A L P H A F X G R O U P P L C 2 E A S T B O U R N E T E R R A C E P A D D I N G T O N L O N D O N W 2 6 L G A N N U A L R E P O R T A L P H A F X G R O U P P L C A N N U A L R E P O R T A B O U T
1 29032018 1404 About Alpha Alpha FX is a foreign exchange specialist focused on helping businesses and institutions manage their foreign exchange exposures more e ectively and e ciently.
O V E R V I E W
Financial Highlights
Why we exist What we do How we do it Who we do it for What drives our business S T R A T E G I C R E P O R T
Chairmans Statement
Chief Executives Statement Our Strategy
Financial Review
Principal Risks and Uncertainties G O V E R N A N C E G O V E R N A N C E Corporate Social Responsibility Board of Directors
Corporate Governance Statement
Remuneration Committee Report
Directors Report F I N A N C I A L S T A T E M E N T S
Independent Auditors Report
Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income Consolidated Statement of Financial Position Consolidated Cash Flow Statement Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity Notes to the Consolidated Financial
Company Balance Sheet Company Statement of Changes in
Notes to the Company Financial
Notice of AGM Shareholder Information A N N U A L R E P O R T A B O U T
1 29032018 1406 F I N A N C I A L H I G H L I G H T S O V E R V I E W H I G H L I G H T S
1 03042018 1041 60% REVENUE GROWTH 2016 65% 55% UNDERLYING OPERATING PROFIT GROWTH 2016 52% 29% OPERATING PROFIT GROWTH 2016 52% UNDERLYING BASIC EARNINGS PER SHARE 2016 13.4p BASIC EARNINGS PER SHARE 2016 13.4p ANNUAL DIVIDEND PER SHARE 21to FRONT OFFICE STAFF INCREASED BY 11 TECHNOLOGY TEAM NEW HEADS ACTIVE CLIENTS INCREASED BY 39% ADDITIONAL CAPITAL SUCCESSFUL AIM LISTING IN APRIL 2017 BEFORE ISSUE COSTS 5% REVENUE GENERATED OUTSIDE OF UK 2016 1% Underlying operating prot excludes the impact of the oneo costs relating to the IPO and their tax eect and sharebased payments.
Underlying EPS excludes the impact of the oneo costs relating to the IPO and their tax eect and sharebased payments.
Includes nal dividend of 3.4p payable on 16 May 2018 date subject to shareholder approval.
The Directors exclude Training Accounts to provide a clearer picture of client retention for the purposes of these gures.
Training Accounts are dened as client accounts that have been onboarded by new employees which have generated less than 10000 in total revenue.
O V E R V I E W H I G H L I G H T S
1 29032018 1413 1 5 .
8 % A N N U A L G B P  U S D V O L A T I L I T Y Why we exist Exchange rates are moving all the time.
If businesses exposures to them are not managed e ectively they can present a signi cant risk impacting pro t margins cash ow and the ability to price competitively. competitively.
For those purchasing signi cant volumes of currency a modest movement of just 1 2 per cent in exchange rates can have a big impact on nancial performance.
Annual volatility in GBPUSD has averaged 15.8% over the past 10 years. over the past 10 years.
Alpha exists because managing these exposures e ectively is time consuming resource intensive and expensive  often involving dedicated inhouse treasury teams or outsourced currency management consultancies. consultancies.
This makes e ective currency management unviable or expensive for many.
There are hundreds of foreign exchange brokers in the UK and most will provide products and market information to manage currency risk.
However these products in risk.
However these products in isolation do not provide a solution and used incorrectly can often exacerbate currency risk further.
O V E R V I E W W H Y W E E X I S T
1 29032018 1409 5 5
1 03042018 0907 Untitled1 1 29032018 1406 What we do Alpha is a foreign exchange specialist working internationally for businesses and institutions impacted by currency volatility.
Founded in 2009 we have a logical Founded in 2009 we have a logical and consultative approach to currency management and deliver this through leading expertise and pioneering technology to help clients achieve better outcomes when managing their foreign exchange exposures whilst also exchange exposures whilst also saving them time and resource.
Despite our consultative approach we charge no upfront costs or retainer fees instead monetising our services by generating a margin on trades.
By doing so we are able to provide a service traditionally the privilege of FTSE100 companies or those with large treasury or those with large treasury departments and make it accessible to all businesses impacted by currency volatility.
O V E R V I E W W H A T W E D O
1 29032018 1407 How we do it Hedging Programmes Our expert currency strategists work in Our expert currency strategists work in consultation with our clients to devise and maintain hedging programmes that are bespoke to their unique objectives and commercial environments.
Whilst formulating these programmes requires high levels of analysis and expertise the principles of analysis and expertise the principles of how they work are very simple clients have to decide how much to hedge how far forward and how often in order to achieve the right level of control over currency volatility for their commercial objectives.
With a hedging programme in place businesses will have a number of hedging windows within which they will need to decide when to buy currency.
This is where technical analysis plays a key role.
Technical Analysis For the majority of corporates and For the majority of corporates and institutions the decision of when to buy currency should be a secondary consideration  one that is made once a hedging programme is in place and risk parameters have been established.
This does not mean however that it cannot garner signi cant value. cannot garner signi cant value.
Conventional wisdom has been to rely on market information and budget rates to guide market entry both of which are notoriously unreliable.
At
Alpha our dedicated team of analysts instead carry out technical analysis.
Such analysis incorporates historical and probability data to identify and probability data to identify statistically optimal entry points within short timeframes hedging windows.
In doing so we are able to achieve consistently high levels of accuracy for clients allowing them to substantiate their decision making with sound and objective rationale. objective rationale.
Online Platform Our intuitive online platform is simple to use but also deeply powerful capable of taking vast amounts of complex information on a companys currency exposure and turning it into meaningful and actionable insight delivered through straightforward graphics and reports.
Such functionality graphics and reports.
Such functionality is providing companies with new levels of visibility and control over their currency exposures expanding their risk management capabilities almost e ortlessly.
At the same time enhanced reporting is instantly delivering a raft of new operating delivering a raft of new operating e ciencies for clients.
We are focused on utilising our deep pool of knowledge and resources to continually develop and enhance our platform which we believe together with our expertise and consultative approach are key competitive strengths for Alpha.
Importantly there is no cost to the Importantly there is no cost to the client for using the platform and implementation is relatively e ortless clients simply sign up and gain access O V E R V I E W H O W W E D O I T
1 29032018 1414 Who we do it for to a leading currency management platform.
The platform is constantly evolving and The platform is constantly evolving and we regularly develop bespoke bolt on solutions for clients which if appropriate are able to be rolled out to all clients.
This means that businesses bene t from the creative problem solving of our team and from the user experience of a network of the user experience of a network of businesses a ected by currency volatility.
In an industry that typically works with thousands of customers our focus remains on growing and retaining a highquality client base to create strong and enduring mutual value.
Our clients are businesses and Our clients are businesses and institutions across the UK and Europe faced with managing currency volatility in order to meet their commercial objectives.
Partnering with Treasurers CFOs FDs CEOs and MDs our focus is on helping these people improve their decision making in order that they can decision making in order that they can manage their currency exposure as e ectively and e ciently as possible.
We then provide access to an intuitive currency management platform to drive greater e ciencies and visibility across the entire nance function.
Our bespoke as standard approach means we have proven expertise across a diverse range of sectors.
Market Opportunity The market opportunity for Alpha is The market opportunity for Alpha is both extensive and growing.
Our
In addition to our core UK corporate market there are other segments both domestically and segments both domestically and internationally that share similar characteristics which we also believe represent signi cant opportunities for growth.
We have therefore begun to invest in teams and products focused on areas such as institutional funds as well as select European territories.
O V E R V I E W W H O W E D O I T F O R
1 29032018 1414 What drives our business
Our greatest strength has always been Our greatest strength has always been our people.
Our team is made up of an eclectic range of high calibre individuals brought together by a shared vision and desire to be leaders within their industry.
Common to everyone is their commitment passion and ability to problem solve creatively in order to problem solve creatively in order to innovate and drive Alpha forward.
Culture
At the heart of Alphas culture is the shared belief that we are all looking to create something very special.
As we grow as a public company we strive to maintain an early stage growth mentality and this is re ected in the urgency accountability and passion which everyone brings to their role.
We which everyone brings to their role.
We are driven by a collective desire to constantly improve so that we can become leaders within our industry and beyond.
Technology
Technology is key to our business and we will continue to invest in the ongoing development of our online platform which provides an everstrengthening foundation upon which we are able to innovate and develop our client services.
Our tech team is focused on Our tech team is focused on pioneering nancial technology solutions for clients whilst equally providing the tools to maximise the e ciencies and capabilities within our own business and infrastructure.
Knowledge
Our reputation is built on the Our reputation is built on the intellectual capital of our people and our teams look beyond the surface of a problem and think deeply and laterally on how to solve it in order to deliver the most e ective solutions.
Ultimately our combined knowledge and experience is intended to empower our experience is intended to empower our clients to manage their currency exposures in the most e ective manner possible whilst also driving Alpha forward.
O V E R V I E W W H A T D R I V E S U S
1 29032018 1408 11 11
1 29032018 1409 Summary FY17 was a landmark year in Alphas history.
The
IPO in April marked the start of a new chapter for the Group providing the capital to make signicant investments across all areas of the business whilst also raising our public prole.
Although we listed less than 12 months ago the benets are already evident in the full year performance of the Group and as such Im pleased to report a strong set of nancial results.
Growth in revenue was up 60% versus FY16 and underlying operating prot increased 55%.
Board and People Alphas success to date has been the result of the passion commitment and vision of its people and 2017 was no exception.
On behalf of the Board I would like to thank everyone for their hard work in making 2017 another successful year and am looking forward to working with you to build on this further in 2018.
We are also pleased to welcome Henry Lisney to the Board in the role of Chief Operating Ocer.
Henry joined Alpha in 2013 as a Portfolio Manager before quickly rising to the role of Operations Director prior to his appointment in March this year as COO.
He has been hugely inuential in developing all areas of the business spearheading the Companys IPO last year as well as leading the expansion of our product oering.
Henrys rapid progression is testament to Alphas culture of meritocracy.
Looking ahead the Group will continue to benet from its founderled management team.
At the same time we are delighted to see many existing employees progressing to take on more senior roles and this is playing a key role in ensuring Alphas impressive culture continues to resonate throughout the Group.
It is particularly pleasing to note that 15 employees saw their rst tranche of share options vest due to the overall strong revenue performance of the Group and I believe this increased level of ownership bodes well for a company that has always thrived o its entrepreneurial mindset.
Dividend
The Board has a stated policy to target a dividend of approximately 30 per cent. underlying prots after tax in each nancial year.
In line with our stated dividend policy we paid our maiden interim dividend of 1.5 pence per share in October 2017.
The Board has recommended a nal dividend of 3.4 pence per share giving a total dividend for the nancial year of 4.9 pence per
Chairmans Statement
Our otation has already signicantly raised the prole of our business whilst enabling us to make key investments and accelerate our growth strategy.
STRATEGIC REPORT CHAIRMANS STATEMENT
Alpha FXpp12pp26.
Page 12 STRA TEGIC REPORT share.
Subject to approval by shareholders at the Annual General Meeting on 11 May 2018 the nal dividend will be paid on 16 May 2018 to shareholders on the register at 13 April 2018.
The exdividend date will be 12 April 2018.
The Year Ahead 2018 will be our rst full year as a publically listed business.
Even with our strong performance to date we have only penetrated a small proportion of our addressable market one that will over time become even larger with our recent entrance into overseas markets and expansion into new sectors such as the institutional and funds market.
Having invested in technology new product development and infrastructure in 2017 along with the growth of our team we are well positioned for further growth.
Q1 has already started positively and with a clear strategy and a highly motivated team in place I am looking forward to the rest of the year with optimism.
Clive Kahn NonExecutive Chairman
CHAIRMANS STATEMENT
Alpha FXpp12pp26.
Page 13 STRATEGIC REPORT CHIEF EXECUTIVES STATEMENT Operational Review 2017 marked a strong year of growth for Alpha both in revenue and in our investment in sta and infrastructure.
During the year we increased our client numbers by 39% bringing our total number of clients to Pleasingly the fact that our revenue has grown at a higher percentage is a reection of the larger trades that we are doing and the increasing size of our clients.
We will continue to focus on growing our client base by penetrating our existing corporate marketplace in the UK alongside continued expansion into the institutional marketplace and overseas sectors.
Europe in particular presents a very exciting area of expansion for us.
During the nancial year we have recruited sta for our London oce who are uent in foreign languages which has enabled us to steadily expand into select European territories.
As a result we successfully onboarded our rst European clients in the second half of the nancial year.
Whilst we are constantly looking for ways to acquire new clients we remain dedicated to providing the very best levels of service to our existing client base.
To ensure this my cofounder Jon Currie has recently moved into a role focused on enhancing our service delivery and is working collaboratively with our clients to improve our customer insights and perpetuate our high levels of client retention.
Further operational progress was made with the expansion of our FX Analysis team and through obtaining regulatory approval to sell derivative products.
As well as providing additional benets to our existing clients both developments will undoubtedly increase our appeal to prospective clients.
Aside from penetrating our traditional corporate marketplace we have targeted the institutional and funds marketplace which presents a valuable growth opportunity for Alpha.
As such we have created a team with a wealth of experience in institutional FX and tailored our technology and service solutions to meet investment managers specic and increasingly complex needs.
Throughout the course of this year we have also continued to invest in the ongoing development of our technology platform which has proved to be an important element of our advisory service oering and this will continue to be a focus moving forward.
Our online currency management platform has been developed inhouse and we believe aords us a strong Chief Executives Statement Everyone at Alpha passionately believes our IPO marked the start of our journey not the end.
We took Alpha public to avoid the destination mentality and now have the opportunity to continue developing a very special business.
Alpha FXpp12pp26.
Page 14 STRATEGIC REPORT CHIEF EXECUTIVES STATEMENT competitive advantage.
It provides our clients with a tailored and comprehensive overview of their currency exposures and is subsequently allowing them to manage and report on these exposures more eectively whilst reducing the time and costs involved in doing so.
We believe that our bespoke platform oers customers a greater insight into their hedging activities than our competitors and has become a key dierentiator in a short space of time helping us with both customer acquisition and retention as well as margin protection.
In light of this we made the important decision to migrate to a new Cloud Application Platform in February 2018 which oers richer functionality greater customisation and increased scalability.
Technology is an important cornerstone of the business and we have a strong technology development roadmap in place and further functionality will be introduced during 2018 to enhance the platform.
A reection of the importance we place on our technology is the fact that our team of developers has grown from 2 at the start of the year to 9.
In December we relocated our head oce to London to bring all our team under one roof in order to support the unique culture which ultimately underpins our success.
We have already seen the benets of a single larger oce with wider skill sharing stronger relationships being forged and a positive atmosphere of camaraderie and collaboration.
People
When we listed Alpha in April we underestimated how inuential it was going to be in helping us acquire exceptional talent.
Our plc status has served as a testament to Alphas success and future ambitions enabling us to attract high calibre individuals in a relatively short space of time and with a noticeable shift in the volume and quality of inbound applications.
As planned total headcount increased from 30 to 51 during the course of the year.
Of these new recruits 11 joined the Front Oce team to continue the rate of client acquisition in the UK corporate market as well as penetrating overseas territories from our oce in London.
As always we expect sta contributions to increase incrementally as individuals develop along the learning curve and I am pleased that yet again new starters in FY17 outperformed those in FY16 a trend I expect to continue due to the compounding eect of surrounding great people with more great people alongside our evolving service and infrastructure and the growing reputation of Alpha in our target markets.
The majority of remaining new team members joined our Technology team spearheading new product development and technological innovation with a particular focus on evolving Alphas online currency management platform and payment functionality as well as developing custom platform solutions for our clients.
Thank you The bedrock of our business has always been our people and I would like to thank everyone who has got Alpha to this stage in its journey.
Your commitment and vision is helping to build a business that is driving change within the industry as well as a culture I feel incredibly privileged to be a part of.
Last but by no means least I would like to thank you our shareholders who believe in our vision and are helping us to take Alpha to new heights whilst accelerating positive changes within our industry.
Outlook
Everyone at Alpha passionately believes our IPO marked the start of our journey not the end.
We took Alpha public to enable our growth ambitions whilst ensuring we could maintain the entrepreneurial culture that got us here in the rst place.
We now have the opportunity to create a very special business with a clear vision and growth strategy.
I look forward to being able to report back on further progress achieved in the current year.
Morgan Tillbrook Chief Executive Ocer Alpha FXpp12pp26.
Page 15 STRATEGIC REPORT OUR STRATEGY Acquire new clients Retain existing clients and increase share of their spend Develop our oering Nurture our culture Build scale and eciencies Our Strategy A clear strategy lies before a highly capable and motivated team who now have an enhanced service oering and wealth of new resources at their disposal.
The Group exclude Training Accounts those that have generated less than 10000 in revenue since being onboarded in order to provide a clearer picture of client numbers for the purposes of these gures.
Strategy
Progress to date Acquire new clients We will continue to grow our client base by penetrating further into the corporate and institutional market in the UK alongside expansion into overseas markets and sectors.
Total number of clients increased from 223 to 310 during the year representing a 39% increase on 2016.
Front Oce team grew from 21 to 32 to accelerate the rate of client acquisition and three experienced Portfolio Managers were promoted internally to Senior Strategists ensuring the Front Oce team has ample support to acquire new clients.
Increased penetration into overseas markets having recruited sta that are uent in foreign languages all of whom are based from our oces in London.
Received approval from the FCA to passport certain regulatory products and services across Europe as well as receiving authorisation from Fintrac in Canada to provide permitted products and services to the Canadian market.
Since the year end we have invested in our fund and institutional FX oering hiring two highly experienced sector heads who lead a team solely focused on penetrating this space.
Alpha FXpp12pp26.
Page 16 STRATEGIC REPORT 2017 OUR STRATEGY
Progress to date Alphas cofounder and second largest shareholder Jon Currie has moved into a role focused on client retention and is supported by an expanded Service Delivery team ensuring our clients continue to receive a dedicated and hightouch level of service as we grow.
Signicant investment has been made in developing the scope and depth of our oering see Developing our service Oering.
We continue to work in consultation with clients to develop custom online platform features specically for their business providing solutions to problems theyve struggled to nd anywhere else and at no upfront or subscription cost.
Retain existing clients and increase share of their spend We will continue to retain our clients by ensuring we can always service and anticipate their needs.
FX Analysis team formed to enhance the depth of research behind hedging programmes as well as provide more comprehensive and detailed technical analysis.
Options department formed led by an FCA approved individual with over ten years experience expanding the range of products we can oer our clients and allowing us to cater eectively to the needs of those with more complex exposures.
Much like the custom online platform features developed by our technology team our Options team is enabling us to develop custom FX products for our clients.
Alphas online currency management platform underwent a number of major upgrades to enhance the reporting and currency management capabilities it provides.
In addition a number of bespoke platform modules were developed for clients which will be rolled out more widely in the future.
There are a number of exciting new online platform developments due to be launched throughout 2018 which will continue to cement Alphas position as a leading innovator in currency management.
Developing our service oering We are constantly innovating to ensure we continue to have a highly dierentiated and valuable service oering which will help us win clients and then retain then.
Alpha FXpp12pp26.
Page 17 Strategy Progress to date In December 2017 we consolidated our teams in Reading and London into a new oce in Paddington.
The benets of this are already being felt with skillsharing stronger relationships being formed and a general atmosphere of camaraderie and collaboration that emanates from having everyone under one roof.
Our oce in Reading was previously recognised as one of the Coolest Oces in Europe and our intention is to create an equally inspiring environment to support our growth culture.
The Groups growth share scheme continues to provide committed and high performing employees with the opportunity to obtain equity in the Company.
It is creating a company of owners and remains a key part of the entrepreneurial mentality that drives our growth.
Signicantly in September 2017 the vesting schedule of the scheme was extended from three to ve years in a unanimous demonstration of our employees commitment to the longterm growth of the business.
Team training activities are held throughout the year both in the UK and abroad.
As well as developing new skills and knowledge these provide key opportunities for our employees to get to know other members of the wider team enhancing Alphas collegiate culture.
Developnurture our culture Alphas culture has underpinned the Groups success to date and is the lifeblood of our business.
As the Group continues to grow we remain relentlessly focused on nurturing it and helping it to evolve in the right way through a focus on collaboration idea sharing and accountability.
STRATEGIC REPORT OUR STRATEGY By order of the Board Henry Lisney Chief Operating Ocer 20 March 2018 Alongside investing in technology and service delivery to support Front Oce sta we have also made considerable investment in developing our existing infrastructure in order to drive eciency and increase automation.
In January 2018 the Group became a member of SWIFT Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunication and we continue to test and investigate new payment networks which have the potential to improve eciencies and the breadth of our service oering.
In recognition of the value of our currency management platform we made the decision to migrate to a new Cloud Application Platform which oers richer functionality greater customisation and scalability.
Whilst the outcomes of the Brexit negotiations still remain uncertain Alphas clients will by their nature continue to have a requirement to buy or sell currency to full their international trading activities.
Subsequently regardless of the outcome of Brexit negotiations we remain condent in our ability to scale and meet our revenue goals.
Build scale and eciencies We will continue to ensure our core service oering and infrastructure remains agile in order that we can maintain an ever evolving foundation upon which to scale and drive eciencies Alpha FXpp12pp26.
Page 18 STRATEGIC REPORT FINANCIAL REVIEW
Financial Review
Revenue in the year ended 31 December 2017 grew by 60% to 13.5m 2016 8.5m.
Revenue continues to be driven by increasing revenue from new clients and strong client retention as well as new starters in 2017 continuing to outperform those from the previous year.
The average commission revenue as a % of gross value of currency transactions sold increased in the year to 31 December 2017 due primarily to a higher proportion of forward trades which attract a higher commission rate as well as the larger trades and a change in the mix of currencies.
There were no structural changes in forward commission rates in the year to 31 December 2017 compared to the prior year.
Underlying operating prot increased by 55% to 6.8m 2016 4.4m whilst on a reported basis operating prot was up 29% to 5.6m 2016 In 2017 there was continued investment in headcount in both the Front and Back Oce with total headcount increasing from 30 to 51.
Despite this continued investment the Group delivered an underlying operating prot margin of 50% 2016 51%.
The eective rate of taxation for 2017 was 22%.
This is higher than the standard rate primarily as a result of costs of the IPO which are not allowable for tax purposes.
Underlying basic earnings per share that exclude the impact of the oneo costs relating to the IPO and their tax eect and sharebased payments increased from 13.4p in 2016 to 17.5p in 2017.
Basic earnings per share increased from 13.4p in 2016 to 14.2p in 2017.
On 7 April 2017 the Company issued 6632653 new shares upon admission to the London Stock Exchange raising 12.3m after expenses.
Part of the net proceeds were used to repay the shareholder loans in existence as at 31 December 2016 of 1.4m.
Cash ow On a statutory basis net cash and cash equivalents increased by 5.5m to 13.1m.
However the Groups cash position can uctuate signicantly from year to year due to the impact of changes in the collateral received from clients early settlement of trades or the unrealised mark to market prot or loss from client swaps resulting in an increase or decrease in cash with a corresponding change in other payables and trade receivables.
Therefore in addition to the statutory cash ow the Group presents an adjusted net cash summary below which excludes the above items.
In the year ended 31 December 2017 net cash on the nonstatutory basis increased by 11.9m to 13.7m largely due to the net proceeds of the IPO and the protable trading in the year.
Financial Review
2017 was another impressive year for Alpha with strong revenue growth and robust prot margins.
Alpha FXpp12pp26.
Page 19 STRATEGIC REPORT FINANCIAL REVIEW 31 December 2017 31 December 2016 Net cash and cash equivalents Variation margin paid to banking counterparties Margin received from clients and client held funds Net MTM timing lossprot from client drawdowns and extensions within trade receivables Adjusted net cash Represents other payables within trade and other payables Excluding collateral received from clients early settlements and the unrealised mark to market prot or loss from client swaps The table below presents the operating cash conversion on a similar basis which excludes collateral received from clients early settlements and the unrealised mark to market prot or loss from client swaps.
Cash conversion for the year ended 31 December 2017 reduced to 47% from 60% on the prior year.
The reduction is due to an increase in the proportion of forward trades which represented 89% of the revenue in 2017 compared to 85% in 2016 as well an increase in the average tenure of forward transactions.
Year ended Year ended 31 December 2017 31 December 2016 Underlying operating prot Depreciation and amortisation Loss on sale of xed assets Increase in debtors Increase in creditors Less capital expenditure Cash from operations before tax and after capex
47% 60% Excluding collateral received from clients early settlements and the unrealised mark to market prot or loss from client swaps Relocation of Head Oce In December 2017 we consolidated our teams into one oce with the sta from Reading moving to London.
The nancial statements at 31 December 2017 include an onerous lease provision of 190000 representing the anticipated dierence in rent receivable and rent payable in Reading for the remainder of the lease.
Dividend
The Board intends to target a dividend of approximately 30% of the Groups underlying prots after tax in each nancial year.
In line with this dividend policy which was set out in its Admission document and following the payment of the interim dividend of 1.5 pence per share in October 2017 the Board is pleased to declare a maiden nal dividend of 3.4 pence per share.
Subject to shareholder approval the Dividend will be payable to Shareholders on the register as at 13 April 2018 and will be paid on 16 May 2018.
Tim Kidd Chief Financial Ocer Alpha FXpp12pp26.
Page 20 STRATEGIC REPORT PRINCIPAL RISKS and UNCERT AINTIES IT and Cyber Security Risk The Group faces the risk of its operating systems failing as well as the failure to safeguard the businesscritical data and systems against cyber security risks.
As a result the Group may become unable to carry out its business activities resulting in a nancial and reputational loss.
This risk is mitigated by maintaining robust network perimeter defences continual data backup and the use of a secure endtoend CRM system and online platform.
Additionally a robust IT security policy is supported by penetration testing as well as regular training for all members of sta.
Liquidity Risk Liquidity risk arises if the Group is unable to meet its nancial obligations when due.
For example if the Group is unable to deposit margin required by its banking counterparties this could lead to the Group becoming unable or restricted in its ability to meet trading capital requirements which in turn could result in the ability of the banking counterparties to terminate the nancing facilities with the Group.
Alpha operates a matchedprincipal brokerage model meaning it simultaneously executes a matching trade with its banking counterparties on receipt of client orders.
The Group has facilities with the banking counterparties.
These facilities enable the Group to book both forward and spot contracts on behalf of its clients.
The banking counterparties mark to market all of the Groups forward contracts at the end of each business day.
To calculate the level of margin required the Groups banking counterparties mark to market MTM the Groups net currency positions meaning foreign exchange positions favourably affected by market movements are offset against those adversely affected.
As a result the Group is able to benefit from exchange rate movements when it has positions on both sides of the market e. short positions.
This results in a net claim payable to or claim on the banking counterparties.
If a net claim is payable the Group is required to deposit margin with its banking counterparties on the following business day.
The Group funds margin due to its banking counterparties through client margin calls and its own funds.
When the Group makes a margin call clients have one business day to deposit margin with the Group once called.
Principal Risks and Uncertainties The Board sets out below the key strategic risks and uncertainties that the Directors consider could impact the business.
The Board continually reviews the potential strategic risks facing the Group and the controls in place to mitigate any potential adverse impacts.
The Board also recognises that the nature and scope of risks may change and that there may be other risks to which the Group is exposed and so the list is not intended to be exhaustive.
Alpha FXpp12pp26.
Page 21 STRATEGIC REPORT PRINCIPAL RISKS and UNCERT AINTIES The Group benets from the fact that trading terms with its banking counterparties are more favourable than those oered to its clients and it only has to fund its net FX exposure with its banking counterparties i. exposure is nil.
Liquidity risk is primarily driven by A sudden sharp movement in exchange rates when a currency is net longshort or An overextension of hedging facilities.
If the Group were unable to meet its nancial obligations when due this would have a material adverse eect on its business results of operations nancial condition and prospects.
The Group has a Liquidity Policy in place to mitigate any such risks.
The Liquidity Policy provides that weekly stress tests are carried out that subject the Groups net currency positions to simulated signicant FX market volatility robust margin call terms are maintained with clients an over extension of hedging facilities is managed through internally mandating a minimum amount of Alphas free cash to be placed against each hedging facility extended and Alphas balance sheet must be well capitalised with cash so that in the event that they are called for margin collateral by a banking counterparty but unable to call on their clients as they have granted them a hedging facility they are able to fund the position.
Credit Risk Alpha is exposed to credit risk if a client fails to deliver currency at maturity of the contract or fails to deposit margin when a margin call is made.
In either scenario Alphas policy is to immediately cancel the trade through booking an equal and opposite trade in order to reverse the original contract.
Alpha is therefore exposed to the movements in the exchange rate of the total value of the contract since the trade was booked or since the date of the last margin call up to the date of cancellation.
However Alpha has a credit policy in place to mitigate any potential losses arising from a client failing to settle in particular Alpha assesses the creditworthiness of clients and where a hedging facility has been extended puts in place strict limits typically limited to 3 per cent. or 5 per cent. contract with a client.
If a client should fail to make payments to the Group when due this could have a material adverse eect on the Groups business results of operations nancial condition and prospects.
Regulatory Risk The Group faces the risk of failing to adhere to its regulatory and legal requirements.
The provision of the Groups services falls within various regulatory spheres including the UK Money Laundering Regulations 2007 the Payment Services Regulations 2009 the UK Financial Services and Markets Act 2000 and the Markets in Financial Instruments Directive MiFID.
The Group maintains robust policies and procedures systems and controls and monitoring and assurance programmes to ensure continued compliance with its regulatory obligations.
Alongside this the Group engages the services of independent compliance consultancies to review its compliance with regulatory requirements.
A report on the Groups arrangements for managing compliance risk is presented to the Board on an annual basis.
A compliance update is also provided at the Groups Board meetings on a regular basis.
Operational Risk The Group is subject to the risk of loss resulting from inadequate or failed internal processes people systems or external events.
This can include socalled Fat Finger errors the incorrect inputting or execution of a trade either into the Groups reporting software or to one of the Groups Banking Counterparties as well as internal fraud e. an employees own account.
Alpha FXpp12pp26.
Page 22 STRATEGIC REPORT PRINCIPAL RISKS and UNCERT AINTIES The Group minimises Fat Finger errors through daily reconciliations of all account balances meaning any trade error should be identied early as well as ensuring trades greater than 2000000.00 are reconciled within the hour.
Where an error has been identied it is the Groups policy to immediately cancel the trade through booking an equal and opposite trade in order to reverse the original contract.
The Group also maintains a strict division between Front and Back Oce functions to ensure Back Oce remain independent and attentive to any errors that may have been caused by Front Oce.
Internal fraud is minimised through DBS screening all Back Oce individuals maintaining strict delegated authority limits segregation of duties and regular monitoring and oversight across dierent management functions.
The
Group also maintains a whistleblowing policy which is communicated to all members of sta.
Financial Reporting Risk The Group may face the risk of reputational damage and nancial loss resulting from a material misstatement in the Groups nancial reporting.
This risk is mitigated by ongoing internal reviews and reconciliation carried out by qualied and experienced members of sta and the oversight of the Audit Committee.
Key Management Risk
The Groups success is linked to the eorts and abilities of key personnel and its capacity to retain such personnel.
The executive management team has signicant experience in the industry and has made an important contribution to the Groups growth and success.
The loss of any member of the executive management team may have an adverse eect on operations of the Group.
To mitigate this risk the Group continues to value the contribution made by its key executives and reward them accordingly.
The Group operates cross functional input and knowledge sharing and there is a detailed business continuity plan in the event of a disruption.
The Group also has a key person insurance policy in place.
Alpha FXpp12pp26.
Page 23 CORPORATE SOCIAL
Equality and Diversity We remain committed to providing equal opportunities and diversity in the workplace by recruiting and promoting sta based on their experience skills and attitude.
The Group therefore does not discriminate between employees or prospective employees on the grounds of age race disability religion gender or any other criteria.
We believe gender diversity within the foreign exchange industry especially within Business Development roles has considerable room for improvement.
We are therefore focused on working with our recruitment partners to improve this trend and ensure gender never has any bearing on the recruitment process.
Health and Safety covering rights The Board takes seriously its responsibility towards employees to provide a safe and healthy working environment.
The Group complies with health and safety legislation including conducting regular inspections and risk assessments.
Environment
Alpha is committed to minimising the impact its operations have on the environment.
Recycling of oce supplies is undertaken where possible and the Group has adopted a largely paperless marketing model.
Corporate Social Responsibility STRA TEGIC REPORT Alpha FXpp12pp26.
Page 24 GO VERNANCE BOARD OF DIRECTORS Board of Directors Clive Kahn  NonExecutive Chairman Appointed to the Board 16 December 2016 Committee membership Nomination Remuneration Audit Clive has over 30 years of experience in nancial services particularly FX and payments.
He previously served as Chief Financial Ocer and Chief Executive Ocer of Travelex the global foreign exchange business as well as CEO of Cardsave a credit card acceptance and payments solutions business.
In addition to his role as NonExecutive Chairman of Alpha FX Group plc Clive is CEO of Payzone UK Limited a payment solutions business.
Clive is also a Chartered Accountant.
Lisa Gordon  NonExecutive Director Appointed to the Board 1 February 2017 Committee membership Nomination Remuneration Audit Lisa has more than 24 years of Board experience at both listed and private companies.
She was previously a founding Director of Local World plc which was acquired by Trinity Mirror plc in November 2015 as well as COO of Yattendon Group a private conglomerate and Corporate Development Director of Chrysalis Group plc the media group.
Lisa is also a NonExecutive Director of Albert Technologies plc an AI technology business operating in the digital marketing sector and of Orange Eyes Limited trading as Magic Light Pictures a leading childrens lm and television production company.
Morgan Tillbrook  Chief Executive Ocer Appointed to the Board 24 May 2010 Committee membership Nomination Morgan founded Alpha in 2009 after identifying the opportunity for providing a high quality FX advisory service dierentiated from traditional providers.
Prior to founding Alpha Morgan established an online poker league and social network Poker Project Ltd which later formed part of Sky Poker.
As CEO Morgan has been instrumental in the expansion of the Group and its strong organic growth prole and is responsible for the overall strategic development of the Group both within the UK and internationally.
Alpha FXpp12pp26.
Page 25 GO VERNANCE BOARD OF DIRECTORS Tim Kidd  Chief Financial Ocer Appointed to the Board 16 November 2016 Committee membership None Tim has over 25 years experience in accounting and nance including 16 years at FTSE listed ICAP plc where he held several senior nance and accounting roles including Group Financial Controller and EMEA Chief Financial Ocer.
Tim is also a Chartered Accountant and Graduated with a degree in Accounting and Finance in 1987.
Henry Lisney  Chief Operating Ocer Appointed to the Board 20 March 2018 Committee membership None Henry is responsible for driving Alphas growth and innovation strategy whilst maintaining the eciency and eectiveness of all departments.
He joined Alpha in 2013 as a Portfolio Manager before quickly rising to the Role of Operations Director in 2015.
He was appointed to the Board as COO in 2018.
Henry is a member of the Chartered Institute for Securities and Investment and holds a rstclass degree in Management and Accounting.
Alpha FXpp12pp26.
Page 26 GO VERNANCE CORPORATE GO VERNANCE ST A TEMENT Compliance Statement The Board recognises the value and importance of high standards of corporate governance.
The
Directors implement appropriate measures having regard to the current stage of development of the Group to comply so far as practicable with the UK Corporate Governance
Board Composition The Board is responsible for the successful stewardship of the Group.
From 20 March 2018 the Board comprised two nonexecutive Directors and three executive
The two nonexecutive Directors are independent.
Board Committees The Directors have established an audit committee a nomination committee and a remuneration committee with formally delegated duties and responsibilities.
Audit Committee The audit committee is chaired by Lisa Gordon its other member is Clive Kahn.
It determines and examines any matters relating to the nancial aairs of the Group including the terms of engagement of the Groups auditors and in consultation with the auditors the scope of the audit.
In addition it considers the nancial performance position and prospects of the Group and ensure they are properly monitored and reported on.
The audit committee meets not less than twice in each nancial year and has unrestricted access to the Groups auditors.
The Remuneration Committee The remuneration committee is chaired by Lisa Gordon its other member is Clive Kahn.
It reviews the performance of the Executive Directors and sets their remuneration determines the payment of bonuses to the Executive Directors and considers the Groups bonus and incentive arrangements for employees.
In exercising this role members of this committee have regard to the recommendations put forward in the Corporate Governance Code.
The remuneration committee meets not less than twice a year and at such other times as the chairman of the committee requires.
Nomination Committee The nomination committee is chaired by Clive Kahn its other members are Lisa Gordon and Morgan Tillbrook.
It reviews and recommends nominees as new Directors to the Board.
The nomination committee meets not less than once a year and at such other times as the chairman of the committee requires.
Board Eectiveness The Boards skills and experience are outlined in their biographical details on pages 25 to 26.
Corporate Governance Statement
Alpha FXpp27pp30.
Page 27 GO VERNANCE CORPORATE GO VERNANCE ST A TEMENT Meetings and Attendance The Directors attendance at Board and Committee meetings during the year is shown below
Audit
Remuneration
Nominations
Clive Kahn Lisa Gordon Morgan Tillbrook
NA
Tim Kidd
NA
NA
Internal Controls The Board is responsible for the Groups system of internal controls and for reviewing its eectiveness.
Such a system is designed to provide reasonable but not absolute assurance against material misstatement or loss.
The Audit Committee monitors and reviews the Groups internal control procedures and reports its conclusions and recommendations to the Board.
Communication with Shareholders Alpha is committed to providing up to date corporate information to existing and potential shareholders.
The Group maintains communications with institutional shareholders through onetoone meetings with Executive Directors particularly following the publication of interim and full year results.
Private shareholders are encouraged to attend the Annual General Meeting at which the Groups activities are considered and questions answered.
Any material presented is uploaded to the Companys website where it is available to all shareholders.
Alpha is committed to providing up to date corporate information to existing and potential shareholders.
Annual General Meeting The Annual General Meeting AGM of the Company will take place at 10am on 11 May 2018.
The Notice of AGM and explanatory notes on all resolutions can be found at the end of this Annual Report and nancial statements.
Alpha FXpp27pp30.
Page 28 GO VERNANCE REMUNERATION COMMIT TEE
Remuneration Committee Details of the remuneration committee are provided in the Corporate Governance Statement.
Remuneration Policy The Groups policy is that the remuneration package of the Executive Directors should be suciently competitive to attract retain and motivate those Directors to achieve the Groups objectives without making excessive payments.
The Board determines the terms and conditions of the NonExecutive Directors.
Directors remuneration The following table summarises the total gross remuneration of the Directors who served in the year ended 31 December 2017.
Year ended 31 December 2017
Sharebased salaryfee
Pension payment
Executive
Morgan Tillbrook Tim Kidd
Clive Kahn Lisa Gordon appointed 1 February 2017 Year ended 31 December 2016
Sharebased salaryfee
Pension payment
Executive
Morgan Tillbrook Tim Kidd appointed 16 November 2016
Clive Kahn appointed 16 December 2016 The salary for Tim Kidd represents the salary for actual days worked.
Remuneration Committee Report
As an AIM listed company Alpha FX Group plc is not required to prepare a Remuneration Report in accordance with the Directors Remuneration Report Regulations 2002 or the Large and Mediumsized companies and Group Accounts and Reports Amendment Regulations 2013 together the
However the Directors appreciate the importance of the Regulations and will seek to follow them to the extent that is appropriate for its stage of development.
Alpha FXpp27pp30.
Page 29 ANNU AL REPORT 2017 REMUNERATION COMMIT TEE
In the year ended 31 December 2016 prior to the IPO there were 5 other individuals who served as a Director of the Company for part of the year.
In aggregate their total remuneration was 345906.
Directors shareholding and share interests The following table summarises the shareholding and share interests of the Directors at 31 December 2017.
As at 31 December 2017
Growth
Benecially share option
Scheme
Total
Executive
Morgan Tillbrook Tim Kidd
Clive Kahn Lisa Gordon Details of the Growth Share Scheme and the unapproved share option scheme are included in Note 25 of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Lisa Gordon Chair of the Remuneration Committee Alpha FXpp27pp30.
Page 30 GO VERNANCE DIRECT ORS REPORT The Directors present their Annual Report and the audited nancial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017.
The corporate governance statement on page 27 also forms part of this Directors report.
Business Review
An analysis of the Groups development including likely future developments and performance is contained in the Chairmans Statement CEO Statement and Our Strategy.
Information on the nancial risk management strategy of the Group and its exposure to its principal risks set out in the Principal Risks and Uncertainties section of the report on pages 21 to 23.
Principal Activity Alpha FX Group PLC the Company is a public limited company incorporated and domiciled in England and Wales.
The registered oce of the Company is 2 Eastbourne Terrace Paddington London W2 6LG.
The registered company number is .
A list of the Companys subsidiaries is presented in note 13.
The Companys principal activity is the provision of foreign exchange services for corporates and institutions exposed to currency market volatility through its wholly owned subsidiary Alpha FX
Activities range from initial design and implementation of hedging strategies to ongoing management and monitoring of currency risks.
Results and Dividend The Groups results for the year are shown in the statement of comprehensive income on page 39.
An interim dividend of 1.5 pence per share was paid on 13 October 2017 to shareholders on the register at 15 September 2017.
The Board intends to target a dividend of approximately 30% of the Groups underlying prots after tax in each nancial year.
In line with our stated dividend policy we are pleased to declare a nal dividend of 3.4 pence per share.
The nal dividend will be payable on 16 May 2018 to shareholders on the register at 13 April 2018.
The exdividend date is 12 April 2018.
Directors
The Directors of the Group are shown below
Morgan Tillbrook Tim Kidd Henry Lisney appointed 20 March 2018
Clive Kahn Lisa Gordon Biographical details along with committee responsibilities are provided on pages 25 to 26.
Directors Interests The Directors interests in the Groups shares and options over ordinary shares are shown in the remuneration committee report on pages 29 to Political Donations The Group has not made in the past nor does it presently intend to make in the future any political donations.
Post Balance Sheet events On 20 March the Group launched a new institutional business division with a focus on expanding Alphas service oering to fund and institutional clients.
On 20 March 2018 the Company determined that following the vesting of shares under the Growth Share Scheme for the year ended 31 December 2017 it would be issuing 565387 shares on 27 March 2018.
Further details are provided in note 29 to the nancial statements.
Directors Report Alpha FXpp31pp33.
Page 31 GO VERNANCE DIRECT ORS REPORT Financial Instruments The nancial risk management objectives and policies of the Group including credit risk liquidity risk cash ow risk interest rate risk and currency risk are provided in note 17 to the Consolidated Financial Statements on pages 61 to 64.
Share Capital Structure Details of changes in the Groups share capital are disclosed in note 20 of the consolidated nancial statement.
Share Options Schemes Details of employee share schemes are set out in note 26 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Going Concern The Directors believe the Group is in a strong nancial position due to its protable operations and strong cash generation and therefore that the Group has adequate resources to continue its operations for at least 12 months from the date of approval of this report.
For this reason they continue to adopt the going concern basis in preparing the nancial statements.
Research and Development The Company has a continuous programme of development expenditure as part of its focus on evolving its service oering through technological innovation.
Capitalised internal development expenditure is disclosed in note 11 of the nancial statements.
All other development expenditure is recognised in the Statement of Comprehensive income as an expense.
Auditor and disclosure of information to auditor BDO UK LLP were appointed as auditors on 7 December 2016 and are continuing in oce.
In accordance with s of the Companies Act 2006 a resolution for their reappointment will be proposed at the forthcoming Annual General
As far as the Directors are aware there is no relevant audit information of which the Companys auditor is unaware and each Director has taken all reasonable steps that he or she ought to have taken to make himself or herself aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that the Groups auditors are aware of this information.
Annual General Meeting The Annual General Meeting will be held at 10am on 11 May 2018 at the oces of Bird and Bird 12 New Fetter Lane London EC4A 1JP.
The Notice of Annual General Meeting and the ordinary and special resolutions to be put to the meeting are included at the end of this Annual Report and nancial statements.
Statement of Directors Responsibilities The Directors are responsible for preparing the Annual Report and the nancial statements in accordance with applicable law and regulations.
Company law requires the Directors to prepare nancial statements for each nancial year.
Under that law the Directors have elected to prepare the Group and Company nancial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as adopted by the European Union IFRSs and the Company nancial statements in accordance with United Kingdom Generally Accepted Accounting Practice United Kingdom Accounting Standards and applicable law.
Under company law the Directors must not approve the nancial statements unless they are satised that they give a true and fair view of the state of aairs and prot or loss of the Group and the Company for the period.
The
Directors are also required to prepare nancial statements in accordance with the rules of the London Stock Exchange for companies trading securities on the Alternative Investment Market.
In preparing these nancial statements the Directors are required to select suitable accounting policies and then apply them consistently make judgements and accounting estimates that are reasonable and prudent state whether applicable IFRSs have been followed subject to any material departures disclosed and explained in the nancial statements and Alpha FXpp31pp33.
Page 32 ANNU AL REPORT 2017 DIRECTORS REPORT prepare the nancial statements on the going concern basis unless it is appropriate to presume that the Company will continue in business.
The Directors are responsible for keeping adequate accounting records that are sucient to show and explain the Companys transactions and disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the nancial position of the Company and enable them to ensure that the nancial statements comply with the Companies Act 2006.
They are also responsible for safeguarding the assets of the Company and hence for taking reasonable steps for the prevention and detection of fraud and other irregularities.
The Directors are responsible for ensuring the annual report and the nancial statements are made available on a website.
Financial statements are published on the companys website in accordance with legislation in the United Kingdom governing the preparation and dissemination of nancial statements which may vary from legislation in other jurisdictions.
The maintenance and integrity of the companys website is the responsibility of the Directors.
The Directors responsibility also extends to the ongoing integrity of the nancial statements contained therein.
By order of the Board Tim Kidd Company Secretary 20 March telAlpha FXpp31pp33.
Page 33 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS INDEPENDENT AUDITORS
Opinion
We have audited the nancial statements of Alpha FX Group plc the parent company and its subsidiaries the Group for the year ended 31 December 2017 which comprise the consolidated statement of comprehensive income the consolidated statement of nancial position the consolidated cash ow statement the consolidated statement of changes in equity the company balance sheet the company statement of changes in equity and the notes to the nancial statements including a summary of signicant accounting policies.
The nancial reporting framework that has been applied in the preparation of the Group nancial statements is applicable law and International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union.
The nancial reporting framework that has been applied in the preparation of the parent company nancial statements is applicable law and United Kingdom Accounting Standards including Financial Reporting Standard 101 Reduced Disclosure Framework United Kingdom Generally Accepted Accounting Practice.
In our opinion the nancial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the Groups and of the parent companys aairs as at 31 December 2017 and of the Groups prot for the year then ended the Group nancial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union the parent company nancial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with United Kingdom Generally Accepted Accounting Practice and the nancial statements have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006.
Basis for opinion We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing UK ISAs UK and applicable law.
Our responsibilities under those standards are further described in the Auditors responsibilities for the audit of the nancial statements section of our report.
We are independent of the Group and the parent company in accordance with the ethical requirements that are relevant to our audit of the nancial statements in the UK including the FRCs Ethical Standard as applied to listed entities and we have fullled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with these requirements.
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sucient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion.
Use of our report This report is made solely to the parent companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006.
Our audit work has been undertaken so that we might state to the parent companys members those matters we are required to state to them in an auditors report
Independent Auditors Report
To The Members of Alpha FX Group PLC Alpha FXpp34pp42.
Page 34 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS INDEPENDENT AUDITORS and for no other purpose.
To the fullest extent permitted by law we do not accept or assume responsibility to anyone other than the parent company and the parent companys members as a body for our audit work for this report or for the opinions we have formed.
Conclusions relating to going concern We have nothing to report in respect of the following matters in relation to which the ISAs UK require us to report to you where the directors use of the going concern basis of accounting in the preparation of the nancial statements is not appropriate or the directors have not disclosed in the nancial statements any identied material uncertainties that may cast signicant doubt about the Groups or the parent companys ability to continue to adopt the going concern basis of accounting for a period of at least twelve months from the date when the nancial statements are authorised for issue.
Key audit matters Key audit matters are those matters that in our professional judgment were of most signicance in our audit of the nancial statements of the current period and include the most signicant assessed risks of material misstatement whether or not due to fraud we identied including those which had the greatest eect on the overall audit strategy the allocation of resources in the audit and directing the eorts of the engagement team.
These matters were addressed in the context of our audit of the nancial statements as a whole and in forming our opinion thereon and we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters.
Existence and accuracy of revenue How we addressed the matter in our audit We reviewed the revenue recognition policy applied to each of the Groups revenue streams and considered its compliance with IAS18
We assessed the design and implementation of the controls covering the existence and accuracy of revenue transactions.
We then sample tested the relevant controls for operating eectiveness throughout the year.
We substantively tested a sample of revenue transactions for each material revenue stream to verify the existence and accuracy of revenue with reference to underlying supporting trade tickets and thirdparty information recorded with the banking counterparty.
Our testing did not identify any material misstatements in the amount of revenue recognised.
Key Audit Matter The Groups revenue recognition policy is included with the accounting policies on page 46.
The Groups reported revenue is a key performance indicator for the market it drives the level of sales commissions payable to front oce sta and is a key metric in the Groups Growth Share Scheme used to incentivise directors key management and certain sta.
Due to the incentive that exists to overstate revenue a signicant risk of material misstatement is considered to be present over the existence and accuracy of revenue.
Alpha FXpp34pp42.
Page 35 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS INDEPENDENT AUDITORS
Fair value of unsettled trades at year end Our application of materiality We apply the concept of materiality both in planning and performing our audit and in evaluating the eect of misstatements.
For planning we consider materiality to be the magnitude by which misstatements including omissions could inuence the economic decisions of reasonable users that are taken on the basis of the nancial statements.
In order to reduce to an appropriately low level the probability that any misstatements exceeded materiality we use a lower level performance materiality to determine the extent of testing needed.
Importantly misstatements below these levels will not necessarily be evaluated as immaterial as we also take account of the nature of identied misstatements and the particular circumstances of their occurrence when evaluating their eect on the nancial statements as a whole.
The materiality for the Group nancial statements as a whole was set at 330000 2016 256000.
This was determined with reference to the Groups prot before tax prior to the costs of the initial public oering IPO in April 2017 and applying a percentage of 5%.
Prot before tax and IPO costs is considered the most appropriate measure in assessing the performance of the Group given the IPO that occurred during the period and the markets focus on the Groups underlying prot before tax.
The prior year comparative was set with reference to prot before tax and applying a percentage of 6%.
Performance materiality was set at 70% 2016 70% of the Group materiality level on the basis that Management is accepting of audit dierences proposed and there is a single trading component within the Group.
The materiality for the parent company nancial statement was set at 300000 How we addressed the matter in our audit We reviewed the fair value policy applied to the open positions at year end and considered its compliance with IFRS 13 Fair value.
We substantively tested a sample of trades within the open forward book at year end ensuring that the mark to market forward rate has been appropriately applied.
We substantively tested a sample of Managements credit valuation adjustment calculations by vouching the input data to underlying accounting records and corroborated the information used by Management to make their assessment.
We recalculated the credit valuation adjustment using industry accepted techniques to compare against Managements own assessment of fair value.
Our testing did not identify any material misstatements in the credit valuation adjustment or the mark to market valuation of the forward book.
Key Audit Matter The Group has a substantial forward book comprising forward foreign currency trades not yet settled.
At each reporting date Management are required to reassess the fair value of unsettled trades which includes adjusting the carrying value of the forward book with reference to their mark to market forward rates and also an assessment of credit worthiness of their counterparties.
A signicant amount of management time is directed at ensuring the revaluation of the forward book to mark to market forward rates has been performed with material accuracy.
Management are required to exercise a signicant level of judgement in their assessment of the credit worthiness of their counterparties and their probability of default.
This presents a signicant risk of material misstatement in the completeness and accuracy of the credit valuation adjustment.
The Groups fair value policy is included with the accounting policies on page 48 and the signicant judgements are set out in note 3.
Alpha FXpp34pp42.
Page 36 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS INDEPENDENT AUDITORS
2016 31000.
This was determined with reference to the net assets of the company using a percentage of 2%.
The performance materiality for the company was set using the same percentage level as the Group for the reason set out above.
We agreed with the Audit Committee that we would report to the committee all individual audit dierences in excess of 16500.
We also agreed to report dierences below this threshold that in our view warranted reporting on qualitative grounds.
An overview of the scope of our audit The Group comprises the parent company and the trading subsidiary Alpha FX Limited.
BDO LLP performed a full scope audit of the parent and the subsidiary.
There have been no signicant changes in scope since the prior year.
Other information The directors are responsible for the other information.
The other information comprises the information included in the annual report other than the nancial statements and our auditors report thereon.
Our
In connection with our audit of the nancial statements our responsibility is to read the other information and in doing so consider whether the other information is materially inconsistent with the nancial statements or our knowledge obtained in the audit or otherwise appears to be materially misstated.
If we identify such material inconsistencies or apparent material misstatements we are required to determine whether there is a material misstatement in the nancial statements or a material misstatement of the other information.
If based on the work we have performed we conclude that there is a material misstatement of this other information we are required to report that fact.
We have nothing to report in this regard.
Opinions on other matters prescribed by the Companies Act 2006 In our opinion based on the work undertaken in the course of the audit the information given in the strategic report and the directors report for the nancial year for which the nancial statements are prepared is consistent with the nancial statements and the strategic report and the directors report have been prepared in accordance with applicable legal requirements.
Matters on which we are required to report by exception In the light of the knowledge and understanding of the Group and the parent company and its environment obtained in the course of the audit we have not identied material misstatements in the strategic report or the directors report.
We have nothing to report in respect of the following matters in relation to which the Companies Act 2006 requires us to report to you if in our opinion adequate accounting records have not been kept or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or the parent company nancial statements are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns or certain disclosures of directors remuneration specied by law are not made or we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit.
Alpha FXpp34pp42.
Page 37 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS INDEPENDENT AUDIT ORS
Responsibilities of directors As explained more fully in the directors responsibilities statement the directors are responsible for the preparation of the nancial statements and for being satised that they give a true and fair view and for such internal control as the directors determine is necessary to enable the preparation of nancial statements that are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error.
In preparing the nancial statements the directors are responsible for assessing the Groups and the parent companys ability to continue as a going concern disclosing as applicable matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless the directors either intend to liquidate the Group or the parent company or to cease operations or have no realistic alternative but to do so.
Auditors responsibilities for the audit of the nancial statements Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the nancial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error and to issue an auditors report that includes our opinion.
Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with ISAs UK will always detect a material misstatement when it exists.
Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if individually or in the aggregate they could reasonably be expected to inuence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these nancial statements.
A further description of our responsibilities for the audit of the nancial statements is located on the Financial Reporting Councils website at www. rc. iteauditorsresponsibilities.
This description forms part of our auditors report.
Neil FungOn Senior Statutory Auditor For and on behalf of BDO LLP Statutory Auditor
United Kingdom 20 March 2018 BDO LLP is a limited liability partnership registered in England and Wales with registered number
Alpha FXpp34pp42.
Page 38 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF COMPREHENSIVE INC OME Year ended Year ended 31 December 31 December
Revenue
Operating expenses Underlying operating prot Cost associated with the IPO Sharebased payments Operating prot Finance income Finance expenses Prot before taxation
Prot and total comprehensive income for the year Prot for the year attributable to Equity owners of the parent Noncontrolling interests Earnings per share attributable to equity owners of the parent pence per share basic diluted underlying basic underlying diluted Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income For the year ended 31 December telAlpha FXpp34pp42.
Page 39 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF FINANCIAL POSITION As at As at 31 December 31 December
Noncurrent assets Intangible assets Property plant and equipment Total noncurrent assets Current assets Trade and other receivables Cash and cash equivalents Other cash balances Total current assets Total assets
Share capital Share premium account Capital redemption reserve Merger reserve Retained earnings Total equity Current liabilities Loans and borrowings Trade and other payables Current tax liability
Total current liabilities Noncurrent liabilities Loans and borrowings Deferred tax liability
Total noncurrent liabilities Total equity and liabilities The consolidated nancial statements of Alpha FX Group plc were approved by the Board of Directors on 20 March 2018 and signed on its behalf by M J Tillbrook T C Kidd Director Director Consolidated Statement of Financial Position As at 31 December telAlpha FXpp34pp42.
Page 40 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONSOLIDATED CASH FLO W ST A TEMENT Year ended Year ended 31 December 31 December
Cash ows from operating activities Prot before taxation Net nance expenses Amortisation of intangible assets Depreciation of property plant and equipment Loss on disposal of xed assets Sharebased payment expense Provision charged in year Increasedecrease in other receivables Decreaseincrease in other payables Increase in derivative nancial assets Decreaseincrease in derivative nancial liabilities Decreaseincrease in other cash balances Cash outows inows from operating activities Tax paid Net cash outowsinows from operating activities Cash ows from investing activities Expenditure on internally developed intangible assets Payments to acquire property plant and equipment Net cash outows from investing activities Cash ows from nancing activities Proceeds from borrowings Repayment of borrowings Dividends paid to equity owners of the Parent Company Amounts repaid by Directors Amounts lent to Directors Issue of ordinary shares by Parent Company Share issue costs Issue of ordinary shares by subsidiary Repurchase of preference shares in subsidiary Purchase of noncontrolling interest for cash Net interest paid Net cash outows from nancing activities Increase in net cash and cash equivalents in the year Net cash and cash equivalents at beginning of year Net cash and cash equivalents at end of year Reclassication of purchase of noncontrolling interest for cash from investing activities in the prior year to nancing activities in the current year
Cash Flow Statement For the year ended 31 December telAlpha FXpp34pp42.
Page 41 ANNU AL REPORT 2017 CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY Attributable to the owners of the parent
Capital
Non
Share premium redemption
Retained controlling capital account reserve reserve
Total interests
Balance at 1 January 2016 Prot and total comprehensive income for the nancial year Transactions with owners Shares issued Shares repurchased from noncontrolling interest Cancellation of shares in Parent Company Cancellation of shares in subsidiary Settlement of noncontrolling interest via share for share exchange Dividends paid Waiver by noncontrolling interests of dividend liabilities Balance at 31 December 2016 Prot and total comprehensive income for the nancial year Transactions with owners Bonus shares issued Cancellation of shares in Parent Company Shares issued on listing Costs of issue of equity shares Dividends paid Sharebased payments Balance at 31 December 2017 Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity For the year ended 31 December telAlpha FXpp34pp42.
Page 42 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE C ONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS General information Alpha FX Group plc the Company is a public limited company having listed its shares on AIM a market operated by The London Stock Exchange on 7 April 2017.
The Company is incorporated and domiciled in the UK registered number  and its registered oce is 2 Eastbourne Terrace London W2 6LG.
The consolidated nancial statements incorporate the results of the Company and its subsidiary undertaking Alpha FX Limited.
The Companys principal activity is the provision of foreign exchange services for corporates exposed to currency market volatility through its 100% owned subsidiary Alpha FX Limited.
Activities range from initial design and implementation of hedging strategies ongoing management and monitoring of currency risks and the provision of technology solutions.
The principal accounting policies adopted by the Group are set out in note 2.
Accounting policies Basis of preparation The consolidated nancial statements have been prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as issued by the International Accounting Standards Board and adopted by the European Union IFRS.
The consolidated nancial statements have been prepared using the measurement bases specied by IFRS for each type of asset liability or expense.
The detailed measurement bases and principal accounting policies of the Group are set out below.
The consolidated nancial statements are presented in pounds sterling  except when otherwise indicated.
The principal accounting policies adopted in the preparation of the consolidated nancial statements are set out below and have been applied consistently throughout all periods presented.
The preparation of consolidated nancial statements in conformity with IFRS requires the use of certain critical accounting estimates.
It also requires management to exercise its judgement in the process of applying the Groups accounting policies.
The areas involving a higher degree of judgement or complexity or areas where assumptions and estimates are signicant to the consolidated nancial statements are disclosed at the end of this section.
The consolidated nancial statements are prepared on the historical cost basis except for the measurement of certain nancial instruments.
Going concern After making appropriate enquiries the Directors have a reasonable expectation that the Group has adequate resources to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future and for at least one year from the approval date of the nancial statements.
For these reasons they continue to adopt the going concern basis in preparing the Groups nancial statements.
Notes to the Consolidated Financial
For the year ended 31 December telAlpha FXpp43pp59.
Page 43 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Accounting policies continued New standards amendments and interpretations At the date of the authorisation of these nancial statements there are number of new standards amendments to standards and interpretations that have been published but are not yet eective for the year ended 31 December 2017 and have not been adopted early.
IFRS 9 Financial Instruments In July 2014 the IASB issued the nal version of IFRS 9 Financial Instruments that replaces IAS 39 Financial Instruments Recognition and Measurement and all previous versions of IFRS 9.
IFRS 9 brings together all 3 aspects of the accounting for nancial instruments project classication and measurement impairment and hedge accounting.
IFRS 9 is eective for annual periods beginning on or after 1 January 2018 with early application permitted.
IFRS 9 requires the Group to record expected credit losses on all of its debt securities loans and trade receivables either on a 12month or lifetime basis.
The Group expects to apply the simplied approach and record lifetime expected losses on all trade receivables.
The Group adopted the new standard on the required eective date.
The Group does not expect a signicant impact on the consolidated statement of nancial position or statement of comprehensive income.
The key areas of change in IFRS 9 are around trade debtors and hedge accounting which are not applicable to the Group as well as intercompany balances.
The intercompany loan between parent and subsidiary is interest free and is repayable on demand.
As the subsidiary is protable and generating cash there is a very low probability of default.
Therefore the present and current value of the loan will have a marginal dierence and the expected loss provision is deemed to be insignicant to the Group.
IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers IFRS 15 was issued in May 2014 and establishes a 5step model to account for revenue arising from contracts with customers.
Under IFRS 15 revenue is recognised at an amount that reects the consideration to which an entity expects to be entitled in exchange for transferring goods or services to a customer.
The new revenue standard will supersede all current revenue recognition requirements under IFRS.
The
Group adopted the new standard on the required eective date of 1 January 2018.
The Group has considered the implications and since revenue is derived from nancial instruments no signicant impact on the consolidated statement of nancial position or statement of comprehensive income has been identied.
IFRS 16 Leases IFRS 16 was issued in January 2016 and it replaces IAS 17 Leases IFRIC 4 Determining whether an Arrangement contains a Lease SIC15 Operating LeasesIncentives and SIC27 Evaluating the Substance of Transactions Involving the Legal Form of a Lease.
IFRS 16 sets out the principles for the recognition measurement presentation and disclosure of leases and requires lessees to account for all leases under a single onbalance sheet model similar to the accounting for nance leases under IAS 17.
The standard includes 2 recognition exemptions for lessees  leases of lowvalue assets e. computers and shortterm leases i. leases with a lease term of 12 months or less.
At the commencement date of a lease a lessee will recognise a liability to make lease payments i. liability and an asset representing the right to use the underlying asset during the lease term i. rightofuse asset.
Lessees will be required to separately recognise the interest expense on the lease liability and the depreciation expense on the rightofuse asset.
Alpha FXpp43pp59.
Page 44 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE C ONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Accounting policies continued Lessees will be also required to remeasure the lease liability upon the occurrence of certain events e. rate used to determine those payments.
The lessee will generally recognise the amount of the remeasurement of the lease liability as an adjustment to the rightofuse asset.
IFRS 16 is eective for annual periods beginning on or after January 1 2019.
Early application is permitted but not before an entity applies IFRS 15.
A lessee can choose to apply the standard using either a full retrospective or a modied retrospective approach.
The standards transition provisions permit certain reliefs.
The Group has entered into a longterm lease in respect of land and buildings.
The Group is currently assessing leases under IFRS 16 and expects an impact as the right of use assets and corresponding lease liabilities will come onto the consolidated statement of nancial position for the rst time in respect of its current operating leases.
Existing operating lease commitments are set in out in Note 27 of the Groups Consolidated Financial Statements.
Basis of consolidation i Subsidiaries Where the Company has control over an investee it is classied as a subsidiary.
The Company controls an investee if all three of the following elements are present power over the investee exposure to variable returns from the investee and the ability of the investor to use its power to aect those variable returns.
Control is reassessed whenever facts and circumstances indicate that there may be a change in any elements of control.
Intragroup balances and any gains and losses or income and expenses arising from intragroup transactions are eliminated in preparing the consolidated nancial information.
Noncontrolling interests in the net assets of consolidated subsidiaries are identied separately from the Groups equity therein.
Noncontrolling interests consist of the amount of those interests at the date of the original business combination and the minoritys share of changes in equity since the date of the combination.
In accordance with IAS 27 the Group recognises any noncontrolling interest at the non controlling interests proportionate share of the acquirees net assets on a transaction by transaction basis.
The Group treats transactions with the noncontrolling interest as transactions with equity owners of the Group.
For purchases from noncontrolling interests the dierence between the fair value of consideration paid and the relevant share of net assets acquired is recorded in equity.
Segment reporting In accordance with IFRS 8 Operating Segments an operating segment is dened as a business activity whose operating results are reviewed by the chief operating decision maker and for which discrete information is available.
Operating segments are reported in a manner consistent with the internal management reporting provided to the chief operating decisionmaker.
Following admission to AIM the chief operating decisionmaker responsible for allocating resources and assessing performance of the operating segments is the board of directors.
Prior to the admission to AIM the chief operating decisionmaker was identied as the Chief Executive Ocer who made strategic decisions.
The Group has one reporting segment due to the nature of services provided across the whole business being the same.
Alpha FXpp43pp59.
Page 45 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Accounting policies continued
Spot and forward revenue is recognised when a binding contract is entered into by a client and the rate is xed and determined.
Revenue represents the dierence between the rate oered to clients and the rate the Group receives from its banking counterparties.
Options revenue is recognised when a binding contract is entered into by a client and the revenue is xed and determined.
Revenue represents the dierence between the premiums oered to clients and the premium the Group receives from its banking counterparties.
When the Group enters into a contract with a client it simultaneously enters into a separate matched contract with its banking counterparty.
Foreign currency translation The Groups consolidated historical nancial statements are presented in sterling which is also the parent and subsidiary companies functional currency.
Transactions and balances Transactions in foreign currencies are initially recorded by the Group entities at the functional currency rates prevailing at the date of the transaction.
Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are retranslated at the functional currency spot rate of exchange ruling at the reporting date.
All dierences are taken to the statement of comprehensive income.
Nonmonetary items that are measured at historical cost in a foreign currency are translated using the exchange rates at the date of the initial transaction.
Nonmonetary items measured at fair value in a foreign currency are translated using the exchange rate at the date when the fair value is determined.
The gain or loss arising on translation of nonmonetary items is recognised in line with the gain or loss of the item that gave rise to the translation dierence translation dierences on items whose gain or loss is recognised in other comprehensive income or prot or loss is also recognised in other comprehensive income or prot or loss respectively.
Financial instruments Financial assets and nancial liabilities are recognised on the Groups balance sheet when the Group has become a party to the contractual provisions of the instrument.
Financial instruments are derecognised when all derecognition criteria of IAS 39 are met and the Group no longer controls the contractual rights that comprise the nancial instrument.
This is normally the case when the instrument is sold or all the cash ows attributable to the instrument are passed to an independent thirdparty.
Financial assets
The Group classies its nancial assets as either fair value through income statement or as loans and receivables.
Management determines the classication of its nancial assets at initial recognition.
Loans and receivables Loans and receivables are nonderivative nancial assets with xed or determinable payments that arise principally through the provision of services to customers.
They are initially recognised at fair value and are subsequently stated at amortised cost using the eective interest method.
They are included in current assets.
Loans and receivables comprise mainly cash and cash equivalents and trade and other receivables.
Trade receivables represent the fair value of derivative nancial assets arising as a result of matched principal transactions.
The treatment of these is outlined in the policy below.
Alpha FXpp43pp59.
Page 46 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE C ONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Accounting policies continued Financial assets at fair value through income statement Financial assets at fair value through income statement include nancial assets designated upon initial recognition at fair value through income statement.
Derivatives are also categorised as nancial assets designated upon initial recognition at fair value through income statement because they are not designated as hedges.
Assets in this category are classied as current assets as they are expected to be settled within 12 months.
Financial assets at fair value through income statement are initially recognised at fair value including directly attributable transaction costs.
Subsequent changes in fair value are recognised directly in the statement of comprehensive income.
Impairment of nancial assets Impairment provisions are recognised when there is objective evidence such as signicant nancial diculties on the part of the counterparty or default or signicant delay in payment that the Group will be unable to collect amounts due as a result of nonperformance under agreed terms.
The amount of such a provision is the dierence between the net carrying amount and the present value of the future expected cash ows associated with the impaired receivable.
Financial liabilities
The Group determines the classication of its nancial liabilities at initial recognition.
All nancial liabilities are recognised initially at fair value and in the case of loans and borrowings carried at amortised cost including directly attributable transaction costs.
The Groups nancial liabilities include derivative nancial liabilities overdrafts trade and other payables and loans received from shareholders.
Derecognition of liabilities A nancial liability is derecognised when the obligation under the liability is discharged or cancelled or expires.
When an existing nancial liability is replaced by another from the same lender on substantially dierent terms or the terms of an existing liability are substantially modied such an exchange or modication is treated as a derecognition of the original liability and the recognition of a new liability and the dierence in the respective carrying amounts is recognised in the statement of comprehensive income.
Osetting nancial instruments When there is a legally enforceable right to oset the recognised amounts and there is an intention to settle on a net basis or realise the asset and settle the liability simultaneously nancial assets and liabilities are oset and the net amount reported in the balance sheet.
Derivative nancial instruments Derivative nancial assets are carried as assets when their fair value is positive and liabilities when their fair value is negative.
Changes in the fair value of derivatives are included in the consolidated statement of comprehensive income.
The Groups derivative nancial assets and liabilities at fair value through income statement comprise of forward foreign exchange contracts and options.
The Group undertakes matched principal broking involving simultaneous backtoback derivative transactions with counterparties.
These transactions are classied as nancial instruments at fair value through the income statement and are shown gross except where a netting agreement which is legally enforceable exists and the intention is for the asset and liability to be settled net.
Alpha FXpp43pp59.
Page 47 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Accounting policies continued Credit valuation adjustment CVA reects the credit risk of the counterparties inherent in the valuation of the derivative nancial instruments.
The adjustment represents the estimated fair value of protection required to hedge the counterparty credit risk.
The adjustment takes into account counterparty exposure applicable collateral arrangement and default probability rates.
Cash and cash equivalents Cash and cash equivalents comprise cash balances and deposits held at call with banks.
For the purposes of the Consolidated Cash Flow Statement cash and cash equivalents consist of cash and cash equivalents as dened above net of outstanding bank overdrafts.
Other payables Other payables are initially stated at fair value and subsequently measured at amortised cost using the eective interest method.
Other payables are obligations to pay for goods or services that have been acquired in the ordinary course of business.
They are classied as current liabilities if payment is due in one year or less.
If payment is due at a later date they are presented as noncurrent liabilities.
Fair value Fair value is the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date.
The Group uses valuation techniques that are appropriate to the circumstances and for which sucient data is available to measure fair value maximising the use of relevant observable inputs and minimising the use of unobservable inputs.
All assets and liabilities for which fair value is measured or disclosed in the nancial statements are categorised within the fair value hierarchy described as follows based on the lowest level input that is signicant to the fair value measurement as a whole Level 1 quoted unadjusted market prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities Level 2 valuation techniques for which the lowest level input that is signicant to the fair value measurement is directly or indirectly observable Level 3 valuation techniques for which the lowest level input that is signicant to the fair value measurement is unobservable Fair value disclosures for nancial instruments are provided in Note 16.
For the purpose of fair value disclosures the Group has determined classes of assets and liabilities based on the nature characteristics and risks of the inputs into the valuations and the level of the fair value hierarchy as explained above.
Taxes
Current income tax Current income tax assets and liabilities are measured at the amount expected to be recovered from or paid to the taxation authorities.
The tax rates and tax laws used to compute the amount are those that are enacted or substantively enacted at the reporting date.
Current income tax relating to items recognised directly in equity or other comprehensive income is recognised in equity and not in the statement of comprehensive income.
Alpha FXpp43pp59.
Page 48 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE C ONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Accounting policies continued Deferred income tax Deferred income tax is provided on all temporary dierences at the reporting date arising between the tax bases of assets and liabilities and their carrying amounts for nancial reporting purposes.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are oset when the Group has a legally enforceable right to oset current tax assets and liabilities and the deferred tax assets and liabilities relate to taxes levied by the same tax authority.
Employee benets Pension obligations The Group operates a dened contribution pension scheme for employees.
The assets of the scheme are held separately from those of the Group.
The annual contributions are charged to the consolidated statement of comprehensive income.
Discretionary contributions are occasionally made to Directors dened benet pension plans.
Sharebased payments The Group issues equitysettled sharebased payments to certain senior executives of the Group through the Growth Share Scheme and unapproved options scheme.
Equitysettled sharebased schemes are measured at fair value excluding the eect of nonmarketbased vesting conditions at the date of grant using an appropriate option pricing model.
The Growth Shares Scheme has been valued using a Monte Carlo Simulation Approach due to the existence of market based conditions.
Nonmarketbased conditions exist over revenue based targets which require management to estimate the probability of meeting these conditions.
The unapproved options scheme has been valued using a Black Scholes option pricing model as only a service based condition exists.
Both schemes require the estimation of appropriate attrition rates to estimate the number of share options which are likely to vest.
The fair value of the shares or share options is recognised over the vesting period to reect the value of the employee services received.
The charge relating to grants to employees of the Company is recognised as an expense in the income statement.
Property plant and equipment Owned assets Property plant and equipment is stated at cost less accumulated depreciation and impairment losses.
Depreciation
Depreciation is charged to the consolidated statement of comprehensive income on a straightline basis over the estimated useful lives of each item of property plant and equipment.
Estimated residual values are included in the calculation of depreciation.
The estimated useful lives of property plant and equipment are as follows Improvements to property Period of lease Fixtures and ttings 4 to 5 years straightline Computer equipment 3 years straightline The residual values and useful lives are reviewed by the Directors and adjusted if appropriate at the end of each reporting period.
Alpha FXpp43pp59.
Page 49 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Accounting policies continued Intangible assets Intangible assets consist of internally developed software.
Development expenditure on an individual project is recognised as an intangible asset when the Group can demonstrate The technical feasibility of completing the development That it will be available for use or sale Its intention to complete and its ability to use or sell the asset How the asset will generate future economic benets The availability of resources to complete the development The ability to measure reliably the expenditure during development Following initial recognition of the development expenditure as an asset the cost model is applied requiring the asset to be carried at cost less any accumulated amortisation and accumulated impairment losses.
Amortisation of the asset begins when development is complete and the asset is available for use.
Internally developed software costs are amortised over the useful life of the asset on a straightline basis over 3 years being the period of expected future benet.
Amortisation is recorded in operating expenses.
During the period of development the asset is tested annually for impairment.
Impairment of nonnancial assets Assets that are subject to amortisation are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable.
An impairment loss is recognised for the amount by which the assets carrying amount exceeds its recoverable amount.
The recoverable amount is the higher of an assets fair value less costs to sell and value in use.
Share capital Ordinary shares are classied as equity.
Incremental costs directly attributable to the issue of new shares are shown in share premium as a deduction from the proceeds.
Operating leases The costs associated with operating leases are taken to the statement of comprehensive income on an accruals basis over the period of the lease.
Rental payable under operating leases is charged to the consolidated statement of comprehensive income on a straightline basis over the lease term.
The benet of lease incentives is spread on a straight line basis over the lease term.
Provisions
Provisions are recognised when the Group has a present obligation as a result of a past event and it is probable that the Group will be required to settle the obligation.
Provisions are measured based on the Directors best estimate of the expenditure required to settle the obligation at the balance sheet date and are discounted to present value where the eect is material.
An onerous property provision is recognised and measured as a provision when the Group has a present obligation arising under a property related contract.
An onerous contract is considered to exist where the Group has a contract under which the unavoidable costs of meeting the obligations under the contract exceeds the economic benets expected to be received under it.
Alpha FXpp43pp59.
Page 50 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE C ONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Signicant accounting estimates and judgements The preparation of the Groups nancial statements requires management to make estimates judgements and assumptions about the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities.
Uncertainty about these assumptions and estimates could result in outcomes that could require a material adjustment to the carrying amount of the assets or liability aected in the future.
The estimates and underlying assumptions are reviewed on an ongoing basis.
In the process of applying the Groups accounting policies management has made the following judgements and estimates which have the most signicant eect on the amounts recognised in the nancial statements
Impairment of nancial assets Impairment provisions are recognised when there is objective evidence that the Group will be unable to collect all the amounts due under the terms receivable the amount of such a provision being the dierence between the net carrying amount and the present value of the future expected cash ows associated with the impaired receivable.
In order to calculate the present value of the future expected cash ows management must make an estimate of expected future cash ows and apply an appropriate discount factor estimated using the latest market information.
Judgements
Development costs Development costs that are directly attributable to the development of a project are capitalised based on managements assessment of the likelihood of a successful outcome for each project.
This is based on the managements judgement that the project is technologically commercially and economically feasible in accordance with IAS 38 Intangible Assets.
In determining the amount to be capitalised management makes assumptions regarding the expected future cash generation of the project discount rates to be applied and the expected period of benets.
Details of capitalised development costs are shown in note 11.
Onerous lease As described in note 2 provisions onerous lease provisions are recognised for estimated losses on leases where the forecast costs of fullling the lease throughout the contracted period exceed the forecast income receivable.
The provision is calculated based on present value of the estimated obligations under a lease where the unavoidable costs of the lease exceed the economic benet expected to be received from it.
Credit value adjustment The credit value adjustment has been calculated by management based on the assumption that the Group will be unable to collect all the amounts due under the terms receivable and therefore is a method of counterparty credit risk management.
The amount of the adjustment represents the dierence between the net carrying amount and the present value of the future expected cash ows associated with the receivables.
In order to calculate the present value of the future expected cash ows management must make an estimate of expected future cash ows using the latest realtime market information risk ratings of the clients and experience.
Sharebased payments As described in note 2 sharebased payments equity settled share awards are recognised as an expense based on their fair value at date of grant.
The fair value of equity settled growth shares scheme and unapproved share options are estimated through the use of option valuation models which require an element of judgement in assessing the inputs.
Judgement is also exercised in assessing the number of options subject to nonmarket vesting conditions that will vest.
Alpha FXpp43pp59.
Page 51 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Signicant accounting estimates and judgements continued Fair value of equity consideration on share for share exchange In the year ended 31 December 2016 the remaining 13.3% noncontrolling interest in Alpha FX Limited was purchased through the issue of equity in the Company.
The fair value of the shares issued was determined based on a multiple of posttax income.
A noncontrolling discount to the overall equity value was applied to arrive at a best estimate of the fair value of this consideration.
Segmental reporting During the year the Group generated revenue from the sale of forward currency contracts foreign exchange spot transactions and option contracts.
The revenue attributable to the sale of these products is shown below 31 December 31 December Foreign exchange spot transactions Foreign currency forward contracts Option contracts During the year ended 31 December 2017 revenue totalling 752888 2016 17186 arose from customers based outside the United Kingdom.
All other revenue arose from customers based in the United Kingdom.
In 2017 one customer contributed 5% of the Groups revenue 2016  11%.
All noncurrent assets of the Group are domiciled in the United Kingdom.
Operating prot Operating prot is stated after chargingcrediting 31 December 31 December Operating lease rentals Depreciation of owned property plant and equipment Amortisation of internally generated intangible assets Loss on disposal of xed assets Provisions note 24 Audit fees Audit fees in respect of the parent and consolidated nancial statements Audit fees in respect of the subsidiary accounts NonAudit fees Corporate nance fees Other assurance services Tax Advisory Sta costs note 7 Net foreign exchange gainslosses IPO costs Other costs include business related expenses including premises and IT related costs.
Alpha FXpp43pp59.
Page 52 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE C ONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Finance income and expenses 31 December 31 December Finance income Interest on bank deposits Finance costs Interest payable on loans and borrowings Other interest payable Employee costs Sta costs including directors remuneration were as follows 31 December 31 December Wages and salaries Social security costs Sharebased payment charge Other pension costs Employee benet expense included in operating prot The sharebased payment charge includes employers national insurance amounting to 28960 relating to an unapproved option scheme.
The average number of employees including directors was as follows 31 December 31 December
No.
Directors
Sales administration and support sta Directors remuneration 31 December 31 December Aggregate Directors emoluments Aggregate Directors pension scheme contributions
During 2017 retirement benets were accruing to 1 director 2016 no directors in respect of dened contribution pension schemes.
Alpha FXpp43pp59.
Page 53 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Employee costs continued The highest paid director received remuneration in 2017 of 250000 2016 200466.
The value of the Companys contributions paid to a dened contribution pension scheme in respect of the highest paid director amounted to 359 in 2017 2016 nil.
Taxation
Tax charge 31 December 31 December Current tax UK Corporation tax charge on the prot for the year Adjustments relating to prior years Total current tax Deferred tax Origination and reversal of temporary dierences Adjustments relating to prior years Total deferred tax Total tax expense Factors aecting tax charge for the year 31 December 31 December Prot on ordinary activities before tax Prot on ordinary activities multiplied by the eective standard rate of UK corporation tax of 19.25% 2016 20% Eects of Expenses not deductible for tax purposes Deferred tax relating to sharebased payments Adjustments relating to prior years Adjust closing deferred tax in respect of change in future rate of taxation Total tax charge for the year Deferred tax The deferred taxation liability at a tax rate of 19% 2016 19% comprises the following 31 December 31 December
At 1 January Tax credit relating to current year Tax charge relating to prior year Total deferred tax liability Alpha FXpp43pp59.
Page 54 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE C ONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Taxation continued The Finance Act 2015 set the main rate of UK corporation tax at 20% with eect from April 2015.
The enactment of the Finance No.2 Act 2015 and Finance Act 2016 reduces the main rate of corporation tax to 19% from April 2017 and 17% from April 2020.
The provision for deferred taxation consists of the tax eect of timing dierences in respect of 31 December 31 December Fixed asset dierences Sharebased payments Total deferred tax liability Earnings per share Basic earnings per share is calculated by dividing the prot for the year attributable to equity holders of the parent by the weighted average number of ordinary shares during the year.
Diluted earnings per share additionally includes in the calculation the weighted average number of ordinary shares that would be issued on conversion of any dilutive potential ordinary shares.
The Group additionally discloses an underlying earnings per share calculation that excludes the impact of the oneo costs relating to the IPO and their tax eect and sharebased payments which better enables comparison of nancial performance in the current year with comparative years.
31 December 31 December pence pence Underlying  basic Underlying  diluted Basic earnings per share Diluted earnings per share The calculation of basic and diluted earnings per share is based on the following number of shares 31 December 31 December
No.
Basic weighted average shares Contingently issuable shares Diluted weighted average shares As disclosed in note 20 in 2017 there was a bonus issue of shares which were converted from 1 shares into shares of 0.002p each prior to the IPO.
The eect of this has been backdated to 1 January 2016 impacting the basic weighted average shares for 31 December 2016.
Alpha FXpp43pp59.
Page 55 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Earnings per share continued The earnings used in the calculation of basic diluted and underlying earnings per share are set out below 31 December 31 December Prot after tax for the year Noncontrolling interests Earnings  basic and diluted Costs associated with the IPO Tax eect Sharebased payments Deferred tax asset impact on sharebased payments Earnings  underlying
31 December 31 December Interim dividend for the year ended 31 December 2017 of 1.5p per Ordinary Share of 0.002 each Interim dividend for the year ended 31 December 2016 of 593 per A Ordinary Share of 1 each The Directors propose that a nal dividend in respect of the year ended 31 December 2017 of 3.4p per share amounting to 1133130 will be paid on 16 May 2018 to all shareholders on the register of members on 13 April 2018.
This dividend is subject to approval by shareholders at the AGM and has not been included as a liability in these Financial Statements.
In the year ended 31 December 2016 A Ordinary shareholders waived their rights to dividends over 260 shares and B Ordinary shareholders waived their rights to dividends over 118 shares.
A reconciliation of the movements in share capital for each year is included in note 20.
Alpha FXpp43pp59.
Page 56 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE C ONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Intangible assets
Cost
At 1 January 2016
At 31 December 2016
At 31 December 2017
At 1 January 2016 Charge for the year At 31 December 2016 Charge for year At 31 December 2017 Net book value At 31 December 2016 At 31 December 2017 Property plant and equipment
Fixtures and
Total
Cost
At 1 January 2016
Disposals
At 31 December 2016
Disposals
At 31 December 2017
At 1 January 2016 Charge for the year
At 31 December 2016 Charge for the year
At 31 December 2017 Net book value At 31 December 2016 At 31 December 2017 No assets were held under nance leases during the years ended 31 December 2017 or 31 December 2016.
Alpha FXpp43pp59.
Page 57 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Details of the subsidiaries in which the Company holds directly or indirectly 20% or more of the nominal value of any class of share capital are as follows % voting interest
Incorporated in England and Wales Nature of business Alpha FX Limited Registered oce address is 100% 100% Provision of foreign exchange 2 Eastbourne Terrace services
London
W2 6LG Alpha FX Limited is the principal trading entity of the Group.
In the year ended 31 December 2017 Alpha FX Limited issued certain employees with a new class of share B Shares.
These nonvoting shares confer no upfront economic rights to their holders and are not entitled to receive dividends.
As a result Alpha FX Limited remains a 100% subsidiary of the Group.
In the year ended 31 December 2016 the Group purchased the remaining 35% of the issued share capital in Alpha FX Limited increasing its holding in the subsidiary undertaking to 100%.
Further details of this transaction can be found in note 21.
Derivative nancial assets and nancial liabilities 31 December 2017 31 December 2016 Derivative nancial assets not
Notional designated as hedging instruments Fair value principal Fair value principal Foreign currency forward and option contracts with customers Foreign currency forward and option contracts with banking counterparties Other foreign exchange forward contracts Foreign currency forward contracts with customers generally require immediate settlement on the value date of the individual contract.
31 December 2017 31 December 2016 Derivative nancial liabilities not
Notional designated as hedging instruments Fair value principal Fair value principal Foreign currency forward and option contracts with customers Foreign currency forward and option contracts with banking counterparties Other foreign exchange forward contracts Alpha FXpp43pp59.
Page 58 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE C ONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Derivative nancial assets and nancial liabilities continued Derivatives not designated as hedging instruments are intended to reduce the level of foreign currency risk for expected future cash ows.
The tables above show the fair value of those foreign exchange forward contracts as at each year end.
Forward foreign exchange contracts and options fall into level 2 of the fair value hierarchy as set out in note 2.
Level 2 comprises those nancial instruments which can be valued using inputs other than quoted prices that are observable for the asset or liability either directly i. prices or indirectly i. derived from prices.
The fair value of forward foreign exchange contracts is measured using observable forward exchange rates for contracts with a similar maturity at the reporting date.
The fair value of option foreign exchange contracts is measured using an industry standard external model that best presents the unpublished interbank valuations.
There were no transfers between level 1 and 2 during the current or prior year.
Financial instruments The principal nancial instruments of the Group from which nancial instrument risk arises are as follows 31 December 31 December a Financial assets per balance sheet Derivatives not designated as hedging instruments Foreign currency forward and option contracts with customers Foreign currency forward and option contracts with banking counterparties Other foreign exchange forward contracts Total derivatives not designated as hedging instruments Loans and receivables Other receivables excluding prepayments Cash and cash equivalents Other cash balances Total loans and receivables Total nancial assets Alpha FXpp43pp59.
Page 59 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Financial instruments continued 31 December 31 December b Financial liabilities per balance sheet Derivatives not designated as hedging instruments Foreign currency forward and option contracts with customers Foreign currency forward and option contracts with banking counterparties Other foreign exchange forward contracts Total derivatives not designated as hedging instruments Other payables measured at amortised cost Other payables and accruals Total other payables Interestbearing loans and borrowings measured at amortised cost Shareholder loans Bank overdrafts Total interestbearing loans and borrowings Total nancial liabilities c Osetting nancial assets and nancial liabilities Financial instruments at fair value through prot and loss represent simultaneous backtoback derivative transactions with banking counterparties and are reported as separate nancial assets and nancial liabilities in the statement of nancial position.
The transactions are subject to ISDA International Swaps and Derivatives Association Master Netting Agreements which provide a legally enforceable right of in the normal course of business the event of a default and the event of insolvency or bankruptcy.
Amounts subject to enforceable netting arrangements
Gross
Variation
Fair asset
Oset
Note 14 balances Derivative nancial assets Derivative nancial liabilities Amounts subject to enforceable netting arrangements
Gross
Variation
Fair asset
Oset
Note 14 balances Derivative nancial assets Derivative nancial liabilities Alpha FXpp60pp73.
Page 60 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE C ONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Fair value Management assessed that the fair values of cash and shortterm deposits trade and other receivables trade and other payables as well as other current liabilities approximated to their carrying amounts.
This was due to the shortterm maturities of these instruments.
The fair values of the Groups interestbearing loans and borrowings are determined by discounting the cash ow using a market rate of interest that reects the issuers borrowing rate as at the end of the reporting period which approximate their carrying amounts.
Management is of the opinion that the fair value of loans and borrowings approximates to their carrying values as these are subject to interest rates which are comparable to open market rates.
The fair value of nancial assets and liabilities is included at the amount at which the instrument could be exchanged in a current transaction between willing parties other than in a forced or liquidation sale.
All loans are classed as Level 2 in the fair value hierarchy.
Financial risk management The Groups current activities result in the following nancial risks and the management response to those risks in order to minimise any resulting adverse eects on the Groups nancial performance.
Objectives policies and processes for managing risk and the methods used to measure the risk Financial assets principally comprise trade and other receivables cash and cash equivalents other cash balances and derivative nancial assets.
Financial liabilities comprise trade and other payables shareholder loans and derivative nancial liabilities.
The main risks arising from nancial instruments are credit risk liquidity risk foreign currency risk and interest rate risk each of which is discussed in further detail below.
The Group monitors and mitigates nancial risk on a consolidated basis.
The Group has implemented a framework to manage the risks of its business and to ensure that the Directors have in place risk management practices appropriate to a listed company.
The Group has a robust threelines of defence risk and compliance framework covering all operational and compliance activities.
This framework is overseen and enforced by the Director of Risk and Compliance who has extensive experience overseeing risk and compliance within a number of reputable nancial services rms.
As part of this framework the Group has a Risk Committee whose membership consists of directors responsible for each risk category.
Credit risk Credit risk is the risk that one or more counterparties will not meet its obligations under a nancial instrument or customer contract leading to a nancial loss.
There are no signicant concentrations of credit risk within the Group.
The maximum credit risk exposure relating to nancial assets arises from derivative nancial instruments represented by the carrying value as at the balance sheet date.
The
Group evaluated the concentration of risk as low with respect to derivative nancial assets arising from contracts with counterparties.
This is due to the fact that no single customer represents a signicant proportion of the total value of customer contracts and the business has historically low levels of counterparty default.
Alpha FXpp60pp73.
Page 61 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Financial risk management continued Where the Group provides credit to counterparties this is subject to credit verication checks.
The
Groups counterparties are reviewed at least annually and are subject to an ongoing credit review process by the Risk and Compliance team.
Counterparty exposures are monitored in real time.
Daily stress tests are carried out to assess and minimise client credit risk exposures under various market volatility scenarios.
Credit risk is minimised by the operation of matched derivative transactions whereby derivatives sold to customers are then matched on a backtoback basis with an osetting derivative from a banking counterparty.
Derivatives are entered into with banking counterparties which minimises credit risk further as the Group is only exposed to the net position of its derivative assets and liabilities and this position is collateralised on a daily basis.
The Groups maximum exposure to credit risk is illustrated in the nancial assets table in note 15.
Liquidity risk The Group is exposed to liquidity risk namely that it may be unable to meet its payment obligations as they fall due.
Extensive controls are in place to ensure that this liquidity risk is mitigated.
The Groups liquidity requirements are constantly reviewed and the Group employs stress testing to model the suciency of its liquidity in stressed market scenarios.
Clients ability to pay margin and settle contracts is monitored in realtime with automated triggers and alerts congured into the Groups systems.
The
Group maintains cash reserves and continues to increase these reserves relative to its trading activity on an ongoing basis.
It is the Boards responsibility to set appropriate limits to the liquidity risk of the Group as well as ensuring that a strong system of internal controls is implemented and enforced whilst the daily management of liquidity risk rests with the Head of Product and Liquidity Risk overseen by its CFO.
The
Group manages its liquidity on a trade by trade basis rejecting any trade that has the potential to harm its liquidity and maintains robust margin terms with its clients that require them to deposit margin if their forward contracts adversely deviate in fair value.
The Group also attempts to ensure it maintains as closely as is possible a balanced position in each currency with regular stress testing of its net long or short in a particular currency against sudden and unforeseen market movements Black Swan
The Head of Product and Liquidity Risk is responsible for implementing and monitoring the relevant controls and for providing the CFO with timely and accurate reporting on the Groups liquidity position and nancial performance e. budget against actual.
In conjunction with the CFO they are also responsible for ensuring the Group has capital and liquidity resources in sucient amount and quality to meet its liabilities as they fall due and to support its growth and strategic objectives.
The Group has sucient cash resources alongside additional borrowing facilities with its banking partner to pay its debts and contractual liabilities as they fall due.
Consequently management does not believe that the Group has a material exposure to liquidity risk.
Alpha FXpp60pp73.
Page 62 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE C ONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Financial risk management continued The table below summarises the maturity prole of the Groups derivative nancial liabilities arising from forward currency contracts with customers based on contractual undiscounted payments.
Derivative liabilities  forward currency contracts with customers
03 months 36 months 612 months 12 Months Buy currency
389594217 154881032 107206528 121759466 Sell currency
226686829 57865893 57010126 66859416 44951393
Total
03 months 36 months 612 months 12 Months Buy currency
Sell currency
Netted
Derivative liabilities  forward currency contracts with brokers
03 months 36 months 612 months 12 Months
Netted
The table below summarises the maturity prole of the Groups other nancial liabilities based on contractual undiscounted payments.
Other liabilities At 31 December 2017
On demand Up to 1 year 12 years 25 years Other payables and accruals At 31 December 2016
On demand Up to 1 year 12 years 25 years Loans and borrowings Interest due on loans and borrowings Other payables and accruals Interest rate risk Interest rate risk is the risk that the value of a nancial instrument or cash ows associated with the instrument will uctuate due to changes in market interest rates.
Interest rate risk arises from interestbearing nancial assets and liabilities used by the Group.
Interestbearing assets comprise cash and cash equivalents which are considered to be short term liquid assets.
It is the Groups policy to settle derivative nancial liabilities arising from contracts with customers included within trade payables and other payables within the credit terms allowed and the Group does not therefore incur interest on overdue balances.
All borrowings are subject to xed interest rates until maturity.
The 300000 overdraft facility is subject to oating interest at 4.75% above the Bank of England base rate.
A change in interest rates would not directly have a material impact on prot or equity and therefore a sensitivity analysis for the impact of interest rate changes has not been disclosed.
Alpha FXpp60pp73.
Page 63 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Financial risk management continued Foreign currency risk Foreign currency risk refers to the risk that nonsterling revenue earned on a transaction may uctuate due to changes in foreign currency rates.
The Group is exposed to foreign currency risk on revenue and cash holdings that are denominated in a currency other than sterling.
The principal currencies giving rise to this risk vary each year depending on the currency of transactions undertaken by the Group.
Details of the foreign currency cash balances can be found in note 19.
The Group manages its exposure to currency movements in line with its Treasury Policy.
Client money received in a foreign currency is deposited in a bank account of the same currency to provide a natural hedge.
The Group reduces its exposure to foreign exchange by retranslating excess cash in foreign currencies into sterling on a regular basis.
The Group hedges a proportion of its unrealised prots through foreign exchange contacts designated as at fair value through prot and loss.
Foreign currency risk  sensitivity analysis The Groups principal recurring foreign currency transactions are in Euros.
Other foreign currency transactions that occur in other currencies including US Dollar and Australian Dollar are adhoc in nature with foreign currency balances being held for short periods of time resulting in minimal risk to the business.
The Group has therefore considered the sensitivity to movements in the SterlingEuro exchange rate by considering the impact on those revenues costs and assets denominated in Euros as experienced in the given period.
Impact on prot after tax Impact on equity Year ended 31 Decembertel 10% weakening in the exchange rate 10% strengthening in the exchange rate The impact of a change of 10% has been selected as this is considered reasonable given the current level of exchange rates and the volatility observed both on a historical basis and market expectations for future movement.
When applied to the closing sterlingeuro exchange rate of 1.1249 2016 1.169 this would result in a weakened exchange rate of 1.0124 2016 1.0521 and a strengthened exchange rate of 1.2374 2016 1.2859.
Management of capital The Groups objectives when managing capital are to maximise shareholder value whilst safeguarding the Groups ability to continue as a going concern.
The Groups policy is to maintain a capital base and funding structure that maintains creditor regulator and market condence and provides exibility for business development whilst also optimising returns to shareholders.
The entity monitors its total capital as its total equity as shown in the statement of nancial position.
In order to maintain or adjust the capital structure the Company may issue new shares or adjust the dividends paid to shareholders.
Alpha FXpp60pp73.
Page 64 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE C ONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Trade and other receivables 31 December 31 December Trade receivables derivative nancial assets  note 14 Other receivables
Trade receivables represent the fair value of derivative nancial assets arising as a result of matched principal transactions note 14.
At 31 December 2017 and 31 December 2016 none of the receivables shown above were past due or impaired.
Cash
Cash and cash equivalents comprise cash balances and deposits held at call with banks.
Other cash balances comprise cash held as collateral with banking counterparties for which the Group does not have immediate access.
Cash balances included within derivative nancial assets relate to the variation margin called against out of the money trades with banking counterparties.
31 December 31 December Cash and cash equivalents Bank overdraft note 22 Net cash and cash equivalents Variation margin called by counterparties note 14c Other cash balances Total cash Cash at bank earns interest at oating rates based on daily bank deposit rates and is made up of the following currency balances 31 December 31 December British Pound
US Dollar Australian Dollar South African Rand Other currencies The directors consider that the carrying amount of cash and cash equivalents approximates to their fair value.
Alpha FXpp60pp73.
Page 65 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Cash continued All changes in nancial liabilities arising from nancing activities are due to cash ow movements and are shown in the Consolidated Cash Flow Statement within cash ow from nancing activities.
Capital and reserves Share capital As at 31 December As at 31 December
Number
Authorised issued and fully paid Ordinary shares of 0.002 each Ordinary A shares of 1 each Ordinary B shares of 1 each Ordinary C shares of 1 each Ordinary D shares of 1 each
Deferred
Number of shares shares shares shares shares shares shares
At 1 January 2017 shares of 1 each Issue of shares
Repurchase and cancellation At 31 Dec tel31 Bonus issue Conversion to 0.002 each
Cancellation of shares Issue of new shares on IPO At 31 Dec 2017 The following movements of share capital occurred during the year ended 31 December 2017 On 24 March 2017 a bonus issues of shares was made for all A B C and D shares of 49 additional shares for each share held.
On the same date all shares were converted from ordinary shares of 1 each to ordinary shares of 0.002 each.
On 31 March 2017 all the A and B shares were converted into ordinary shares the C shares were converted into 371851 ordinary shares and 403149 deferred shares and the D shares were converted into 1307475 ordinary shares and 1417525 deferred shares.
On the same date the 1820674 deferred shares were cancelled.
On 7 April 2017 the Company issued 6632653 new shares upon admission to the London Stock
Alpha FXpp60pp73.
Page 66 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE C ONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Capital and reserves continued The following movements of share capital occurred during the year ended 31 December 2016 On 12 October 2016 65 B ordinary shares were reallocated as A ordinary shares.
On the same day 760 new A ordinary shares and 138 new B ordinary shares with a nominal value of 1 were issued at par.
The A shares were issued prorata on the basis of existing shareholdings in order to maintain the split of shares between certain shareholders.
The 138 B shares were issued as consideration for shares repurchased from a noncontrolling interest shareholder in Alpha FX Limited.
On 10 November 2016 the Company repurchased and cancelled 40 A ordinary shares and 20 B ordinary shares.
On 14 November 2016 the Company issued 31 C Ordinary shares and 109 D ordinary shares with a nominal value of 1 were issued at par.
A and B ordinary shares carry full voting and dividend rights as well as rights to returns on capital.
C and D shares carry no voting rights and limited rights to returns on capital.
Share premium account The share premium account of 12237951 arose on the issue of new shares on 7 April 2017 upon admission to the London Stock Exchange amounting to 13000000 less the directly attributable costs of issuing of the new equity amounting to 762049.
Capital redemption reserve The reserve of 3701 arose following the buyback of shares in both the year ended 31 December 2016 and the year ended 31 December 2017.
Merger reserve The merger reserve was created in October 2016 as a result of the share for share exchange with non controlling interests.
The merger relief reserve represents the dierence between the fair value and nominal value of shares issued on the acquisition of noncontrolling interests where the Company has taken advantage of merger relief.
Retained earnings Represents all other net gains and losses and transactions not recognised elsewhere.
Transactions with noncontrolling interests in prior year In the year ended 31 December 2016 the Company repurchased 25% of the issued share capital Alpha FX Limited from a noncontrolling interest for a total consideration of 1000000.
Dividends due to the 25% noncontrolling interest were waived at on 31 March 2016.
The 60 Ordinary A shares purchased from the noncontrolling interest were subsequently cancelled which had the eect of increasing the remaining shareholding of the noncontrolling interest from 10% to 13.3%.
In October 2016 the Company repurchased the remaining 13.3% of the issued share capital of Alpha FX Limited at par value of 2300 from a noncontrolling interest.
The consideration was satised by the issue of 138 shares in the Company at par.
The merger reserve represents the dierence between fair value of the shares issued by the Company which was assessed to be 666667 and the nominal value of the shares of 138.
Alpha FXpp60pp73.
Page 67 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Transactions with noncontrolling interests in prior year continued On 12 October 2016 all remaining dividend liabilities due to noncontrolling interests were waived by the receiving parties.
31 December 31 December At 1 January Prot attributable to noncontrolling interests Shares repurchased from noncontrolling interest Cancellation of shares in subsidiary Shares repurchased from noncontrolling interests via share for share exchange Waiver by noncontrolling interests of dividend liabilities At 31 December In accordance with IFRS 3 an increase in a parents ownership in a subsidiary is accounted for as an equity transaction.
The dierence between the cost of acquiring the additional ownership and the increase in the attributable net assets of the subsidiary has been transferred to equity as a retained earnings movement.
An amount of 260759 was credited to retained earnings on the repurchase of a 25% noncontrolling interest in March 2016.
An amount of 31701 was charged to retained earnings on the cancellation of shares in the subsidiary in March 2016 and a further 173081 was credited to retained earnings on the repurchase of a 13.3% noncontrolling interest in October 2016.
With eect from October 2016 Alpha FX Limited is a whollyowned subsidiary of the Company.
Summarised nancial information in relation to the noncontrolling interest of Alpha FX Limited before intragroup eliminations is given below.
At 31 December 2016 there were no assets or liabilities attributable to the noncontrolling interest.
31 December 31 December
Operating costs Finance costs Prot before tax
Prot and total comprehensive income allocated to NCI Cash ows from operating activities Cash ows from investing activities Cash ows from nancing activities Net cash inow Alpha FXpp60pp73.
Page 68 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE C ONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Loans and borrowings Loans and borrowings measured at amortised cost using the eective interest method are detailed below 31 December 31 December Interest rate
Current loans and borrowings 498925 shareholder loan 5.00% December 2017 500000 shareholder loan 5.00% June 2020 Bank overdraft facility Bank of England base rate  4.75% On demand Total current loans and borrowings Noncurrent loans and borrowings 304000 shareholder loan 1.50% December 2019 66500 shareholder loan 5.00% October 2018 Total noncurrent loans and borrowings Total loans and borrowings All shareholder loans were repaid in the year ended 31 December 2017.
The bank overdraft facility at 31 December 2017 was 300000 2016 600000.
In the year ended 31 December 2016 the shareholder loan maturing in June 2020 was classied as a current liability because it was repayable to the lender on demand.
Other loan amounts classied as current liabilities were those facilities either repayable in full or in part within the following 12 months.
All loans were unsecured.
Trade and other payables 31 December 31 December Trade payables derivative nancial liabilities  note 14 Other payables Other taxation and social security Accruals and deferred income Trade payables represent the fair value of derivative nancial liabilities arising as a result of matched principal transactions note 14.
Other payables consist of margin received from clients and client held funds.
The carrying value of trade and other payables classied as nancial liabilities measured at amortised cost approximates fair value.
Alpha FXpp60pp73.
Page 69 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Onerous lease provision At 1 January 2017 Increase in provision At 31 December 2017
Current
Noncurrent
The onerous lease provision represents the present value of the estimated obligations under a lease where the unavoidable costs of the lease exceed the economic benet expected to be received from it.
Related party transactions The Parent Company of the Group is Alpha FX Group plc.
Note 13 provides information about the subsidiaries and the holding company.
Details of the ultimate controlling party can be found in note 28.
The Group considers its key management personnel to be the Directors of the Company.
The compensation of the Directors of the company together with their shareholding is included in the
Remuneration Report.
Transactions between the Group and its subsidiaries which are related parties have been eliminated on consolidation and are not disclosed in this note.
The subsidiary undertaking traded foreign currency contracts with M J Tillbrook on normal commercial terms amounting to nil 2016 1318268.
Contracts with notional principal amounts of 659137 2016 781257 were open as at year end and are included within trade receivables.
The subsidiary undertaking traded foreign currency contracts with M P Tillbrook M J Tilbrooks father on normal commercial terms amounting to 750167 2016 18584.
Contracts with notional principal amounts amounting to 700000 2016 nil were open as at year end and are included within trade receivables.
The subsidiary undertaking also traded foreign currency contracts with C I Kahn on normal commercial terms amounting to 24431 2016 nil none of which were open at the year end.
A loan of 304000 at 31 December 2016 due from the subsidiary undertaking to the Tillbrook Pension Scheme a scheme in which M J Tillbrook and M P Tillbrook are trustees was repaid in the year ended 31 December 2017.
The loan was subject to interest charged annually at 1.5% and interest payments of 5090 2016 5700 were made on this loan during the year.
A loan of 500000 at 31 December 2016 from M P Tillbrook was repaid in the year.
Interest was charged annually at 5% and interest payments of 8151 2016 25000 were made on this loan during the year.
Alpha FXpp60pp73.
Page 70 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE C ONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Related party transactions continued At 31 December 2016 M J Tillbrook had made a loan to the subsidiary undertaking of 498925.
In the year ended 31 December 2017 a further loan of 400000 was made before the balance was repaid in full together with interest at 5% of 14575.
In the year ended 31 December 2016 the Group paid consultancy fees totalling 113347 to Mask Enterprises Limited a Company owned by M Singh a Director within the Group.
In the year ended 31 December 2016 advances made to M J Tillbrook a Director of the Group of 219642 were repaid in full.
Sharebased payments Employees including senior executives of the Group receive remuneration in the form of sharebased payments whereby employees render services as consideration for equity instruments equitysettled transactions.
Under the Growth Share Scheme selected employees of the Group have been issued with B shares in Alpha FX Limited.
The rights attaching to the B shares include a put option which when exercised enable the shareholder to convert the B shares into ordinary shares of the Company.
The rate of conversion is that the B shares will be regarded as worth a pro rata share of the gain above a specic hurdle set at 25m.
The B shares will vest in 5 equal annual instalments starting on 31 December 2017 until 31 December 2021.
Vesting requires 30% revenue growth per annum for the rst three years and 20% revenue growth per annum in years four and ve.
Conversion each year is following the publication of the audited nancial statements of Alpha FX Limited.
The share options granted will not vest if performance conditions are not met.
Providing the vesting conditions have been met the Company will issue shares in consideration of the B shares based on the average share price of the Company over the 60 days prior to the exercise of the put option.
The B shares were subscribed for at nominal value with the employee settling the applicable tax based on the market value at the date of grant.
In the year ended 31 December 2017 awards were made of 2073 B shares in Alpha FX Limited 2016 nil representing 10.7% of the issued share capital.
The fair value was calculated using a MonteCarlo simulation model.
The model considers historical and expected dividends and the share price volatility of the Group relative to that of its competitors to predict the share performance.
The sharebased payment charge of the Growth Shares awarded during the year ended 31 December 2017 was 399685 2016 nil.
Based on share price of the Company of 487.5p at 31 December 2017 it is estimated upon exercise of the put options in respect of the year ended 31 December 2017 the Company will issue 565387 shares.
Under the original terms of the Growth Share Scheme the B Shares allotted to participants would vest in three equal tranches occurring annually starting on 31 December 2017 until 31 December 2019.
Vesting would require 30 per cent revenue growth per year meaning that full vesting would require threeyear compound growth of 120 per cent.
After consultations with participants in the scheme it was extended to 5 years.
However in line with IFRS2 the charges incurred by Alpha FX will still be recognised over the original threeyear period assuming modication has not occurred.
Alpha FXpp60pp73.
Page 71 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Sharebased payments continued When determining the grant date fair value of awards service and nonmarket performance conditions are not taken into account.
However the likelihood of the conditions being met is assessed as part of the Groups best estimate of the number of equity instruments that will ultimately vest.
Market performance conditions are reected within the grant date fair value.
The inputs used for fair valuing the awards granted during the year were as follows 31 December Expected volatility % 25.0% Risk free interest rate % 0.09% Option life years Starting equity value m In the absence of any historical data for Alpha FX Group plc the expected volatility was determined by reviewing the share price of similar entities that are traded on AIM.
In the year ended 31 December 2017 an award was made to a Director under an unapproved option agreement of 57297 share options at an exercise price of 0.002 per option share which are exercisable between 3 April 2018 and 3 April 2020.
The fair value of the option granted during the year was 82687 which was calculated using a Black Scholes model.
The inputs used for fair valuing this award were expected volatility of 25% a riskfree interest rate of 0.09% and a one year option life.
The Group recognised total expenses related to the above equitysettled sharebased payment transactions in the year ended 31 December 2017 of 482372 2016 nil.
Operating lease commitments Total minimum lease payments under noncancellable operating leases are as follows 31 December 31 December Operating lease payment due Within one year In two to ve years More than ve years All operating lease commitments relate to noncancellable lease on the Groups oces in the UK.
Ultimate controlling party The Directors believe that there is no ultimate controlling party of the Group.
Alpha FXpp60pp73.
Page 72 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE C ONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Subsequent events On 20 March 2018 the Group launched a new business division Alpha Institutional whose focus is on expanding Alphas service oering to fund and institutional clients.
In order to incentivise key personnel a newly formed subsidiary has been incorporated under Alpha FX Limited the Groups existing subsidiary and main trading entity.
The share capital of the new subsidiary is 60% owned by Alpha FX Limited with the balance split between ve key individuals.
Commencing three full years following incorporation the individuals will have the option to convert a percentage of their shareholding into Group shares each year based upon strict performance criteria.
At conversion and in exchange for converting their shares into the Group Alpha FX Limiteds shareholding over Alpha FX Institutional Limited will commensurately increase.
On 20 March 2018 the Company determined that following the vesting of shares under the Growth Share Scheme for the year ended 31 December 2017 it would be issuing 565387 shares on 27 March 2018.
The number of shares to be issued is based on the average share price in the 60 days prior to vesting of 508.1p.
Alpha FXpp60pp73.
Page 73 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS COMPANY BALANCE SHEET As at As at 31 December 31 December
Noncurrent assets
Deferred tax asset Total noncurrent assets Current assets Trade and other receivables Current tax asset Cash and cash equivalents Total current assets Total assets
Share capital Share premium account Capital redemption reserve Merger reserve Retained earnings Total equity Current liabilities Trade and other payables Total current liabilities Total equity and liabilities The Company reported a prot for the year ended 31 December 2017 of 2240522 2016 523384.
The nancial statements of Alpha FX Group plc were approved by the Board of Directors on 20 March 2018 and signed on its behalf by M J Tillbrook T C Kidd
Director
Company Balance Sheet As at 31 December 2017 Company numbertel25 Alpha FXpp74end.
Page 74 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS COMPANY STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY Called up
Capital share premium redemption
Retained
Total capital account reserve reserve earnings equity Balance at 1 January 2016 Changes in equity Shares issued Cancellation of shares Settlement of shares in subsidiary via share for share exchange
Total comprehensive income Balance at 31 December 2016 Changes in equity Bonus shares issued Cancellation of shares Shares issued on listing Costs of issue of equity shares Dividend paid Sharebased payment Total comprehensive income Balance at 31 December 2017 Company Statement of Changes in Equity For the year ended 31 December telAlpha FXpp74end.
Page 75 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE COMPANY FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Basis of preparation The nancial statements have been prepared under the historical cost convention and with Financial Reporting Standard 100 Application of Financial Reporting Requirements FRS 100 and Financial Reporting Standard 101 Reduced Disclosure Framework FRS 101.
In preparing these nancial statements the Company has taken advantage of all disclosure exemptions conferred by FRS 101.
Therefore these nancial statements do not include certain comparative information as otherwise required by EUendorsed IFRS certain disclosures regarding the Companys capital a statement of cash ows the eect of future accounting standards not yet adopted the disclosure of the remuneration of key management personnel and disclosures of related party transactions with other whollyowned members of Alpha FX Group plc group of companies.
In addition and in accordance with FRS 101 nancial instrument disclosure exemptions have been adopted because equivalent disclosures are included in the Companys consolidated nancial statements.
These nancial statements do not include certain disclosures in respect of Share based payments Financial instruments other than certain disclosures required as a result of recording nancial instruments at fair value or Fair value measurement other than certain disclosures required as a result of recording nancial instruments at fair value.
The nancial statements are prepared in pounds sterling which is the functional currency of the Group.
Signicant accounting policies The principal accounting policies adopted are the same as those set out in Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements except as noted below.
Investments in subsidiaries and associates are stated at cost less where appropriate provisions for impairment.
Prot for the year As permitted in section 408 of the Companies Act 2006 the Company has elected not to present its own prot and loss account for the year.
The Company reported a prot for the nancial year ended 31 December 2017 of 2240522 2016 523384.
The auditors remuneration for audit and other services is disclosed in Note 5 to the consolidated nancial statements.
Notes to the Company Financial
For the year ended 31 December telAlpha FXpp74end.
Page 76 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE C OMPANY FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Investments in subsidiary undertakings The Companys investment in the share capital of Alpha FX Limited is disclosed in Note 17 to the consolidated nancial statements.
31 December 31 December Balance at 1 January Share for share exchange Additional investment in the year Merger reserve Balance at 31 December The additional investment in the year represents the sharebased payment for employees of the subsidiary company.
Trade and other receivables 31 December 31 December Amount owed by Group undertaking Other receivables
During the year no impairment provisions have been made against any class of debtor.
Trade and other payables 31 December 31 December Accruals and deferred income Deferred tax The deferred taxation asset at a tax rate of 19% 2016 19% comprises the following 31 December 31 December
At 1 January Deferred tax relating to sharebased payments Total deferred tax asset Alpha FXpp74end.
Page 77 ANNU AL REPORT 2017 NOTES TO THE COMPANY FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Employee costs The company did not have any employees during the period 2016 nil.
All sta are employees of the subsidiary.
Share capital Details of the share capital of the Company are included in note 20 to the consolidated accounts.
Alpha FXpp74end.
Page 78 NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that the Annual General Meeting AGM of the members of the Company will be held at the oces of Bird and Bird LLP 12 New Fetter Lane London EC4A 1JP at 10.00 a.
11 May 2018.
Members will be asked to consider and if thought t pass the resolutions set out below.
Resolutions 1 to 10 will be proposed as ordinary resolutions and Resolution 11 will be proposed as a special resolution.
ORDINARY RESOLUTIONS To receive and adopt the Companys nancial statements and annual accounts for the nancial year ended 31 December 2017 together with the Directors report and auditors report on these accounts.
To reelect Morgan Tillbrook as a Director of the Company.
To reelect Tim Kidd as a Director of the Company.
To reelect Clive Kahn as a Director of the Company.
To reelect Lisa Gordon as a Director of the Company.
To reelect Henry Lisney as a Director of the Company.
To reappoint BDO LLP as auditors of the Company in accordance with section 489 of the Companies Act 2006 the Act to hold oce until the conclusion of the next annual general meeting at which the accounts of the Company are laid.
To authorise the Directors of the Company to determine the auditors remuneration for the coming nancial year.
To declare a nal dividend for the year ended 31 December 2017 of 3.4 pence per ordinary share in the capital of the Company.
That the Directors be and are hereby generally and unconditionally authorised pursuant to section 551 of the Act which authority shall be in addition to all existing authorities of the Directors to allot relevant securities for the purposes of section 551 of the Act to exercise all the powers of the Company to allot shares in the Company and to grant rights to subscribe for or to convert any security into such shares all of which transactions are hereafter referred to as an allotment of relevant securities up to an aggregate nominal amount of a.
22000 and b.
ANNU AL REPORT 2017 NOTICE OF ANNU AL GENERAL MEETING Notice of Annual General Meeting Alpha FXpp74end.
Page 79 with legal or practical problems under the laws of any overseas territory the requirements of any regulatory body or any stock exchange in any territory in relation to fractional entitlements or any other matter which the Directors consider merits any such exclusion or other arrangements provided that in each case such authority shall expire 15 months after the date of the passing of this resolution or at the conclusion of the next AGM of the Company following the passing of this resolution whichever occurs rst unless previously revoked or varied by the Company in general meeting but the Company may before this authority expires or is revoked or varied make an oer or agreement which would or might require relevant securities to be allotted after this authority expires or is revoked or varied and the Directors may allot relevant securities pursuant to such oer or agreement as if this authority had not expired or been revoked or varied.
SPECIAL RESOLUTION That conditional only on the passing of resolution 10 above the Directors be and are hereby empowered pursuant to section 570 of the Act which power shall be in addition to all existing powers of the Directors to allot equity securities for the purposes of sections 570 or 571 of the Act to allot equity securities as dened in section 560 of the Act for cash pursuant to the authority conferred by resolution 10 above as if section 561 of the Act did not apply to any such allotment provided that this authority shall a. i. ii.
Directors may allot equity securities pursuant to such oer or agreement as if this authority had not expired or been revoked or varied.
By order of the board Tim Kidd Company Secretary 4 April 2018 Registered Oce 2 Eastbourne Terrace
London W2 6LG ANNU AL REPORT 2017 NOTICE OF ANNU AL GENERAL MEETING Alpha FXpp74end.
Page 80 Entitlement to attend and vote Only those members registered on the Companys register of members at 6.30 p. shall be entitled to attend and vote at the AGM.
Appointment of proxies If you are a member of the Company at the time set out in note 1 above you are entitled to appoint a proxy to exercise all or any of your rights to attend speak and vote at the AGM and you should have received a Form of Proxy with this Notice of Meeting.
You can only appoint a proxy using the procedures set out in these notes and the notes to the Form of Proxy.
A proxy does not need to be a member of the Company but must attend the AGM to represent you.
Details of how to appoint the Chairman of the AGM or another person as your proxy using the Form of Proxy are set out in the notes to the Form of Proxy.
If you wish your proxy to speak on your behalf at the AGM you will need to appoint your own choice of proxy not the Chairman and give your instructions directly to them.
You may appoint more than one proxy provided each proxy is appointed to exercise rights attached to dierent shares.
You may not appoint more than one proxy to exercise rights attached to any one share.
To appoint more than one proxy please contact the registrar of the Company.
A vote withheld is not a vote in law which means that the vote will not be counted in the calculation of votes for or against the resolution.
If no voting indication is given your proxy will vote or abstain from voting at his or her discretion.
Your proxy will vote or abstain from voting as he or she thinks t in relation to any other matter which is put before the AGM.
Appointment of proxy using hard copy form of proxy The notes to the Form of Proxy explain how to direct your proxy how to vote on each resolution or withhold their vote.
To appoint a proxy using the Form of Proxy the form must be completed and signed sent or delivered to Equiniti Limited at Aspect House Spencer Road Lancing West Sussex BN99 6DA and received by Equiniti Limited no later than 10.00 a. on 9 May 2018.
In the case of a member which is a company the Form of Proxy must be executed under its common seal or signed on its behalf by an ocer of the company or an attorney for the company.
Any power of attorney or any other authority under which the Form of Proxy is signed or a duly certied copy of such power or authority must be included with the Form of Proxy.
ANNU AL REPORT 2017 NOTES TO THE NOTICE OF ANNU AL GENERAL MEETING Notes to the Notice of Annual General Meeting AGM Alpha FXpp74end.
Page 81 Appointment of proxy by joint members In the case of joint holders where more than one of the joint holders purports to appoint a proxy only the appointment submitted by the most senior holder will be accepted.
Seniority is determined by the order in which the names of the joint holders appear in the Companys register of members in respect of the joint holding the rstnamed being the most senior.
Changing proxy instructions To change your proxy instructions simply submit a new proxy appointment using the methods set out above.
Note that the cut o time for receipt of proxy appointments see above also apply in relation to amended instructions any amended proxy appointment received after the relevant cut o time will be disregarded.
Where you have appointed a proxy using the hardcopy Form of Proxy and would like to change the instructions using another hardcopy Form of Proxy please contact Equiniti Limited at Aspect House Spencer Road Lancing West Sussex BN99 6DA.
If you submit more than one valid proxy appointment the appointment received last before the latest time for the receipt of proxies will take precedence.
Termination of proxy appointments In order to revoke a proxy instruction you will need to inform the Company by sending a signed hard copy notice clearly stating your intention to revoke your proxy appointment to Equiniti Limited at Aspect House Spencer Road Lancing West Sussex BN99 6DA.
In the case of a member which is a company the revocation notice must be executed under its common seal or signed on its behalf by an ocer of the company or an attorney for the company.
Any power of attorney or any other authority under which the revocation notice is signed or a duly certied copy of such power or authority must be included with the revocation notice.
The revocation notice must be received by Equiniti Limited no later than 10.00 a. on 9 May 2018.
If you attempt to revoke your proxy appointment but the revocation is received after the time specied then subject to the paragraph directly below your proxy appointment will remain valid.
Appointment of a proxy does not preclude you from attending the AGM and voting in person.
If you have appointed a proxy and attend the AGM in person your proxy appointment will automatically be terminated.
Corporate representatives A corporation which is a member can appoint one or more corporate representatives who may exercise on its behalf all its powers as a member provided that no more than one corporate representative exercises powers over the same share.
CREST members CREST members who wish to appoint a proxy or proxies through the CREST electronic proxy appointment service may do so for the AGM and any adjournment by using the procedures described in the CREST manual sitecrest.
CREST personal members or other CREST sponsored members and those CREST members who have appointed a voting service provider should refer to their CREST sponsor or voting service provider who will be able to take the appropriate action on their behalf.
ANNU AL REPORT 2017 NOTES TO THE NOTICE OF ANNU AL GENERAL MEETING Alpha FXpp74end.
Page 82 19 In order for a proxy appointment or instruction made using the CREST service to be valid the appropriate CREST message a CREST proxy instruction must be properly authenticated in accordance with Euroclears specications and must contain the information required for such instructions as described in the CREST manual.
All messages relating to the appointment of a proxy or an instruction to a previously appointed proxy must be transmitted so as to be received by Equiniti Limited ID RA19 no later than 10.00 a. on 9 May 2018.
It is the responsibility of the CREST member concerned to take such action as shall be necessary to ensure that a message is transmitted by means of the CREST system by any particular time.
In this connection CREST members and where applicable their CREST sponsors or voting service providers are referred in particular to those sections of the CREST manual concerning practical limitations of the CREST system and timings.
The Company may treat a CREST proxy instruction as invalid in the circumstances set out in Regulation a of the Uncerticated Securities Regulations 2001.
Issued shares and total voting rights As at 4 April 2018 the Companys issued share capital comprised 33327366 ordinary shares of 0.002 each.
Each ordinary share carries the right to one vote at a general meeting of the Company therefore the total number of voting rights in the Company on 4 April 2018 is 33327366.
Questions at the AGM Under section 319A of the Companies Act 2006 the Company must answer any question you ask relating to the business being dealt with at the AGM unless a answering the question would interfere unduly with the preparation for the AGM or involve the disclosure of condential information b the answer has already been given on a website in the form of an answer to a question or c it is undesirable in the interests of the Company or the good order of the AGM that the question be answered.
Communication
You may not use any electronic address provided either in this Notice of Meeting or any related documents including the letter with which this Notice of Meeting was enclosed and Form of Proxy to communicate with the Company for any purposes other than those expressly stated.
Inspection of documents The following will be available for inspection at the place of the meeting prior to and during the AGM copies of service contracts of executive directors copies of letters of appointment of nonexecutive directors and a copy of the Companys articles of association.
ANNU AL REPORT 2017 NOTES TO THE NOTICE OF ANNU AL GENERAL MEETING Alpha FXpp74end.
Page 83 Explanation of the Resolutions Resolutions 1 to 10 are proposed as ordinary resolutions.
This means that for each of those resolutions to be passed more than half of the votes cast must be in favour of the resolution.
Resolution 11 is proposed as a special resolution.
This means that for this resolution to be passed at least three quarters of the votes cast must be in favour of the resolution.
Resolution 1 Approval of Annual Report and Accounts Resolution 1 proposes that the Companys annual accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 together with the directors report and auditors report on these accounts be received considered and adopted Annual Report and Accounts.
The Companys Annual Report and Accounts will be posted to shareholders on 4 April 2018 and will be available online at httpssiteinvestorsnancialinformationreportsandaccounts for download and printing from such date.
Resolutions 2 to 6 Reelection of directors Resolutions 2 to 6 deal with the reelection of directors who shall each retire as directors in accordance with the Articles of Association and being eligible oer themselves for reelection as directors of the Company.
Biographical details for each of the directors are available online at httpssiteinvestorsdirectors Resolutions 7 and 8 Reappointment and remuneration of auditor Resolution 7 relates to the reappointment of BDO LLP as the Companys auditor to hold oce until the next annual general meeting of the Company whilst resolution 8 will be proposed to authorise the directors to set the auditors remuneration.
Resolution 9 Payment of nal dividend Resolution 9 proposes the payment of a nal dividend of 3.4 pence per ordinary share in the capital of the Company.
An interim dividend of 1.5p per ordinary share was paid in October 2017 giving a total dividend for the nancial year of 4.9p per ordinary share.
Resolution 10 Allotment of share capital Resolution 10 grants the directors general authority to allot ordinary shares in the capital of the Company or to grant rights to subscribe for or to convert any security into such shares in the Company up to an aggregate nominal amount of 22000 representing approximately 33 per cent.
Companys current issued ordinary share capital.
Resolution 11 Disapplication of statutory preemption rights Section  of the Companies Act 2006 requires that on an allotment of new shares for cash such shares must rst be oered to existing shareholders in proportion to the number of shares that they each hold at that time.
The directors believe that there may be circumstances when it is in the best interests of the Company to allot new ordinary shares either on an entirely nonpreemptive basis or in a way that departs from the statutory requirements set out in the Companies Act 2006.
Accordingly resolution 11 grants the directors general authority to allot equity securities for cash a in connection with a rights issue open oer scrip dividend scheme or other preemptive oer and b otherwise up to an aggregate nominal amount equal to 6552 representing approximately 10 per cent. not apply to any such allotment.
ANNU AL REPORT 2017 NOTES TO THE NOTICE OF ANNU AL GENERAL MEETING Alpha FXpp74end.
Page 84 ANNU AL REPORT 2017 SHAREHOLDER INFORMA TION Registered Oce 2 Eastbourne Terrace
London W2 6LG Company Advisers Liberum Capital Limited Ropemaker Place Level 12 25 Ropemaker Street London EC2Y 9LY Share Registrars
Aspect House Spencer Road
West Sussex BN99 6DA Corporate Brokers Liberum Capital Limited Ropemaker Place Level 12 25 Ropemaker Street London EC2Y 9LY Financial PR and Advisors Alma PR Aldwych House 7191 Aldwych London WC2B 4HN
BDO LLP Level 12 Thames Tower Station Road
Berkshire RG1 1LX Legal Advisers Bird and Bird 12 New Fetter Lane London EC4A 1JP Shareholder Information Perivan Financial Printtel25 Alpha FXpp74end.
