ABOUT US Find the digital version of this report on our corporate website at site BGEO GROUP BGEO Group PLC BGEO or the Group is a UK incorporated holding company of a Georgiafocused investment platform.
BGEO aims to deliver on its strategy of 1 at least 20% ROAE from its Banking Business 2 1520% growth of its Banking Business loan book 3 at least 25% IRR and 4 up to 20% of the Groups profit contribution from its Investment Business.
On 3 July 2017 BGEO announced its intention to demerge BGEO Group PLC into a Londonlisted banking business the Banking Business Bank of Georgia Group PLC and a London listed investment business the Investment Business Georgia Capital PLC by the end of the first half of 2018.
See page 14 for our current business model and page 19 for the demerger.
BANKING BUSINESS Our Banking Business comprises a retail banking and payment services b corporate investment banking and wealth management operations and c banking operations in Belarus BNB.
JSC Bank of Georgia BOG or the Bank is the core entity of the Groups Banking
The Banking Business will continue to aim to benefit from the underpenetrated banking sector in Georgia primarily through its retail banking services.
See page 4 for the overview of our Banking Business.
INVESTMENT BUSINESS Our Investment Business comprises the Groups stakes in Georgia Healthcare Group PLC Healthcare Business or GHG  an LSE a London Stock Exchange premium listed company Georgia Global Utilities Utility and Energy Business or GGU m Real Estate Real Estate Business or m Aldagi Property and Casualty Insurance Business or Aldagi and Teliani Valley Beverage Business or Teliani.
Georgias fastgrowing economy provides opportunities in a number of underdeveloped local markets and the Investment Business will aim to capture growth opportunities in the Georgian corporate sector.
See page 5 for the overview of our Investment Business.
01 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
CONTENTS
Strategies after
Board of Directors Financial Statements Strategic Report 0275
02 Financial Highlights 03 Operating Highlights 04 At a Glance
06 Chairmans Statement
08 Chief Executive Officers Statement
Strategy
10 Industry and Market Overview 14 Current Business Model 18 Delivering on Current Strategy 19 Demerger 20 Bank of Georgia Strategy 24 Georgia Capital Strategy 30 Key Performance Indicators
32 BGEO Risk Management
34 Principal Risks and Uncertainties
38 Bank Risk Management
44 Resources and Responsibilities
52 Overview of Financial Results 55 Discussion of Banking Business Results 64 Discussion of Investment Business
Read this report online.
Find the digital version of this report on our corporate website at site Please note that long forms of abbreviated terms can be found in the abbreviations section on page 213.
Governance 76117 76 Directors Governance Overview 77 Board of Directors 80 Executive Management 84 Corporate Governance Framework 89 Nomination Committee Report 91 Audit Committee Report 95 Risk Committee Report 97 Shareholder Engagement
98 Directors Remuneration Report
114 Statement of Directors Responsibilities 115 Directors Report Financial Statements 118212
118 Independent Auditors Report
126 Consolidated Statement of Financial
128 Consolidated Income Statement 132 Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income 133 Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity 134 Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows 136 Separate Statement of Financial
137 Separate Statement of Changes in Equity 138 Separate Statement of Cash Flows 139 Notes to the Consolidated Financial
Additional Information 213216 213 Abbreviations 214 Glossary 216 Shareholder information 02 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLCtel 1080.6 764.1tel el 2017 21.9% 22.2% 25.2%tel 5011.3 5755.8 7078.1tel 5366.8 6681.7 7741.4tel 35.5% 37.7%37.7%tel 10.9% 9.1% 10.3%tel 106.6tel
FINANCIAL HIGHLIGHTS
The effectiveness of our strategy is reflected in the record 2017 financial results highlighted below.
Profit from continuing operations  GEL 403.5 million 9.0% yoy Profit from discontinued operations  GEL 59.9 million 2.8% yoy.
Tier 1 Capital Ratio NBG Basel III at 31 December 2017  12.4%.
Including discontinued operations.
In 2017 we changed the Groups accounting policy in relation to subsequent measurement of office buildings and service centres from revaluation model to cost model.
We have accordingly restated the balance sheet accounts for affected periods while the change did not have any material impact on the income statement.
In addition we started presenting Aldagi as part of the Investment Business since 2Q17.
Therefore Banking Business balance sheet and income statement accounts and the ratios have been updated accordingly for prior periods presented to reflect these changes.
NET LOANS GEL million Banking Business 15.9% yoy 7741.4 CLIENT DEPOSITS GEL million Banking Business 23.0% yoy 7078.1 EBITDA GEL million Investment Business 55.7% yoy PROFIT BEFORE NONRECURRING ITEMS AND INCOME TAX GEL million Investment Business 21.4% yoy COST TO INCOME RATIO Banking Business flat yoy 37.7% TIER 1 CAPITAL RATIO NBG BASEL II Bank of Georgia 1.2 ppts yoy 10.3% RETURN ON EQUITY Banking Business 3 ppts yoy 25.2% PROFIT GEL million
8.1% yoy REVENUE GEL million
23.7% yoy 1080.6 BASIC EARNINGS PER SHARE GEL
11.5% yoy 11.61 03 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
BANKING BUSINESS NUMBER OF RETAIL BANKING CLIENTS BANKING BUSINESS NUMBER OF CARDS BANKING BUSINESS BANKING BRANCHES 2315038 2227000 286 173809 OVER 2016 170742 OVER 2016 8 OVER 2016 2017 operating highlights reflect the expanding footprint of our banking and investment businesses in Georgia.
OPERATING HIGHLIGHTS
10 OVER 2016 UTILITY AND ENERGY BUSINESS WA TER BILLED TO CUSTOMERS M
42902 OVER 2016 PandC INSURANCE BUSINESS NEW INSURANCE POLICIES WRITTEN 222 OVER 2016 REAL ESTATE BUSINESS NUMBER OF APARTMENTS SOLD 13291 850 2842 2934 OVER 2016 49 OVER 2016 113 OVER 2016 BANKING BUSINESS POS TERMINALS BANKING BUSINESS EXPRESS PAY TERMINALS BANKING BUSINESS
2100 OVER 2016 457 OVER 2016 12 OVER 2016 BEVERAGE BUSINESS DISTRIBUTION SALES POINTS HEALTHCARE BUSINESS NUMBER OF PHARMACIES HEALTHCARE BUSINESS NUMBER OF HEALTHCARE BEDS 2016 includes Pharmadepots pharmacies.
04 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC AT A GLANCE RETAIL BANKING CLIENTCENTRIC MULTIBRAND STRATEGY FOR OUR C.2.3 MILLION CLIENTS.
We are the leading retail banking player in Georgia serving c.2.3 million clients through the widest network of 281 retail branches 850 ATMs and 2842 Express Pay selfservice terminals a sales force of more than 3000 people along with our diverse products and services.
Our Retail Banking business the prominent component of our business runs a clientcentric multibrand strategy which reaches the entire spectrum of retail clients through three wellestablished and recognised brands Express  designed to service emerging retail clients with minimal incremental operational costs through costefficient distance channels such as our Express Pay terminals internet and mobile banking and technologyintensive Express branches Bank of Georgia  providing longestablished banking services to our mass retail clients and Solo  targeting mass affluent clients and providing a unique blend of banking and lifestyle products and services.
WEALTH MANAGEMENT WE ARE AN ESTABLISHED LEADER OF INVESTMENT MANAGEMENT SERVICES IN GEORGIA.
We have been active in asset and wealth management since 2005.
Accommodating 1434 local and international clients from 75 countries worldwide our Wealth Management business provides private banking services to our high networth individual clients and offers investment management products internationally through representative offices in Eastern Europe the Middle East and Great Britain.
The unique offer of the Bank of Georgia provides our clients with the opportunity of investing in Georgia which many foreign customers perceive as very attractive.
As Georgia has a payasyougo pension system the Bank believes that its wealth management franchise can benefit by focusing on the distribution of local debt.
In May 2017 we held the first regional conference of Wealth Management in Tbilisi.
The event aimed to introduce Georgia as a regional hub for private banking services.
The prospects and challenges of making Georgia a regional banking centre were discussed including the investment climate in Georgia the countrys economy and the banking sector.
The conference was attended by leading financial institutions from the countries of Europe and the Middle East including Israel and Russia as well as by international clients and professionals with legal and taxation backgrounds.
CORPORATE INVESTMENT BANKING INTEGRATED SOLUTIONS FOR OUR CIB CLIENTS.
Our Bank is a leading corporate lender in the country with deep sector knowledge and local expertise.
Our
Corporate Banking business is characterised by outstanding flexibility in meeting our corporate clients needs and offers the most comprehensive range of products and services in the country.
We are proud to accommodate more than 2500 businesses in Georgia and play our part in developing various sectors of the economy such as trade energy industry and tourism among others.
Corporate Banking additionally serves as the countrys leading trade finance business and provides leasing services through the Groups whollyowned subsidiary Georgian Leasing Company GLC.
We are at the forefront of capital markets development in Georgia.
We aim to leverage our superior knowledge and capital markets capabilities in the Georgian and neighbouring markets in terms of both reach and expertise that we have accumulated over the past several years through our corporate advisory debt and equity capital market research and brokerage practices united under Galt and Taggart a whollyowned subsidiary of the Group.
Our brokerage business serves regional and international markets including hardtoreach frontier economies.
Our macro and sectoral research currently covers various sectors of the Georgian economy and developments taking place in regional economies.
In addition since August 2017 Galt and Taggart publishes an extensive quarterly report on macroeconomic developments in the Georgian economy followed by a conference call hosted by Galt and Taggart for interested stakeholders to discuss the developments subscription to the research on site.
BNB
WELL CAPITALISED SME BANK IN BELARUS.
JSC Belarusky Narodny Bank BNB offers individual and business banking services principally to SMEs and middleincome retail banking customers in Belarus.
BNB was one of the first privatelyowned commercial banks in Belarus established in 1992.
The Group increased its ownership of BNB from 79.99% in 2016 to 99.98% in 2017.
The Group is exploring options for realising value from BNB as it is not located in our core region of focus.
05 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
PandC INSURANCE ALDAGI THE LEADING PROPERTY AND CASUALTY INSURANCE BUSINESS.
Our Property and Casualty business PandC or Aldagi is a leading player in the Georgian PandC insurance market with a market share of 38.6% based on gross premiums earned as of and for the nine months ended 30 September 2017.
The company offers a wide range of insurance products in Georgia to corporate and retail clients covering more than 47000 customers through five business lines motor property credit life liability and other insurance services.
Aldagis insurance products are offered through the offices in Tbilisi and large cities across Georgia a network of insurance agents local partner banks and nonfinancial institutions such as major car dealerships insurance brokers and online portals.
Aldagi aims to unlock the full potential of Georgias significantly underpenetrated retail insurance segment by extending cooperation with local financial institutions to successfully diversify its multichannel distribution network uncover additional sources of high quality customers for its leading insurance products and consolidate its market leadership position in digital insurance which will enable Aldagi to strengthen its presence in the fastemerging retail insurance segment.
REAL ESTATE m A FASTGROWING LEADING REAL ESTATE DEVELOPER AND ASSET MANAGER IN GEORGIA.
Our real estate business the Groups whollyowned subsidiary m Real Estate develops and sells residential and commercial properties in Georgia.
For the past couple of years m has established itself as one of the most recognisable and trustworthy residential housing brands in the country. opportunistic investments in high street real estate. brand Ramada Encore.
First Ramada Encore hotel opened in Tbilisi in February 2018.
Ramada Encore hotel in Kutaisi and a fourstar Ramada hotel in Tbilisi.
The hotel in Tbilisi is currently under construction.
In 2017 m acquired BK Construction LLC a local real estate construction company with the aim to bring the construction works inhouse to achieve cost and project development efficiencies.
The vertical integration of the construction arm into m business model enables the company to generate fee income from construction management from franchised deals and third party constructions. asset light strategy.
Real Estate has sold 2676 apartments worth US 222.3 million since 2011 with 99.1% of apartments sold in seven successfully completed projects and 83.2% presales in four ongoing projects.
GEORGIA HEALTHCARE GROUP GHG THE LEADING INTEGRATED PLAYER IN THE GEORGIAN HEALTHCARE ECOSYSTEM WITH A VALUE OF GEL 3.5 BILLION.
Georgia Healthcare Group PLC is the UK incorporated holding company of the largest healthcare services provider and the largest pharmaceuticals retailer and wholesaler in the fastgrowing predominantly privately owned Georgian health market.
GHG offers by far the most comprehensive range of inpatient and outpatient services in Georgia.
GHG targets the mass market segment through its vertically integrated network of 37 hospitals and 12 polyclinic clusters including 16 district polyclinics and 24 express outpatient clinics and 255 pharmacies as at 31 December 2017.
GHG is the single largest market participant accounting for 24.5% of total hospital bed capacity in the country as at 31 December 2017.
GHG is the largest pharmaceuticals retailer and wholesaler in Georgia with approximately 30% market share by revenue in 2017.
GHG has approximately c.2.1 million client interactions per month with 0.5 million loyalty card members.
GHG is also the second largest provider of medical insurance in Georgia with a 29.0% market share based on gross revenue and has approximately 155000 insurance customers at January 2018.
At 31 December 2017 in line with IFRS GHG is classified as a disposal group held for sale and the results of its operations are reported under discontinued operations.
For details see Overview of Financial Results on page 52.
GEORGIA GLOBAL UTILITIES GGU MAJOR UTILITY AND ENERGY COMPANY WITH CLEAR GROWTH OPPORTUNITIES AND ROOM TO IMPROVE EFFICIENCY.
GGU has two main business lines  water utility and electric power generation.
In its water utility business GGU has a natural monopoly that supplies water and provides a wastewater service to 1.4 million people more than onethird of Georgias population in three Georgian cities Tbilisi Mtskheta and Rustavi.
In the electric power business GGU has a portfolio of three hydropower generating facilities an additional 2.9MW facility under management with a total of 149.3MW capacity.
Generated power is primarily used by GGUs water business with the excess amount sold to third parties.
GGU is developing hydropower plants HPPs as well as solar and wind power sources in Georgia.
In 2017 GGU commenced construction of the 50MW HPP in NorthWestern Georgia Svaneti region aiming for the HPP to be operational in December 2018.
Moreover 44.3MW Zoti HPP in Western Georgia Guria region is currently under development with a target to complete the construction by the end of 2020. to commence construction works.
BEVERAGE BUSINESS TELIANI VALLEY CREATING A LEADING BEVERAGE PRODUCER AND DISTRIBUTOR IN SOUTH CAUCASUS.
Teliani is a leading Georgian wine producer and beverage distributor with a wide distribution platform for a variety of imported beverages as well as own produced wine.
Teliani sells around 3.5 million bottles of wine annually with about 68% of sales coming from exports.
Building on its existing distribution franchise of c.5000 sales points Teliani has expanded into a new business line of beer and soft beverage production with a tenyear exclusivity from Heineken to sell in three countries Georgia Armenia and Azerbaijan  a total population of c.17 million people.
The construction of the beer brewing facility completed in 2016 and Teliani launched local mainstream beer and lemonade production in June and August 2017 respectively.
The newly launched beer ICY was well received by the local market which immediately earned 97% brand awareness and 16% market share upon launch.
Teliani is on track to brew Heineken and Krushovice beers in 2018.
With a strong management team and a proven track record Teliani aims to become a leading beverages producer and distributor in South Caucasus.
06 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC
CHAIRMANS STATEMENT
Dear Shareholders This is expected to be the last BGEO annual report.
The forthcoming demerger of the Group announced in July 2017 reflects both the end of an era and the start of a new one.
The Board and management team are convinced that we are on the right strategic path.
In fulfilling our fiduciary duties to you the Board regularly examines strategic options.
We elected to split the Group into two independent businesses the Bank and an investment vehicle which we call Georgia Capital.
If we do it right we could be at the eve of a major jump in value creation.
We will have created three large groups all quoted on the London Stock Exchange each with their own Board management and strategic logic.
It is an opportunity to deliver better service to our clients better development to our employees more growth of the corporate sector of the country and finally significant financial return to our shareholders.
Each management team and the Boards will focus on the development of one kind of business.
In my letter I have traditionally followed a set structure.
First a few words on Georgia then on the strategy of the Group and then on people  Board and top management.
Irakli Gilauri our CEO and others will expand on the detail of the businesses.
Economically Georgia is doing exceptionally well in a difficult region and world.
I believe three key factors make the Georgian situation positive in the long term Macroeconomic stability.
Prudent monetary and fiscal policies have led to almost 5% real GDP growth during 2017.
This has allowed the first ever issuance of offshore local currency bonds by Bank of Georgia.
NEIL JANIN
Many healthy and developing sectors in line with Government policies a.
The financial sector of which we are part b.
Infrastructure development especially in the power sector c.
Healthcare where we participate in the universal healthcare access policies of d.
Finally and more long term the Government has a programme to improve education and to make the public sector more efficient.
Good Government a.
Strong anticorruption policies.
According to Transparency International Georgia has maintained its ranking as a low bribery environment  on a par with many European Union member states b.
Georgias ease of doing business ranking was 9th out of 190 countries in the world in 2018 up from 16th last year.
Here again an excellent result c.
Fiscal development.
The corporate tax reforms effectively eliminating corporate income tax for all reinvested or retained earnings started at the beginning of the year and have already yielded GEL 600650 million cash buffer for corporate reinvestment in the first year on the policys adoption.
The reform efforts also envisage capital market development and pension reform.
Georgia is on the right path and these are developments which take time d.
Reduction of the fiscal deficit.
The
Government is determined to reduce its fiscal deficit on the back of reducing nonessential current spending.
The
2018 draft budget is an illustration that Government delivers on its commitments as was the case in 2017.
The proof of this economic progress lies in the fact that we were able do the first ever Lari Eurobond issuance and that Moodys has upgraded both Georgia and Bank of Georgia to a level two notches below investment grade.
The strategy of creating a mini Singapore within the region is moving forward day by day.
Singapore was not created in one day.
Politically things are as calm as they can be with Russia.
The New York Times reported last year on Russias attempts to provoke Georgia on the boundaries of Abkhazia and South Ossetia  all true but we also see that Russia is doing more business with Georgia specifically in terms of transport links and increased tourism flows.
Elsewhere Turkey remains Georgias largest trade partner whilst the development of trading links with Iran are likely to take more time than we originally thought.
At the same time Georgia signed a free trade agreement with China and now has access to a market of 1.4 billion consumers with zero tariffs without additional customs fees and without any transition period.
Internally it is important to remember that Georgia is still a pluralist and free country.
It is taking the habits of democracies albeit with one party dominance historically the UNM party and Georgian Dream now.
We have a Government which is supportive and has very competent public servants.
Finally investors should not forget that the United States and the European Union exercise strong external checks and balances  they do not want to lose Georgia as a rare democratic success story.
They showed their confidence in the country by granting Georgia visafree entry to the 26 countries of the Schengen Area.
07 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
The thinking behind our decision to breakup the Group into two separate businesses each expected to be quoted on the premium segment of the London Stock Exchange deserves to be explained.
It did not come from the analysis of a conglomerate discount and the expectation that we would see a valuation bump because of the transaction.
The value creation boost for the two entities is derived from our belief that we will run them better with higher ROE and higher growth.
The logic is simple first complexity creates confusion simplicity creates focus.
Second each entity will be freer to pursue its own growth strategy without worrying about the Group.
We can already see the effects of this decision.
One example is our insurance subsidiary which has already signed a number of distribution agreements with banks other than the Bank of Georgia.
This might not have happened if we had decided to stay in the previous structure.
Both entities have substantial potential of earnings and sales growth.
The Bank is repositioning its portfolio away from straight lending to corporates which require capital and see their margins diminishing.
It behooves us to find innovative ways to serve the corporate segment much more profitably.
We are also moving into the high networth segments where we can attract wealth from the region.
We will continue to reduce costs.
Finally digital technologies offer us an opportunity that we have not yet exploited.
The Bank has a very good management team with Kaha Kiknavelidze as its leader and they are at work on this strategy.
I will become Chairman of the Bank and this will be my only Board appointment.
The nonbanking business within BGEO will become an investment company  Georgia Capital  which will include real estate energy utility beverages and insurance.
It will also have listed stakes in the healthcare business and the
The value proposition to investors is the best vehicle for emerging growth opportunities in Georgia selected by people with unsurpassed understanding of the local landscape and managersentrepreneurs.
Georgia Capital will be run like a private equity fund with one exception.
The interest of its investors will be aligned with those of its Partners.
In fact its CEO will be paid exclusively in shares vesting over six years and his executive team will have a similar compensation structure.
Irakli Gilauri will leave the Group and the Bank to head this company as Chairman and CEO.
The Board is made up of old hands such as David Morrison and Kim Bradley and a number of new recruits Caroline Brown William Huyett Massimo Salvadori and Jyrki Talvitie.
The healthcare company GHG is a standalone entity today with its own Board and separate stock market listing.
It has much potential that you can read about in its own annual report.
Board quality and composition have been one of my main preoccupations we have an opportunity to build a new Board for Georgia Capital and to reinforce the Boards of the Bank and the healthcare company.
We have tried to prioritise skills and experience as well as gender diversity.
We need Board members who will spend time on the ground in Georgia.
We have attracted Cecil Quillen to the Banks Board and are actively seeking an additional member.
All of our Board members are Tshaped capable of broad judgement and all bring a speciality to the company.
The composition of the two new Boards and the experience and qualifications of their members are set forth on page 19 of this Report.
Unfortunately at the outset we will still have only one woman on each of our boards.
Our
We are still seeking to achieve the diversity targets at board level expected of a company of our size and as chairman I make this a personal priority.
It has been a war for talent.
Corporate culture and human capital have increasingly become the cornerstone of our success.
We would not be able to breakup if we had not developed capable leaders to take over.
One of the key components of our talent or human resource development strategy has been our incentive system.
Its intent is to incentivise management to create value on a longterm basis more than 85% of managements compensation is in shares that vest over a threetofiveyear period discouraging quick earnings temptations.
This year we have moved further into changing our corporate culture in every one of the entities.
We want to go from solo performance executives to executives who thrive on teamwork.
We have instituted personal development programmes starting at the very top and cascading to the lower level of the hierarchy.
Meritocracy and trust are what we aim to achieve.
This starts with top managers behaviour and talk.
It is reinforced by training programmes which teach both selfdevelopment how to give and receive feedback as well as how to dialogue rather than impose.
All this will not be enough if good behaviour is not encouraged and bad behaviour not tolerated.
The Board and I take a particular interest in seeing this through.
Before closing I would like to thank Irakli Gilauri for his leadership as Chief Executive Officer.
During his tenure at BGEO Irakli has taken a Georgia quoted bank and transformed it into the organisation with multiple businesses which we have today.
He did not do it alone.
He attracted and developed many executives who all lead their own businesses today and are developing in turn a set of new leaders.
His final act will be to achieve the breakup successfully.
The Board of Directors and I are truly grateful for his leadership over the years he has been with the company.
In closing I would like to thank our investors.
It is because of your trust that we were able to achieve all that has been achieved.
You will now have a choice of which parts of the business you will hold  I hope that you will continue to hold both.
Neil Janin
7 March 2018 08 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICERS STATEMENT
In what is expected to be my final letter to BGEO Group shareholders I would like to talk about three subjects The outstanding performance of the Group Simplicity is a key ingredient to our future success which drove our difficult decision to demerge Our determined and highachieving Board
BGEO Group delivered another extremely strong performance during 2017 that resulted in record profit for the year of GEL 463 million and earnings per share of GEL 11.61 an increase of 11.5% yearonyear.
Group revenues increased by 23.7% to GEL 1.1 billion.
Book value per share at the end of 2017 was GEL 65.22 up 15.2% yearonyear.
This reflects excellent performance from our Banking Business as well as strong momentum and strategic delivery from our Investment Businesses which were supported by Georgias strong macroeconomic performance and business outlook.
In the Banking Business 2017 was characterised by strong franchise growth in Retail Banking operations particularly in the fourth quarter.
This reflected the continued strong performance of our retail business in all segments and an increase in retail lending during the year of 29.3%.
In addition in 3Q17 we completed our threeyear programme to reduce concentration risk in our Corporate Bank and consequently started to deliver corporate lending growth in the last quarter of the year.
Loan yields have remained stable and net interest margins have therefore stayed robust at 7.3%.
Costs have remained wellcontrolled whilst ensuring continued investment in building an increasingly strong customer franchise.
The Banking Business cost of risk ratio in 2017 was 2.2% in line with our mediumterm cost of risk expectations and a significant reduction from 2.7% in 2016.
In addition we have continued to improve our asset quality and provisions coverage ratios.
The Return on Average Equity in the Banking Business continued to improve and stood at 25.2% for the year and 27.8% in the fourth quarter.
We have again delivered on all of our key strategic priorities.
2017 revenue growth of 17.5% was particularly supported by strong Retail Banking franchise growth where revenue increased by 24.4% and customer lending continues to grow at more than 20% per annum.
This offset the anticipated decline in the Corporate Investment Banking loan portfolio as we wound down the banking relationship with a small number of significant corporate borrowers earlier in 2017.
Importantly this helped us to make strong progress in reducing concentration risk in the Corporate Investment Banking and we lowered the concentration of our top ten corporate borrowers to only 10.7% of our lending portfolio.
We have now exceeded our targeted rebalancing of the retailcorporate portfolio mix to further improve the return profile of the Banking
Retail Banking now represents 68% of the Banks customer lending and Corporate Investment Banking represents 32%.
In addition to the strong retail lending growth Retail Banking made strong progress in implementing its customercentric approach with the launch of its new loyalty reward programme Plus in July 2017 and continued investment in digital growth.
Our product to client ratio also improved from 2.0 to 2.2 during the second half of 2017.
In July 2017 we won the exclusive right to modernise public transport payment system in Tbilisi and continue as the sole provider of the Tbilisi Metros payment support systems for the next ten years.
In addition Solo our premium banking brand has continued to deliver strong growth momentum with customer numbers increasing to 32104 up 66.6% over the last 12 months.
Solo is on track to achieving its target of 40000 Solo clients by the end of 2018.
The improving growth and strength of the Georgian economy continue to support asset quality.
In addition to the reduction to 2.2% in the cost of risk ratio mentioned above we were able to reduce the ratio of NPLs to Gross Loans which fell from 4.2% in December 2016 to 3.8% in December 2017.
Our NPL coverage ratio also improved  from 86.7% at the end of December 2016 to 92.7% at the end of 2017.
The Groups capital and funding position remain strong with capital being held both in the regulated Banking Business and at the holding company level.
At the end of 2017 liquid assets totalling GEL 310 million were held at the holding company level.
Within the Banking Business the NBG Basel II Tier 1 Capital Adequacy ratio increased by 120 basis points to 10.3% during the year reflecting both the continued dedollarisation of the Banking Business lending portfolio and the Banking Business high return on average equity and internal capital generation.
The National Bank of Georgia is currently in the process of transitioning to Basel III standards and introduced new capital adequacy requirements in December 2017.
On the basis of new regulation the NBG Basel III Tier 1 capital adequacy ratio was 12.4% at 31 December 2017 compared to a new minimum Tier 1 capital requirement of 9.9% which is expected to increase to 11.4% on 31 December 2018.
Bank of Georgia has strong capital ratios and high levels of internal capital generation.
As a result the transition to Basel III is not expected to affect the Banks growth expectations or existing dividend payout policy.
The Groups Investment Business continued to deliver strong growth and performance with EBITDA growing 55.7% yearonyear and profit before nonrecurring items and income tax including discontinued operations increasing by 21.4% over the same period.
We now expect that in line with our planned exit strategy for the business it is highly probable that the Group will own less than a 50% stake in Georgia Healthcare Group GHG at the end of 2018.
As a result GHG is now reported under discontinued operations in the Groups consolidated income statement.
Within the business GHG delivered a year of strong progress towards its planned investment and business rollout in all key areas of the Georgian healthcare system.
GHG delivered net revenues of GEL 745.7 million during the year an increase of 76.0% reflecting a combination of solid organic growth and the impact of IRAKLI GILAURI CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER 09 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
The healthcare services EBITDA margin continues to be strong at 26.4% notwithstanding the dilutive effect of the significant rollout of the two major hospital renovations  Tbilisi Referral Hospital and Deka and the ongoing rollout of a nationwide chain of polyclinics outpatient clinics.
In the pharmacy business we have made significant progress towards the integration of our two recently acquired businesses whilst avoiding any significant business disruption.
As a result the EBITDA margin of 8.6% for the year has already exceeded our target of a margin of more than 8%.
Our water utility and energy business GGU continued to focus on improving efficiencies in the water utility business and delivered a 6.1% yearonyear growth in revenues during the year whilst achieving a 52% EBITDA margin.
GGU has also continued to achieve efficiencies in its own energy consumption to free up electricity for thirdparty sales and has started a number of investments in additional capacity for electricity generation with the goal to establish a renewable energy platform.
During
2017 GGU commenced construction of one of two planned hydro power plants targeting c.100MW of additional capacity over the next few years.
Our real estate business m Real Estate continues to demonstrate its strong execution skills to unlock value in the real estate development business.
During 2017 m sold 629 apartments with a total sales value of US 49.1 million in addition to further increasing its portfolio of yielding assets.
In addition the real estate business continued to execute on its strategy of developing 1000 hotel rooms by the end of 2020.
In the fourth quarter of 2017 we acquired the shell of approximately 100room hotel and in February 2018 we launched a 152room Ramada Encore hotel in central Tbilisi.
As part of our asset light strategy m signed its largest ever franchise agreement to construct and develop a residential complex under the m brand name on a thirdparty land plot in a densely populated Tbilisi suburb.
Additionally s construction arm gained its first major thirdparty construction agreement to construct the shell and core of a new shopping mall and business centre in Tbilisis Saburtalo district.
These developments underpin an extremely successful year for the real estate business and provide significant growth potential over the next few years.
Our property and casualty insurance business Aldagi continues development of a strong portfolio of new products supporting 24.6% yearonyear growth in net earned premiums during 2017 and Aldagis position as the clear market leader in the fastdeveloping Georgian PandC insurance market.
Over the last few months Aldagi has also enhanced its distribution capabilities by signing major third party partnership agreements with two Georgian banks  Liberty Bank and Credo Bank  which will support the further diversification of Aldagis multichannel distribution network.
These contracts would not have materialised had it not been for the proposed demerger.
Our beverage business Teliani increased its revenues by 102.5% yearonyear continued to diversify its distribution portfolio and launched its mainstream beer and lemonade production during 2017.
The Group Board expects to recommend a regular annual dividend for 2017 totalling c.
EL
120 million.
This is in the range of our regular dividend payout ratio target of 2540% paid from the Banking Business profits.
Since 2010 the Group has grown its annual dividend per share by 40% CAGR on a GEL basis and by 32% CAGR on a Dollar basis.
If the expected demerger is successfully implemented as planned it is intended that Bank of Georgia Group PLC the then new parent company of the Banking Business will instead shortly after the demerger is completed declare and pay a dividend in a similar aggregate amount to shareholders then on the record.
In the event that the demerger is for any reason not completed it is intended subject to shareholder approval that the Board would implement the payment of this dividend which would represent a payment of GEL 3.1 per share payable in British Pounds Sterling at the prevailing rate a 19.2% increase over the 2016 dividend.
In addition to the regular annual dividend paid to shareholders US5.0 million was returned to shareholders by way of the buyback and cancellation of 115608 shares during 2017 as part of the existing Board approved US50 million buyback and cancellation programme.
During 2017 the Group Employee Benefits Trust also purchased shares in the market totalling US34.1 million.
SIMPLICITY
In July 2017 the Group announced its intention to demerge BGEO Group PLC into two separate Londonlisted businesses a banking business Bank of Georgia Group PLC and an investment business Georgia Capital PLC.
On
12 February 2018 the Group announced that the Board has approved the implementation of the demerger which is subject to shareholder approval at a General Meeting expected to be held in April 2018.
The demerger is expected to complete before the end of June 2018.
The main benefit of the demerger is to simplify the structure which in turn will enable the Boards and management teams of the respective businesses greater focus on strategy setting and execution.
It was not an easy decision to separate the Group but simplicity will bring so much benefit that it has clearly outweighed all the potential downsides.
In its final year before the forthcoming demerger and supported by the continued macroeconomic performance of Georgia BGEO Group has delivered a record breaking performance in terms of profitability and growth.
Growth and return momentum is there for both the Banking and the Investment Businesses.
BOARD
Our Boards role in the success of the Group may not always be apparent to our shareholders or the broader community  but it is pivotal.
Each Board members dedication vision rationalism and collaboration have made an important contribution to our development into the worldclass institution we have become.
Special thanks go to Neil Janin our Chairman whose leadership of the board and active involvement in strategy setting and mentoring of senior management has been critical in the success of our Group.
The good news is that Neil will continue to be the Chairman of Bank of Georgia.
We have continued our commitment to a strong and independent governance structure and have managed to put firstclass independent Boards and management teams in both businesses and I am confident that under the proposed governance structure following the demerger both companies independently will prosper even more and will continue their excellent recent track record for many years to come.
In what is expected to be my final letter to shareholders I would like to thank you for your continuous support and loyalty.
I have very much enjoyed meeting you on roadshows which served as very good guidance for me personally.
I have learned a great deal over the past 13 years of being an executive of a publicly listed company and believe with your help a lot more learning will follow in the years ahead.
I am very much looking forward to meeting you to discuss our strategy in my new capacity as CEO of the first publicly listed investment company from the region.
Sincerely yours Irakli Gilauri
Chief Executive Officer
7 March 2018 This Strategic Report as set out on pages 2 to 75 was approved by the Board of Directors on 7 March 2018 and signed on its behalf by Irakli Gilauri
Chief Executive Officer
7 March 2018 10 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC INDUSTRY AND MARKET OVERVIEW REFORMSDRIVEN SUCCESS Georgia has carried out genuine economic and structural improvements which have been institutionalised.
As a result corruption has decreased doing business has become easier productivity was enhanced and the economy diversified  enabling the country to withstand global financial crisis and recent shocks related to the commodity price slump with a relative strength.
Georgia is consistently ranked as the top performer in governance and doing business indicators in economic policy and institutional assessments as tracked by eminent international institutions.
Georgia with a ranking of 9 has implemented the highest number of business regulation reforms since the launch of the Ease of Doing Business report by the World Bank in 2003  a total of 47 reforms and Georgia is the only lowermiddleincome country that made it in the top 20 countries ranked by Ease of Doing Business.
Furthermore Georgia is ranked 16th out of 180 countries by Index of Economic Freedom measured by Heritage Foundation in 2018 and 25th out of 200 countries in the Trace Internationals 2017 Matrix of Business Bribery
Georgia is a positive exception to the trend of high bribery rates in the regional economies and is on a par with European Union EU member states with only 7% of people admitting having paid a bribe according to the 2017 Global Corruption Barometer study by Transparency International.
The Economic Liberty Act effective since January 2014 ensures the continuation of a credible fiscal and monetary framework for Georgia by capping consolidated Government expenditures at 30% of Gross Domestic Product GDP fiscal deficit at 3% of GDP and public debt at 60% of GDP .
The Economic Liberty Act also requires electorates approval through a nationwide referendum for imposing new taxes and raising existing tax rates subject to certain exceptions.
Furthermore as of January 2017 corporate income tax is now applicable to only distributed profits undistributed profits reinvested or retained are exempted.
Georgia has one of the worlds friendliest tax regimes according to the Forbes Misery Tax Index having slashed the number of taxes from 21 in 2004 to just six currently.
The EUGeorgia Association Agreement that came into force in July 2016 and related Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Agreement DCFTA effective since September 2014 lay solid groundwork to improve governance strengthen the rule of law and provide more economic opportunities by expanding the EU market to Georgian goods and services.
A closer economic tie with the EU and a trust in prudent policymaking are also expected to attract foreign investments to Georgia. major success of the Georgian foreign policy.
While remaining committed to EU integration Georgia has also managed to stabilise its relations with Russia as the latter lifted its embargo on Georgian products in 2013.
Tourism increasingly benefits from rising Russian arrivals with Georgia being rediscovered by Russian as well as other visitors from regional countries.
Moreover GeorgiaChina economic ties are increasing and a free trade agreement signed in 2017 is expected to further expand the Chinese market for Georgias exports.
In
2017 China was the third largest consumer of Georgian wine after Russia and Ukraine and the fifth largest consumer of Georgias exports overall.
Georgia is participating in Chinas huge Belt and Road Initiative that will have positive spillovers on the Georgian economy and the region overall.
The number of countries now engaged in the Initiative stands at nearly 70 and may reach 100 or more and cumulative investment in the corridors could reach US 1 trillion over the next ten years according to International Monetary Fund IMF.
Georgia once again demonstrated its commitment to European standards and norms by ensuring free and fair 2016 parliamentary elections.
After the elections Georgias ruling Georgian Dream party introduced a package of legislative changes to support the implementation of the Governments fourpillar reform programme aimed to boost growth and enhance the economys resilience to external shocks.
The programme includes new tax benefits infrastructure schemes governance reforms and modernisation of the education system.
Attractive place for doing business Georgia is an open and resilient emerging market and its ambition to transform itself into a Regional Hub Economy has already produced tangible results tourism is booming and trade integration has strengthened.
These coupled with a business friendly environment and policies aimed at further diversifying the economy support to attract foreign investments and boost growth.
EASE OF DOING BUSINESS RANKED GEORGIA IN 2018 In protecting minority investors 2nd In starting a business 4th In registering property 4th Overall ranking 9th Up from 16th in 2017 ahead of Sweden Ireland and Germany Source World Bank Doing Business.
ECONOMIC FREEDOM INDEX RANKED GEORGIA IN 2018 Up from 23rd in 2016 ahead of the Netherlands the United States and Germany 16th Source Heritage Foundation.
GLOBAL CORRUPTION BAROMETER % OF SURVEYED ADMITTING HAVING PAID A BRIBE Ahead of the Czech Republic the Slovakia and Latvia 7% Source Transparency International 2017.
11 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
Georgia
Armenia
Euro
Moldova
Turkey
Russia
Kazakhstan
Belarus
Ukraine
Azerbaijan
7.4% 15.4% 16.9% 30.3% 36.4% 43.1% 43.2% 47.8% 53.9% 56.8% 4.8% 12.6% 2.4% 3.7% 6.2% 7.2% 6.4% 3.4% 4.6% 2.9%2.8%telteltel 2016
Ukraine
Latvia
Estonia
Czech Rep
Lithuania
Romania
Moldova
Poland
Turkey
Armenia
The ongoing US 285 million threeyear IMF programme will help Georgia reduce economic vulnerabilities and promote economic growth.
The programme includes ambitious structural reforms to generate higher and more inclusive growth and fully supports Governments fourpoint reform programme focusing on improving education investing in infrastructure making public administration more efficient and further developing the business environment to boost the private sector as a growth engine.
In September 2017 Moodys upgraded the sovereign credit rating of Georgia to Ba2 from Ba3 and maintained the stable outlook.
According to Moodys the Georgian economys resilience in the wake of the 2014 regional economic shock proves the countrys economic and institutional strength and is the main driver behind the onenotch rating upgrade.
Government focuses on addressing the shortcomings in employment benefit schemes further cutting nonessential expenditures consolidating public sector institutions making social and healthcare spending more targeted and increasing the efficiencies in capital expenditure.
In order to enhance external sustainability National Bank of Georgia introduced a ten point dedollarisation action plan including the reforms to expand the use of the local currency in the economy address high dollarisation in the banking sector and support domestic savings in the economy through capital markets development.
MEASURES TO STRENGTHEN GEORGIAS POSITIONING TO BECOME THE REGIONAL HUB ECONOMY With its businessfriendly environment stable Government developed infrastructure stable energy supply flexible labour legislation stable and profitable banking sector strategic geography and a Government committed to addressing structural improvements in the economy through its fourpillar reform programme Georgia is well positioned to become a regional hub economy.
A natural transport and logistics hub connecting important regions and a market of 2.8 billion customers without customs duties.
Georgias favourable geographic location between landlocked energyrich countries in the East and European markets in the West and well developed air land and sea transport networks position the country to reap the benefits in transport logistics and tourism.
The Anaklia deep sea project is seen as a major scheme to enhance the regional transit hub potential.
The Port of Anaklia sits on the shortest route from China to Europe the route that has become a major focal point for Chinese investments in infrastructure.
Once completed it will be the first Georgian port capable of accommodating Panamax size cargo vessels.
The Governments ongoing infrastructure investments and increased spending on roads energy tourism and municipal infrastructure will also reinforce the potential.
To enhance Georgias competitiveness the Government continues to strengthen integration in existing international systems as well as new transit routes e.
Lapis Lazuli Persian Gulf  Black Sea Baltic Sea  Black Sea.
Georgia is a regional energy corridor that accounts for approximately 1.6% of the worlds oil and gas supply transit volumes.
Georgias existing free trade deals with the EU CIS EFTA Turkey and China enable it to access a market of 2.8 billion customers and are expected to further strengthen Georgias positioning as a platform to trade with produce for and service regional markets.
Established tourism destination.
Georgia is already an established tourism destination.
Travel inflows are a significant source of foreign currency for Georgia.
The number of visitors to Georgia increased at a 21.7% compounded annual growth rate CAGR over 20082017 and tourism inflows stood at US 2.8 billion 18.2% of GDP in 2017.
The Government plans to enhance Georgias positioning as a fourseason tourism location through improved connectivity of different regions with an aim to tap into their potential.
COMPARATIVE REAL GDP GROWTH RATES % 20072017 AVERAGE Source IMF GeoStat.
GROSS DOMESTIC PRODUCT % Source GeoStat.
Source Bloomberg Dollar per unit of national currency period 1 August 2014  14 February 2018.
Nominal GDP  US billion Real GDP growth % CURRENCY WEAKENING VS.
DOLLAR 12 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC
Turkey
2.8% Georgia 3.0%
3.3% Lithuania
3.8%
4.1% Hungary 4.8% Armenia 6.8% Czech Rep 10.2%
11.1% 12.3% Bosnia and Herz.
12.4%
12.7% 3.6%
Kazakhstan
12.8% 15.5% NONPERFORMING LOANS % 2017 LATEST AVAILABLE DATA Stable energy supply and electricity transit hub potential.
Georgia has a developed stable and competitively priced energy sector.
The country has overcome the chronic energy shortages of electricity and gas supply interruptions of a decade ago by renovating and building new hydropower plants HPPs improving transmission infrastructure and increasingly diversifying its natural gas imports from Azerbaijan instead of from Russia.
Energy needs of the country are growing steadily on average by 3.6% for electricity and by 5.3% for natural gas.
The needs are being addressed by constructing HPPs renovating and rehabilitating internal and external electricity grid and natural gas pipelines.
Currently only an estimated 20%25% of Georgias hydro potential is utilised.
The pipeline of investment projects in the energy sector is estimated at about US 4.4 billion in the next five to seven years including US 2.5 billion for three large HPP projects Nenskra Khudoni and Tskhenistskali cascade.
Currently
43 power plants 1.5GW are at various stages of construction or development with 102 more 3.7GW at feasibility study stage.
Government policy over the last decade has encouraged investment in the hydropower sector resulting in 28 new HPPs with a total capacity of 509.9MW being added to the system over 20122017.
Georgias transmission capacity is poised to increase and accommodate an additional installed capacity of 3.5GW by 2027 to meet the growth in export and domestic demand.
Georgia is foreseen to be an electricity transit hub for neighbouring economies.
In 20162017 already 1104GWh was transited through Georgia to neighbouring countries.
Attractive place for foreign investors.
Georgias businessfriendly environment coupled with its sustainable growth prospects continues to attract foreign investments.
Georgias liberal economic reforms and businessfriendly environment supported substantial Foreign Direct Investment FDI over the past decade.
These capital flows boosted productivity and accelerated growth.
Public infrastructure projects were also instrumental in driving growth as well as better realising the countrys potential in logistics transport and tourism.
Faced with low domestic savings FDI is an important source of financing growth in Georgia as well as a reliable source of Georgias persistently high current account deficit funding.
Despite the fact that many countries faced reduced capital flows during the recent economic turbulence FDI into Georgia was relatively secure thanks to the businessfriendly environment as well as strategic infrastructure projects  such as the British Petroleum gas pipeline construction project and the railway project connecting
FDI was at alltime high during nine months 2017 reaching US 1.3 billion or 12.1% of GDP .
FDI increased substantially in construction 204.1% yoy hotels and restaurants 287.1% yoy and real estate 68.9% yoy sectors.
Importantly
S 600 million during nine months of 2017 indicating investors trust in Georgias growth model and the success of the profit tax reform introduced in 2017.
Along with planned investment programmes of crosscountry significance such as the Anaklia deep sea port and hydro energy projects Georgias businesssupportive environment and the growing numbers of free trade agreements are expected to lead to further strong FDI inflows to Georgia in the medium term.
Growing number of free trade deals.
There have been significant changes in Georgias export structure and destination markets in recent years however Georgia has not yet tapped into international markets.
Georgias exports performance is explained by its commodity structure dominated by used car reexports and resourcebased metals and minerals while employmentgenerating processed product exports remain secondary.
One of the biggest changes in destination markets has been a reorientation from the Russian market after the 2005 embargo as the embargo forced Georgian producers to redirect exports to other Commonwealth of Independent States CIS countries the EU and the Middle East.
Exports to Russia picked up again in 2013 as Russia opened its borders to Georgian products.
Since 2013 Georgias developed logistics and transport infrastructure has helped to shore up opportunities for new reexport commodities including copper and pharmaceuticals.
Given these trends it is likely that reexports will continue to fuel Georgias export growth supported also by the Government policies which aim at further enhancing the platform for current and potential trade partners.
Access to new large markets  EU and China  could increase market penetration and there is also scope for diversifying agricultural exports once the quality and standards improve under EU
Georgias existing free trade deals with the EU CIS EFTA Turkey and China enable it to access a market of 2.8 billion customers without customs duties.
The prospective free trade agreements with Hong Kong and India also offer significant upside potential for Georgias exports.
INDUSTRY AND MARKET OVERVIEW CONTINUED Source IMF NBG.
13 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
GEORGIAN ECONOMY  THE FASTEST GROWING ECONOMY IN THE REGION Georgia continued to deliver positive results in 2017.
It is the ninth easiest place to do business globally according to the latest World Bank Doing Business report.
The resilience of the economy has been acknowledged by a onenotch sovereign credit rating upgrade from Moodys.
Trust in Georgias growth model was demonstrated by record high reinvestment by foreign companies in 2017 on the back of which the economy grew by an estimated 4.8%.
Increased external demand for goods and services originating in Georgia made net exports the main driver of growth in 2017 for the first time since 2013.
Tourism demonstrated a stellar performance with revenues in the sector totalling US 2.8 billion.
The Government boosted capital expenditure while the fiscal deficit reduced to 2.9% in 2017 under an IMF supported programme.
Annual inflation came in at 6.7% in December 2017  above the National Bank of Georgias NBG target of 4.0%  as the rising world commodity prices and increased excise tax on fuels and tobacco have been putting pressure on prices in 2017.
Notably 3ppts of the growth in prices was due to excise taxrelated increases.
With overall increase in prices driven broadly by fuel and food prices core inflation remained below the headline figures throughout 2017 and came in at 4.7%.
To curb inflationary expectations the NBG increased the policy rate to 7.25% in 2017 from 6.5% at end of 2016.
As the price pressures are transitory inflation is expected to decline in 2018 close to the 3.0% target once the effects of the excise tax increases fade.
After a weak start in 2017 the Georgian Lari started appreciating in midFebruary reflecting stronger external earnings and the pickup in economic activity.
The NBG intervened in the FX market and purchased US 129.8 million during AprilAugust 2017 boosting international reserves to US 3.0 billion.
The currency then started weakening against the Dollar again in September 2017 predominantly driven by the negative expectations built up over the past three years.
The lack of fundamental reasons behind this depreciation coupled with a strong external inflow supported the Lari to partially regain its value without central bank intervention in December 2017.
The growth is expected to accelerate further in 2018 as an economic recovery in Georgias major trading partners is gaining momentum and the public infrastructure investments and growing free trade deals are boosting growth prospects.
Notably the 2018 budget envisages a further decline in the fiscal deficit despite an increase in capital spending.
Ongoing reforms in various directions  pension reform capital market development and business enhancing measures  are expected to further support investments thus reinforcing the countrys economic potential.
The IMF expects growth to average 4.9% annually in 20182022 making Georgia the fastest growing economy in the region.
WELL CAPITALISED BANKING SECTOR WITH LOW NONPERFORMING LOANS
The banking sector has been one of the faster growing sectors of the Georgian economy.
The banking sectors assets growth rate of 17.0% tenyear CAGR has far outstripped the nominal GDP growth rate for the same period.
The banking sector is entirely privately owned and quite concentrated with the two largest banks accounting for 70.8% of total assets as at the end of 2017.
Amidst multiple downgrades by global rating agencies across the region in the face of the economic headwinds of 20152016 the Georgian banking sector has remained profitable and maintained its credit ratings with a stable outlook.
Prudent regulation and conservative oversight by the central bank resulted in stability and resilience of the financial sector during different shocks to the economy.
In 2017 the average capital adequacy ratio remained above 16% the share of NPLs.
NPLs stood at 2.8% and the overall liquidity ratio remained high at close to 40%.
Pickup in economic activity along with improved confidence supported the solid credit portfolio growth at 17.9% yoy in 2017.
Although Lari depreciation spurred loan and deposit ratios to GDP  the penetration rates still remain low with the retail loans estimated at 29.6% of GDP and the total loans at 54.8% of GDP as of 2017 and 52.1% of GDP for the deposits.
Due to the central banks conservative regulations liquidity and capitalisation rates in the banking sector have been historically high.
Nevertheless the sectors profitability has remained robust at 21.0% return of equity over the past three years.
14 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC CURRENT BUSINESS MODEL BGEO Group is a Georgiafocused investment platform.
We have a successful track record of delivering profitable growth for more than a decade growing our market capitalisation since 2004 by approximately 85 times to c.
S 1.8 billion as at 28 February 2018.
The Banking Business services are offered through Retail Banking Corporate Investment Banking and Wealth Management with ancillary business lines including leasing payment and banking operations in Belarus through BNB.
The Investment Business includes the utility and energy the real estate the PandC insurance the beverage and the healthcare businesses.
We believe that the Banking Business is the number one or two player on the market in all of its major business lines and that investment businesses are leading companies in their respective markets.
The Groups current business model is simple and purposebuilt to capture growth opportunities in Georgia.
REGULAR DIVIDENDS BANKING BUSINESS Retail Banking GHG Healthcare Wealth Management Real Estate Corporate Investment Banking GGU Utility and Energy Teliani Valley Beverages BNB Bank in Belarus CAPITAL RETURNS CASH BUFFER
Aldagi PandC Insurance INVESTMENT BUSINESS 15 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
GEL 1545.3 million 53.7% 18.2% RB CIB BNB Other BB 2.4% 25.7% 0.1% GEL 1481.8 million 28.0% 8.5% 55.6% GHG GGU m Teliani Valley PandC 4.4% 1.9% 1.5% GEL 309.8 million 9.3% 90.7% Total dividend paid for the year 3.0teltel Dividend per share GEL millions tel 2016 2017 GEL millions Amount purchased SOLID REGULAR DIVIDEND AND CAPITAL RETURN TRACK RECORD BGEO CAPITAL ALLOCATION BANKING BUSINESS GEL 3336.9 MILLION INVESTMENT BUSINESS CASH BUFFER REGULAR DIVIDENDS CAPITAL RETURN 10% 15% 30% 36% 33% 34% 32% Linked to recurring profit from the Banking Business.
Aiming 2540% dividend payout ratio GEL 435.2 million cash dividend paid since 2010 resulting in DPS CAGR20102016 of 43.3% and payout ratio above 30% over the past five years Management Trust buybacks and share buyback and cancellation Share buyback and cancellation programme in place with US 45 million repurchases remaining as of 31 December 2017 Comprises the sum of the following items a book value of equity attributable to BGEO shareholders of GEL 2420.6 million GEL 653.7 million market value adjustment to GHGs equity book value and longterm borrowing of GEL 262.7 million.
Payout ratio 16 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLCtel May 2016 EBRD loan to GHG GEL 26816000 loan for renovation and development of Deka hospital with fiveyear maturity Dec 2016 EBRD and DEG loan to Teliani Valley EUR 18500000 for brewery construction with nineyear maturity Dec 2016 GGU issues local bonds GEL 30000000 with fiveyear maturity Oct 2017 FMO and DEG loan to GGU GEL 100000000 and EUR 25000000 loans with 10 to 15year maturities Jul 2017 GHG issues local bonds GEL 90000000 for capital expenditures with fiveyear maturity INVESTMENT BUSINESS BANKING BUSINESS BGEO has superior access to both equity and debt capital which provides flexibility with liability management and is our key competitive advantage in realising our ambition to capture attractive investment opportunities in Georgia.
We have completed IPO on the LSE in 2006 first from Georgia and second from the CIS US 200 million Eurobond issue in 2007 first from Georgia US 100 million capital raised in 2008 Premium listing on the LSE in 2012 first from Georgia US 250 million Eurobond issued in 2012 US 150 million Eurobond issue in 2013 US 114 million capital raised in 2014 IPO on the LSE in 2015 of the healthcare subsidiary  GHG US 350 million Eurobond raised in 2016 GEL 500 million local currency denominated bond issued in 2017 first from Georgia and first from wider CIS region excluding Russia in the past ten years We are the undisputed leader in the local capital market industry through Galt and Taggart and Bank of Georgia custody GEL 1.0 billion local bonds placed by Galt and Taggart since 2014 The only international subcustodian in the region through State Street Citi and Clearstream Bank Luxembourg The strength of our franchise and brand name translate into pricing power driving down cost of deposits.
Ability to replace more costly borrowings with cheaper funding also leads to improved funding costs Lower deposit rates than offered on the market Cost of client deposits and notes 3.5% in 2017 down from 7.5% in 2010 Cost of funds 4.7% in 2017 down from 8.2% in 2010 BGEOS SUPERIOR ACCESS TO CAPITAL MARKETS ACCESS TO CAPITAL MARKETS Nov 2015 IFC loan to m Real Estate US 23000000 and US 7000000 loan for new residential project development with four and 11year maturities Nov 2015 GHG IPO proceeds of GBP 70697598 from premium listing on London Stock Exchange mid1990s EBRD IFC DEG and other IFIs provide credit lines to fund growth Oct 2004 Firebird and East
Feb 2005 Issues bonds GEL 2000000 11% callable twoyear local bonds Nov 2006
US 159843723 issue price GBP 9.2 GDR listing on LSE Feb 2008 Equity issuance US 100 million raised through an offering of new ordinary shares in the form of GDRs Dec 2008
US 29000000 tenyear senior mortgage facility Dec 2010
US 50000000 fiveyear maturity loan for SMEs Jul 2012 Issues Eurobonds US 250000000 7.75% fiveyear Eurobond Feb 2012 Premium listing on London Stock Exchange Jan 2007 Issues Eurobonds US 200000000 9% fiveyear Eurobond Jan 2007
US 12500000 to finance SME loan portfolio EBRD becomes a shareholder Aug 2016 Proparco loan to GHG US 25000000 loan for renovation of hospital premises and development of ambulatory clinics with eightyear maturity Oct 2016 Real Estate issues local bonds US 25000000 with threeyear maturity Sep 2016 IFC loan to GHG GEL 61080000 loan for corporate finance needs with 11year maturity Dec 2017 EIB loan to GGU EUR 21470000 loan with tenyear maturity 17 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
Asset
Managers
71%
Institutions
22%
PBs
7%
14%
30%
46%
5% Other Europe 3%
2% ALLOCATION BY GEOGRAPHY ALLOCATION BY INVESTOR TYPE
Listing
Notes rating Joint Lead Managers
GEL 500 million 3 year 11.00% Eurobonds settled in US dollar Irish Stock Exchange Moodys Ba3Fitch BB
Morgan Renaissance Capital JSC Galt and Taggart BANK OF GEORGIA 500 MILLION GEL INAUGURAL LARI EUROBOND ISSUANCE Nov 2013 Issues Eurobonds US 150000000 7.75% Eurobond consolidated with US 250000000 2012 bond Dec 2014 US 114 million capital raise share price GBP 20.25 raised capital to purchase Privatbank and support further acquisitions May 2015
US 90000000 subordinated debt Jul 2016 Issued Eurobonds US 350000000 6% sevenyear Eurobond May 2017 Issues local currency
GEL 500000000 11% threeyear GEL denominated bond Aug 2016
GEL 60000000 for MSME financing with fiveyear maturity Sep 2015
US 40000000 financing for SME Apr 2015 European Investment Bank EUR 40000000 financing for SME and micro businesses with sevenyear maturity Jun 2014
EUR 18500000 for SME and micro businesses May 2016
GEL 220000000 for MSME financing with fiveyear maturity 18 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLCtel 2017 20.1% 21.9% 22.2% 25.2%tel 2017 28.1% 35.3% 39.5% 29.3%tel 2016 11.7% 20.3% 15.8% 20.2% PERFORMANCE AGAINST STRATEGY IN 2017 DELIVERING ON CURRENT STRATEGY 4x20 strategy  Georgiafocused investment platform  reflected the Groups competitive strengths and opportunities in the market During 2017 BGEOs 4x20 strategy entailed a 20% metric for ROAE retail loan growth minimum IRR for the Investment Business and its profit contribution to the Groups profit.
This strategy was built to allow the Group to capture compelling investment opportunities in Georgias corporate sector on top of its continued commitment to growing its strong Banking Business.
ROAE
20%
RR of 20%
20% Retail loan book growth 20% BANKING BUSINESS INVESTMENT BUSINESS 121% IRR from GHG IPO 74% IRR from m
Estate projects STRATEGIC TARGET 2017 PERFORMANCE
Business
20% Return on Equity Record profitability Revenue up 17.5% yoy to GEL 909.3 million Profit up 25.0% yoy to GEL 369.5 million Noninterest income up 7.7% yoy to GEL 237.2 million NIM stood at 7.3% ROAE stood at 25.2% Operational efficiency and scale Cost to Income ratio at 37.7% Prudent risk management Cost of risk of 2.2% 20% Retail loan book growth  Net Retail Banking loan book grew 29.3% yoy to GEL 5044.4 million while Retail Banking client deposits increased 35.4% yoy to GEL 3267.3 million.
Growth on constant currency basis was 30.6% and 37.4% for retail net loan book and retail deposits respectively Retail Banking Loan Yield was 16.1% in 2017 compared to 16.8% in 2016 Retail Banking Cost of Client Deposits decreased to 2.9% in 2017 from 3.3% in 2016
Business
Internal rate of return of minimum 20% for each of the individual future investments of the Group Achieved 121% IRR and 3.9xmoney on our investment in GHG at IPO in November 2015 74% IRR from m Real Estate projects Profit up to 20% of BGEO Group profit Profit from continuing operations was GEL 46.6 million or 11.5% of the Groups profit Profit including GHG which is classified as a discontinued operation was GEL 93.9 million or 20.3% of the Groups profit
Dividend payout ratio of 2540% from Banking Business The Group Board expects to recommend a regular annual dividend for 2017 totalling c.
EL
120 million.
This is in the range of our regular dividend payout ratio target of 2540% paid from the Banking Business profits.
Since 2010 the Group has grown its annual dividend per share by 40% CAGR on a GEL basis and by 32% CAGR on a Dollar basis.
If the expected demerger is successfully implemented as planned it is intended that Bank of Georgia PLC the then new parent company of the Banking Business will instead shortly after the demerger is completed declare and pay a dividend in a similar aggregate amount to shareholders then on the record.
In the event that the demerger is for any reason not completed it is intended subject to shareholder approval that the Board would implement the payment of this dividend which would represent a payment of GEL 3.1 per share payable in British Pounds Sterling at the prevailing rate a 19.2% increase over the 2016 dividend GEL 435.2 million cash dividend was paid since 2010 resulting in a dividend per share CAGR20102016 of 43.3% and a payout ratio above 30% over the past five years Capital return from investment  US 39.1 million capital was returned to shareholders whereby 115608 shares were repurchased and cancelled for a total consideration of US 5.0 million since the commencement of the share buyback and cancellation programme US 34.1 million capital was spent on Employee Benefit Trust buybacks Excluding the impact of gains from deferred tax liability writeoffs bargain purchase gain recorded on GGU acquisition and other nonrecurring items.
The prior periods presented are updated as a result of Aldagis results included under Investment Business and change of accounting policy from revaluation model to cost model for subsequent measurement of office buildings and service centres.
19 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
TWO DISTINCT ENTITIES TO UNLOCK ADDITIONAL LONGTERM VALUE FOR SHAREHOLDERS STRUCTURE POST DEMERGER BENEFITS OF THE DEMERGER GEORGIA CAPITAL Private companies Public companies 100%
PandC Insurance 19.9% Bank of Georgia 100% Real Estate 100%
Utility and Energy 57%
Healthcare
76% Teliani Valley
BANK OF GEORGIA
Banking
Business flexibility Efficient capital structure Growth opportunities Improved management focus Regulatory clarity and flexibility Alignment of incentives Investor clarity and understanding
Management
Corporate
Investment Banking
Bank in Belarus Bank of Georgia Group will continue to be a fullylicensed and regulated systemically important universal banking business focused on Georgia with industryleading characteristics.
Georgia Capital will be the only professionally managed publicly listed Georgiafocused investment platform with a track record of over ten years of successfully investing in growing companies in the Georgian economy.
The Board believes the demerger of the businesses will deliver additional longterm value to shareholders by creating two distinct entities each of which will have enhanced
On 3 July 2017 the Group announced its intention to demerge BGEO Group PLC into two separate Londonlisted businesses a banking business Bank of Georgia Group PLC and an investment business Georgia Capital PLC.
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE POST DEMERGER ROBUST AND TRANSPARENT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FRAMEWORK TO BE PUT IN PLACE ON DEMERGER GEORGIA CAPITAL BANK OF GEORGIA RATIONALE FOR DEMERGER Neil Janin
NonExecutive Chairman Formerly a Director of McKinsey and Company based in Paris for over 27 years Irakli Gilauri Chairman and Chief Executive Officer BGEO CEO since 2011 previously BOG CEO since 2006.
Formerly an EBRD banker Jonathan Muir
NonExecutive Director CEO of LetterOne.
Formerly a Partner at Ernst and Young Kim Bradley
NonExecutive Director Formerly with Goldman Sachs for over 15 years.
Senior
Executive at GE Capital Tamaz Georgadze
NonExecutive Director Formerly a partner at McKinsey and Company in Berlin.
Founder of SavingGlobal GmbH Massimo Gesua sive Salvadori
NonExecutive Director Currently an analyst at Odey Asset Management.
Formerly with McKinsey and Company for over nine years Kaha Kiknavelidze
Chief Executive Officer
Formerly managing partner of Rioni Capital.
Executive
Director at UBS David Morrison Senior Independent NonExecutive Director Formerly a senior partner at Sullivan and Cromwell LLP for over 28 years Al Breach
NonExecutive Director Formerly head of research strategist and economist at UBS Russia and CIS economist at Goldman Sachs William Huyett
NonExecutive Director Formerly a Director of McKinsey and Company based in Boston for over 28 years Hanna Loikkanen Senior Independent NonExecutive Director Advisor to East Capital 20 years of experience working with financial institutions in Russia and Eastern Europe Cecil Quillen
NonExecutive Director Partner at Linklaters LLP with nearly 29 years of experience in working on a broad spectrum of securities and finance matters Caroline Brown
NonExecutive Director Has managed divisions of FTSE 100 groups and worked as a corporate finance advisor to governments and corporations with Merrill Lynch UBS and HSBC.
Has chaired audit committees of listed companies for the past 15 years Jyrki Talvitie
NonExecutive Director Formerly in charge of strategic partners and investors at Sberbank.
29 years of experience in the banking sector VTB Bank BNP Paribas Bank of New York growth opportunities in the strongly growing Georgian economy.
Both businesses are already leaders in their respective fields with separate strategic capital and economic characteristics and strong and knowledgeable management teams.
We expect the demerger to benefit the two businesses in a number of areas most specifically by providing greater flexibility for each business to manage its own capital and human resources and to pursue strategic options appropriate to its respective sector.
The Board believes that the demerger is the best way to enable the individual businesses to grow faster and develop independently over the next few years.
In February 2018 the Board approved the implementation of the demerger.
The demerger is subject to shareholder approval at the 2018 AGM and the process is currently expected to complete by 30 June 2018.
For strategies of Bank of Georgia Group and Georgia Capital provided the demerger is approved see pages 20 to 29.
This annual report speaks for BGEO Group PLC for the year ended 31 December 2017 and its current strategy and position and in the case of the demerger not being approved the current strategy of the Group remains unchanged.
20 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC
BANK OF GEORGIA STRATEGY OVER THE NEXT TWO TO THREE YEARS Bank of Georgia is a leading universal Georgian bank which is well positioned to benefit from the underpenetrated banking sector in Georgia through providing best in class services.
Two key metrics we use to measure Banking Business performance are 1 Return on Average Equity ROAE targeted at 20% and 2 15%20% growth of our loan book.
Bank of Georgia is also well positioned in terms of both capital and liquidity to deliver on its growth strategy.
We have two segments in the Bank of which Retail Banking will drive most of our Banking Business growth.
In Retail Banking we aim to harness our optimised branch operating model to effectively serve each target segment of our emerging mass and affluent clients based on their needs.
In Corporate Investment Banking we have successfully achieved our risk deconcentration and loan portfolio repositioning targets and intend to resume the corporate loan book growth as well as increase the share of fee and commission income in the medium term.
Going forward we expect the growth of the total loan book to be balanced between Retail Banking and Corporate Investment
In Wealth Management under Corporate Investment Banking we will focus on strengthening and promoting our regional private banking franchise.
The Bank is well positioned to become a regional finance centre where high networth individuals are confident to deposit their funds.
The Banks strategic priorities are In Retail Banking to increase the mass retail product to client ratio from the current 1.8 to 3.0 in the next two years In Express Banking to double the number of transactions over the next two years In Solo Banking to increase the number of Solo clients to 40000 by the end of 2018 currently 32104 In Investment Banking to develop a significant regional private banking franchise to reach AUM of GEL 2.5 billion by the end of 2020 currently GEL 1.9 billion In addition over the medium to long term The net interest margin is expected to exceed 7% currently 7.3% The Bank aims to manage a cost to income ratio of around 35% currently 37.7% The Bank will enhance its already prudent risk management practice and will aim to maintain its NonPerforming Loans coverage ratio in the range of 80%120% through the economic cycle currently 92.7%  with a normalised ratio of 100% Through the longterm economic cycle the Banks cost of risk ratio is expected to be c.2.0% per annum currently 2.2% The Bank aims for its dividend payout ratio to be in the range of 25%40%.
Implementing our strategy successfully should improve the quality of ordinary dividend generation capabilities of Bank of Georgia and make it more sustainable over a long period of time.
For information on this years dividend see page 18.
TOTAL BANKING BUSINESS LOAN BOOK GROWTH INCREASE MASS RETAIL PRODUCT TO CLIENT RATIO 20% 1520% 35% to 40000 80120% AUM GEL 2.5bn 2.0% 2540% 7%
NIM
COST TO INCOME RATIO COST OF RISK THROUGH THE CYCLE BECOME A REGIONAL PRIVATE BANKING HUB NPL COVERAGE RATIO DIVIDEND PAYOUT RATIO INCREASE NUMBER OF SOLO CLIENTS OUR TARGETS AND PRIORITIES GOING FORWARD
TARGETS
PRIORITIES
FINANCIAL
METRICS 21 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Informationtelteltel 2011 Product to client 2.2 Over 2 million retail clients CAGR 13.6% Volume of transactions millions 9tel980 Number of transactions thousands Through digital channels millions Through tellers millions Over two million retail clients Continued investment in digital penetration growth In order to better connect with and efficiently serve the various segments of the retail client base Bank of Georgia operates a multibrand strategy.
We began implementing our Express Banking strategy in 2012 by rolling out smallformat Express branches offering predominantly transactional banking services to clients through ATMs and Express Pay terminals.
Out of the total current network of 281 retail branches 156 have been transformed to Express while a remaining 12 will follow in 2018.
Under the Bank of Georgia brand we target the mass retail segment.
This is our flagship brand and the most significant profit contributor.
By the end of 2017 we completed the transformation process of our Retail Banking operations from a productbased model into a clientcentric model as well as the implementation of the clientcentric model in our branches.
As a result 86 out of 113 mass retail branches now operate on a clientcentric service model.
In April 2015 we launched Solo  a fundamentally different approach to premium banking.
The Banks Solo clients are given access to exclusive products and the finest conciergestyle environment at our specially designed Solo lounges.
They are provided with new lifestyle opportunities such as exclusive events and handpicked lifestyle products.
NUMBER OF RETAIL BANKING CLIENTS TRANSACTIONS THROUGH MOBILE BANK DIGITAL VS NONDIGITAL
Over the past decade Retail Banking demonstrated a stellar performance by reaching 2.3 million clients delivering on loan book growth and ROAE targets.
While we were targeting this milestone the Bank was productcentric with a focused client acquisition approach.
Having attracted over two million clients we now target growth through increasing product to client ratio.
We are actively investing in information technology solutions in order to increase digital banking penetration for our services.
In 2017 we launched a new fullytransformed userfriendly multifeature mobile banking application  mBank  which continues to gain popularity.
Since its launch on 29 May 2017 and over the course of the following seven months over 261000 downloads were made by the Banks customers while the previous application had less than 120000 downloads since its launch.
C.3.88 million online transactions were performed during the same period using the new application.
The number of transactions have increased by c.140% since 2016.
22 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC BANK OF GEORGIA STRATEGY OVER THE NEXT TWO TO THREE YEARS CONTINUED RETAIL BANKING SEGMENTS MEDIUM TERM TARGETS AND PRIORITIES Customercentric approach BRANCH OPERATING MODEL NEW WAY OF THINKING CUSTOMER FIRST NEW CUSTOMER SEGMENTATION AND SERVICE MODEL Productcentric approach
FROM
TO
TO
CUSTOMER PRODUCT
UNIVERSAL
BANKER
Productcentric crossselling
360 financial planning
Productcentric crossselling Number of branches Number of branches Number of customers Number of customers
Number of product categories
Credit cards Accounts and deposits Additional services Consumer loans
Credit cards Accounts and deposits Additional services Consumer loans Emerging Retail Mass Retail
SOLO
Mass Retail Mass Retail Emerging Retail Emerging Retail Segments Emerging Retail Mass Retail Mass Affluent MSME Strategic target Double number of transactions Productclient ratio growth to 3.0 Client growth to
Clients 524.4k 1592.8k 32.1k 165.8k Full year profit GEL 39.3 million 27.0% yoy GEL 110.2 million 0.5% yoy GEL 42.8 million 32.6% yoy GEL 50.2 million 34.1% yoy Profit per client GEL 78.0 GEL 70.7 GEL 1704.4 GEL 342.9 Product to client ratio Branches 156 113 12 na 1523.1k 1592.8k 156 23 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
RETAIL BANKING  CLIENTCENTRIC MULTIBRAND STRATEGY EXPRESS  CAPTURING EMERGING RETAIL BANKING CLIENTS Our Express Bank brand is aimed at the emerging bankable population.
Express serves as a platform for bringing the currently underbanked population into banking and its main focus is to enable its client base to transact in a fast and easy way.
SOLO  A FUNDAMENTALLY DIFFERENT APPROACH TO PREMIUM BANKING The Solo brand is used to serve the emerging mass affluent segment.
Our new Solo model was introduced in 2015.
It is a fundamentally different approach to premium banking.
As part of the new strategy the Banks Solo clients are given access to exclusive products and the finest conciergestyle environment at our specially designed Solo lounges and are provided with new lifestyle opportunities such as exclusive events and handpicked lifestyle products.
BANK OF GEORGIA  UNPARALLELED MASS RETAIL BANKING FRANCHISE Under the Bank of Georgia brand we serve mass retail clients for whom we have successfully optimised and redesigned the operating model of our mass retail branches around a clientcentric approach.
Mass retail is the largest segment of Retail Banking where we aim to increase the product to client ratio from the current 1.8 to 3.0 in the medium term.
In 2017 we installed 113 new Express Pay terminals resulting in 2842 total Express Pay terminals at the end of the year.
We are leaders in Georgia in the payment systems market.
In 2017 we won a tender organised by Tbilisi City Hall for the modernisation of the public transportation payment system in Tbilisi.
As a result the Bank will continue to be the sole provider of payment support services to the public transport network and operate Express branches in Tbilisi metro i. subway stations for the next ten years.
As part of the tender mandate and the Banks own digitilisation strategy Bank of Georgia will implement a modern digital payment system across public transport network in Tbilisi including payment processing using Visa and MasterCard cards and create a digital platform for ticket reservations and purchases through mobile applications.
The Banks branch network presence in public transport services contributes c.2.1 million transactions per month.
We issued 388567 Express cards in 2017 and had 1258940 Express cards outstanding at the end of the year.
In 2017 the number of clients served and number of total transactions through Express cards increased by 48.3% and 15.2% yoy respectively.
We sell only a limited number of banking products to our Express Banking clients.
Currently 106 out of a total of 156 Express branches are located in Tbilisi.
Nowadays Express is the major growth driver in our fee and commission income from the Retail Banking segment and a strong franchise attracting the unbanked population to the Bank eventually growing them into mass retail customers.
To qualify for Solo services one needs to have an income of GEL 3000 per month.
At Solo lounges clients are attended by personal bankers and in addition to the banking products are offered luxury goods at cost and other lifestyle offers including a travel magazine and entertainment.
In 2017 Solo organised concerts with world famous artists.
Such events are limited to Solo clients and create additional interest in the Solo franchise.
Profit per Solo client reached GEL 1704 in 2017 over 24 times what we have in the mass retail segment under the Bank of Georgia brand.
Solos gross loan book and deposit portfolio demonstrated impressive growth of 44.7% and 37.4% yoy.
We are well on track to achieve our target of 40000 Solo customers by the end of 2018 from the current 32104.
The share of new customers acquired in 2017 accounted for 43.8% of the total of Solo clients at the end of the year which clearly demonstrates the growing popularity of the franchise in our domestic market.
In 2017 we launched Solo Club a membership group within Solo which offers exclusive access to Solos products and offers ahead of other Solo clients at a higher fee.
This includes American Express Platinum cards which were also launched in 2017 and are available to Solo Club members only.
At 31 December 2017 Solo Club had 1882 members.
Solo is actively diversifying the range of its lifestyle offerings in travel entertainment education and wellbeing to make the franchise even more distinguishable and enjoyable.
In 2017 we accelerated proactive interactions with our clients by advising and offering them the financial products and solutions that best serve their individual needs.
We continue to see strong growth in sales volumes and the number of products sold to our clients in transformed branches contributing to 29.3% yoy growth in the retail loan book.
The number of products sold to mass retail customers has increased by 163.0% compared to the sales before transformation of the retail segment.
In order to unlock the full potential of current customers and boost a product to client ratio we launched a new loyalty programme called Plus in 2017.
The programme is part of the mass retail customercentric approach and offers the customers different status levels and reward points.
They accumulate based on their business with the Bank and can redeem points with partner companies products andor services.
At 31 December 2017 the number of upgraded members reached 159781 and active Plus cards outstanding were 250307 while the total number of members grew to 586870.
24 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC 2% management fee 20% success fee c.2% operating expenses GEORGIA CAPITAL STRATEGY GEORGIA CAPITALS KEY PRINCIPLES AROUND INVESTING AND MANAGING COMPANIES KEY TO SUCCESS  ALIGNED SHAREHOLDER AND MANAGEMENT INTERESTS GEORGIA CAPITAL THREE PILLAR STRATEGIC FRAMEWORK Cash preservation is a key target for Georgia Capital and therefore two thirds of total operating expenses are related to sharebased compensation Georgia Capitals senior managements compensation will be paid in longvested shares only with no cash component Portfolio company management will be paid in proxy shares of their respective companies PRIVATE EQUITY na Georgia Capital is a Georgiafocused well diversified investment company targeting minimum IRR of 25% from its investments.
Georgia Capital seeks to capture growth opportunities in the sectors in which it currently operates and drive the development of new structurally attractive highgrowth businesses in Georgia which it intends to add either by acquiring businesses in their early development stage or by establishing greenfield businesses often consolidating fragmented or underdeveloped markets.
Georgia Capital actively manages its portfolio companies to maturity setting the strategy and business plan of each business and driving its execution.
In order to unlock the value of the companies in which it invests and which it manages Georgia Capital sets an exit strategy prior to making an investment.
STRONG CORPORATE GOVERNANCE Outstanding track record in Institutionalising businesses creating independently run managed institutions investor reporting transparency and granularity Aligned shareholder and management interests Management compensation linked to performance Equityperformance dominating compensation structure Top class Board and governance INVESTMENT and CAPITAL MANAGEMENT Highly disciplined investing approach.
The Georgian economy entered into a period of significant development and growth approximately ten years ago and different sectors and businesses are at an early stage of formation.
Access to capital and management personnel is limited owners of businesses are cash poor and as a result Georgia Capital can pursue attractive investment opportunities and acquire assets on relatively attractive terms with a view to consolidating fragmented and underdeveloped markets.
Because the company is under no time pressure to invest it takes a selective and opportunistic approach to new investments.
Georgia
Capitals capital return policy is a natural selfdiscipline mechanism for its capital allocation decisions analysis when evaluating capital returns new investment opportunities or divestments.
Georgia Capital does not have capital commitments or a primary mandate to deploy funds or divest assets within a specific timeframe.
As such it can focus on shareholder returns and on opportunities which meet its investment return and growth criteria.
The company targets a minimum IRR of 25% for its existing and new businesses to buy back and cancel its shares andor pay special dividends linked to exits from its existing businesses and new investments MANAGING PORTFOLIO COMPANIES Georgia Capital sets the strategy and business plan of each business it acquires or establishes and then actively manages their implementation particularly at early stages of development.
As the availability of management personnel is limited by developing top talent in Georgia the company can add value for the companys shareholders.
Investing time in growing and developing management continues to be critical for the success of the companys strategy.
Georgia Capital will apply a handson management approach to the nonpublic portfolio companies at early stages of their development and acts as an advisor for the management of more mature companies.
In the publicly listed companies Georgia Capital will be represented on the Board at least until its ownership stake falls below 25%.
EXIT
As a business matures Georgia Capital will normally seek to monetise its investment including through initial public offering strategic sale or other appropriate exit typically within five to ten years from acquisition.
As investments are monetised Georgia Capital plans either to redeploy the proceeds to capture opportunities for growth in new sectors or in the companys existing businesses or return proceeds to shareholders in accordance with its capital return policy.
ACCESS TO MANAGEMENT Reputation among talented managers as the best group to work for Attracted talent have demonstrated track record of successful delivery Proven DNA in turning around the companies and growing them efficiently Strong skillset in company exits LSE IPO track record Divestiture skills SUPERIOR ACCESS TO CAPITAL Only investment company in Georgia Uniquely positioned given the access to capital in a small frontier economy where access to capital is limited c.
S 500 million raised in equity at LSE Issued four Eurobonds totalling US 1.2 billion US 3 billion raised from IFIs EBRD IFC etc.
Flexibility to use own shares as acquisition currency na na 25 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
GGU  NATURAL MONOPOLY IN THE WATER BUSINESS WITH UPSIDE IN ELECTRICITY GENERATION AND SALES GGU has a significant opportunity to increase its operational cash flow over the next few years from a combination of improving cash collection rates growing cost efficiencies from cutting technical and commercial water loss rates and reducing energy consumption internally to preserve the supply available for sale to third parties while also planning the construction of hydro wind and solar power generation plants.
GGU is an established business with two business lines  water utility and electric power generation.
In its water utility business GGU has a natural monopoly that supplies water and provides a wastewater service to 1.4 million people more than onethird of Georgias population in three cities Tbilisi Mtskheta and Rustavi.
GGU is selfsufficient in its power usage for water transportation and invests in additional capacity for electricity generation with the goal to establish a renewable energy platform.
GGU has been investing heavily in its infrastructure thereby replacing the depreciated asset base over time and achieving continuous growth in the Regulatory Asset Base RAB.
GGU plans to invest at least GEL 200 million over the next three years in the upgrade of existing and the development of substantial new water utility infrastructure.
GGUs
Investment in infrastructure is expected to significantly improve the rendering of water supply and wastewater services to customers and achieve cost efficiencies through reduced water losses.
In 2017 GGUs regulatory body approved increased tariffs for water supply and wastewater services based on a new methodology which is in line with international best practices.
New tariffs provide fair return on investment as well as compensating for eligible operating expenses.
In 2017 GGU commenced construction of a 50MW HPP in NorthWestern Georgia Svaneti region with a target to have the HPP operational in December 2018.
Construction of 2.5MW Bodorna HPP also started in 2017 which is expected to become fully operational from September 2018.
Moreover 44.3MW Zoti HPP in Western Georgia Guria region is currently under development with a target to complete the construction of this plant by the end of 2020. construction works.
The key elements of GGUs business strategy are outlined below Reducing water loss rates and increasing energy efficiency.
GGU aims to achieve efficiencies in operating and maintaining its network by heavily investing in the refurbishment of its existing and the development of new infrastructure.
As a result GGU plans to substantially reduce technical and commercial water losses in the medium term thereby reducing water and energy consumed internally.
Asa result of achieving efficiencies in its own energy consumption GGU expects to free up electricity for thirdparty sales.
GGU intends to achieve additional cost efficiencies through reduced maintenance costs for existing water infrastructure which management expects to result in increased profitability Establishing a renewable energy platform.
GGU plans to establish a renewable energy platform by developing hydro wind and solar power plants.
Currently GGU owns and operates 149.3MW installed capacity has c.100MW HPPs at a construction stage and c.100MW wind projects at feasibility stage.
Additionally
GGU is constantly identifying new renewable projects that it aims to develop in the medium term Preparing for IPO in the medium term.
As part of preparing for a potential IPO GGU aims to achieve EBITDA of more than GEL 115 million in 2019.
GGU plans to use IPO proceeds to fund new development initiatives including renewable energy projects GGU has been successfully growing EBITDA and reaching its targets for several years in a row and the company is well on track to further increase it to more than GEL 115 million in 2019 by increasing its renewable energy portfolio and tapping into additional efficiencies in the water business.
Strong and stable cash flow generation is expected to enable GGU to sponsor steadily increasing dividend payouts to shareholders and to prepare the combined utility and renewable energy business for an IPO in approximately two to three years.
CURRENT
STANDING
MEDIUM
TERM GOAL
DIVIDEND
PROVIDER
VALUE
CREATION
UPSIDE
EBITDA 2019 GEL 70 million EBITDA 2019 GEL 45 million 200MW capacity REVENUE 2017 GEL 125 million EBITDA 2017 GEL 62 million REVENUE 2017 GEL 14 million EBITDA 2017 GEL 9 million 149.3MW capacity IPO in 23 years time
ENERGY
TARGETS AND PRIORITIES FOR THE NEXT TWO YEARS 1 26 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC A FASTGROWING LEADING REAL ESTATE DEVELOPER AND ASSET MANAGER IN GEORGIA Real Estate develops residential and commercial property including hotels in Georgia.
Over the past ten years m has established itself as one of the most recognised and trustworthy residential housing brands in the country. generates fee income.
For the next three years the main priority for m Real Estate will be to target an internal rate of return of 40% whilst delivering a capital return of US 25 million in 2020 by Developing remaining residential land bank.
As a residential real estate developer m targets mass market customers by introducing high quality and comfortable living standards in Georgia and making them affordable through its well established branch network and sales force.
The total value we are aiming to unlock from the remaining residential land bank by 2020 is US 27.8 million with 4690 apartments in addition to 217 remaining apartments to be sold in the existing 11 projects both completed and ongoing. under franchise agreements.
Franchising real estate development in plots and generate a fee income.
While following its asset light strategy m will capitalise on its Strong brand name.
Pricing power.
Under m apartments can sell at a higher price than under other brands. revenues as well as margins.
Moreover owing to a vertical integration of its construction arm m has control over the largest part of a developments cost base which enables m to achieve construction and project development efficiencies access to finance.
Presale reduces the equity needed to finance the projects.
The top three banks provide mortgages under the m completion guarantee and to budget.
The company manages the entire process from development and construction through to apartment handover and property management services Access to finance.
Institutions DFIs has also been active in local fixed income instruments market and has issued Dollardenominated bonds in the local market.
Since 2012 m has raised approximately US 100 million of debt financing of which US 45 million is from international financial institutions Growing yielding business.
Commercial space enhancing the income generating asset portfolio by incorporating commercial elements in its residential developments and opportunistically acquiring andor developing high street retail commercial and office space.
In addition to rental income these assets can also deliver capital appreciation Hotel development m launched a threestar Ramada Encore hotel in Tbilisi under Wyndhams sevenyear Ramada Encore brand exclusivity in February 2018.
The company is currently constructing a fourstar Ramada hotel in the centre of Tbilisi and another threestar Ramada Encore hotel in Kutaisi is in pipeline.
Both are expected to launch in 2019.
All
Wyndham brand hotels cater to the growing number of budget travellers and will offer c.400 rooms in total by 2019. development.
The Ramada fourstar hotel in Tbilisi will be constructed inhouse by the companys recently acquired construction subsidiary.
In addition in 2017 m acquired a controlling stake in a lifestyle boutique hotel which is expected to launch in 2019 Construction management.
Real
Estate historically outsourced construction and architecture works and focused on project management and sales.
In 2017 m acquired BK Construction LLC a local real estate construction company with the aim to bring the construction works inhouse and achieve cost and project development efficiencies. thirdparty constructions.
Unlock land value by developing own land bank Grow yielding portfolio Franchise m brand Construction management Capital management discipline  aim to pay US 25 million dividends to the shareholders in 2020 Possibility to spin off yielding properties as a listed REIT managed by m Grow portfolio of rentearning assets by retaining commercial space in residential buildings developed by m and opportunistically purchase yielding real estate in prime locations Develop hotels with a total of 500 rooms to increase yielding business Fully develop land bank valued at US 27.8 million by 2020 Use part of the proceeds to distribute dividends to shareholders Harness m brand name as a platform to develop thirdparty land plots and generate fee income Increase the awareness of m franchise among land owners Utilise benefits of most recent vertical integration of a construction arm and achieve cost and project development efficiencies Generate fee income from construction management from both franchised deals exclusive contractor and thirdparty constructions NAV Net Asset Value  US 59.5 million Land bank  US 28.1 million Yielding assets  US 16.3 million Deferred revenue  US 18.0 million TARGETS AND PRIORITIES FOR THE NEXT TWO YEARS Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
The current low level of insurance market penetration in Georgia 1.2% of which 0.6% relates to PandC insurance and 0.6% to medical insurance provides enormous potential of growth and Aldagi is well equipped to capture these opportunities.
Aldagi aims to triple its current net profit and become a GEL 50 million net profit company by 2022.
The company plans to achieve this by strategically focusing on each of its three main business lines set out below Retail customers.
The Georgian retail insurance market offers ample room for growth as most of its potential is yet to be unlocked.
Motor insurance accounts for 50% of the total retail insurance market in Georgia of which Aldagis share is 42%.
The motor insurance segment has great potential to increase as only 4% of registered cars are insured on the local market.
Moreover compulsory Border Motor Third Party Liability MTPL insurance will be effective from March 2018 and Aldagi expects it to increase the size of the existing PandC market by approximately GEL 3050 million 1525% of the existing PandC insurance market.
Furthermore a new law requiring a mandatory local MTPL for all vehicles registered in Georgia is expected to launch in 2019 and significantly boost retail market penetration.
In 2017 Aldagi actively worked on developing new products and introduced livestock insurance to underpenetrated rural areas.
The company came up with an online travel insurance product with a unique combination of coverage and competitive pricing.
Aldagi partnered with Public Service Hall whose clients can electronically acquire affordable insurance for any property registered on the public registry.
Aldagi aims to further strengthen its market leadership position by harnessing its digital insurance platform over the next five years.
The company intends to execute all of its processes and procedures including issuance of epolicies remote claims regulation and building webmobile customer profiles principally through digital channels.
Aldagi plans to increase the percentage of retail sales conducted online to approximately 20% of total retail sales and the percentage of motor claims processed online to 25% of total motor claims.
The company actively diversifies its distribution channels by forming partnerships with financial institutions.
Extended cooperations with leading financial institutions in Georgia will enable Aldagi to uncover additional sources of high quality deals for its leading insurance products and continue to successfully diversify its multichannel distribution network.
SME segment.
Georgias insurance market for small and medium sized enterprises is currently in its infancy.
Aldagis strategy is to focus the attention of its experienced retail sales force in addition to the corporate sales department towards entering this underpenetrated segment.
Aldagi sees significant potential to grow this segment of the portfolio by developing tailormade products and providing them through digital portals created especially for SME clients and its multichannel distribution network.
Large corporates.
Although the level of insurance penetration within the corporate segment is relatively high compared to retail and SME segments a combination of favourable Georgian macroeconomic conditions a good investment climate stable economic growth and an increase in infrastructure projects will further increase customer demand for insurance products.
ALDAGI  UNDISPUTED LEADER IN GEORGIAS FASTDEVELOPING PandC INSURANCE MARKET Over nearly three decades in the Georgian PandC insurance market Aldagi has achieved almost universal brand awareness leading positions in retail insurance services the largest product portfolio and exceptional financial strength.
The company has doubled its retail portfolio over the last three years outperformed market growth by 5% and achieved a ROAE of 38.5%.
Based on the latest available market data as at 30 September 2017 Aldagi continues to be the most profitable insurance company in the local market with 89.4% share of the insurance industry profit and a market share of 38.6% based on gross premiums earned.
TARGETS AND PRIORITIES FOR THREE BUSINESS DIRECTIONS No mandatory lines border and local MTPL also GTPL mandatory insurance to be introduced Develop simple products for mass retail Digitilisation of all processes More partnership with financial institutions after demerger Underpenetrated market Developing tailored products Digital portal for SME Good investment climate Stable economic growth Increase in infrastructural projects Retail  Penetration Low SME  Penetration Zero Corporate  Penetration GEL c.16
GEL 50
2017 2022 ALDAGI PROFIT 28 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC TELIANI  CREATING A LEADING BEVERAGE PRODUCER AND DISTRIBUTOR IN SOUTH
Teliani Valley aims to become a leading beverage producer and the biggest distribution company not only in Georgia but in South Caucasus.
The company is well equipped to leverage its strong existing production and excellent sales and distribution franchise.
LOCAL MAINSTREAM BEER PRODUCTION LAUNCHED IN 2017 Teliani Valley is an established leading beverage producer and distributor in Georgia with three major business lines wine production beer production and distribution of its own and thirdparty brands in Georgia.
The company is a leading wine producer in Georgia selling around 3.5 million bottles of wine in 14 countries globally per annum with about 68% of its revenue coming from exports.
Teliani intends to not only retain its leading position on the local wine market but also to become a top exporter by 2019.
Teliani aims to grow its domestic and international wine sales by benefiting from favourable market trends in Georgia and expanding exports through new sales channels in highgrowth countries including China.
Teliani has an established distribution franchise which has contracts with a number of international beverage brands.
Teliani plans to diversify the products in its distribution portfolio and eventually become the largest thirdparty distribution company.
Telianis strong production and distribution franchise led the company to establish a partnership with Heineken.
Teliani will produce Heineken brands in Georgia under a tenyear exclusive license agreement and sell them in the countries of the South Caucasus region population of c.17 million.
Teliani is well on track to brew Heineken and Kruovice Beers in its brand new brewery in 2018.
In line with its strategy to diversify its distribution portfolio Teliani obtained exclusive rights to import and distribute Lavazza coffee in Georgia and won other nonalcoholic beverage distribution contracts in 2017.
In 2017 Teliani launched production of a lemonade and local mainstream beer.
The newly launched beer ICY was well received by the local market which immediately earned 97% brand awareness and 16% market share upon launch.
Both products are planned to be exported to CIS countries.
Of the US 49.3 million investment in the beer project US 29.5 million is equity of which US 23.3 million is BGEOs share.
Teliani expects EBITDA to grow to c.
S 5.5 million in 2020 up from the current US 0.6 million with growth primarily driven by the expansion into the beer segment.
BUSINESS SEGMENTS PRIORITIES FOR 2018
Wine
Distribution
Distribution
Beer
Beer
GOAL  BECOME THE LEADING BEVERAGES PRODUCER AND DISTRIBUTOR IN SOUTH CAUCASUS c.3.5 million bottles sold annually GEL 24.3 million revenue in 2017 GEL 5.5 million EBITDA in 2017 68% of sales from exports Grow in line with a local market Enhance exports c.5000 sales points New distribution lines  LAVAZZA coffee and BAGRATIONI 1882 sparkling wine Exporting wine to 14 countries including all FSU Poland Sweden USA Canada and China Enhance product portfolio and become the leading FMCG distributor in Georgia Launched mainstream beer and lemonade production under ICY and Berika brands in June and August 2017 respectively Beer and lemonade sales amounted to GEL 17.5 million and GEL 1.5 million in 2017 respectively c.6700 sales points as of 2017 yearend Tenyear exclusivity with Heineken to sell in Georgia Armenia and Azerbaijan c.17 million population Achieve 23% market share The results are presented excluding the IFRS 15 impact.
29 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
GHG  LEADING IN ALL SEGMENTS OF GEORGIAS HEALTHCARE ECOSYSTEM GHG will continue to focus on building its presence throughout the Georgian healthcare ecosystem while also focusing on enhancing its margins and achieving higher intergroup synergies through various crossselling initiatives.
GHGs strategic priorities are set out below.
In the hospitals and polyclinics business GHGs aim is to Rebound healthcare services EBITDA margin up to c.30% in the medium to long term Achieve a c.25% market share by revenues and c.28% market share by beds by 2018 and 30% market share by both in the long term currently 21.0% share of revenues and 24.5% share of hospital beds Roll out a network of polyclinics to achieve a c.5% market share of revenues in 2018 and a 15% market share of revenues in the long term currently 2% Enhance digital channels The key strategic focus in the hospital business over the next few years will be to enhance the companys footprint in Tbilisi continue to fill the current gaps in medical services in Georgia and strengthen and expand services in elective care.
In the pharmaceuticals business GHGs aim is to Achieve a 30% market share in 2018 whilst targeting an EBITDA margin to 8.0% Continue to decrease the cost of goods soldservices by consolidating GHGs pharmacy and hospital purchases of pharmaceuticals and medical disposables Enhance the retail margin by launching private label initiatives increasing the number of loyalty programme users and expanding sales to hospitals Enhance digital channels In the medical insurance business GHG s aim is to Reduce the combined ratio to less than 97% over the next few years currently 102.5% Improve synergies by seeking to retain the number of claims of more than 70% currently 59.1% Excluding depreciation and amortisation expenses.
Addressable market  excluding the revenue from speciality beds.
Addressable market  excluding the revenue from dental and aesthetic services.
ISSSG 9M17 annualised.
18%  27% 21%  25% c.25%  28% 30% In 2015 In 2017 For 2018
1% 2% c.5% 15% 30% 30% 30% 38% 29% 30% 30% Renovated and launched Tbilisi Referral Hospital Renovated Deka Hospital which opened in 2018 Launched 50 new services in referral hospitals Added three new district polyclinics bringing the total number of clusters to 12
Improved
Increased claims retained within the group by 11.4% yoy Turning the corner in profitability HOSPITALS POL YCLINICS PHARMACY INSURANCE By revenue  beds By revenue By revenue By revenue GHG HAS FULL PRESENCE IN GEORGIAS HEALTHCARE ECOSYSTEM GEL 1.2bn GEL 0.7bn GEL 1.5bn GEL 0.2bn
ADDRESSABLE MARKET PROGRESS TOWARD STRATEGIC GOALS IN 2017
SHARES
TARGET
MARKET SHARES 30 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLCtel 310.9tel 22.2% 25.2% 21.9%tel el 2017 106.6tel 3.1tel KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS PROFIT BGEO GEL million BASIC EARNINGS PER SHARE BGEO
DIVIDEND PER SHARE BGEO
RETURN ON AVERAGE EQUITY Banking Business % 25.2% INVESTMENT BUSINESS EBITDA GEL million DIVIDEND PER SHARE BGEO
Profit is calculated in accordance with IFRS and represents revenue less operating expenses cost of credit risk net nonrecurring expenses and tax expense plus profit from discontinued operations.
Profit attributable to shareholders divided by weighted average number of outstanding shares.
Profit attributable to shareholders divided by monthly average total equity attributable to shareholders.
Total equity attributable to shareholders is made up of share capital additional paidin capital treasury shares retained earnings and other reserves.
EBITDA from the Investment Business for the year ended.
The following GELGBP exchange rates are used for presenting GBP amounts 2017 3.5005GBP at 31 December 2017 2017 dividends to be approved by shareholders at the 2018 AGM 2016 3.0690GBP at 26 June 2017 the currency conversion date for the year 2016 2015 3.0376GBP at 11 July 2016 the currency conversion date for the year 2015.
For further details see page 216.
Record results driven by strong performance across all businesses.
The Groups KPIs for 2017 reflect a continuing strong performance in each of the Groups Banking and Investment Businesses demonstrating excellent customer lending growth with stable margins a strong balance sheet and strong profitability together with substantial further progress in the Groups Investment Businesses.
PROFITABILITY KPIs Diversified revenue sources a growing loan book improved asset quality and efficient cost performance were the main drivers of the exceptional results in terms of profitability.
The resilience of Net Interest Margin NIM is a function of our distribution capabilities and pricing power.
The substantial growth of the loan book as well as shift to GELdenominated loan portfolio and stable cost of funds during 2017 enabled our NIM to withstand downward pressures from increased competition on the market.
The resulting outstanding growth in interest and noninterest income strong margins and well controlled asset quality and costs translated into 25.0% growth in profit.
In 2018 and beyond we will continue to focus on profitable earnings growth to be driven by sustainable levels of customer lending growth without compromising asset quality to increase the share of income from feegenerating operations and to enhance cost efficiencies.
For more information on our financial results see pages 52 to 75.
In 2017 we changed the Groups accounting policy in relation to subsequent measurement of office buildings and service centres from revaluation model to cost model.
We have accordingly restated the balance sheet accounts for affected periods while the change did not have any material impact on the income statement.
In addition we started presenting Aldagi as part of the Investment Business since 2Q17.
Therefore Banking Business balance sheet and income statement accounts and the ratios have been updated accordingly for prior periods presented to reflect these changes.
31 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Informationtel
35.5% 37.7% 37.7%tel 16.1% 6.4% 0.1%tel 35.3% 39.5% 29.3%tel 20.7% 94.7% 73.8%tel 2.7% 2.7% 2.2%tel 120.6% 132.1% 130.6%tel 10.9% 9.1% 10.3%tel COST TO INCOME RATIO Banking Business % 37.7% NET RETAIL LOAN BOOK GROWTH Banking Business % yoy 29.3% COST OF RISK Banking Business % 2.2% TIER I CAPITAL ADEQUACY RATIO BASEL II % 10.3% OPERATING LEVERAGE Banking Business % 0.1% REVENUE GROWTH Investment Business % yoy 73.8% NPL COVERAGE RATIO ADJUSTED FOR DISCOUNTED VALUE OF COLLATERAL Banking Business % 130.6%
Banking Business times Operating expenses divided by revenue.
Net loans to customers and net finance leases receivables at the end of the year compared to the previous year.
Cost of Risk equals impairment charge for loans to customers and finance lease receivables for the period divided by monthly average gross loans to customers and finance lease receivables over the same period.
NBG Basel II Tier I Capital Adequacy ratio Tier I Capital divided by risk weighted assets.
Tier 1 Capital Ratio NBG Basel III  12.4%.
Operating leverage is measured as the percentage change in revenue less the percentage change in operating expenses.
Revenue from the Investment Business at the end of the year compared to the previous year.
NPL Coverage Ratio adjusted for discounted value of collateral equals allowance for impairment of loans and finance lease receivables divided by NPLs discounted value of collateral is added back to allowance for impairment.
Leverage is calculated as total liabilities divided by total equity.
EFFICIENCY KPIs In 2017 operating expenses broadly kept pace with revenue growth reflecting organic growth of our Retail Banking business and increase in administrative expenses.
Express Banking a technologyintensive remote banking channel is the main driver of efficiency for our Banking
Other measures such as various investments in IT aimed at optimising of workflow processes and cost centre reporting procedures represent the cost control measures we continue to deploy across the board in order to keep a tight grip on costs.
CAPITAL KPIs In 2017 our Tier I Capital Adequacy ratio NBG Basel II stood at 10.3%.
The risk weighted assets increased by 13.5% reflecting the increase in interest earning assets during the year.
Tier I Capital Adequacy ratio NBG Basel III stood at 12.4% at 31 December 2017 above the minimum 9.9% requirement.
GROWTH KPIs The 15.9% loan book growth was driven by our Retail Banking business which posted a 29.3% growth in the loan book in 2017.
The Corporate Investment Banking loan book decreased by 5.6% in 2017 which marked the end of successful risk deconcentration and loan portfolio repositioning.
CIB resumed its growth in the fourth quarter of 2017 and qoq growth on constant currency basis reached 9.2%.
Going forward we will be targeting growth of 1520% in the Banking Business loan book.
ASSET QUALITY KPIs Our asset quality improved in 2017 as a result of our prudent application of the Groups risk management policies.
Cost of risk decreased from 2.7% in 2016 to 2.2% in 2017.
NPLs to gross loans improved from 4.2% as at 31 December 2016 to 3.8% at the end of 2017.
NPL coverage ratio increased in 2017 to 92.7%.
32 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC
BGEO RISK MANAGEMENT
We identify evaluate manage and monitor the risks that we face through an integrated control framework supported by formal policies and procedures clearly delegated authority levels and comprehensive reporting.
The Board confirms that our framework has been in place throughout the year under review and to the date of approval of this Annual Report and is integrated into both our business planning and viability assessment processes.
OVERVIEW
Our Board supported by our Audit and Risk Committees and executive management is ultimately responsible for the Groups risk management and internal controls.
We believe that in order to have an effective risk management framework there needs to be a strong risk management culture within the Group.
We have worked to ensure that managing risk is ingrained in our everyday business activities.
We seek to create an environment where there is openness and transparency in how we make decisions and manage risks and where business managers are accountable for the risk management and internal control processes associated with their activities.
Our culture also seeks to ensure that risk management is responsive forwardlooking and consistent.
OUR FRAMEWORK The Boards mandate includes determining the Groups risk appetite and risk tolerance as well as monitoring risk exposures to ensure that the nature and extent of the main risks we face are consistent with our overall goals and strategic objectives.
The Board is accountable for reviewing the effectiveness of the systems and processes of risk management and internal control with the Audit and Risk Committees assisting in the discharge of this responsibility.
At the Board Committee and executive management levels we develop formal policies and procedures which explain the way in which risks need to be systematically identified assessed quantified managed and monitored.
Each business participates in the risk management process by identifying the key risks applicable to its business.
The principal risks and uncertainties faced by the Group are identified through this process.
On a daytoday basis management is responsible for the implementation of the Groups risk management and other internal control policies and procedures.
Based on our risk culture managers own the risks relevant to their respective function.
For each risk identified at any level of the business the risk is measured mitigated if possible in accordance with our policies and procedures and monitored.
Managers are required to report on identified risks and responses to such risks on a consistent and frequent basis.
Executive and senior management regularly review the output from the bottomup process by providing independent challenge and assessing the implementation of the risk management and internal control policies and procedures.
Our reporting process enables key risks to be escalated to the appropriate level of authority and provides assurance to the Committees and the Board.
Key developments affecting our principal risks and associated mitigating actions are reviewed quarterly or more often if necessary on an ad hoc basis outside of the regular reporting process by the Audit and Risk Committees as appropriate and the Board.
The principal risks and uncertainties faced by the Group are identified through the above processes.
A description of these principal risks and uncertainties including to recent trends and outlook as well as mitigation efforts can be found on pages 34 to 37 of the Strategic Report.
Since the Bank is the Groups largest business and operates in the complex financial services sector its risk management and internal control framework is key to that of the Group.
A description of the Banks risk management and internal control framework can be found on pages 38 to 43 of the Strategic Report.
INTERNAL CONTROL As mentioned above our Board is responsible for reviewing and approving the Groups system of internal control and its adequacy and effectiveness.
Controls are reviewed to ensure effective management of strategic financial operational and compliance among other risks we face.
Certain matters such as the approval of major capital expenditure significant acquisitions or disposals and major contracts among others are reserved exclusively for the
The full schedule of matters specifically reserved for the Board can be found on our website at httpsitepageid67 scheduleofmattersreservedfortheboard.
With respect to other matters the Board is often assisted by both the Audit and Risk Committees.
With respect to internal control over financial reporting including over the Groups consolidation process our financial procedures include a range of system transactional and management oversight controls.
Our businesses prepare detailed monthly management reports that include analyses of their results along with comparisons relevant strategic plans budgets forecasts and prior results.
These are presented to and reviewed by executive management.
Each quarter the CFO of the Bank and the Group and other members of the finance team discuss financial reporting and associated internal controls with the Audit Committee which reports significant findings to the Board.
The Audit Committee also reviews the quarterly halfyear and fullyear financial statements and corresponding press releases and provides feedback to the Board.
The external and internal auditors attend each Audit Committee meeting and the Audit Committee meets regularly both with and without management present.
Our Audit and Risk Committees monitor internal control over operating and compliance risk through discussions with the Deputy CEO Chief Risk Officer and the Head of AML and Compliance and other executive management on a quarterly basis.
Any key issues identified are escalated to the Board.
The Board also receives regular presentations directly from the head of each risk unit.
Important risk and internal control issues are addressed in such presentations.
The Groups internal audit function reviews a number of areas of risk pursuant to a programme approved by the Audit Committee.
Any significant issues or risks arising from an internal audit review are reported to the Audit Committee and appropriate actions are undertaken to ensure satisfactory resolution.
The Head of Internal Audit has a direct reporting line to the Chairman of the Audit Committee.
Our systems of internal control are also supported by our Whistleblowing Policy which allows employees to report concerns on an anonymous basis.
The Audit Committee approves the Whistleblowing Policy on an annual basis and receives reports from the Head of AML and Compliance on any significant issues raised.
EFFECTIVENESS REVIEW Each year we review the effectiveness of our risk management processes and internal control systems with the assistance of the Audit and Risk Committees.
This review covers all material systems including financial operational and compliance controls.
The latest review covered the financial year to 31 December 2017 and the period from yearend to the approval of this Annual Report.
We obtained assurance from management and Internal Audit.
The Board is able to conclude with reasonable assurance that the appropriate internal controls and risk management systems were maintained and operated effectively throughout 2017 and the period from yearend to the approval of this Annual Report.
The review did not identify any significant weaknesses or failings in the systems.
We are satisfied that our risk management processes and internal control systems processes comply with the UK Corporate Governance Code 2016 the Code and the Financial Reporting Council FRCs guidance on Risk Management Internal Control and Related Financial and Business Reporting.
Although we did not identify any significant weaknesses or failings we continuously strive to improve our framework and focus on further mitigating our key risks especially as they evolve.
We will also provide online training focused on the importance of risk management and internal controls.
COMMITTEE REPORTS As noted throughout this discussion both the Audit and Risk Committees play an essential role in implementing effective risk management and internal control.
Each Committee has described this work in its Committee report.
The Audit Committee Report and Risk Committee Report can be found on pages 91 to 94 and pages 95 to 96 respectively.
CREATING A CULTURE OF INTEGRITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY 33 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
In accordance with the Corporate Governance Code the Directors are required to assess the prospects of the Company to meet its liabilities by taking into account its current position and principal risks.
The viability review was conducted in respect of the Group in case the demerger is not approved by AGM as well as its underlying businesses post demerger.
The Board performed this review over a threeyear period beginning 1 January 2018 being the first day after the end of the financial year to which this report relates.
In determining the appropriate period over which to make their assessment the Directors considered the duration of strategic plans and financial forecasts which are usually set and prepared for the three year period the diverse nature of the Groups activities the evolving nature of the regulatory environment in which the Groups businesses operate demerger of the Group as well as recent trends relating to Lari volatility.
A period of three years beyond the balance sheet date was therefore considered the most appropriate viability period for the Company.
In order to consider the Groups viability the Board considered a number of key factors including the Groups financial and operational position including capital allocation and other key financial ratios the Boards risk appetite the Groups business model and strategy as set out on pages 14 to 29 the Groups principal risks and uncertainties principally those related to adverse economic conditions the depreciation of the Lari IT andor information security including cybersecurity control failures Investment Business strategy demerger risk and how these risks and uncertainties are managed as set out on pages 34 to 37 the effectiveness of our risk management framework and internal control processes and stress testing as described below.
The key factors above have been reviewed in the context of our current position and strategic plan financial budgets and forecasts assessed annually and on a threeyear basis.
The viability assessment involved a risk identification process which included recognition of the principal risks to viability risks that could impair the Groups business model future performance solvency or liquidity excluding risks not sufficiently severe over the period of assessment for consolidated BGEO Group PLC including Banking and Investment Businesses.
Principal risks and uncertainties identified by the Group are currency volatility global and regional economic instability market competition and interest rate volatility.
We also identified other risks which while not necessarily severe in themselves could escalate when combined with others.
For each risk we considered our risk appetite and tolerance as well as risk proximity and momentum.
For those risks considered sufficiently severe to affect our viability we performed stress testing for the assessment period which involved modelling the impact of a combination of severe and plausible adverse scenarios.
The Group has examined following stress scenarios over the assessment period GEL depreciation against US Dollar market competition driven shrinkage of net interest margin increase in operating expenses resulting in higher Banking Business cost to income ratio impairment of loan portfolio quality possible underperformance of Investment Business entities.
The stress test scenarios were then reviewed against the Groups and its businesses current and projected liquidity position considering current committed funding capital adequacy and solvency.
The stress testing also took into account the availability and likely effectiveness of the mitigating actions such as decline in lending activity reduction of operating expenses as well as the assumption that the Group will be able to prolong or refinance existing borrowings or increase the financing from DFIs at the terms similar to existing ones that could be taken to avoid or reduce the impact or occurrence of the identified underlying risks to which the Group and its businesses are exposed.
The Directors have also satisfied themselves that they have the evidence necessary to support the statement below in terms of the effectiveness of the Groups risk management framework and internal control processes in place to mitigate risk.
Based on the analysis described above the Directors confirm that they have a reasonable expectation that the Group and its businesses will be able to continue operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the threeyear period from 1 January 2018 to 31 December 2020.
If the demerger is implemented successfully then the new Boards of the demerged businesses will make their own viability statement in their respective annual reports next year and the Group as it is currently comprised will cease to exist.
VIABILITY STATEMENT GOING CONCERN STATEMENT The Groups business activities objectives and strategy principal risks and uncertainties in achieving its objectives and performance are set out on pages 14 to 75.
After making enquiries the Directors confirm that they have a reasonable expectation that BGEO and the Group as a whole have adequate resources to continue in operational existence and therefore the Directors consider it appropriate to adopt the going concern basis of accounting in preparing the financial statements.
34 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC PRINCIPAL RISKS AND UNCERTAINTIES IDENTIFYING PRIORITISING AND MANAGING OUR RISKS TO SUPPORT OUR GOALS AND STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES We outline the principal risks and uncertainties that may have an impact on our strategic objectives business model operations future performance solvency and liquidity.
These principal risks are described in the table that follows together with the relevant strategic business objectives key driverstrends material controls which have been put in place to mitigate the risks and the mitigation actions we have taken.
It is recognised that the Group is exposed to risks wider than those listed.
We disclose those which we believe are likely to have had the greatest impact on our business at this moment in time and which have been discussed in depth at recent Board Audit or Risk Committee meetings.
The order in which the Principal Risks and Uncertainties appear does not denote their order of priority.
It is not possible to fully mitigate all of our risks.
Any system of risk management and internal control is designed to manage rather than eliminate the risk of failure to achieve business objectives and can only provide reasonable and not absolute assurance against material misstatement or loss.
CURRENCY AND MACROECONOMIC ENVIRONMENT PRINCIPAL RISK
Macroeconomic factors relating to Georgia including depreciation of the Lari against the Dollar may have a material impact on our loan book.
KEY DRIVERS
The Groups operations are primarily located and most of its revenue is sourced from Georgia.
Macroeconomic factors relating to Georgia such as GDP  inflation and interest rates may have a material impact on the quality of our loan portfolio loan losses our margins and customer demand for our products and services.
Real GDP growth in Georgia increased to 4.8% in 2017 compared to 2.8% in 2016 and 2.9% in 2015 according to Geostat.
Uncertain and volatile global economic conditions could have substantial political and macroeconomic ramifications globally which in turn could impact the Georgian economy.
In 2017 the Lari appreciated against the Dollar by 2.1%.
The volatility of Lari against Dollar has affected and may continue to adversely affect the quality of our loan portfolio as well as increase the cost of credit risk and impairment provisions.
This is because our corporate MSME and mortgage loan books are largely Dollardenominated and the majority of our customers income is Laridenominated.
The creditworthiness of our customers may be adversely affected by the depreciation of the Lari against the Dollar which could result in them having difficulty repaying their loans.
The depreciation of Lari may also adversely affect the value of our customers collateral.
As at 31 December 2017 in the Banking Business approximately 83% and 49% of our corporate investment banking and retail loans respectively were denominated in foreign currency predominantly Dollars while Dollar income revenue loans covered 9.5% of retail gross loans and 43.1% of corporate investment banking gross loans.
In 2017 our Banking Business cost of credit risk was at 2.2% compared to 2.7% in 2016.
MITIGATION The Group continually monitors market conditions and reviews market changes and also performs stress and scenario testing to test its position under adverse economic conditions including adverse currency movements.
The Asset and Liability Management Committee sets our open currency position limits and the Banks proprietary trading position limits which are currently more conservative than those imposed by the National Bank of Georgia NBG our regulator.
The Treasury department manages our open currency position on a daytoday basis.
The open currency position is also monitored by the Quantitative Risk Management and Risk Analytics department.
In order to assess the creditworthiness of our customers we take into account currency volatility when there is a currency mismatch between the customers loan and revenue.
We allocate 75% additional capital to the foreign currency loans of clients whose source of income is denominated in Lari.
Our Credit Committees and Credit Risk Management department set counterparty limits by using a credit risk classification and scoring system for approving individual transactions.
The credit quality review process is continuous and provides early identification of possible changes in the creditworthiness of customers including regular collateral revaluations potential losses and corrective actions needed to reduce risk which may include obtaining additional collateral in accordance with underlying loan agreements.
Since the beginning of 2016 we have focused on increasing local currency lending.
We actively work with IFIs to raise longterm Lari funding to increase our Laridenominated loans to customers.
Furthermore in June 2017 we completed the inaugural local currency denominated international bond issuance in the amount of GEL 500 million to support local currency lending.
Applicable from the beginning of 2017 the NBG expanded the list of assets that banks are permitted to use as collateral for REPO transactions which provides an additional funding source for our Laridenominated loan book.
As a result as of 31 December 2017 in the Banking Business our Laridenominated loan book increased by 54.6% while our foreign currencydenominated loan book increased by 0.2% in constant currency terms.
The trend was supported by the Georgian Governments dedollarisation initiatives a a oneoff programme effective from 15 January 2017 until 25 March 2017 allowing qualified borrowers to convert eligible Dollardenominated loans into Lari at a discount compensated by the Government at the clients election and b a new regulation effective from 15 January 2017 restricting issuance of new loans in foreign currency with amounts less than GEL 100000 equivalent.
35 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
REGIONAL INSTABILITY PRINCIPAL RISK
The Georgian economy and our business may be adversely affected by regional tensions and instability.
The Groups operations are primarily located and most of its revenue is sourced from Georgia.
The Georgian economy is dependent on economies of the region in particular Russia Turkey Azerbaijan and Armenia who are key trading partners.
There has been ongoing geopolitical tension political instability economic instability and military conflict in the region which may have an adverse effect on our business and financial position.
KEY DRIVERS
Russian troops continue to occupy the Abkhazia and the TskhinvaliSouth Ossetia regions and tensions between Russia and Georgia persist.
Russia is opposed to the eastward enlargement of NATO potentially including former Soviet republics such as Georgia.
The introduction of a preferential trade regime between Georgia and the EU in July 2016 and the European Parliaments approval of a proposal on visa liberalisation for Georgia in February 2017 may intensify tensions between countries.
The Government has taken certain steps towards improving relations with Russia but as of the date of this Annual Report these have not resulted in any formal or legal changes in the relationship between the two countries.
Relations between Russia and Turkey remain uncertain as despite Russia repealing sanctions on Turkey in March 2017 certain sanctions and legal limitations on Turkish nationals remain.
In April 2017 amendments to the Turkish constitution were approved by voters in a referendum.
The amendments which grant the president wider powers are expected to transform Turkeys system of government away from a parliamentary system.
These amendments could have a negative impact on political stability in Turkey which is already tense after a failed coup against the president in July 2016.
Conflict remains unabated between Azerbaijan and Armenia.
MITIGATION The Group actively monitors regional and local market conditions and risks related to political instability and performs stress and scenario tests in order to assess our financial position.
Responsive strategies and action plans are also developed.
Despite tensions in the breakaway territories Russia has continued to open its export market to Georgian exports since 2013.
While lower global commodity prices and macroeconomic factors have affected Georgias regional trading partners leading to lower exports within the region Georgia has benefited from increased exports earnings from nontraditional markets such as Switzerland China Egypt Saudi Arabia South Korea and Singapore.
In April 2017 the IMF approved a new threeyear US 285 million economic programme aimed at preserving macroeconomic and financial stability and addressing structural weaknesses in the Georgian economy to support higher and inclusive growth.
During 2017 Georgia delivered real GDP growth of 4.8% from 2.8% in 2016.
REGULATORY RISK PRINCIPAL RISK
The Group operates across a wide range of industries principally banking but also healthcare services pharmacy insurance real estate water and energy utility hydro power wine and beverages.
Many of these industries are highly regulated.
The regulatory environment continues to evolve.
We however cannot predict what additional regulatory changes will be introduced in the future or the impact they may have on our operations.
KEY DRIVERS
Our banking operations must comply with capital adequacy and other regulatory ratios set by our regulator the NBG including reserve requirements and mandatory financial ratios.
Our ability to comply with existing or amended NBG requirements may be affected by a number of factors including those outside of our control such as an increase in the Banks riskweighted assets our ability to raise capital losses resulting from deterioration in our asset quality andor a reduction in income levels andor an increase in expenses decline in the value of the Banks securities portfolio as well as weakening of global and Georgian economies.
Each of our Investment Businesses is subject to different regulators and regulation.
Legislation in certain industries such as healthcare energy and utilities are continuously evolving.
Different changes including but not limited to governmental funding licensing and accreditation requirements and tariff structures may adversely affect our businesses.
MITIGATION Continued investment in our people and processes is enabling us to meet our current regulatory requirements and means that we are well placed to respond to any future changes in regulation.
In line with our integrated control framework we carefully evaluate the impact of legislative and regulatory changes as part of our formal risk identification and assessment processes and to the extent possible proactively participate in the drafting of relevant legislation.
As part of this process we engage in constructive dialogue with regulatory bodies where possible and seek external advice on potential changes to legislation.
We then develop appropriate policies procedures and controls as required to fulfil our compliance obligations.
Our compliance framework at all levels is subject to regular review by internal audit and external assurance providers.
36 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC PRINCIPAL RISKS AND UNCERTAINTIES CONTINUED CYBERSECURITY INFORMATION SYSTEMS AND FINANCIAL CRIME PRINCIPAL RISK
We are at risk of experiencing cybersecurity breaches unauthorised access to our systems and financial crime or failures in our banking activity processes or systems or human error which could disrupt our customer services result in financial loss have legal or regulatory implications andor affect our reputation.
We are highly dependent on the proper functioning of our risk management internal controls and systems and internal processes including those related to data protection IT and information security in order to manage these threats.
KEY DRIVERS
During 2017 we saw a number of major organisations subjected to cyberattacks although fortunately our operations were not materially affected.
The external threat profile is continuously changing and we expect threats to continue to increase.
Over the past few years as our operations have expanded we have seen an increase in electronic crimes including fraud although losses have not been significant.
Money laundering has also increased globally in recent years which the bank has certain responsibilities to guard against.
MITIGATION We have an integrated control framework encompassing operational risk management IT systems corporate and other data security each of which is managed by a separate department.
We also have an AntiMoney Laundering AML officer and controls.
We identify and assess operational risk categories within our risk management framework identifying critical risk areas or groups of operations with an increased risk level and develop policies and security procedures to mitigate these risks.
We have security controls in place including policies procedures and security technologies.
We also regularly carry out IT and information security checks internally and with the assistance of external consultants.
We have sophisticated antivirus protection and firewalls to help protect against potentially malicious software.
We have increased our internal and external penetration testing and have backup disaster recovery and business continuity plans in place across the
Access control and password protections have been improved through the implementation in 2016 of Privileged Access Monitoring for employees with the highest privileged access to confidential and customer data.
We continue to invest in technology to enhance our ability to prevent detect and respond to increasing and evolving threats.
Our Internal Audit function provides assurance on the adequacy and effectiveness of our risk management internal controls and systems in place.
These types of operational risk are on the Audit Committees regular agenda and are also frequently discussed at Board level.
INVESTMENT BUSINESS STRATEGY PRINCIPAL RISK
Market conditions may adversely impact our Investment Business strategy and all our Investment Businesses have their own risks specific to their industry.
Our Investment Businesses have growth and expansion strategies and we face execution risk in implementing these strategies.
Our Investment Business strategy is to achieve an internal rate of return of at least 25% from investments.
The Invesment Business will normally seek to monetise its investments including through initial public offering strategic sale or other appropriate exit typically within five to ten years of acquisition.
Macroeconomic conditions and the financial and economic environment and other market conditions in international capital markets may limit the Groups ability to achieve a partial or full exit from its existing or future businesses.
It may not be possible or desirable to divest including whether suitable buyers can be found at the appropriate times or cases where there may be difficulties in obtaining favourable terms or prices.
KEY DRIVERS
Each investment business  GGU m Aldagi Teliani Georgia Healthcare Group  faces their own risks.
These include risks inherent to their industry or to their industry particularly in Georgia and each faces significant competition.
They also face the principal risks and uncertainties referred to throughout this table such as macroeconomic and regulatory risk.
MITIGATION The Group has a strong track record of growth and has accessed the capital markets on multiple occasions.
Our
For each business we focus on building a strong management team and have successfully been able to do so thus far.
Management succession planning is regularly on the agenda for the Nomination Committee and Board as whole.
We closely monitor the implementation of strategy financial and operational performance risk management and internal control framework and corporate governance structure of our businesses.
We hold management accountable for meeting targets.
For each industry in which we operate we closely monitor industry trends market conditions and the regulatory environment.
We have also sought and continue to seek advice from experienced global professionals in our industries.
37 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
DEMERGER AND FUTURE PERFORMANCE RISK PRINCIPAL RISK
The Group is implementing a demerger of its Banking Business and Investment Business subject to shareholder approval.
The demerger is dependent on a number of conditions and steps to complete and there is a risk that it may not go ahead despite extensive management time having been focused on the initiative.
There is also risk that the demerger will go ahead but that the full anticipated benefits are not realised.
KEY DRIVERS
On 3 July 2017 the Group announced its intention to demerge the Group into a Londonlisted banking business and a Londonlisted investment business.
On 12 February 2018 the Group announced that the Board had approved the implementation of the demerger and gave an update on its structure.
The Board has stated that it believes a demerger of the businesses will deliver additional longterm value to shareholders by creating two distinct entities each of which will have enhanced growth opportunities in the strongly growing Georgian economy.
The Board has stated that it believes the demerger will benefit the two businesses in the following areas business flexibility pursuing growth opportunities regulatory clarity and flexibility efficient capital structure improved management focus alignment of incentives and investor clarity and understanding.
More detail is expected to be included in the circular to be sent to shareholders relating to the demerger.
MITIGATION We continue to monitor the businesses as usual through the processes and risk framework outlined in this Risk Management and Principal Risks and Uncertainties section.
The Board and management also receive major progress updates on the demerger.
The project team for the demerger which includes some of our executives steers the process and helps ensure the implementation plans are in place.
We are seeking advice from experienced professionals in respect of the demerger.
More detail is expected to be included in the circular to be sent to shareholders relating to the demerger.
38 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Credit Committee Credit risk management Operational risk management
AML and
Legal
Quantitative risk management and risk analytics Risk Committee Audit Committee Internal Audit Asset and Liability Management Committee Management Board Supervisory Board of Bank of Georgia RISK MANAGEMENT BODIES OF BANK OF GEORGIA
BANK RISK MANAGEMENT
The Banking Business is the principal driver of the Groups revenue and operates in the financial services sector  its risk management and internal control framework are fundamental to that of the Group.
OVERVIEW
The BGEO Board supported by our BGEO Audit and Risk Committees and management is ultimately responsible for the Groups risk management and internal controls.
Formal policies and procedures have been developed at the BGEO level with the help of senior management to explain the way risks need to be systematically identified assessed quantified managed and monitored.
Clearly delegated authority levels and reporting lines have been established which together with the comprehensive reporting process form an integral part of the BGEO risk management framework and internal control processes.
Each business participates in the risk management process by identifying the key risks applicable to its business.
A detailed description of the BGEO risk management control framework can be found on pages 32 to 33 of the Strategic Report.
The work undertaken by the Banks risk management bodies feeds back directly to
Certain bankingrelated risks have been identified in the Groups Principal Risks and Uncertainties which can be found on pages 34 to 37 of the Strategic Report.
Given the significance of the Banking Business the risk management and internal control framework are in place at the Bank as described in this section.
THE ROLE OF THE BANK IN THE OVERALL
RISK MANAGEMENT STRUCTURE
Management of risk is fundamental to the Banking Business and is an essential element of the Groups operations.
The main risks inherent in the Banks operations are credit risk liquidity risk market risk including currency and foreign exchange rate risks operational risk and legal risk.
The following is a description of the Banks risk management policies and procedures in respect to those risks.
Business risks such as changes in the environment technology and industry are monitored through the Groups strategic planning process.
The Banks risk management system is based on the principle of continually assessing risk throughout the life of any operation and includes such stages as risk identification qualitative and quantitative assessment of a particular risk determination of an acceptable risk level risk monitoring and mitigation ongoing monitoring and control allowing efficient adjustments in case of any negative changes in the conditions on which the preliminary risk assessment was made analysis of the efficiency of the risk management system
BANK RISK MANAGEMENT BODIES
The principal risk management bodies of the Bank are the Supervisory Board Audit
Committee Management Board Risk
Committee Internal Audit Treasury Credit Committee Asset and Liability Management Committee the ALCO AML and Compliance and the Banks Legal department.
Each of the Supervisory Board Audit Committee and Risk Committee perform similar roles as the BGEO Board BGEO Audit Committee and BGEO Risk Committee only at Bank level.
Please refer to the diagram at the bottom of this page.
Management Board.
The Management Board has overall responsibility for the Banks asset liability and risk management activities policies and procedures.
In order to effectively implement the risk management system the Management Board delegates individual risk management functions to each of the various decisionmaking and execution bodies within the Bank.
Internal Audit department.
The Internal Audit department is responsible for the regular reviewaudit of the Banks operations activities systems and processes in order to evaluate and provide reasonable independent and objective assurance and consulting services designed to add value and improve the Banks operations.
The Banks Internal Audit department is independent of the Banks Management
The Head of the Banks Internal Audit department is appointed by the Banks Supervisory Board and reports directly to the Banks Audit Committee.
The Banks Internal Audit department discusses the results of all assessments with the Bank s Management Board and reports its findings and recommendations to the Banks Audit Committee.
The purpose of the Internal Audit department is to determine whether the Banks risk management internal controls and corporate governance processes which are designed and implemented by the Management Board are adequate such that material risks including strategic credit market liquidity and operational risks are appropriately identified measured assessed and managed across the Bank including its outsourced activities interaction with the various internal governance groups occurs appropriately 39 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
In order to fulfil its function the Bank s Internal Audit department has unrestricted access to all the Banks functions records property and personnel.
Treasury.
Treasury is responsible for managing the Banks assets and liabilities and its overall financial structure and is also primarily responsible for managing funding and liquidity risks of the Bank.
Credit Committee.
The Bank has three credit committees together the Credit Committees each responsible for supervising and managing the Banks credit risks in respect of loans for retail and wealth management clients corporate loans and counterparty loans.
These three committees are the Retail Banking Committee the Corporate Banking Credit Committee and the Financial and Governmental Counterparty
Risk Management Committee FGCRMC.
FGCRMC manages monitors and controls counterparty risk in relation to financial and Governmental counterparties of the Bank.
Each Credit Committee approves individual loan transactions.
Each Credit Committee is comprised of tiers of subcommittees.
The FGCRMC comprises two tiers of subcommittees.
The Committee consists of six members  Deputy CEO Chief Risk Officer Deputy CEO Finance Deputy CEO Corporate Investment Banking Head of Quantitative Risk Management Department Head of Treasury and Head of Trade Finance.
A majority of votes is enough for approval.
If the potential exposure exceeds US 10.0 million then the decision is deferred to the ALCO.
The
Credit Committee for retail loans comprises four tiers of subcommittees for risk management purposes loans for wealth management clients are classified as retail loans.
The Credit Committee for corporate loans comprises three tiers of subcommittees.
Participation of the CEO is required for exposures exceeding US 10.0 million.
All exposures to single group borrowers over US 25.0 million require approval by the Supervisory Board.
Lower tier subcommittees meet on a daily basis whereas higher tier ones typically meet three to four times a week.
Each of the subcommittees of the Credit Committees makes its decisions by a majority vote of its respective members.
Since 2017 Micro and SME loan applications are approved by credit risk managers.
The Problem Assets Committee is chaired by one of the following the Head of the Problem Loan Management Department first level pertains to loans of up to GEL 250000 Deputy CEO Operations second level pertains to the loans in the range of GEL 250000 500000 and Deputy CEO Chief Risk Officer third level pertains to loans above GEL 500000.
The Problem Loan Management Department manages the Banks exposures to problem loans and reports to the Deputy CEO Operations.
The Corporate Recovery Committee is chaired by the Deputy CEO Chief Risk Officer and is responsible for monitoring all of the Banks exposures to loans that are managed by the Corporate Recovery department.
The
Corporate Recovery department reports to the Deputy CEO Corporate Investment Banking.
Asset and Liability Management Committee ALCO.
The ALCO is the core risk management body that establishes policies and guidelines with respect to capital adequacy market risks and respective limits funding liquidity risk and respective limits interest rate and prepayment risks and respective limits money market general terms and credit exposure limits.
ALCO designs and implements respective risk management and stress testing models in practice and regularly monitors compliance with the preset risk limits and approves treasury deals with nonstandard terms.
Specifically ALCO sets moneymarket credit exposurelending limits sets open currency position limits with respect to overnight and intraday positions establishes stoploss limits for foreign currency operations and securities monitors compliance with the established risk management models for foreign exchange risk interest rate risk and funding liquidity risk sets ranges of interest rates for different maturities at which the Bank may place its liquid assets and attract funding and reviews different stress tests and capital adequacy models prepared by the Finance Department and FGCRMC The ALCO is chaired by the CEO and meets at any time deemed necessary with decisions made by a majority vote of its members.
ALCO members include the CEO Deputy CEO Finance Deputy CEO Chief Risk Officer Deputy CEO Corporate Investment Banking Deputy CEO Retail Banking Deputy CEO SOLO and MSME Deputy CEO Operations the Head of the Finance department and the Head of the Treasury department.
The ALCO reviews financial reports and indices including the Banks limitsratios balance sheet statement of operations maturity gap interest rate gap currency gap foreign exchange risk interest rate risk and funding liquidity risk reports total cash flow analysis customer cash flow analysis and concentration risk analysis for the past periods as well as future projections and forecasts other financial analysis and further growth projections on a monthly basis.
Regulatory capital requirements in Georgia are set by the National Bank of Georgia NBG and are applied to the Bank on a standalone basis.
NBG requires the Bank to maintain minimum Capital Adequacy ratios computed based on the Banks standalone special purpose financial statements prepared in accordance with NBG regulations and pronouncements.
In order to transition to Basel III NBG introduced new capital adequacy requirements in December 2017.
As a result of the changes Bank of Georgia became subject to the following minimum capital requirements at 31 December 2017 Common Equity Tier 1 ratio 8.1% expected to increase to 9.5% on 31 December 2018 Tier 1 ratio 9.9% expected to increase to 11.4% on 31 December 2018 and Total Capital ratio 12.4% expected to increase to 16.0% on 31 December 2018 CREDIT COMMITTEE TIERS OF SUBCOMMITTEES FOR RETAIL AND CORPORATE BANKING LOANS Subcommittee Chair Approval limit for Corporate Banking loans US Tier I Risk Manager of the relevant Credit Risk Management Less than US 2.0 million for existing and new borrowers Tier II Deputy CROHead of the Credit Risk Department Between US 2.0 million and US 10.0 million for existing and new borrowers Tier III CEOCRO Greater than US 10.0 million for existing and new borrowers Subcommittee Chair Approval limit for Retail Banking loans US Tier I Risk Manager of the relevant Credit Risk Management Less than US 200000 Tier II Head of Portfolio Quality Analysis Unit Between US 200000 and US 500000 for retail loans Tier III Deputy CRO Between US 500000 and US 2.0 million Tier IV CEOCRO Greater than US 2.0 million 40 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC At 31 December 2017 Bank of Georgias Common Equity Tier 1 and Tier 1 ratios were 12.4% while Total Capital ratio was 17.9%.
Transition to Basel III is not expected to affect the Banks growth prospects or its ability to maintain dividend distributions within the existing dividend policy payout range.
ALCO is the key governing body for capital adequacy management as well as for respective risks identification and management.
ALCO establishes limits and reviews actual performance over those limits for both NBG and Basel I capital adequacy regulations.
The Finance department is in charge of regular monthly monitoring of and reporting on NBG and Basel I capital adequacy compliance with original pronouncements as well as with ALCO policies.
Capital adequacy management is an integral part of the Banks monthly reporting as well as the Banks annual and semiannual budget approval and budget review processes.
The Finance department prepares NBG Basel I and Basel IIIII capital adequacy actual reports as well as their forecasts and budgets and different stress scenarios for both regulations while ALCO and the Management Board regularly review them identify risks issue recommendations and if applicable propose action plans.
Legal department.
The Legal departments principal purposes are to ensure that the Banks activities conform to applicable legislation and to minimise losses from the materialisation of legal risks.
The Legal department is responsible for the application and development of mechanisms for identifying legal risks in the Banks activities in a timely manner the investigation of the Banks activities in order to identify any legal risks the planning and implementation of all necessary actions for the elimination of identified legal risks participation in legal proceedings on behalf of the Bank where necessary and the investigation of possibilities for increasing the effectiveness of the Banks legal documentation and its implementation in the Banks daily activities.
The Legal department is also responsible for providing legal support to structural units of the Bank andor its subsidiaries.
AntiMoney Laundering AML and
The Banks AML and Compliance department is responsible for the implementation of the Banks AML programme including the development of AML policies and procedures transaction monitoring and reporting and employee training throughout the Bank and its subsidiaries.
The AML programme is based on recommendations directives and requirements of international organisations including FATFBasel the European Parliament the US department of treasury on sanctions programmes as well as local regulations.
The Banks Internal Audit department makes annual assessments of the Banks AML systems and controls and provides independent assurance of internal controls.
The Bank has adopted a riskbased approach towards MLFT risks including a general antimoney laundering policy customer acceptance policy and financial sanctions compliance policy.
The Banks riskbased approach means that it applies enhanced due diligence towards MLFT risks it determines highrisk categories of products customers services and jurisdictions.
The Bank is obliged to notify the Financial Monitoring Service of Georgia of all transactions that are subject to monitoring in accordance with Georgian legislation.
These reports are currently filed in electronic form in an offline mode by the AML and Compliance department.
The reporting process is fully automated and is supported by a special software application.
Furthermore the Bank operates special AML software which meets the industry requirements.
The programme covers every sanctions list as well as debarred and banned individuals and organisations as identified by OFAC EU UN and other similar bodies.
It allows fullyautomated monitoring of all transactions against special lists.
In pursuance of identifying suspicious transactions the AML and Compliance department has implemented a centralised solution that links transactions accounts and customers so that the Bank can see the enterprisewide risk associated with each customer.
BODIES IMPLEMENTING THE
RISK MANAGEMENT SYSTEM
The Banks risk management system is implemented by the Credit Risk Management
Quantitative Risk Management and Risk
Analytics department Treasury Operational Risk Management Legal AML and Compliance and Security departments Finance department and other departments.
The Credit Risk Management
CB Portfolio Analysis Quantitative Risk Management and Risk Analytics department and Operational Risk Management departments report to the Deputy CEO Chief Risk Officer and the Legal department is under supervision of the General Legal Counsel who directly reports to the CEO.
The Finance department and the Treasury department report to the Deputy CEO
The AML and Compliance department reports to Deputy CEO Operations.
The Quantitative Risk Management and Risk Analytics department in coordination with the Treasury implements the Banks market risk policies by ensuring compliance with established open currency position limits counterparty limits VAR limits on possible losses and the interest rate policy set by the ALCO.
The Treasury department manages foreign currency exchange money market securities portfolio and derivatives operations and monitors compliance with the limits set by the ALCO for these operations.
The Treasury department is also responsible for management of shortterm liquidity and treasury cash flow and monitors the volumes of cash in the Banks ATMs and at its service centres.
The Credit Risk Management department manages credit risks with respect to particular borrowers and assesses overall loan portfolio risks.
It is responsible for ensuring compliance with the Banks Credit Policies and management of the quality of the Banks loan portfolio.
The Operational Risk Management department identifies and assesses operational risk within the Banks processes and operations.
It also detects critical risk areas or groups of operations with an increased risk level and develops internal control procedures to address these risks through among other things businessprocess redesign schemes including document circulation information streams distribution of functions permissions and responsibility.
The Legal department monitors all changes in relevant laws and regulations and ensures that those changes are properly reflected in the Banks procedures instructions manuals templates and other relevant documentation.
It also disseminates information on legislative changes to all relevant departments within the
The Legal department also participates in drafting laws and regulatory documents upon request of legislators and regulators certain associations and other professional bodies.
The Tax Reporting and Tax Risks Management Unit focuses on the Banks relationship with the tax authorities and provides practical advice and monitors tax compliance across the Group.
Each of the foregoing departments is provided with policies andor manuals that are approved by the Banks Management Board andor the Supervisory Board as required.
The manuals and policies include comprehensive guidance for each stage of a transaction including but not limited to manuals outlining asset and liability management policies foreign exchange operations procedures fixed income investment guidelines Retail Banking operations procedures the deposit policy and Credit Policies.
Risk measurement and reporting.
The Bank measures risk using a method which reflects both the expected loss likely to arise in normal circumstances and unexpected losses which are an estimate of the ultimate actual loss based on different forecasting models.
These models use probabilities derived from historical experience adjusted from time to time to reflect the economic environment.
The Bank also runs worst case scenarios that could arise in light of extreme events.
Monitoring and controlling of risks is primarily performed based on limits established by the
These limits reflect the business strategy and market environment of the Bank as well as the level of risk that it is willing to accept with additional emphasis on selected industries.
The
Bank also conducts ongoing monitoring and control allowing efficient adjustments in case of any unexpected changes in the conditions on which the preliminary risk assessment was made.
In addition the Bank monitors and measures overall riskbearing capacity in relation to aggregate risk exposure across all risk types and activities.
The Bank maintains a management reporting system which requires the Credit
Risk Management Quantitative Risk
Management and Analytics Finance and Treasury departments to prepare certain reports on a daily and monthly basis.
On a daily basis a statement of operations balance sheet and treasury report which includes the Banks open foreign exchange positions cash flows limits and balances on correspondent accounts with other banks and confirmation that there has been compliance with mandatory financial ratios must be provided by each department.
On a monthly basis a report on the structural liquidity gap a report on interest rate risk monthly financial statements and a quarterly BANK RISK MANAGEMENT CONTINUED 41 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
Information
This information is presented and explained to the Management Board and the head of each business division.
The report includes aggregate credit exposure liquidity ratios and risk profile changes.
Management assesses the appropriateness of the allowance for credit losses on a monthly basis.
The Banks Management Board and the Supervisory Board receive a comprehensive risk report once a quarter which is designed to provide all the necessary information to assess and draw conclusions on the Banks risk exposure.
Specifically tailored risk reports are prepared and distributed to all levels throughout the Bank in order to ensure that all business divisions have access to extensive relevant and uptodate information.
A daily briefing is given to the Banks Management Board and all other relevant employees of the Bank on the utilisation of market limits proprietary investments and liquidity as well as any other risk developments.
RISK MITIGATION AND EXCESSIVE RISK CONCENTRATION As part of its overall risk management the Bank uses derivatives and other instruments to manage exposures resulting from changes in interest rates foreign currencies credit risks and exposures arising from forward transactions.
While these derivatives are intended for hedging they do not qualify for hedge accounting.
The Bank actively uses collateral to reduce its credit risks.
In order to avoid excessive concentrations of risks the Bank focuses on maintaining a diversified portfolio.
Identified concentrations of credit risks are controlled and managed accordingly.
Concentrations arise when a number of counterparties or related shareholders are engaged in similar business activities or activities in the same geographic region or have similar economic features that would cause their ability to meet contractual obligations to be similarly affected by changes in economic political or other conditions.
Concentrations also involve combined aggregate exposures of large and significant credits compared to total outstanding balance of the respective financial instrument.
Concentrations indicate the relative sensitivity of the Banks performance to developments affecting a particular industry or geographical location.
Identified concentrations of credit risks are controlled and managed accordingly.
CREDIT RISK Definition Credit risk is the risk that a borrower or counterparty will be unable to pay amounts in full or in part when due.
Credit risk arises mainly in the context of the Banks lending activities.
Mitigation The general principles of the Banks credit policy are outlined in the Credit
The Credit Policies also outline credit risk control and monitoring procedures and the Banks credit risk management systems.
The
Credit Policies are reviewed annually or more frequently if necessary.
As a result of these reviews new loan restructuring tools are introduced.
The Bank also uses the NBGs provisioning methodology in order to comply with NBG requirements.
The Bank manages its credit risk by placing limits on the amount of risk accepted with respect to individual corporate borrowers or groups of related borrowers liability of insurance companies types of banking operations and by complying with the exposure limits established by the NBG.
The Bank monitors the market value of collateral requests additional collateral in accordance with the underlying agreement and monitors the market value of collateral obtained during its review of the adequacy of the allowance for loan impairment.
The Bank also mitigates its credit risk by obtaining collateral and using other security arrangements.
The exposure to financial institutions is managed by limits covering on and offbalance sheet exposures and by settlement limits with respect to trading transactions such as foreign exchange contracts.
The Credit Committees approve individual transactions and the Credit Risk Management department establishes credit risk categories and provisioning rates which are set as per provisioning methodology.
The Deputy CEO Chief Risk Officer and the Credit Risk Management department review the credit quality of the portfolio and set provisioning rates in consultation with the Banks CEO and Deputy CEO Finance on a monthly basis.
The Banks credit quality review process provides early identification of possible changes in the creditworthiness of counterparties including regular collateral revaluations.
Counterparty limits are established by the use of a credit risk classification system which assigns a risk rating to each counterparty.
Risk ratings are subject to regular revision.
The credit quality review process allows the Bank to assess the potential loss as a result of the risks to which it is exposed and to take corrective action.
The Bank makes available to its customers guaranteesletters of credit which may require that the Bank makes payments on their behalf.
Such payments are collected from customers based on the terms of the guaranteeletter of credit.
They expose the Bank to similar risks to loans and these are mitigated by the same control processes and policies.
LOAN APPROVAL PROCEDURES The procedures for approving loans monitoring loan quality and for extending refinancing and or restructuring existing loans are set out in the Banks Credit Policies that are approved by the Supervisory Board andor the Management Board of the Bank.
The Credit Committees approve individual transactions.
The Bank evaluates Corporate Investment Banking clients on the basis of their financial condition credit history business operations market position management level of shareholder support proposed business and financing plan and on the quality of the collateral offered.
The appropriate level of the relevant Credit Committee is responsible for making the decision for loan approval based on credit memorandum and where appropriate the Credit Risk Managers report.
The loan approval procedures for Retail Banking loans depend on the type of retail lending products.
Applications for consumer loans including credit cards and auto loans up to GEL 20000 are approved by the scoring system.
Applications for mortgage loans of Retail Banking clients are completed by the Mortgage Loan Officer and submitted to the Credit Risk Manager who evaluates the credit risks and determines the amount terms and conditions of the loan which must be approved at the appropriate Credit Committee level.
In the case of micro financing loans loan officers evaluate loan applications prepare a project analysis and submit proposals to the appropriate Credit Committee which makes the final decision.
Credit Committee members have equal voting authority and decisions are approved by a simple majority of votes.
COLLATERAL
The Bank typically requires credit support or collateral as security for the loans and credit facilities that it grants.
The main forms of credit support are guarantees and rights to claim amounts on the borrowers current account with the Bank or other assets.
The main forms of collateral for corporate lending are charges over real estate properties equipment inventory and trade receivables and the main form of collateral for retail lending is a mortgage over residential property.
In the case of corporate loans the Bank usually requires a personal guarantee surety from the borrowers shareholders.
Under the Banks internal guidelines collateral should be provided where it is required to cover outstanding liabilities during the entire duration of a transaction.
As of 31 December 2017 83.3% of the Banking Business loans to clients were collateralised.
An evaluation report of the proposed collateral is prepared by the Asset Appraisal and Disposal department and submitted to the appropriate Credit Committee together with the loan application and Credit Risk Managers report.
When evaluating collateral the Bank discounts the market value of the assets to reflect the liquidation value of the collateral.
MEASUREMENT
Exposure and limits are subject to annual or more frequent review.
The Banks compliance with credit risk exposure limits is monitored by the Credit Risk Management department on a continuous basis.
The Bank establishes provisions for impairment losses of financial assets on a collective basis and on an individual basis when there is objective evidence that a financial asset or group of financial assets is impaired.
The Bank creates provisions by reference to the particular borrowers financial condition and the number of days the relevant loan is overdue.
If in a subsequent period the amount of the impairment loss decreases and the decrease can be related objectively to an event occurring after the impairment was recognised the previously recognised impairment loss is reversed by an adjusted provision account.
The determination of provisions for impairment losses is based on an analysis of the assets at risk and reflects the amount which in the judgement of the Banks management is adequate to provide for losses incurred.
42 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Provisions are made against gross loan amounts and accrued interest.
Under the Banks internal loan loss allowance methodology which is based upon IFRS requirements the Bank categorises its loan portfolio into significant and nonsignificant loans.
Significant loans are defined as loans in excess of US 150000 and nonsignificant loans are defined as loans less than US 150000.
The Credit Risk Management Department makes an individual assessment of all defaulted significant loans.
Nondefaulted significant loans are given a collective assessment rate.
For the purposes of provisioning all loans are divided into different groups such as mortgage consumer microfinancing loans.
Since 2004 the Bank jointly with certain other Georgian banks and with the Credit Information Group a provider of credit information solutions established JSC Credit Info Georgia CIG that serves as a centralised credit bureau in Georgia.
Since 2009 all the participating banks insurance companies and microfinance organisations share and contribute positive and negative customer credit information to CIG.
Loans up to US 500000 secured by real estate are subject to a writeoff once overdue for more than 365 days.
Unsecured loans or the loans secured by collateral other than real estate are subject to a writeoff once overdue for more than 150 days.
Corporate loans and loans above US 500000 secured by real estate may be written off following an assessment by the Deputy CEO Chief Risk Officer and the Credit Risk department in consultation with the Banks CEO and Deputy CEO Finance.
The Group has completed its IFRS 9 implementation programme and adopted IFRS 9 Financial Instruments from 1 January 2018.
For further information see page 159 in the Consolidated Financial Statements of this Annual Report.
LIQUIDITY RISK Definition Liquidity risk is the risk that the Bank will be unable to meet its payment obligations when they fall due under normal and stress circumstances.
Monitoring Liquidity risk is managed through the ALCOapproved liquidity framework.
Treasury manages liquidity on a daily basis.
In order to manage liquidity risk it performs daily monitoring of future expected cash flows on customers and banking operations which is a part of the assetsliabilities management process.
The Finance department prepares and submits monthly reports to the ALCO.
The ALCO monitors the proportion of maturing funds available to meet deposit withdrawals and the amounts of interbank and other borrowing facilities that should be in place to cover withdrawals at unexpected levels of demand.
The liquidity risk management framework models the ability of the Bank to meet its payment obligations under both normal conditions and crisis.
The Bank has developed a model based on the Basel III liquidity guidelines.
This approach is designed to ensure that the funding framework is sufficiently flexible to secure liquidity under a wide range of market conditions.
The liquidity management framework is reviewed from time to time to ensure it is appropriate to the Banks current and planned activities.
Such review encompasses the funding scenarios modelled the modelling approach wholesale funding capacity limit determination and minimum holdings of liquid assets.
The liquidity framework is reviewed by the ALCO prior to approval by the Banks Management Board.
The Treasury and Funding departments also undertake an annual funding review that outlines the current funding strategy for the coming year.
This review encompasses trends in global debt markets funding alternatives peer analysis estimation of the Banks upcoming funding requirements estimated market funding capacity and a funding risk analysis.
The annual funding plan is reviewed by the Bank Management Board and approved by the Bank Supervisory Board as part of the annual budget.
The Funding and Treasury departments also review from time to time different funding options and assess the refinancing risks of such options.
Mitigation The Banks capability to discharge its liabilities is dependent on its ability to realise an equivalent amount of assets within the same period of time.
The Bank maintains a portfolio of highly marketable and diverse assets that it believes can be easily liquidated in the event of an unforeseen interruption of cash flow.
It also has committed lines of credit that it can access to meet its liquidity needs.
Such lines of credit are available through the NBGs refinancing facility.
In addition the Bank maintains a cash deposit obligatory reserve with the NBG the amount of which depends on the level of customer funds attracted.
As of 31 December 2017 in line with the NBGs requirements 20% of customer deposits in foreign currencies were set aside as minimum reserves.
In addition the Bank maintains a minimum average balance of 7% of its customers deposits in Georgian Lari at its correspondent account at the NBG.
For wholesale funding and Certificates of Deposits the NBG requires the Bank to set aside 20% of its unsubordinated foreign currency wholesale funding for borrowings with a remaining maturity of less than one year 10% for borrowings with a remaining maturity of one to two years and 7% of its unsubordinated Georgian Lari wholesale funding for borrowings with a remaining maturity of less than one year.
There is no minimum reserves requirement for Georgian Lari Certificates of Deposits.
Funding In the Georgian marketplace the majority of working capital loans are shortterm and granted with the expectation of renewal at maturity.
As such the ultimate maturity of assets may be different from the analysis presented elsewhere.
In addition the maturity gap analysis does not reflect the historical stability of current accounts.
The Banks principal sources of liquidity are as follows deposits borrowings from international credit institutions interbank deposit agreement debt issuances proceeds from sale of securities principal repayments on loans interest income fee and commission income As of 31 December 2017 the Groups total consolidated client deposits and notes were GEL 6712.5 million US 2589.5 million as compared to GEL 5382.7 million and GEL 4751.4 million as of 31 December 2016 and 2015 respectively and represented 54.0% as compared to 50.9% and 59.1% as of 31 December 2016 and 2015 respectively of the Groups total liabilities.
In accordance with Georgian legislation the Bank is obliged to repay such deposits upon demand of a depositor.
In the case of early withdrawal the interest on the deposit is foregone or reduced.
As of 31 December 2017 total amounts due to credit institutions and debt securities issued were GEL 4865.0 million US 1876.8 million as compared to GEL 4725.7 million and GEL 2828.9 million as of 31 December 2016 and 2015 respectively and represented 39.1% as compared to 44.7% and 35.2% as of 31 December 2016 and 2015 respectively of the Groups total liabilities.
Amounts due to credit institutions and debt securities are taken from a wide range of counterparties.
The Bank Management Board believes that the Banks liquidity is sufficient to meet the present requirements.
For information on the Groups liquid assets liabilities and maturity profile of the Groups financial liabilities as well as further information on the liquidity risk of the Group see Note 31 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements of this Annual Report.
MARKET RISK Definition The Bank is exposed to market risk including currency exchange rate risk and interest rate risk which is the risk that the fair value or future cash flows of financial instruments will fluctuate due to changes in market variables.
Market risk exposure arises from mismatches of maturity and currencies between the assets and liabilities all of which are exposed to market fluctuations.
Mitigation The general principles of the Banks market risk management policy are set by the ALCO.
The Bank aims to limit and reduce the amount of possible losses on open market positions which may be incurred by the Bank due to negative changes in currency exchange rates and interest rates.
The Bank classifies exposures to market risk into either trading or nontrading positions.
Trading and nontrading positions are managed and monitored using different sensitivity analyses.
In order to address these risks the ALCO specifically establishes Value at Risk VAR limits on possible losses for each type of operation currently the VAR limit is set for foreign currency exchange operations only and the Quantitative Risk Management and Risk Analytics department monitor compliance with such limits.
Currency exchange rate risk Currency exchange rate risk is the risk that the value of a financial instrument will fluctuate due to changes in foreign currency exchange rates.
BANK RISK MANAGEMENT CONTINUED 43 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
The Bank is exposed to the effects of fluctuation in the prevailing foreign currency exchange rates on its financial position.
The Banks currency risk is calculated as an aggregate of open positions and is controlled by setting a VAR calculation established by the ALCO with respect to the Banks currency basket.
The Bank uses the historical simulation method based on 400businessday statistical data.
Its open currency positions are managed by the Treasury department on a daytoday basis and are monitored by the Quantitative Risk Management and Risk Analytics department.
The ALCO sets open currency position limits with respect to both overnight and intraday positions and stoploss limits.
Currently the Banks proprietary trading position is limited by the ALCO to a maximum of 15.0% of the Banks NBG total regulatory capital.
The open currency position is also limited by ALCO to an annual VAR of GEL 50 million for a oneday trading period with a 98.0% tolerance threshold.
The ALCO limits are more conservative than NBGs requirements which allow banks to keep open positions of up to 20.0% of regulatory capital.
The Bank also applies sensitivity stress tests to its open currency positions to estimate any potential negative impact on its net assets and earnings.
Interest rate risk The Bank has exposure to interest rate risk as a result of lending at fixed and floating interest rates in amounts and for periods which differ from those of term borrowings at fixed and floating interest rates.
Interest margins on assets and liabilities having different maturities may increase or decrease as a result of changes in market interest rates.
Similarly to other Georgian banks the majority of the Banks assets and deposits have fixed interest rates.
In order to minimise interest rate risk the Bank monitors its interest rate repricing gap and maintains an interest rate margin net interest income before impairment of interestearning assets divided by average interestearning assets sufficient to cover operational expenses and risk premium.
Within limits approved by the Bank Supervisory Board the ALCO approves ranges of interest rates for different maturities at which the Bank may place assets and attract liabilities.
The
Quantitative Risk Management and Risk
Analytics department analyses duration gap and capital sensitivity to interest rate changes.
As of 31 December 2017 the Banking Business floating rate borrowings accounted for 11.5% of the Banking Business total liabilities.
The Bank is also subject to prepayment risk which is the risk that the Bank will incur a financial loss because its customers and counterparties repay or request repayment earlier than expected such as fixed rate mortgages when interest rates fall.
The Bank reviews the prior history of early repayments by calculating the weighted average effective rate of early repayments across each credit product individually applying these historical rates to the outstanding carrying amount of each loan product as of the reporting date and then multiplying the product by the weighted average effective annual interest rates for each product.
This allows the Bank to calculate the expected amount of unforeseen losses in the case of early repayments.
For further information on the Groups market risk see Note 31 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements of this Annual Report.
OPERATIONAL RISK Definition Operational risk is the risk of loss arising from systems failure human error fraud or external events.
When controls fail to perform operational risks can cause damage to reputation have legal or regulatory implications or lead to financial loss.
The Bank cannot expect to eliminate all operational risks but through a control framework and by monitoring and responding to potential risks the Bank aims to manage the risks.
Controls include effective segregation of duties access authorisation and reconciliation procedures staff education and training and assessment processes including the use of internal audit.
Mitigation The Bank manages its operational risks by establishing monitoring and continuously improving its policies and procedures relating to the various aspects of the Banks cash payments accounting trading and core processing operations and data backup and disaster recovery arrangements.
The Bank has elaborated a framework which is in compliance with normative acts defined by Georgian legislation and international standards.
Regular review of and amendments to the policy are performed by the Risk Committee which is also responsible for setting an overall risk appetite.
The Bank has an integrated control framework encompassing operational risk management and control AML and Compliance corporate and information security and physical security each of which is managed by a separate department.
The Operational Risk Management department is responsible for development of policies processes and procedures for managing operational risks in all products activities processes and systems consistently implementing operational risk framework throughout the Bank.
The department is responsible for identification and assessment of operational risks detecting critical risks areas or groups of operations with an increased risk level developing escalation process considering business recommendations and mitigation action plans.
The Operational Risk Management Committee is responsible for setting and overseeing qualitative and quantitative parameters of operational risk appetite and tolerance.
Operational risks are identified and assessed by using several methodologies such as internal loss database collection and analysis scenario analysis Risk and Control SelfAssessment RCSA new products assessment Key Risk Indicators KRIs analysis etc.
To mitigate an impact of operational risk the Bank applies a number of approaches including the implementation of control elements in a business process segregation of duties and development of preventive control tools within operating systems.
The Head of the Operational Risk Management department who reports to the Deputy CEO Chief Risk Officer is responsible for the oversight of the Banks operational risks.
BORROWED FUNDS REPAYMENT SCHEDULE BANKING BUSINESS US milliontelteltel Eurobonds   193   250 Senior loans Subordinated loans 10  4   65  90
RESOURCES AND RESPONSIBILITIES Sustainability lies at the heart of our business We understand our corporate responsibility which is embedded in our culture and believe we can make a difference to society.
The concept of sustainability lies at the heart of our business and reflects our contribution to sustainable development  development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs.
We consider sustainability to be integral to the growth of our business.
Our sustainability agenda allows us to be profitable as well as environmentally and socially responsible at the same time.
By implementing a sustainability approach in our activities we foster longterm relationships with our main stakeholders by providing high return on investment for shareholders satisfying the financial needs of customers developing employees and contributing to the economic and social welfare of local communities while taking into account our environmental footprint.
In 2012 in order to effectively manage the Groups direct and indirect impact on society and the environment the Board of Directors adopted an Environmental and Social Policy.
This policy describes the Groups strategy to develop solid management controls to conserve natural resources minimise health and safety risks and provide employees with equal development opportunities fair compensation and benefits.
We are pioneering sustainability practices in our operations and are constantly seeking new ways to improve our performance.
The policy was last updated in 2016.
The Group continues to be included in the global responsible investment index FTSE4Good.
The index is designed to demonstrate strong Environmental Social and Governance ESG practices measured against international standards.
SOCIAL MATTERS The Group considers the interests of its main stakeholders customers shareholders employees lenders and wider society when developing the strategy and the processes to improve its operations.
We continually strive to positively contribute to society through the entire scope of our business activities by developing sociallyoriented products and services implementing responsible approaches to our business operations carrying out sponsorship and charitable activities.
SOCIALLYORIENTED PRODUCTS AND SERVICES CORPORATE BANKING In order to efficiently manage its indirect environmental and social impact the Bank prioritised the integration of sustainable finance principles into its credit risk management procedures.
In 2012 in order to effectively manage the Banks direct and indirect impact on society and the environment the Board of Directors adopted an Environmental and Social EandS Policy.
In 2013 the Bank updated its Environmental and Social Risk Management ESRM procedures in order to ensure a proper application of appropriate riskbased and sectorspecific environmental and social risk assessment practices to its commercial lending activities and in 2014 the Bank actively started to put the procedures into practice.
The Bank defined priority targets and promotes environmental and social risk management activities accordingly.
Since then the Bank ensures it has a consistent approach to evaluating and managing the environmental human health and safety risks of its financed projects.
These procedures are now being integrated into the Banks credit risk management process and soon will be routinely applied to all commercial transactions.
In all that the Bank does it strives to find sustainable solutions that make business sense to clients and minimise negative impacts on the social and natural environments.
ESRM procedures were further updated in 2017.
The purpose of the review was to ensure that the policy remains fit for purpose and reflects experience and changes in the relevant legislation.
In 2017 the Bank updated the assessment procedures of low medium and high risk projects and refined the monitoring procedures of the projects.
The main objective of the EandS Policy is to increase environmental and social benefits for our clients.
Through the ESRM procedures the Bank enhances our clients opportunities to be in compliance with national environmental and social regulations and adopt international best practices in this area.
The Environmental and Social Policy and Risk Management procedures along with other tools necessary for their implementation comprise the core components of the Banks Environmental and Social Risk Management System ESMS.
Under this concept the Bank endeavours to become an environmentally friendly financial institution.
In 2014 the Bank won the Green Service award at the Georgian Green Business Awards ceremony organised by the Ministry of Environmental and Natural Resources Protection of Georgia.
In May 2017 the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development EBRD awarded the Bank The Deal of the Year 2016 prize for having financed a project aimed at boosting the renewable energy capacity of one of the hydropower plants in Georgia.
The
EBRDs Green Trade Facilitation Programme TFP allows partner banks to use existing TFP facilities to finance exports imports and local distribution of imported green technologies and services in line with the EBRDs Green Economy Transition approach.
Furthermore to ensure a more effective operation and maintenance of the ESRM Policy the Social and Environmental Risk Unit was created in September 2016.
Until then the Environmental and Social Risk Coordinator was responsible for the implementation of the Policy.
In 2017 we selected a Social and Environmental Risk Specialist who will oversee the practical daytoday implementation of the Banks ESMS.
We implement the following procedures to ensure the operation and maintenance of the ESMS We refrain from financing environmentally or socially sensitive business activities mentioned in the exclusion lists of Development Finance Institutions such as EBRD IFC DEG FMO and ADB among others We aim to assess the relative level of environmental and social risk associated with clients businesses.
We require certain customers to implement specific environmental or social action plans to avoid or mitigate their environmental and social impact and adhere to specific monitoring and reporting requirements that we set in order to minimise environmental and social risk.
These requirements are included as covenants in agreements between certain of our customers and the Bank We aim to regularly monitor environmental and social risks associated with the Banks activities and assess clients compliance with the terms of respective agreements Through ensuring comprehensive environmental and social assessment and action plans as a part of stable due diligence the Bank encourages its customers to fulfil their environmental and social obligations and establishes a framework for them to achieve good environmental and social standards.
In many cases the Bank s proper and timely management of customers environmental and social risks has helped them to avoid financial and legal sanctions during inspections conducted by state enforcement agencies.
Environmental and social issues are tracked at project sites in cooperation with the facility staff providing ongoing advice and guidance on good practice and standards and monitoring compliance with the requirements.
For environmental and social due diligence of certain high risk projects the Bank contracts independent external experts.
As part of monitoring the Bank requires each high risk client to provide the Bank with an annual report on their environmental and social performance and the implementation of applicable Environmental and Social Action
Alternatively the Bank s staff visits high risk clients on a regular basis.
In 2017 the Bank held extensive Environmental and Social Due Diligence ESDD where the Bank monitored clients and developed action plans for noncompliant clients.
Thanks to the Bank s efforts some clients conducted an environmental audit and obtained the necessary environmental impact permits to continue their business operations.
Those clients started to identify avoid mitigate and manage environmental and social risks and their impact on the natural and social environment.
In addition as a result of ESDD some clients took out loans to enhance their companies power and ability to reduce negative impacts on the environment and positively benefit their communities.
Others implemented environmental and social management systems in accordance with international standards.
Procedures for addressing external queries and concerns developed within the framework of 45 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
ESMS provide a means for the public to submit queries or concerns related to the Banks EandS Policy and have these inquiries responded to by the Bank in a timely manner.
In the Association Agreement between the European Union and Georgia Georgia has committed to progressively approximate its legislation in the relevant sectors with that of the EU and to implement it effectively.
Through this approximation process Georgia is actively developing and amending its national legislation in the relevant sectors.
As a result the Bank regularly checks legal developments and updates with regard to environmental health and safety and labour issues and places great emphasis on the improvement of ESDD opportunities.
The Banks staff are very focused on introducing clients to information about relevant existing and new regulations and laws during ESDD with the aim to strengthen public knowledge and capacity in the area of environmental and social protection.
Training activities play an important role in enhancing the implementation of the policy.
In
2017 the Bank provided training opportunities for the Head of Social and Environmental Risk and the staff involved in environmental and social risk management process.
The Head of Unit participated in the 11th Annual Performance Standards Community of Learning organised by
The Community of Learning is a knowledge sharing forum aimed at strengthening the implementation of environmental and social standards by financial institutions in emerging markets.
The event provided a chance to exchange experience learn from investment case studies and engage in dialogue among environmental and social risk management specialists from all over the globe.
Trainings was also held for staff and focused on strengthening social and environmental due diligence and risk management.
More generally the Bank has delivered several training sessions in this area and consequently more than 100 employees were trained during the last three years.
Leading experts and state inspectors were invited as trainers.
We intend to continue the trainings in the future.
The Bank is committed to respecting the principles of sustainable development protecting the environment and is willing to improve the level of public health safety as an essential element for sustainable development and economic growth.
The Bank will continue to conduct business with due consideration to environmental and social protection and contribute to the creation of a sustainable society.
The Bank will further help its clients benefit from a proper and diligent implementation of the EandS Policy.
Bank of Georgia also continues to support Georgias emerging economy by financing industries that are of strategic importance for the development of the country.
ENERGY
Electricity consumption growth in Georgia has averaged 3.6% over the last five years.
The Bank finances electricity generation and transmission companies to support the countrys sustainable growth.
In 2017 the Bank in collaboration with two other local banks provided a longterm credit facility to the electricity distributor in Tbilisi.
The total financing amounted to GEL 36.0 million.
The Bank financed the construction of a hydro power plant HPP in Svaneti in the North West of Georgia.
The plant has an installed capacity of 10.0MW and will contribute on average 43.0GWh to local energy generation annually.
Out of the total investment of US 10.2 million the Bank financed US 9.1 million with EBRDs credit line to SMEs that comply with DCFTA requirements.
The Bank channels the facility to support the companies that are willing to upgrade their facilities and invest in modern and environmentallyfriendly technologies.
HEALTHCARE
In 2017 the Bank financed the Georgian German Oncology Research Centre LLC known as Mardaleishvili Medical Centre which is one of the leading diagnostic clinics in Georgia.
With the financing provided by the Bank the company will open a stateoftheart diagnostic centre in Tbilisi equipped with the latest medical facilities acquired from General Electric.
The Bank financed the rehabilitation of Zugdidis hospital for infectious diseases  the only clinic where patients can receive Hepatitis C and HIV treatment in Western Georgias Samegrelo region.
The hospital has been fully rehabilitated in line with modern standards.
With a 25bed capacity the clinic also serves patients from Abkhazia occupied region of Georgia.
The treatment of Hepatitis C and HIV is supported by the Global fund.
TOURISM
T ourism remains one of the most rapidly developing sectors of the Georgian economy.
The Bank actively provides financing for hotel constructions throughout the country.
The Bank has financed the construction of a hotel in Akhasheni in Georgia s Kakheti region to the
The hotel is scheduled to open in the first half of 2018 and will be run by local management.
The hotel is located in the heart of a vineyard and will be a part of the Wine Route.
This will make the hotel a popular destination not only among the tourists but also the local population.
The Bank has recently financed a land acquisition in one of the most popular Winter resorts in
The acquired area is reserved for a fullscale Winter ski resort development.
In 2017 a contract was signed with Georgian Airports Union for the construction of a new terminal in Kutaisi International Airport.
T otal project size is GEL 23 million and the Bank issued a guarantee in the amount of GEL 4.6 million for financing the construction works.
With this project the capacity of Kutaisi International Airport will double.
In addition to the Bank s financial support the Group s real estate business m started developing hotels and signed an exclusive agreement with Wyndham Group to develop Wyndham s threestar Ramada Encore hotel in
First Ramada Encore opened in Tbilisi in February 2018.
Ramada hotel in Tbilisi and a threestar Ramada Encore in Kutaisi where the international airport serves lowcost airlines and makes the city popular with tourists visiting Georgia.
EDUCATION
In 2017 the Bank issued financing for a Georgian university of GEL 10 million and US 4 million.
Due to increasing demand the university decided to build its fourth campus which will increase its capacity from 7000 to 12000 students.
The project includes the construction and refurbishment of a tenfloor building with a net usable area of 25000 square metres including 112 new auditoriums an exam centre a conference hall for 500 guests a library a swimming pool a fitness centre among others.
INFRASTRUCTURE
Infrastructure development remains one of the most important objectives for Georgia.
In 2017 the Bank financed several important projects and among them is Caucasus Roads Project CRP a leading Georgian construction company with its main focus on core infrastructure.
The Bank has partnered with CRP for many years and supported the companys various projects.
In
2017 CRP won a public tender for the design construction and rehabilitation of the Tskneti Samadlo and TsknetiAkhaldaba roads affected by the natural disaster in Tbilisi on 13 June 2015.
The Bank supported the project by issuing a letter of guarantee for US 3 million to finance the works.
In 2017 the Bank financed several small and mediumsized roads water supply systems and other construction projects.
The Bank issued guarantees for around GEL 130 million to support two new projects announced by the Department of Roads of the Ministry of Regional Development and Infrastructure of Georgia.
One of the projects is the construction of Batumi Bypass Road with a contractual value of around GEL 330 million and another is the construction of the E60 highway section from Zemo Osiauri to Chumateleti central Georgia with a contractual value of GEL 130 million.
Both projects are part of improving Georgias transit capacity and increasing the potential of the Silk Road.
In collaboration with EBRD the Bank financed more than 50 kilometres of road rehabilitation with GEL 2.7 million in Western Georgias Samegrelo and Imereti regions.
PRODUCTION AND EXPORT In 2017 the Bank financed a textile manufacturing plant in Western Georgias Adjara region.
The plant produces apparel for internationally recognised brands employing more than 2500 workers from the local population.
The Bank supported Atlantic Group a French manufacturer of heating systems and home appliance products with around US 2 million credit line.
The company entered the Georgian market in 2017 and intends to commence a production process in Kutaisi Free Industrial Zone.
RETAIL BANKING Bank of Georgia continues to innovate and generate a wide range of sociallyoriented financial products and services that provide additional value to individuals and small and mediumsized enterprises SMEs and meet their respective needs.
EXPRESS BANKING The Georgian banking sector still experiences difficulties in overcoming economic and geographical barriers in expanding its financial services in remote regions and among lowincome segments of the population.
Our Express Banking service plays an important role in addressing this issue.
46 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC As at 31 December 2017 a network of 156 Express branches and 2842 Express Pay terminals are located all over the country including in remote mountain regions.
Express financial products such as Express Card Express Deposit and Express Loan are uncomplicated easily accessible and affordable to a segment of the population that would not have access to banking products and services otherwise.
By
31 December 2017 the Bank had attracted 524366 clients of which 52399 became clients of the Bank in 2017.
As a part of the Express Banking service we prioritise the development of selfservice skills.
We plan to expand services offered by Express Pay terminals.
All of these changes will provide a more accessible banking service to our clients.
In 2017 the Bank developed webbased application processing tools that enable completion of a full lending cycle remotely.
In 2017 we enhanced the functions of an Express Student Card.
It now offers special discounts on public transport and free distance banking services among other benefits.
Moreover students can get special StudentBreak discounts in various stores cafes and entertainment centres.
Students are automatically involved in the PLUS Loyalty Scheme  the Banks initiative that offers different status levels to customers and reward points that accumulate based on the clients business with the Bank and can be redeemed into partner companies products andor services at the clients request.
PLUS points can also be converted into mobile phone topups and used to pay public transport utility bills and other products.
The programme encourages the student population to use financial services and supports them financially during their studies.
In 2017 Express Bank launched a Student Loan a product with a ninemonth grace period on principle payments.
The application process for a Student Loan is fully webbased and once its approved the funds get automatically transferred to the account of the selected university.
Youth support.
We have developed a wide range of financial products to support young people in Georgia.
For example via special conditions of the Child Deposit we provide parents with the opportunity to secure their children s future.
Starting from a minimal amount of GEL 10 a deposit can be opened for at least two years at any time from a child s birth until the age of 18.
The annual interest rate 10.2% for Georgian Lari and 1.0%3.5% for foreign currency is added to the initial deposit.
In 2017 we opened approximately 11855 Child Deposit accounts.
The Bank also offers special products that allow young people to get a higher education.
Examples of such products are student loans with favourable terms that do not require any financial guarantees and collateral.
Total portfolio of student loans amounted to GEL 790456 by the end of 2017 while loans with a total value of GEL 400852 were issued in 2017.
In 2016 the Bank partnered with the International Educational Centre IEC and created a new opportunity for students to study abroad.
Students can apply for the loans to finance the tuition living and insurance expenses abroad.
The loans have a grace period of maximum 27 months.
With a recommendation letter from IEC the Bank finances the students without requesting a confirmation of income.
In
2017 the Bank extended the contract with IEC and will continue to support students education.
Another example of the Banks products aimed at supporting young people is a socialeducational project sCool Card  a multifunctional card for school children.
The main objective of the project is to teach children about financial culture and build their knowledge around financial services at an early stage. and services are also free of charge. public and private schools.
The benefits include free public transport in Tbilisi metro buses and Batumi buses discounts for entertaining centres popular among children bookstores toyshops children cafes as well as the accumulation of points sCoola with each transaction.
In a further effort to help children better understand banking products the Bank opened a sCool Card Business School where experienced staff provide free training about topics such as The importance of money Bank and me Family budget I am a manager etc.
Bank of Georgia and the sCool Card are the finalists of the Child Friendly Banking Award 2017 The Global Inclusion Awards 2017 Berlin Germany.
SME SUPPORT We continue to provide financing to SMEs a backbone of the Georgian economy that helps to ensure the sustainable development of Georgia.
In addition to our own micro financing and SME loan programmes we also participate in various programmes that support entrepreneurs.
Since 2015 the Bank has partnered with the nonprofit Agricultural Projects Management Agency APMA which supports SMEs in the agricultural sector.
Together we have cofinanced agricultural loans at fixed annual interest rates which are partially subsidised by APMA.
In 2017 the total amount of loans that the Bank issued to SMEs amounted to GEL 1.3 billion of which GEL 85 million was issued through the Preferential Agriculture Lending Programme.
In 2017 the Bank continued to reinforce financing micro business owners and considers this segment as one of the main areas of its portfolio growth.
The Bank has dedicated staff and established processes for its new product microexpress loans that targets the micro business segment and offers loans under GEL 10000.
Increasing
In 2016 the Bank partnered with the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development EBRD to offer the market a much needed local currency funding.
Bank of Georgia is committed to further extending its financing to SMEs.
Furthermore the Bank is keen to develop financial products and lending practices to specifically service womenled SMEs which will ultimately increase their involvement in developing Georgias private sector.
The loan facility signed with EBRD enables the Bank to issue longerterm local currency loans and to provide essential financial support for micro small and mediumsized enterprises in adhering to DCFTA requirements as well as underserved women entrepreneurs.
In addition to assisting the SMEs financially the Bank launched an SME portal in September 2017.
The portal provides financial and businessrelated advice to entrepreneurs in order to upgrade their financial literacy and management skills and ensure the sustainable development of their businesses.
The portal provides entrepreneurs with information on trainings and equips them with knowledge and skills in accounting legal documents business development sales and marketing.
Environmental and social risk management processes of SME clients are embedded throughout the Banks activities.
By ensuring that comprehensive environmental and social risk assessments and the necessary action plans are undertaken we encourage our SME clients to be in compliance with national environmental and social legislation.
During site visits we provide our clients with advice and guidance on good practice and standards in these areas.
We update them on environmental health and safety as well as labour issues and monitor their compliance with environmental and social legislation.
In many cases of noncompliance our proper and timely management of the environmental and social risks of our SME clients has helped them to address issues that would otherwise have resulted in financial and legal sanctions from the state enforcement agency.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING Currently the Georgian real estate market is vulnerable to various economic and financial uncertainties.
Numerous construction projects remain unfinished for long periods of time while there is a strong growing demand for housing from the Georgian population.
In response to this increasing demand the Groups real estate development business m Real Estate was established in order to offer affordable housing to the emerging middle class in Georgia and to young families especially.
Nowadays m is a major player in Georgias real estate market offering its customers turnkey apartments with finetuned infrastructure firealarm systems in accordance with international standards roundtheclock security service maintenance of elevators as well as common and green areas.
Real Estate has completed seven projects so far and has delivered them to its customers within and frequently ahead of the agreed deadlines.
The company plans the design and construction processes so that each square metre is distributed efficiently. the tenants.
The level of energy savings in m buildings is significantly above that of the average residential properties in Tbilisi. materials for a fitout themselves.
Since only a few customers can afford to buy large flats with an area exceeding 100 square metres the company continuously works to optimise the size of its apartments to meet the current demand RESOURCES AND RESPONSIBILITIES CONTINUED 47 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
In June 2017 m acquired BK construction LLC a local real estate construction company which is expected to reduce m construction costs and improve the design management process through vertical integration.
A large segment of m s customers is made up of young Georgian families more than 50% of the companys customers are 2342 years old.
We believe that by continuing to offer affordable housing products we are helping them to significantly enhance the quality of their lives and enjoy modern living standards.
SPONSORSHIP AND CHARITY As part of our sponsorship and charitable activities the Group continues to focus on promoting and enhancing access to education conserving nature supporting people with disabilities and special needs developing social enterprises and facilitating innovative projects that focus on social goods.
The Groups Sponsorship and Charity Policy encourages partnerships with various foundations and Nongovernmental Organisations NGOs to deliver sustainable results and bring positive change.
Sponsorship and charity funds are channelled through the Banks Tree of Life Foundation that in its turn distributes funding by means of grant competitions in order to ensure transparent and fair methods of financing.
The
Group also implements its own social projects.
Tree of Life has allocated around GEL 2.5 million to support education nature conservation people with disabilities and special needs social platforms and development of social entrepreneurship.
Bank of Georgia together with the Tree of Life Foundation established a charity platform www. onate. items clothes books etc.
The platform offers collection sorting and delivery of items.
Bank of Georgia recognises the impact it can have on the countrys socialeconomic development.
Therefore the Bank launched a grant programme to support socially driven enterprises in Georgia.
In 2017 and 2016 Bank of Georgia supported five social enterprises with up to GEL 200000 and GEL 50000 per project respectively.
At the same time the Bank provided probono services by helping the businesses in areas such as marketing public relations information technology etc.
The Bank partners with various NGOs to maximise its role in the social cause.
GGU regularly runs charitable activities for the social service agency Child and Environment and international humanitarian network Catharsis in
GGU covers the annual water supply expenses for Child and Environment  the agency that cares for homeless children and children with disabilities.
Twice a year GGU sponsors the project Dinner for Everyone which is organised by Catharsis for approximately 3000 people.
Aldagi supports many socially vulnerable people by onetime help upon special requests.
The company traditionally provides a home for at least one family every Christmas.
Aldagis employees are engaged in various programmes that supply socially vulnerable people with food and first aid kits.
As part of its sponsorship activities Teliani Valley focuses on promoting a healthy lifestyle.
As the sponsors of the Georgian Rugby Union and National Olympic Committee the company aims to attract more youngsters to healthy activities.
The company is a main sponsor of the Georgian Tag Rugby initiative that is the biggest platform for raising awareness of a healthy lifestyle among school children.
GHG supported the construction of a childrens hospice which aims to create a friendly and comfortable atmosphere where in addition to caring personnel a great importance is attached to the environment and the interior.
GHG traditionally participates in the state Childrens Oncology Programme under which the company offers cancerrelated conditions treatment for children with different cancer disorders leukaemia tumours and lymphomas in GHGs Iashvili Paediatric Tertiary Referral Hospital a multiprofile paediatric medical establishment.
Promoting and enhancing access to education.
Bank of Georgia University has offered a top quality master s degree programme since its foundation in 2014.
The university welcomed its fourth intake of MBA students in 2017 and simultaneously launched a bachelor s degree programme.
The cost of studies in 2017 were again largely subsidised by the Bank with GEL 350250.
Up to 20 students study at no cost while 40 students benefit from a 0% loan with grace period until graduation.
Bank of Georgia University provides its students with handson experience by offering them the possibility to observe various business processes at the Group s companies.
In 2013 the Bank became the first Georgian company to cooperate with one of the most prestigious scholarship programmes in the world  the Chevening scholarship.
This cooperation provides Georgian students with an opportunity to pursue education in the UK.
In 2017 the Group provided GBP 89532 to finance a masters degree programme for three students.
The partnership with Chevening will continue next year and the Group is looking forward to selecting students who will continue their studies in the UK.
In 2014 the Bank signed a partnership agreement with the prestigious US Fulbright scholarship scheme.
Thanks to the Bank of Georgias contribution a selected number of students from Georgia are able to enrol in a twoyear masters degree programme at a US university.
In 2017 the funding provided to the students for their twoyear degrees amounted to US 50000.
Since 2014 the Bank has granted US 250000 to the US Fulbright scholarship programme.
For the last four years the Bank has been supporting a public speaking competition organised by the English Speaking Union
The competition allows high school senior year or university freshman students to prepare a speech on a preselected topic and present it in front of a competent jury.
The winner is granted a fully paid trip to London to attend a global public speaking competition.
We aim to support this competition in 2018 as well.
The Bank has been supporting every single TEDx Tbilisi conference since they were first organised in 2012.
A TEDx conference is a locally organised TED format event where communities organisations and individuals join to initiate a conversation and connect with each other on different topics which are important to society.
In 2017 m Real Estates subsidiary BK Construction signed a memorandum of cooperation with the Ministry of Education and Science of Georgia.
According to the memorandum m will build an institute for vocational education in the Municipality of Zestaponi Western Georgia.
The institute will offer more than 20 shortterm vocational courses in engineering to more than 200 students annually.
The studies will include both theoretical and practical courses.
The latter will be conducted on m s construction sites.
Most of the alumna will be employed by m and its subsidiary BK Construction.
Supporting people with disabilities.
Since
2014 the Bank has focused its efforts on supporting people with disabilities  one of the most vulnerable social groups in Georgia.
In 2017 the Bank donated GEL 78200 to the Tree of Life Foundation for this cause.
The
Foundation distributed the funds through grant competitions  one intended for the relevant NGOs that work with people with disabilities and another with the specific aim of promoting social entrepreneurship.
In order to qualify for the competition the proposals had to focus on the creation of a small enterprise with a social component aimed at improving the livelihood of people with disabilities.
The Bank continues to focus on the adaptation of its own infrastructure.
In 2017 an additional nine service centres became available for people with disabilities. severe disabilities.
The project is built in Tbilisi within the framework of Protection of Children with Disabilities  a project run by the United States Agency for International Development
The project is being carried out by the Ministry of Labour Health and Social Affairs USAID and United Nations Childrens Fund UNICEF since 2015.
The goal of the specialised home is to ensure that the children receive care in a familylike environment and are provided with all the services necessary for their adequate growth individual development and smooth integration into society.
After construction and renovation works are completed seven children with severe forms of disability will be moved to live in the house.
It is worth noting that all m buildings are friendly to people with special needs.
Conserving nature.
Another priority of the Groups charitable activities is the preservation of wildlife diversity.
In 2017 the Bank granted US 100000 to the Caucasus Nature Fund CNF to provide support to the Protected Areas of Georgia.
Bank of Georgia allocated GEL 1 million for restoration of the forests destroyed by the wildfires in the summer of 2017.
48 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Bank 5501
GGU2631
1tel999
Valley
Others 1523 3tel101 In 2017 Bank of Georgia launched a car pooling app Gzad for its employees.
The application enables them to share a ride to and from the Bank which in turn helps reduce air pollution and ease the traffic in Tbilisi.
In 2017 GGU granted GEL 250000 to restore a forest in Borjomi Gorge after a massive wildfire in August 2017.
In 2017 m committed to restoring a landscape and a burnt territory of 20000 square metres on Tbilisis Mtatsminda slope.
The works are conducted jointly with Tbilisi City Hall Caucasus Environmental NGO Network CENN Regional Environmental Centre for the Caucasus REC Caucasus the Greens Movement of Georgia GMG botanical institute of Ilia State University and the Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources of Georgia.
Gorge in August 2017.
Air quality is an immediate and acute problem in Georgian cities affecting peoples quality of life.
In order to increase awareness of climate change and contribute to a healthier environment m actively promotes electric vehicles.
As part of its spring campaign the company offered its customers electric scooters as a gift.
Moreover throughout 2017 m contributed to developing infrastructure for electric vehicles by financially supporting a startup company Espace with the installation of up to 50 charging stations in the country Tbilisi Batumi Kutaisi Rustavi Kvareli and Telavi.
GHG contributed GEL 500000 to rehabilitate the damaged area and to help restore the remarkable nature in Borjomi.
With the support of the CNF the company is involved in the Project on Maintenance of Caucasus Natural and Cultural Heritage.
The fund is meant for effective longterm management of the protected territories of Armenia Azerbaijan and
In 2017 GHG donated GEL 52800 to support the project.
EMPLOYEE MATTERS A key factor to our success is a cohesive and professional team capable of accomplishing the Group s objectives.
We are committed to attracting and identifying the best professionals caring and planning for their needs investing in their development and fostering their commitment.
The Human Capital Management HCM department and the management system it implements play a vital role in managing our most valuable resources  our employees.
The
HCM department develops Human Resource HR policies and procedures which determine key principles areas approaches and methods that are crucial for building HCM systems for all our businesses.
Examples of some of our HR policies and procedures include but are not limited to employee planning and recruiting staff administration compensation and benefits code of conduct employee development and training human rights grievances retrenchment antinepotism The Bank s HCM department works closely with HR managers and executives from our subsidiaries in order to ensure proper implementation of the main principles and the provision of necessary support in all HRrelated matters.
We recognise the importance of observing human rights and are committed to implementing socially responsible business practices.
Our Human Rights Policy establishes priorities and puts control procedures in place to provide equal opportunities and prevent discrimination or harassment on any grounds including disability.
Our Human Rights Policy applies to all employees and includes procedures in relation to employment processes including recruitment procedures and procedures governing the continuity of employment of employees who become disabled during the course of their employment training and development.
We are committed to employee engagement.
We believe that the knowledge of our Group is key and we strive to provide our employees with a continuous flow of information which includes but is not limited to information about our corporate culture the Groups strategy and performance risks relating to its performance such as financial and economic factors and our policies and procedures.
We provide information in a number of ways including via managers presentations intranet email and regular town hall and offsite meetings.
We also value the views of our employees.
We consult with them regularly and have implemented feedback systems such as frequent employee satisfaction surveys which ensure that opinions of our employees are taken into account when making decisions which are likely to affect their interests.
Employee feedback also helps to improve our customerfocused approach.
In order to ensure pay is competitive the Bank monitors employee pay satisfaction via labour market compensation surveys in the banking industry.
The results of the 2017 survey confirm that the Bank remains a competitive employer.
In 2017 the Bank conducted Barrett Organisational Values assessment.
The results enable us to measure and manage organisational culture.
In 2017 we focused on identifying the personal current and desired organisational cultures in the Bank.
Cultural alignment ensures positive outcomes such as job satisfaction employee retention and engagement.
Based on the survey results our cultural entropy is currently 7% cultural entropy score 10% is considered healthy.
We are in the process of creating a holistic view of the cultural factors in performance indicators.
TALENT ATTRACTION Sustained development of the Groups businesses requires the strengthening of the teams of our subsidiaries both by using the Groups own significant internal resources through staff development and rotation and by attracting external candidates.
Our recruitment policy and relevant control procedures ensure TOTAL HEADCOUNT BY AGE CATEGORY Less than 20 years old 2130 years old 3140 years old 4150 years old Over 51 years old RESOURCES AND RESPONSIBILITIES CONTINUED David Morrison BGEO Board member serves as the Chairman of the Board of Directors of CNF.
The management concluded that the fund is not a related party in accordance with the IFRS and the payment does not constitute directors remuneration.
49 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
According to the HR Policy internal candidates have priority when filling vacant positions especially in situations where there are vacancies in top and middle management.
Thus in 2017 266 Group employees were promoted to managerial positions.
In order to attract young talent we actively partner with leading Georgian business schools and universities participate in job fairs and run extensive internship programmes aimed at the professional development of young professionals.
In 2012 Bank of Georgia established a new format for its traditional internship programme and constantly develops it.
The programme attracts promising graduates and provides them with the opportunity to participate in professional trainings.
Interns are directly coached by the Bank s executives and middle managers to help them on their path to gaining their first management positions in the near future.
In 2016 the Company successfully completed a talent acquisition project for its Investment Officer position and launched it in 2017 as well.
The project selects a number of young and talented candidates for various assignments within BGEO Group.
In 2017 the number of young professionals under 30 years old represented 32% of the total headcount.
In 2017 GGU in collaboration with Georgia s Innovation and T echnology Agency organised a project for talented and motivated young people with technical academic backgrounds for the second consecutive year since its initial launch in 2016.
Participants had the opportunity to work on and introduce technological solutions to real challenges that the company is facing in the fields of water supply and sewerage systems.
T welve authors of the best projects were offered a job and they are successfully continuing their work and development within the company.
GGU has been working in collaboration with the countrys leading universities professional colleges and their career services to attract new talent.
The collaborations are bound by the memoranda with Free University and the latest with San Diego State University according to which the students will engage in GGUs traineeship programmes and benefit from practical experience received at the company.
In 2017 a GHGs human resources department organised job fairs for students in leading medical universities and nursing colleges in Tbilisi and other regions.
The companys healthcare services business attracted more than 300 students to its nursing course.
GHG has memoranda of understanding with various nursing colleges and universities.
In 2017 GHGs Evex Learning Centre conducted sixmonth free nursing courses for 278 students from nursing colleges.
72 graduates were offered jobs at the companys healthcare services facilities.
In 2017 GHG signed a special memorandum with Panatsea  the biggest nursing college in Tbilisi whose students will undergo 18 months of practical training at GHGs hospitals.
The top five students will get a grant from Evex.
TRAINING AND DEVELOPMENT To manage our employees in a way that best supports our business strategy we seek to help them contribute to business performance through personal and professional development.
Following our aspiration to develop strong leaders we have developed an extensive leadership development programme.
The Groups corporate learning system is comprised of a wide range of internal and external training sessions specifically designed to meet the needs of front and back office employees at the Groups subsidiaries including banking energy and utilities real estate development healthcare and insurance.
Middle and seniorlevel employees are given the opportunity to receive external training in well known training institutions outside of Georgia.
In 20142015 Bank of Georgia launched a Leadership Development Executive Coaching programme.
It provides an individual approach towards developing leadership skills.
The programme continued to run successfully throughout 2017 and further expanded to lower leadership levels having benefited its participants with a personally tailored development experience.
Employees involved in the programme gained a greater awareness of their leadership strengths and opportunities for future growth.
Based on its previous years experience the Bank has refined its Leadership Development System together with the 360 degree feedback process.
The Bank highly values the talent of its employees and provides various talent retention activities engaging them through leadership development and various professional certification programmes.
BOG creates different development opportunities for employees in terms of career and personal growth.
Internal promotions are part of the talent attraction and retention system and also create a basis for employee loyalty and retention.
The Bank also offers competitive remuneration and benefit packages for its employees and supports worklife balance by providing additional paid days off in addition to those in the Labour Code of Georgia.
The Bank also encourages engagement and dedication of its talented employees with awards made to the Best Employee and T eam of the Year.
Each of the Groups businesses has developed an extensive training programme for front office employees in order to provide them with relevant skills such as effective communication and building strong and valued client relationships.
For example the Banks mentoring programme is part of a front office training process.
Every new employee is provided with regular advice guidance and practical instructions from an appointed mentor who later participates in the new employees performance evaluation.
Through this programme we aim to provide individual support to our employees in achieving their professional goals.
In 2017 the Bank launched an online Learning Management System LMS enabling employees to easily and comfortably access corporate learning opportunities.
The Bank also started updating the managerial induction and onboarding programmes which will cover employees at all levels.
2015 15955 2016 22080 2017 25795 ALL EMPLOYEES GENDER DIVERSITY SENIOR MANAGERS
Male
DIRECTORS
Female
Male
Female
Male
GHG offers continuous medical education through Evex Learning Centre.
Apart from modern training methods the centre offers uptodate equipment auditoria computer labs and other facilities that conform to the highest international standards.
In 2017 the centre trained a total of 2046 nurses 1510 physicians and 1508 administrative employees.
In 2017 GHG s healthcare services business spent about GEL 2 million on training and development.
Most of the expenditures went towards training nurses ER specialists and the advancement of specialists in various medical fields.
HUMAN RIGHTS POLICY The Human Resources and Human Rights Policies are an integral part of the employee onboarding package.
It is available for employees on the intranet and the updates are communicated electronically.
50 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC The Human Rights Policy covers the following Equal opportunities and antidiscrimination Work environment free of harassment Grievance policy CODE OF ETHICS AND ANTIBRIBERY
The Group has a Code of Ethics as well as AntiBribery Policy which are also applicable to the Group companies.
In BOG the Corporate and Information Security department is in charge of implementing and monitoring controls related to antibribery issues.
The department has the procedures in place which define the process of establishing relationships with vendors undertaking public tenders etc.
The Corporate and Information Security department provides annual online training for employees on antibribery issues which are also included in induction trainings.
As an organization that is fully committed to prevention of bribery and corruption the Bank ensures that appropriate internal controls are in place and operating effectively.
Antibribery and anticorruption policy enforcement processes include Operating an internal whistleblowing and hotline system Disclosure of gifts or other benefit including hospitality offered to or received by the Bank personnel Voluntary disclosure of corrupt conduct Third party screening to identify the level of risk third parties might pose Informing the bankspartnerscounterparties about anticorruption and antibribery principles before commencement of business relations Ensuring that antibribery and anticorruption clauses are incorporated in the agreements with customers and third parties Ensuring that antibribery and anticorruption matters are included in contractual agreements with partners counterparties Online training programs aiming raising awareness in corruption and bribery issues among employees As part of the Groups third party screening to identify the level of risk the third parties might pose the Group carries out the following due diligence processes indirect investigations which includes general research of the activities undertaken by the proposed business partners their reputation and information whether the company is a related party.
OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH AND SAFETY Ensuring the safety of the workplace and providing healthy working conditions are among the Groups fundamental HR management principles.
The Group pays particular attention to preventive measures such as conducting regular staff training and medical checkups certifying workplaces and promoting a healthy lifestyle.
In order to enhance the awareness of employees and contractors regarding health and safety risks associated with construction work the company conducts regular training and educational seminars.
In 2015 2016 and 2017 the number of health and safety training hours amounted to approximately 110 70 and 86 respectively.
Real Estate publishes brochures and booklets with warnings and special rules to be followed when working on sites.
Respective control procedures include quarterly audits by external health and safety consultants and internal monthly inspections of m Real Estate worksites.
In addition m has a comprehensive reporting procedure for health and safety concerns.
With regard to emergency preparedness and response m follows an Emergency Management Plan.
This outlines possible scenarios during emergency situations and determines specific strategies for the companys employees contractors and visitors on how to react when in a crisis situation.
ENVIRONMENTAL MATTERS The Group recognises that its operations have both an indirect and direct impact on the environment and therefore seeks to establish management approaches which will help it become a more environmentallyfriendly institution.
Being the leading financial institution in Georgia the Bank through the projects it finances produces significant indirect impacts on the environment.
In order to properly manage this impact the Bank has implemented Environmental and Social Policy and Risk Management procedures as detailed in the Social matters section.
As for the direct environmental impact we believe that the impact of the banking and insurance businesses is not significant.
Nevertheless we undertake a number of measures to reduce electricity paper water and fuel consumption.
Green Boxes are placed on every floor of the Banks headquarters and are designated to collect paper for recycling purposes.
In 2017 the lighting system in all of the Banks service centres was replaced with energy efficient LED lamps which consume far less electricity than traditional economical ones.
30W lamps were replaced with more energy efficient 12W lamps and 4060W light bulbs with 11W.
Furthermore installation of modern computer technology resulted in reduction of energy consumption from 500800W per unit to 150300W.
Centralised uninterruptible power supply is being installed in the Banks service centres which will save considerable energy resources compared to individual systems.
The most significant direct impact on the environment within the Group is created by our real estate development business m Real Estate.
The company addresses industry specific environmental issues and undertakes appropriate measures to manage them.
The companys projects are constructed with impeccable attention to energy efficient design for sustainable development which achieves energy savings over the long term.
Aiming to increase efficient use of energy water and materials m installs energy efficient lighting systems and uses low emissivity window glasses and other modern insulation materials to cover a facade of the buildings.
This reduces a Uvalue of constructed buildings to 0.21Wm
As a result it is expected that utility costs in these buildings will be cut by up to 43% compared to average residential buildings in Georgia.
GGU is currently in the process of implementing an Environmental and Social Management System ESMS in accordance with the roadmap schedule presented in the Environmental and Social Policy Framework adopted by the company in 2016.
ESMS is in compliance with the Georgian legislation and IFC performance standards Environmental Health and Safety guidelines for Water and Sanitation.
As part of the ESMS environmental and social audit of the company has been performed.
The audit report covers the environmental issues that are mainly associated with water treatment water distribution sanitation sewerage system and wastewater treatment and discharge as well as occupational health and safety issues related to accidents and injuries chemical exposure noise etc.
To manage and mitigate the risks associated with GGUs business the company has elaborated ESMS procedures and topical management plans which are implemented according to the Environmental and Social Action Plan ESAP in the set timeframe.
ESMS will facilitate the process of obtaining the ISO14000 standard for environmental management and the ISO26000 standard for social responsibility.
GHGs most significant environmental impact is associated with the generation of medical waste.
The company developed medical waste management record keeping standards.
GHGs personnel is responsible for filling out daily and weekly forms such as waste registration form waste information form and hazardous waste transportation form.
Special storing rooms were set up in GHGs hospitals to place waste before final disposal.
To prevent human and environmental harm the companys clinics collect and dispose of medical and biological waste through an outsourced service specialising in medical waste disposal.
For waste collection GHG uses plastic bags that have sufficient strength and are secured with staples to safely retain waste.
Also the company does not fill more than twothirds of the bags capacity.
Further steam sterilisation is used to decontaminate biological and bio hazardous waste including blood.
All used sharps are placed only in the labelled hermetic singleuse special containers made of hard plastic.
Waste is collected from GHGs sites daily or twice a day when required.
The maximum onsite storage time of waste is up to 24 hours.
METHODOLOGY
We have reported on all of the emission sources required under the Companies Act 2006 Strategic Report and Directors Report Regulations 2013 Scopes 1 and 2 and additionally have reported on those emissions under Scope 3 that are applicable to our business.
All reported sources fall within our Consolidated Financial Statements which can be found on pages 118 to 212.
We do not have responsibility for any emission sources that are not included in our Consolidated Financial
In preparing our emissions data we have used the World Resources InstituteWorld Business Council for Sustainable Development WRIWBCSD Greenhouse Gas Protocol A Corporate Accounting and Reporting Standard revised edition and emissions factors from the UK Governments Greenhouse Gas Conversion Factors for Company Reporting 2016.
For wastewater treatment and discharge operations we used conversion factors from 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories.
RESOURCES AND RESPONSIBILITIES CONTINUED 51 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
Our reported data is collected and reported on in respect of six of the Groups main businesses Banking represented by the Bank which includes all of its offices and retail branches where the Bank has operational control Real estate development represented by m Real Estate which includes its offices and construction sites Utility and energy business represented by Georgia Global Utilities which includes all of its offices and operational sites PandC insurance represented by Aldagi which includes all of its offices and retail branches where the company has operational control Beverage business represented by Teliani Valley which includes all of its offices and operational sites Georgia Healthcare Group represented by Evex and Imedi L which includes its main office and hospitals where the company has operational control Scope 1 combustion of fuel and operation of facilities includes emissions from Combustion of natural gas diesel and petrol in stationary equipment at owned and controlled sites Combustion of petrol diesel and aviation fuel in owned transportation devices cars and aeroplanes Scope 2 electricity heat steam and cooling purchased for own use includes emissions from Used electricity at owned and controlled sites to calculate the emissions we used the conversion factor for NonOECD Europe and Eurasia average conversion from the UK Governments Greenhouse Gas Conversion Factors for Company Reporting 2014 Used heat and steam only applies to one site of Imedi L Scope 3 includes emissions from Air business travel short haul and long haul information on the class of travel is unavailable hence we used an average passenger conversion factor Ground transportation including taxis coaches and car hire Data on emissions resulting from travel is reported for businessrelated travel only and excludes commuting travel.
Data from joint ventures investments or subleased properties have not been included within the reported figures.
The data is provided by onsite delegates invoices and metre readings.
GROUP POLICIES The Group has in place a Code of Ethics as well as policies which relate to environmental matters employees social matters our respect for human rights and anticorruption and bribery.
Copies of these polices can be found on the Groups website httpsitepageid69policies Due to the nature of their operations GHG GGU and Teliani contributed to the increase in greenhouse gas emissions in 2017.
Environmental aspect Preventive measures Dust  Introducing speed limits on unmade roads Damping down using water bowsers with spray bars Sheeting of construction materials and storage piles Using defined moving routes and reducing vehicle speed limits where required Spills and leaks during refuelling Installing a sealed drainage system at refuelling areas Providing suitable tanks e.
Using drip trays for static plant e.
Training staff in refuelling and pump operations Shortening the refuelling line as much as possible Performing regular maintenance checks of hoses and valves Conducting followup procedures for proper and safe refuelling by operators Air emissions purchase  Ensuring that new vehicles comply with the current European Union EU emissions standards at the time of purchase Implementing a regular maintenance programme to ensure all new vehicles continue to comply with relevant emissions standards Ensuring that older vehicles are maintained in order to eliminate extra emissions as much as reasonably practicable Strictly enforcing speed limits in order to optimise fuel consumption and production of exhaust fumes and minimise dust generation on unpaved surfaces Water contamination  Locating fuel stores and refuelling points further away from watercourses and aquifers Fire  Providing a fire extinguisher adjacent to each item of mobile plant and equipment Noise  Fitting effective silencers at all plant and machinery and providing ear defenders andor plugs on sites No idling or revving of plant enginesvehicles Using controlled venting silenced equipment and absorbing screens Working at preferred times of day daylight hours Monday to Saturday otherwise communicated to the local community and authorities Vibration  Operating the equipment within the manufacturer specification limits and limiting any overuse Depletion of the stratospheric ozone layer Ensuring that no ozone depleting substances ODS such as chlorofluorocarbons CFCs and hydro chlorofluorocarbons HCFCs or products with known global warming potential are used TOTAL GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS DATA FOR THE PERIOD BEGINNING 1 JANUARY 2017 AND ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 TONNES OF CO tel Scope 1 emissions fuel combustion and facility operations 6679 10567 19165 Scope 2 emissions from electricity heat steam and cooling purchased for own use 12183 30826 47869 Scope 3 emissions from air travel and ground transportation 4487 10266 16229 TOTAL GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS 23349 51660 83264 FTEs 15955 21278 25900 TOTAL GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS PER FTE 1.46 2.43 3.21 52 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC OVERVIEW OF FINANCIAL RESULTS Record annual results driven by strong performance across all businesses In its final year before the forthcoming demerger supported by the continued macroeconomic performance of Georgia BGEO Group has delivered another year of strong earnings momentum.
Growth and returns in both the Banking Business and the Investment Businesses now renamed Georgia Capital continue to be high.
Following the completion of the demerger we are confident both companies are independently extremely well positioned to continue their excellent recent track record for many years to come.
In line with IFRS requirements the Group reviewed the classification of its operating segments at 31 December 2017.
Given the expectation in line with Georgia Capitals strategy it is highly probable the Group will own less than a 50% stake in GHG at the end of 2018.
As a result and in line with IFRS the Group classified GHG as disposal group held for sale and its results of operations are reported under discontinued operations line as a single amount in the consolidated income statement.
Comparative periods have been restated accordingly to reflect reclassification of GHG from continuing operations into discontinued operations.
Assets and liabilities held by GHG are also presented separately in the consolidated balance sheet as of 31 December 2017 under assets of disposal group held for sale and liabilities of disposal group held for sale.
INCOME STATEMENT BGEO Consolidated GEL thousands unless otherwise noted 2017 2016
Net banking interest income 672535 548121 22.7% Net fee and commission income 130050 122477 6.2% Net banking foreign currency gain 79106 89480 11.6% Net other banking income 18645 10667 74.8% Gross insurance profit 27265 24569 11.0% Gross real estate profit 34390 18485 86.0% Gross utility and energy profit 88010 38541 128.4% Gross other investment profit 30630 21288 43.9% REVENUE 1080631 873628 23.7% OPERATING EXPENSES 413045 322806 28.0% OPERATING INCOME BEFORE COST OF CREDIT RISKEBITDA 667586 550822 21.2% Profit from associates 1311 4074 67.8% Depreciation and amortisation of investment business 28235 10062 NMF Net foreign currency loss from investment business 4937 3134 57.5% Interest income from investment business 5415 3745 44.6% Interest expense from investment business 29660 11220 NMF OPERATING INCOME BEFORE COST OF CREDIT RISK 611480 534225 14.5% Cost of credit risk 170711 168756 1.2% PROFIT BEFORE NONRECURRING ITEMS AND INCOME TAX 440769 365469 20.6% Net nonrecurring items 4923 12682 61.2% PROFIT BEFORE INCOME TAX EXPENSE BENEFIT 435846 352787 23.5% Income tax expense benefit 32340 17500 NMF PROFIT FROM CONTINUING OPERATIONS 403506 370287 9.0% Profit from discontinued operations 59943 58289 2.8% PROFIT 463449 428576 8.1% EARNINGS PER SHARE BASIC 11.61 10.41 11.5% EARNINGS PER SHARE DILUTED 11.07 10.09 9.7% BALANCE SHEET BGEO Consolidated GEL thousands unless otherwise noted Dec17 Dec16
Liquid assets 4373251 3914596 11.7% Cash and cash equivalents 1582435 1573610 0.6% Amounts due from credit institutions 1225947 1054983 16.2% Investment securities 1564869 1286003 21.7% Loans to customers and finance lease receivables 7690450 6648482 15.7% Property and equipment 988436 1288594 23.3% Assets of disposal group held for sale 1136417  NMF TOTAL ASSETS 15168669 12954176 17.1% Client deposits and notes 6712482 5382698 24.7% Amounts due to credit institutions 3155839 3470091 9.1% Borrowings from DFI 1624347 1403120 15.8% Shortterm loans from NBG 793528 1085640 26.9% Loans and deposits from commercial banks 737964 981331 24.8% Debt securities issued 1709152 1255643 36.1% Liabilities of disposal group held for sale 516663  NMF TOTAL LIABILITIES 12436299 10565963 17.7% TOTAL EQUITY 2732370 2388213 14.4% The Group held 57% of GHGs equity stake as of 31 December 2017 65% as of 31 December 2016.
53 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
The Group delivered another extremely strong performance that resulted in record profit for the year of GEL 463 million and earnings per share of GEL 11.61 an increase of 11.5% yearonyear.
This strength reflects an excellent performance from our Banking Business as well as growth momentum and strategic delivery from our Investment Businesses which were supported by Georgias strong macroeconomic performance and business outlook.
Strong economic activity in Georgia has continued.
Georgian economic growth has accelerated to 4.8% in 2017 from 2.8% in Holding company liquidity remains high.
As of 31 December 2017 liquid assets of GEL 310 million were held at the holding company level Solid distributions to shareholders continue.
US39.1 million capital was returned to shareholders during 2017 BANKING BUSINESS HIGHLIGHTS OUTSTANDING PROFITABILITY AND BALANCE SHEET GROWTH MOMENTUM The Banking Business generated a record profit of GEL 369.5 million in 2017 up 25.0% yoy while ROAE reached 25.2% in 2017 up 300 bps yoy Asset quality improved during 2017.
NPLs to gross loans ratio decreased to 3.8% at 31 December 2017 4.2% at 31 December 2016.
NPL coverage ratio was strong at 92.7% at 31 December 2017 86.7% at 31 December 2016 while the NPL coverage ratio adjusted for discounted value of collateral stood at 130.6% at 31 December 2017 132.1% at 31 December 2016.
The asset quality improvement positively impacted the cost of risk ratio which stood at 2.2% in 2017 2.7% in 2016 Retail Banking RB continued to deliver strong growth across all its business lines.
Retail Banking revenue reached GEL 614.7 million in 2017 up 24.4% yoy.
The number of Retail Banking clients reached 2.3 million at the end of 2017 up 8.1% from 2.1 million at the end of 2016 Our Retail Banking product to client ratio increased to 2.2 in 2017 from 2.0 in 2016.
In 4Q17 we completed the transformation of our Retail Banking operations from a productbased model into a clientcentric model as well as the implementation of the clientcentric model in our branches.
As of 31 December 2017 we had 86 transformed branches.
We continue to see outstanding growth in sales volumes and the number of products sold to our clients in these branches contributing to 29.3% yoy growth in the retail loan book The loan book growth on a constant currency basis reached 17.4% at 31 December 2017.
As a result Retail Bankings loan book share in the total loan portfolio was 68.0% at 31 December 2017 60.9% at 31 December 2016.
The Retail Banking net loan book reached GEL 5044 million at 31 December 2017 up 29.3% yoy.
The growth on a constant currency basis was 30.6% yoy Retail Banking client deposits increased to GEL 3267.3 million at 31 December 2017 up 35.4% yoy.
Growth on a constantcurrency basis was 37.4% yoy Corporate Investment Banking CIB resumed growth in 4Q17 after delivering on its risk deconcentration and loan portfolio repositioning targets in 3Q17.
CIBs net loan book amounted to GEL 2260.1 million at 31 December 2017 down 5.6% yoy but up 13.4% qoq.
The top ten CIB client exposure was 10.7% at 31 December 2017 down from 11.8% at 31 December 2016.
Consequently CIBs profit increased to GEL 105.9 million in 2017 up 19.9% yoy and CIB ROAE reached 17.6% in 2017 up from 14.7% in 2016 Investment Managements Assets Under Management AUM increased to GEL 1857.5 million up 17.9% yoy reflecting higher bond issuance activity by our brokerage arm Galt and Taggart IFRS 9 implementation delivered  no impact on capital adequacy ratios.
The Group has completed its IFRS 9 implementation programme and adopted IFRS 9 Financial Instruments from 1 January 2018.
The Banking Business will recognise the estimated impact from IFRS 9 adoption of approximately GEL 31.5 million gross of income tax as a reduction to shareholders equity at the transition date on 1 January 2018.
As allowed by IFRS 9 the Group will not be restating priorperiod data.
IFRS 9 does not have any impact on regulatory capital and capital adequacy ratios.
Throughthecycle cost of risk is expected to remain unchanged.
NPL coverage ratio adjusted for additional IFRS 9 allowance was 102.9% as at 31 December 2017 Amendments to Capital Adequacy requirements.
In order to transition to Basel III the National Bank of Georgia NBG introduced new capital adequacy requirements in December 2017.
As a result of the changes Bank of Georgia became subject to the following minimum capital requirements at 31 December 2017 Common Equity Tier 1 ratio 8.1% expected to increase to 9.5% on 31 December 2018 Tier 1 ratio 9.9% expected to increase to 11.4% on 31 December 2018 Total Capital ratio 12.4% expected to increase to 16.0% on 31 December At 31 December 2017 both of Bank of Georgias Common Equity Tier 1 and Tier 1 ratios were 12.4% while Total Capital ratio was 17.9%.
Transition to Basel III is not expected to affect the Banks growth prospects or its ability to maintain dividend distributions within the existing dividend policy payout range.
54 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC OVERVIEW OF FINANCIAL RESULTS CONTINUED INVESTMENT BUSINESS HIGHLIGHTS Our utility and energy business GGU delivered a stable performance in 2017.
GGU continued its investments in water pipeline infrastructure leading to continued growth in the regulated asset base and reduction of the respective water losses.
Due to successfully implemented efficiency projects GGU was able to significantly reduce its own electricity consumption in 2017.
GGU also continued the construction works on the 50MW Mestiachala HPPs in NorthWestern Georgia while the 44.3MW Zoti HPPs entered their construction phase In December 2017 the Georgian National Energy and Water Supply Regulatory Commission GNERC approved new tariffs for water and wastewater services which have been updated according to the new Regulatory Asset Base methodology adopted by GNERC in August 2017.
The new tariffs have been set for a threeyear regulatory period effective from 1 January 2018.
As a result tariffs in Tbilisi have increased by 23.8% for residential customers and decreased by 0.4% for legal entities Our real estate business m achieved the best sales performance in its history during 2017.
2017 was recordbreaking for in terms of square metres sold number of apartments sold and sales revenue. sales value of US 34.4 million in 2016.
In 2017 m signed its largest ever franchise agreement as part of its asset light strategy and will construct and develop a residential complex under the m brand name on a thirdparty land plot to generate construction fees sales commissions and a share from the projects overall profit In 2017 m acquired a controlling stake in an upcoming lifestyle boutique hotel in a prime location of Tbilisi which is expected to add at least 100 rooms to m s portfolio and is expected to complete in the first quarter of 2019.
The acquisition is in line with m s strategy to increase its presence in the hospitality sector and capitalise on growing tourist activities in the country In 2017 m s construction arm was awarded its first major thirdparty construction agreement to construct the shell and core of a new shopping mall and business centre located in Tbilisi.
The total amount of the contract is US 11.6 million and completion is planned for the first half of 2019 Aldagi delivered its best ever year as it continued organic growth primarily in the motor insurance property insurance and credit life lines as Aldagi shifted its focus more to the retail market.
New product development initiatives and enhancements of existing products resulted in more than 19000 livestock insurance policies and 3334 travel and trip insurance policies sold across the country in 2017 In 2017 Aldagi signed major thirdparty partnership agreements with two Georgian banks JSC Liberty Bank and JSC Credo Bank to successfully diversify its multichannel distribution network which will enable Aldagi to successfully tap into Georgias underpenetrated retail insurance segment Our beverage business Teliani achieved significant milestones during 2017 and launched its mainstream beer and lemonade production in June 2017 and August 2017 respectively.
Teliani is on track to brew Heineken and Krusovice beers in 2018 under a tenyear exclusive license agreement to produce Heineken brands in Georgia and to sell into the Caucasus region countries.
Teliani also continued to diversify its distribution portfolio with the addition of the exclusive right to import and distribute Lavazza coffee in Georgia and winning other nonalcoholic beverage distribution contracts in 2017 In February 2018 we acquired a 100% equity stake in a leading Georgian craft beer producer Black Lion LLC Black
Black Lion is the largest producer of a premium class craft beer in Georgia that launched sales in the beginning of 2016 and sold approximately 300000 litres of craft beer in 2017 primarily targeting restaurants and bars in Tbilisi Our healthcare business GHG continued to deliver on its strategic priorities across its businesses.
Healthcare services EBITDA margin continued to be high at 26.4% in 2017 notwithstanding the dilutive effect of the significant rollout of the two major hospital renovations and the ongoing rollout of a nationwide chain of polyclinics outpatient clinics.
In the pharmacy business we have made significant progress towards the integration of our two recently acquired businesses whilst avoiding any significant business disruption.
As a result the EBITDA margin of 8.6% for the year has already successfully exceeded our target of more than 8% margin In January 2018 GHGs medical insurance arm signed a new medical insurance agreement with the Georgian Ministry of Internal Affairs the countrys largest insurance client by number of insured customers of c.65000.
As a result the number of GHGs insured individuals reached approximately 155000 55 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
Discussion of Banking Business results The Groups Banking Business is primarily comprised of three segments.
1 Retail Banking operations in Georgia principally provide consumer loans mortgage loans overdrafts credit cards and other credit facilities funds transfer and settlement services and handling customers deposits for both individuals as well as legal entities.
Retail Banking targets the emerging retail mass retail and mass affluent segments together with small and medium enterprises and micro businesses.
2 Corporate Investment Banking comprises Corporate Banking and Investment Management operations in Georgia.
Corporate Banking principally provides loans and other credit facilities funds transfers and settlement services trade finance services documentary operations support and handles saving and term deposits for corporate and institutional customers.
The Investment Management business principally provides private banking services to high networth clients.
3 BNB comprising JSC Belarusky Narodny Bank principally provides retail and corporate banking services to clients in Belarus.
REVENUE
GEL thousands unless otherwise noted 2017 2016
Banking interest income 1140292 932063 22.3% Banking interest expense 468192 378452 23.7% NET BANKING INTEREST INCOME 672100 553611 21.4% Fee and commission income 192499 172630 11.5% Fee and commission expense 61025 47720 27.9% NET FEE AND COMMISSION INCOME 131474 124910 5.3% Net banking foreign currency gain 86060 83203 3.4% Net other banking income 19701 12183 61.7% REVENUE 909335 773907 17.5% Net Interest Margin 7.3% 7.4% Average interest earning assets 9234600 7441186 24.1% Average interest bearing liabilities 9922414 7984426 24.3% Average net loans and finance lease receivables currency blended 6856802 5640611 21.6% Average net loans and finance lease receivables GEL 2414121 1592987 51.5% Average net loans and finance lease receivables FC 4442681 4047624 9.8% Average client deposits and notes currency blended 6146052 5040486 21.9% Average client deposits and notes GEL 1706726 1243028 37.3% Average client deposits and notes FC 4439326 3797458 16.9% Average liquid assets currency blended 3854019 3099731 24.3% Average liquid assets GEL 1527420 1205982 26.7% Average liquid assets FC 2326599 1893749 22.9% Excess liquidity NBG 289942 418016 30.6% Liquid assets yield currency blended 3.4% 3.2% Liquid assets yield GEL 7.1% 7.3% Liquid assets yield FC 0.9% 0.5% Loan yield currency blended 14.2% 14.2% Loan yield GEL 21.9% 23.3% Loan yield FC 10.0% 10.6% Cost of Funds currency blended 4.7% 4.7% Cost of Funds GEL 6.9% 6.5% Cost of Funds FC 3.7% 4.2% CostIncome 37.7% 37.7%
PERFORMANCE HIGHLIGHTS
In the Banking Business 2017 was characterised by strong franchise growth in the Retail Banking operations particularly in the fourth quarter reflecting the continued strong performance of our business in all segments and an increase in retail lending.
In addition we completed our threeyear programme to reduce concentration risk in the Corporate Investment Banking and consequently started to deliver corporate lending growth in the last quarter of the year.
Strong Banking Business revenue.
We recorded revenue of GEL 909.3 million up 17.5% yoy.
Yoy revenue growth in 2017 was primarily driven by a strong increase in net banking interest income which resulted from strong loan book growth and increase in net other banking income.
Additionally net fee and commission income contributed to increase of Banking Business revenues in 2017 Net banking interest income.
Our net banking interest income was up 21.4% yoy in 2017.
The increase was primarily driven by the strong growth of our Retail Banking loan book which experienced 30.6% constant currency growth during 2017 Our NIM was 7.3% in 2017.
While both loan yield and cost of funds stayed flat and liquid assets yield was up 20 bps compared to 2016 NIM was down 10 bps yoy as a result of the NBGs decision in 2Q16 mandating an increase in minimum reserve requirements Loan yield.
Currency blended loan yield was stable at 14.2% in 2017 flat yoy.
While local and foreign currency loan yields decreased yoy the overall stable trend in the loan yield primarily reflected a continued shift towards highyielding local currency denominated loans in the total loan portfolio mix Liquid assets yield.
Our liquid assets yield was 3.4% in 2017 up 20bps yoy.
The foreign currency denominated liquid assets yield increased by 40pbs yoy in 2017 as a result of the US Federal Reserves decisions in December 2016 March 2017 and June 2017 to raise interest rates by 75 bps in aggregate which triggered similar increases on interest rates paid by a The National Bank of Georgia the NBG on the Banks obligatory reserves foreign currency only and b correspondent banks on deposits placed by the Bank.
On the other hand local currency denominated liquid assets yield decreased by 20 bps yoy in 2017.
The currency blended liquid assets yield increased only by 20 bps yoy in 2017 on the back of decreasing yields on higher return local currency denominated liquid assets while the total liquid assets portfolio composition remained largely the same during the period 56 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC OVERVIEW OF FINANCIAL RESULTS CONTINUED GEL thousands unless otherwise noted 2017 2016 Change yoy NONPERFORMING LOANS NPLs 301268 294787 2.2% NPLs to gross loans 3.8% 4.2% NPLs to gross loans RB 1.3% 1.4% NPLs to gross loans CIB 7.5% 8.0% NPL coverage ratio 92.7% 86.7% NPL coverage ratio adjusted for the discounted value of collateral 130.6% 132.1% PAST DUE DATES Retail loans  15 days past due rate 0.9% 1.2% Mortgage loans  15 days past due rate 0.6% 0.6% Cost of funds.
Cost of funds stood at 4.7% in 2017 flat yoy.
Despite the significant increase in cost of debt securities issued in 2017 following the issuance of GEL 500 million 11.0% Laridenominated notes in 2Q17 up 60bps yoy in 2017 cost of funds remained largely flat as a result of a decrease in the cost of client deposits and notes down 30 bps yoy in 2017 Continued shift to the GELdenominated loan book which increased to 38.3% of the total book at 31 December 2017 compared to 28.7% a year ago.
The dollarisation of our loan book has decreased since last year as the demand for local currency denominated loans outpaced the demand for foreign currency denominated loans.
The trend was supported by the Georgian Governments dedollarisation initiatives a a oneoff programme effective from 15 January 2017 to 25 March 2017 allowing qualified borrowers to convert eligible Dollardenominated loans into GEL at a discount compensated by the Government at the clients election and b a new regulation effective from 15 January 2017 restricting issuance of new loans in foreign currency with amounts less than GEL 100000 equivalent Net loans to customer funds and DFI ratio.
Customer funds client deposits and notes increased by 23.0% yoy to GEL 7078.1 million driven by strong deposit generation in both the Retail and Corporate Investment Banking operations.
Retail Banking client deposits and notes grew by 35.4% yoy to GEL 3267.3 million while CIB client deposits grew by 13.0% yoy to GEL 3457.3 million.
As a result our Net loans to customer funds and DFI ratio which is closely monitored by management remained strong at 92.4% 94.9% at 31 December 2016 despite the strong growth of the loan book Net fee and commission income.
Net fee and commission income performance is mainly driven by the strong performance in our settlement operations supported by the success of our Express Banking franchise.
This was partially offset by a decline in CIBs fees from guarantees and letters of credit reflecting the deconcentration of our corporate risk Net banking foreign currency gain.
In line with the volatility of the GEL exchange rate the net banking foreign currency gain was up 3.4% yoy in 2017.
RB and CIB businesses together contributed 87.4% to the total 2017 net banking foreign currency gain Net other banking income.
Net other banking income increased to GEL 19.7 million in 2017 up 61.7% yoy.
The yoy increase in 2017 was largely driven by a GEL 1.5 million net gains on derivative financial instruments recorded in 2017 and b GEL 7.3 million revaluation gain from investment properties recorded in 2017 OPERATING INCOME BEFORE NONRECURRING ITEMS COST OF CREDIT RISK PROFIT FOR THE PERIOD GEL thousands unless otherwise noted 2017 2016 Change yoy Salaries and other employee benefits 198213 168374 17.7% Administrative expenses 100291 82113 22.1% Banking depreciation and amortisation 40974 37207 10.1% Other operating expenses 3458 3854 10.3% OPERATING EXPENSES 342936 291548 17.6% Profit from associate 1311  NMF OPERATING INCOME BEFORE COST OF CREDIT RISK 567710 482359 17.7% Impairment charge on loans to customers 155210 158892 2.3% Impairment charge on finance lease receivables 496 777 36.2% Impairment charge on other assets and provisions 11590 8083 43.4% COST OF CREDIT RISK 167296 167752 0.3% PROFIT BEFORE NONRECURRING ITEMS AND INCOME TAX 400414 314607 27.3% Net nonrecurring items 4300 45355 90.5% PROFIT BEFORE INCOME TAX 396114 269252 47.1% Income tax expense benefit 26592 26444 NMF PROFIT 369522 295696 25.0% Operating expenses increased to GEL 342.9 million in 2017 up 17.6% yoy.
The growth in operating expenses minimally outpaced growth in revenues and consequently yoy operating leverage was negative in 2017 at 0.1 percentage points.
2017 yoy changes in operating expenses were driven by an increase in salaries and employee benefits by 17.7% yoy in 2017 which mainly reflects the strong organic growth of Retail Banking operations and an increase in administrative expenses by 22.1% yoy in 2017 primarily driven by increased marketing personnel training rent and repair and maintenance costs.
The increase was attributable to the combined effect of the larger branch network and the higher average quarterly and annual exchange rate during 2017 as the vast majority of branch rental agreements are denominated in Dollars Cost of risk ratio.
The Banking Business cost of risk ratio was 2.2% down 50 bps yoy primarily driven by 160 bps decrease in the CIB cost of risk ratio driven by overall improvement in the CIB loan portfolio quality offset by 20 bps increase in the RB cost of risk ratio Quality of the Banking Business loan book remains strong as evidenced by the following closely monitored metrics 57 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
Income tax expense benefit.
The 2017 yoy movement in income taxes mostly reflects the impacts of changes in corporate taxation model approved by the Parliament of Georgia in May 2016 which resulted in the writeoff of Banking Business net deferred tax liabilities in 2016 BNB  the Groups banking subsidiary in Belarus  generated a profit of GEL 10.3 million in 2017 up from GEL 2.7 million in 2016.
BNBs earnings were positively impacted by decreased levels of cost of risk in 3Q17 and 4Q17.
While Belarus experienced weak macroeconomic conditions in 2016 and 1Q17 starting from 2Q17 the Belarus economy started to show early signs of stabilisation.
As a result BNBs cost of credit risk significantly improved in 2017 BNBs loan book reached GEL 399.5 million at 31 December 2017 up 10.3% yoy mostly reflecting an increase in corporate and consumer loans.
Client deposits were GEL 310.1 million at 31 December 2017 up 32.8% yoy.
The yoy increase in client deposits was primarily attributable to the agreement signed with BelSwissBank in June 2017 which allowed BNB to manage and service current and term deposit accounts and card operations of BelSwissBanks customers BNB continues to remain strongly capitalised with Capital Adequacy Ratios well above the requirements of its regulating Central Bank.
At 31 December 2017 total CAR was 13.9% well above the 10% minimum requirement of the National Bank of the Republic of Belarus NBRB while Tier I CAR was 8.1% above NBRBs 6% minimum requirement.
Return on Average Equity ROAE was 14.6% in 2017 2.8% in 2016.
Strong capitalisation and improved profitability allowed BNB to make a dividend payment in the amount of GEL 1.2 million in 3Q17 the first capital return to the Bank since the BNB acquisition in 2008 As a result the Banking Business profit reached GEL 369.5 million in 2017 up 25.0% yoy while ROAE increased to 25.2% in 2017 up 300 bps yoy Our Banking Business balance sheet remains highly liquid NBG Liquidity ratio of 34.4% and strongly capitalised Tier I ratio NBG Basel II of 10.3% and NBG Basel III of 12.4% with a well diversified funding base Client deposits and notes to total liabilities of 62.3%.
Liquidity.
Liquid assets increased to GEL 4346.5 million at 31 December 2017 up 17.3% yoy largely driven by proceeds from the GEL 500 million Laridenominated bonds in June 2017 and increase in local currency bonds which are used by the Bank as collateral for shortterm borrowings from the NBG.
Management successfully continued to deploy excess liquidity accumulated as a result of proceeds from issuance of local currency Eurobonds during the second half of the year.
As a result the NBG liquidity ratio stood at 34.4% at 31 December 2017 compared to 37.7% at 31 December 2016 and above the regulatory minimum requirement of 30.0% In addition in May 2017 NBG introduced a Liquidity Coverage Ratio requirement for commercial banks which became effective from 1 September 2017.
Banks are required to maintain a liquidity coverage ratio which is defined as the ratio of high quality liquid assets to net cash outflow over the next 30 days.
The ratio should be in excess of 100% for assets denominated in all currencies cumulatively at all times.
In addition liquidity coverage ratio is applicable to local and foreign currency denominated assets separately and should be in excess of 75% and 100% respectively at all times.
NBG liquidity coverage ratio was 112.4% at 31 December 2017 129.8% at 30 September 2017 Diversified funding base.
Debt securities issued grew by 61.6% yoy primarily due to the issuance of GEL 500 million Laridenominated bonds in June 2017 which positively contributed to GEL liquidity allowing the Banking Business to significantly reduce shortterm borrowings from the NBG down 26.9% yoy Loan book.
Our net loan book and finance lease receivables reached GEL 7741.4 million at 31 December 2017 up 15.9% yoy.
As of 31 December 2017 retail book represented 68.0% of the total loan portfolio 60.9% at 31 December 2016.
While both local and foreign currency portfolios experienced yoy growth the local currency loan portfolio demonstrated an outstanding increase of 54.6% yoy partially driven by the Georgian Governments dedollarisation initiatives and our goal to increase the share of local currency loans in our portfolio BANKING BUSINESS BALANCE SHEET HIGHLIGHTS GEL thousands unless otherwise noted Dec17 Dec16 Change yoy Liquid assets 4346509 3705171 17.3% Liquid assets GEL 1791708 1450269 23.5% Liquid assets FC 2554801 2254902 13.3% Net loans and finance lease receivables 7741420 6681672 15.9% Net loans and finance lease receivables GEL 2968832 1920422 54.6% Net loans and finance lease receivables FC 4772588 4761250 0.2% Client deposits and notes 7078058 5755767 23.0% Amounts due to credit institutions 2778338 3067651 9.4% Borrowings from DFIs 1297749 1281798 1.2% Shortterm loans from central banks 793528 1085640 26.9% Loans and deposits from commercial banks 687061 700213 1.9% Debt securities issued 1386412 858036 61.6% LIQUIDITY AND CAR RATIOS Net loansclient deposits and notes 109.4% 116.1% Net loansclient deposits and notes  DFIs 92.4% 94.9% Liquid assets as percent of total assets 33.7% 33.3% Liquid assets as percent of total liabilities 38.3% 37.9% NBG liquidity ratio 34.4% 37.7% Excess liquidity NBG 289942 418016 30.6% NBG Basel II Tier I Capital Adequacy Ratio 10.3% 9.1% NBG Basel II Total Capital Adequacy Ratio 14.8% 14.4% NBG Basel III Tier I Capital Adequacy Ratio 12.4% NBG Basel III Total Capital Adequacy Ratio 17.9%  58 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC OVERVIEW OF FINANCIAL RESULTS CONTINUED In 2017 we changed the Group accounting policy in relation to subsequent measurement for office buildings and service centres.
Effective
31 December 2017 we switched to the cost model whereby office buildings and service centres are carried at cost less accumulated depreciation and accumulated impairment.
Prior to this change we applied the revaluation model where office buildings and service centres were carried at their fair value less any subsequent accumulated depreciation and subsequent accumulated impairment losses.
Valuations were performed once every three years.
We believe that cost model provides more reliable and more meaningful presentation to our investors as it 1 enhances comparability for the investors since the application of cost model is a market practice and global standard across the banking industry 2 more closely aligns the accounting with the business model around these asset categories.
The switch to cost model resulted in GEL 33.3 million decrease to Banking Business equity attributable to shareholders.
We have accordingly restated the balance sheet accounts for affected periods while the change did not have any material impact on the income statement.
Banking Business ratios have been updated for the prior periods.
On 13 September 2017 Moodys upgraded JSC Bank of Georgias localcurrency deposit rating to Ba2 from Ba3 and the Banks foreign currency deposit rating to Ba3 from B1.
The Banks senior unsecured foreigncurrency rating was also upgraded to Ba2 from Ba3 with a stable outlook.
The Banks credit rating action followed Moodys upgrade of Georgias sovereign local and foreign currency issuer ratings to Ba2 from Ba3 on 11 September 2017.
Amendments to Capital Adequacy requirements.
To transition to Basel III National Bank of Georgia NBG introduced new capital adequacy requirements in December 2017.
Bank of Georgia is required to maintain the following minimum capital requirements Common Equity Tier 1 CET 1 ratio at 4.5% Tier 1 ratio at 6% Total Capital ratio at 8% The combined buffer requirement has also been introduced and Bank of Georgia is required to hold the following Capital Conservation Buffer set at 2.5% Countercyclical Buffer set at 0% Systemic Capital Buffer of 0% for 2018 which will increase to 1% on 31 December 2018 and by an additional 0.5% annually until it reaches 2.5% on 31 December 2021 NBG also introduced Pillar 2 requirements.
The new regulation applicable to Bank of Georgia includes Currency Induced Credit Risk CICR buffer which substitutes current additional 75% weighting of FX denominated exposure.
A 56% of CICR buffer should be held on CET1 level 75% on Tier 1 level and 100% on total capital Net GRAPE buffer expected to be set at 2.2% according to NBGs annual General Risk Assessment Program GRAPE.
The GRAPE buffer will be reviewed annually and phasedin on different levels of capital according to the below schedule Feb18 31Dec18 31Dec19 31Dec20 31Dec21 CET 1 0% 15% 30% 45% 56% Tier 1 0% 20% 40% 60% 75% Total Capital 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% Credit Portfolio Concentration buffer effective from 1 April 2018 and phased in over the four year period on different levels of capital according to the above schedule Net Stress Test buffer effective from 1 January 2020 In view of the above the following overall capital requirements apply to Bank of Georgia at 31 December 2017 CET 1 ratio 8.1% expected to increase to 9.5% on 31 December 2018 Tier 1 ratio 9.9% expected to increase to 11.4% on 31 December 2018 Total Capital ratio 12.4% expected to increase to 16.0% on 31 December 2018 Bank of Georgias capital ratios calculated as of 31 December 2017 were at 12.4% CET1 and Tier 1 and 17.9% Total Capital.
Transition to Basel III is not expected to affect the Banks growth prospects or its ability to maintain dividends distributions within the existing dividend policy payout range.
Indicated minimum Capital Adequacy Ratio contains CICR and Credit Portfolio Concentration buffers estimate for 31 December 2018.
59 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
RETAIL BANKING RB Retail Banking provides consumer loans mortgage loans overdrafts credit card facilities and other credit facilities as well as funds transfer and settlement services and the handling of customer deposits for both individuals and legal entities SME and micro businesses only.
RB is itself represented by the following four subsegments 1 the emerging retail segment through our Express brand 2 retail mass market segment 3 SME and micro businesses  MSME through our Bank of Georgia brand and 4 the mass affluent segment through our Solo brand.
INCOME STATEMENT HIGHLIGHTS GEL thousands unless otherwise noted 2017 2016 Change yoy Net banking interest income 480955 374022 28.6% Net fee and commission income 99790 90193 10.6% Net banking foreign currency gain 28937 26086 10.9% Net other banking income 5029 3833 31.2% REVENUE 614711 494134 24.4% Salaries and other employee benefits 125668 106396 18.1% Administrative expenses 72464 57743 25.5% Banking depreciation and amortisation 34741 30943 12.3% Other operating expenses 2279 2545 10.5% OPERATING EXPENSES 235152 197627 19.0% Profit from associate 1311  NMF OPERATING INCOME BEFORE COST OF CREDIT RISK 380870 296507 28.5% Cost of credit risk 110800 75690 46.4% PROFIT BEFORE NONRECURRING ITEMS AND INCOME TAX 270070 220817 22.3% Net nonrecurring items 2358 32002 92.6% PROFIT BEFORE INCOME TAX 267712 188815 41.8% Income tax expense benefit 18046 20475 NMF PROFIT 249666 209290 19.3% BALANCE SHEET HIGHLIGHTS GEL thousands unless otherwise noted 2017 2016 Change yoy Net loans currency blended 5044372 3902306 29.3% Net loans GEL 2582677 1530661 68.7% Net loans FC 2461695 2371645 3.8% Client deposits currency blended 3267276 2413569 35.4% Client deposits GEL 910878 603149 51.0% Client deposits FC 2356398 1810420 30.2% of which Time deposits currency blended 1829433 1437644 27.3% Time deposits GEL 361775 228047 58.6% Time deposits FC 1467658 1209597 21.3% Current accounts and demand deposits currency blended 1437843 975925 47.3% Current accounts and demand deposits GEL 549103 375102 46.4% Current accounts and demand deposits FC 888740 600823 47.9% BANKING BUSINESS SEGMENT RESULT DISCUSSION 60 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC KEY RATIOS 2017 2016 ROAE Retail Banking 31.6% 31.2% Net interest margin currency blended 8.5% 9.2% Cost of risk 2.5% 2.3% Cost of funds currency blended 5.7% 5.7% Loan yield currency blended 16.1% 16.8% Loan yield GEL 23.6% 25.4% Loan yield FC 9.1% 10.2% Cost of deposits currency blended 2.9% 3.3% Cost of deposits GEL 4.5% 4.5% Cost of deposits FC 2.3% 2.9% Cost of time deposits currency blended 4.3% 4.9% Cost of time deposits GEL 8.8% 9.3% Cost of time deposits FC 3.3% 4.0% Current accounts and demand deposits currency blended 1.0% 0.9% Current accounts and demand deposits GEL 1.6% 1.2% Current accounts and demand deposits FC 0.6% 0.6% Costincome ratio 38.3% 40.0%
PERFORMANCE HIGHLIGHTS
Retail Banking delivered another outstanding annual result across all of its segments and generated total revenue of GEL 614.7 million in 2017 up 24.4% yoy RBs net banking interest income experienced 28.6% yoy growth in 2017 as a result of the strong growth in the Retail Banking loan portfolio.
Higher net banking interest income also reflects the benefits from the increase in the local currency loan portfolio which generated 14.5 ppts higher yield than the foreign currency loan portfolio during 2017 The Retail Banking net loan book reached GEL 5044.4 million up 29.3% yoy.
Our local currency denominated loan book grew at a faster pace up 68.7% yoy than the foreign currency denominated loan book up 3.8% yoy.
As a result the loan book dollarisation decreased to 48.8% at 31 December 2017 from 60.8% at 31 December 2016 The loan book growth was a product of continued strong loan origination levels delivered across all major Retail Banking segments RETAIL BANKING LOAN BOOK BY PRODUCTS GEL thousands unless otherwise noted 2017 2016 Change yoy LOAN ORIGINATIONS Consumer loans 1384 1019 35.8% Mortgage loans 1062 718 48.0% Micro loans 1018 800 27.2% SME loans 594 509 16.6% POS loans 244 221 10.4% OUTSTANDING BALANCE Consumer loans 1242 887 40.1% Mortgage loans 1706 1228 39.0% Micro loans 1031 857 20.3% SME loans 607 490 23.9% POS loans 131 121 7.9% OVERVIEW OF FINANCIAL RESULTS CONTINUED Retail Banking client deposits increased to GEL 3267.3 million up 35.4% yoy despite a decrease in the cost of deposits of 40 bps yoy in 2017.
The dollarisation level of our deposits decreased to 72.1% at 31 December 2017 from 75.0% at 31 December 2016.
This is in line with the current decreasing trend of cost on FC denominated deposits down 60 bps yoy in 2017.
The spread between the cost of RBs client deposits in GEL and foreign currency widened to 2.2 ppts GEL 4.5% FC 2.3% compared to 1.6 ppts in 2016 GEL 4.5% FC 2.9%.
Local currency denominated deposits increased at a faster pace to GEL 910.9 million up 51.0% yoy as compared to foreign currency denominated deposits that grew to GEL 2356.4 million up 30.2% yoy Retail Banking NIM was 8.5% down 70 bps yoy.
The lower NIM was a result of a 70 bps decrease in loan yield as cost of funds remained flat in 2017 Strong growth in Retail Banking net fee and commission income.
The 10.6% yoy growth in 2017 was driven by an organic increase in our fee and commission income and the strong underlying growth in both our Express Banking and Solo platforms RB cost to income ratio remained well controlled at 38.3% in 2017 down 170 bps yoy.
The significant yoy improvement resulted from the increasing utilisation of our Solo lounges coupled with the growth of the Express Banking franchise which has the most costefficient model among our four Retail Banking segments RB cost of credit risk was GEL 110.8 million in 2017 up 46.4% yoy.
The cost of risk ratio was 2.5% in 2017 up from 2.3% in 2016 due to higher cost of risk levels in 1H17 mainly reflecting a an increased pace of loan growth in express and micro express loan portfolio during 1H17 which are characterised with the highest cost of risk ratios in the RBs loan portfolio and the highest loan yields and b impact from a major fire at one of the largest shopping centres located in downtown Tbilisi which destroyed the inventory of some of RBs Micro and SME clients and negatively affected their creditworthiness in 1Q17 The number of Retail Banking clients reached 2.3 million up 8.1% yoy while the number of total cards outstanding amounted to 2227000 up 8.3% yoy to deliver strong growth as we further develop our strategy as demonstrated by the following performance indicators Growth in the client base was due to the increased offering of cost effective remote channels.
The strong increase to 2315038 customers in 2017 up 8.1% yoy reflects the sustained growth in our client base over recent periods and was the main driver of the increase in our Retail Banking net fee and commission income The number of outstanding cards increased in 2017.
The increase reflects the launch of new loyalty programme Plus in July 2017 see details below.
Since the programme launch Bank customers who sign up for the programme are issued Plus cards.
We had 250307 active Plus cards outstanding at 31 December 2017 61 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
RETAIL BANKING PERFORMANCE INDICATORS Volume information in GEL thousands 2017 2016 Change yoy RETAIL BANKING CUSTOMERS Number of new customers 198488 141360 40.4% Number of customers 2315038 2141229 8.1%
Number of cards issued 1022283 955549 7.0% Number of cards outstanding 2227000 2056258 8.3% EXPRESS PAY TERMINALS Number of Express Pay terminals 2842 2729 4.1% Number of transactions via Express Pay terminals 104021767 117518668 11.5% Volume of transactions via Express Pay terminals 4748036 3167369 49.9% POS TERMINALS Number of desks 9934 8516 16.7% Number of contracted merchants 5341 4514 18.3% Number of POS terminals 13291 10357 28.3% Number of transactions via POS terminals 46177412 30897709 49.5% Volume of transactions via POS terminals 1405800 926318 51.8% INTERNET BANKING Number of active users 219496 122456 79.2% Number of transactions via Internet Banking 6415427 5797851 10.7% Volume of transactions via Internet Banking 1402969 1094260 28.2% MOBILE BANKING Number of active users 177243 74796 137.0% Number of transactions via Mobile Banking 6348533 2648779 139.7% Volume of transactions via Mobile Banking 685470 246300 178.3% The utilisation of Express Pay terminals continued to grow in 2017.
The volume of transactions increased to GEL 4748.0 million in 2017 up 49.9% yoy while the number of transactions was down yoy in 2017.
This trend was largely driven by managements decision to introduce transaction fees on nonbanking transactions processed through Express Pay terminals in 4Q16.
However while this introduction negatively affected the number of transactions the decrease was more than offset by the fees charged to clients leading to a 31.2% yoy increase in 2017 in fee income from Express Pay terminals Digital penetration growth.
The number of transactions and the volume of transactions carried out through our mobile banking app continue to show outstanding growth primarily due to the introduction of our new mobile banking application in May 2017.
The new fullytransformed userfriendly multi feature mobile banking application continues to gain popularity.
Since its launch on 29 May 2017 and over the course of the following seven months approximately 261000 downloads were made by the Banks customers while the previous application had less than 120000 downloads since its launch.
During the same period c.3.88 million online transactions were performed using the new application Significant growth in loans issued and deposits opened through Internet
During 2017 we started to actively offer loans and deposit products to our customers through Internet
As a result 5798 loans were issued with the value of GEL 15.1 million and 7458 deposits were opened with the value of GEL 19.1 million through Internet Bank in 2017 445 loans with the value of GEL 1.9 million and 3546 deposits with the value of GEL 7.3 million in 2016 On 15 September 2017 Bank of Georgia signed an agreement with Tbilisi City Hall for the exclusive right to operate the public transport payment system in
In accordance with the agreement Bank of Georgia will continue as the sole provider of payment support services to the public transportation network and operate retail branches in Tbilisi metro stations for the next ten years.
Bank of Georgia will implement a modern payments system for public transport network in Tbilisi including payment processing using Visa and MasterCard cards and create a digital platform for ticket reservations and purchases through mobile applications.
This further strengthens the Banks leading position in the express segment by maintaining branch network presence across Tbilisis public transport network We launched the new loyalty programme Plus on 5 July 2017.
Plus is part of RBs customercentric approach and offers different status levels to customers and reward points that accumulate based on the clients business with the Bank.
Points can be redeemed into partner companies products andor services.
We launched the programme as part of our efforts to increase the Mass Retail segments product to client ratio from current 1.8 to 3.0 Solo our premium banking brand continues its strong growth momentum and investment in its lifestyle brand.
The number of Solo clients reached 32104 at 31 December 2017 19267 at 31 December 2016 up 287.6% since its relaunch in April 2015.
We are on track to achieving our target of 40000 Solo clients by the end of 2018.
We have now launched 12 Solo lounges of which nine are located in Tbilisi the capital of Georgia and three in major regional cities of Georgia.
In 2017 annualised profit per Solo client was GEL 1704 compared to a profit of GEL 78 and GEL 71 per Express and mass retail client respectively.
Product to client ratio for Solo was 6.1 compared to 3.4 and 1.8 for Express and mass retail respectively.
While
Solo clients currently represent 1.4% of our total retail client base they contributed 24.3% to our retail loan book 37.4% to our retail deposits 13.9% and 16.9% to our net interest income and to our net fee and commission income respectively in 2017.
The fee and commission income from Solo segment increased from GEL 8.3 million in 2016 to GEL 14.4 million in 2017.
Solo
Club launched in 2Q17 a membership group within Solo which offers exclusive access to Solo products ahead of other Solo clients at a higher fee continues to gain popularity.
At 31 December 2017 Solo Club had 1882 members up 23.2% qoq MSME banking delivered solid growth.
The number of MSME clients reached 165781 at 31 December 2017 up 30.7% yoy.
MSMEs loan portfolio was GEL 1739.2 million at 31 December 2017 up 29.2% yoy.
The MSME segment generated revenue of GEL 125.3 million in 2017 up 51.0% yoy As a result Retail Banking profit reached GEL 249.7 million in 2017 up 19.3% yoy.
Retail Banking continued to deliver an outstanding ROAE which reached 31.6% in 2017 31.2% in 2016 62 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC OVERVIEW OF FINANCIAL RESULTS CONTINUED CORPORATE INVESTMENT BANKING CIB CIB provides 1 loans and other credit facilities to Georgias large corporate clients and other legal entities excluding SME and micro businesses 2 services such as fund transfers and settlements services currency conversion operations trade finance services and documentary operations as well as handling savings and term deposits 3 finance lease facilities through the Banks leasing operations arm the Georgian Leasing Company 4 brokerage services through Galt and Taggart and 5 Wealth Management private banking services to high networth individuals offering investment management products internationally through representative offices in London Budapest Istanbul and Tel Aviv.
INCOME STATEMENT HIGHLIGHTS GEL thousands unless otherwise noted 2017 2016 Change yoy Net banking interest income 156171 147108 6.2% Net fee and commission income 22717 27963 18.8% Net banking foreign currency gain 46276 48643 4.9% Net other banking income 14256 10170 40.2% REVENUE 239420 233884 2.4% Salaries and other employee benefits 54573 47731 14.3% Administrative expenses 16190 15214 6.4% Banking depreciation and amortisation 5134 5124 0.2% Other operating expenses 761 1031 26.2% OPERATING EXPENSES 76658 69100 10.9% OPERATING INCOME BEFORE COST OF CREDIT RISK 162762 164784 1.2% Cost of credit risk 47403 76266 37.8% PROFIT BEFORE NONRECURRING ITEMS AND INCOME TAX 115359 88518 30.3% Net nonrecurring items 1882 11934 84.2% PROFIT BEFORE INCOME TAX 113477 76584 48.2% Income tax expense benefit 7584 11698 NMF PROFIT 105893 88282 19.9% BALANCE SHEET HIGHLIGHTS GEL thousands unless otherwise noted 2017 2016 Change yoy Net loans and finance lease receivables currency blended 2260107 2394876 5.6% Net loans and finance lease receivables GEL 383058 400395 4.3% Net loans and finance lease receivables FC 1877049 1994481 5.9% Client deposits currency blended 3457331 3059150 13.0% Client deposits GEL 1276401 772253 65.3% Client deposits FC 2180930 2286897 4.6% Time deposits currency blended 1297984 1230627 5.5% Time deposits GEL 470288 135002 NMF Time deposits FC 827696 1095625 24.5% Current accounts and demand deposits currency blended 2159347 1828523 18.1% Current accounts and demand deposits GEL 806113 637251 26.5% Current accounts and demand deposits FC 1353234 1191272 13.6% Letters of credit and guarantees standalone 644750 511615 26.0% Assets under management 1857495 1575521 17.9%
GEL thousands unless otherwise noted 2017 2016 ROAE Corporate Investment Banking 17.6% 14.7% Net interest margin currency blended 3.4% 3.6% Cost of risk 1.5% 3.1% Cost of funds currency blended 4.6% 4.7% Loan yield currency blended 10.7% 10.4% Loan yield GEL 12.8% 13.2% Loan yield FC 10.3% 10.1% Cost of deposits currency blended 4.0% 3.9% Cost of deposits GEL 6.6% 6.3% Cost of deposits FC 2.7% 3.1% Cost of time deposits currency blended 5.8% 5.9% Cost of time deposits GEL 8.4% 9.5% Cost of time deposits FC 5.0% 5.3% Current accounts and demand deposits currency blended 2.8% 2.6% Current accounts and demand deposits GEL 5.9% 5.4% Current accounts and demand deposits FC 1.0% 0.9% Costincome ratio 32.0% 29.5% Concentration of top ten clients 10.7% 11.8% Offbalance sheet item.
63 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
CIB resumes growth after achieving targets on loan portfolio risk de concentration initiatives.
During 4Q17 CIB started to rebound and resume growth after delivering on its risk deconcentration and loan portfolio repositioning targets in 3Q17 Net loan book amounted to GEL 2260.1 million at 31 December 2017 down 5.6% yoy and up 13.4% qoq.
The yoy decrease was largely driven by winding down lending relationships with several large borrowers in 2017 as a result of risk deconcentration and loan portfolio repositioning targets.
Starting from 4Q17 the CIB gradually resumed growth resulting in a qoq increase in loan portfolio.
The concentration of top ten CIB clients stood at 10.7% at 31 December 2017 down from 11.8% at 31 December 2016 CIBs net banking interest income increased by 6.2% yoy in 2017.
The yoy growth in 2017 net banking interest income reflects an increase in the currency blended loan yields as well as the significant decline in cost of funds CIBs net fee and commission income was GEL 22.7 million in 2017 compared to GEL 28.0 million in 2016.
The yoy decline in 2017 was driven by decrease in net fee and commission income from guarantees and letters of credit.
The
26.0% yoy increase in guarantees and letters of credit portfolio in 2017 was offset by a decline in yields on these products during the same periods as a result of increased competition on the market and increased exposure to lower yielding crossguarantees of highly rated institutions to manage the risk driving the yoy decline in the net fees and commission income from guarantees and letters of credit in 2017 In 2017 dollarisation of our CIB deposits decreased to 63.1% as at 31 December 2017 from 74.8% a year ago which was partially due to the State Treasury of Georgias decision to place part of their GEL funds on deposits with local commercial banks in 3Q17.
Another driver of GEL denominated deposits increase was the significant decrease in interest rates on foreign currency deposits 2.7% in 2017 down from 3.1% in 2016.
In contrast the cost of deposits in local currency in 2017 reached 6.6% up from 6.3% in 2016 and remained well above foreign currency deposit yields.
Consequently total deposits amounted to GEL 3457.3 up 13.0% yoy.
On a constant currency basis total deposits were up 14.5% yoy CIB recorded a NIM of 3.4% in 2017 down 20 bps yoy.
Loan yield was up 30 bps yoy and cost of funds was down 10 bps yoy.
The yoy decrease in NIM was primarily driven by the increased share of liquid assets in the total interest earning assets portfolio during the period Net banking foreign currency gain.
In line with the volatility of the GEL exchange rate CIB net banking foreign currency gain was GEL 46.3 million in 2017 down 4.9% yoy Net other banking income.
Net other banking income increased significantly to GEL 14.3 million in 2017 up 40.2% yoy.
The yoy increase in 2017 was largely driven by revaluation gain of investment properties recorded in 4Q17 Cost of credit risk.
Cost of credit risk decreased significantly in 2017 down 37.8% yoy primarily driven by overall improvement in the CIB loan portfolio quality as a result of successful risk deconcentration and loan portfolio repositioning initiatives CIBs cost to income ratio increased to 32.0% up from 29.5% in 2016.
CIBs operating expenses were up 10.9% yoy in 2017.
The increase was primarily driven by 14.3% yoy increase in 2017 in staff costs as a result of CIBs efforts to restructure its corporate recovery and sales teams.
The benefits of these undertakings are positively reflected in CIBs lower cost of risk ratio of 1.5% in 2017 down from 3.1% in 2016 As a result Corporate Investment Banking profit reached GEL 105.9 million in 2017 up 19.9% yoy and CIB ROAE increased to 17.6% compared to 14.7% in 2016 PERFORMANCE HIGHLIGHTS OF WEALTH MANAGEMENT OPERATIONS The AUM of the Investment Management segment increased to GEL 1857.5 million in 2017 up 17.9% yoy.
This includes a deposits of Wealth Management franchise clients b assets held at Bank of Georgia Custody c Galt and Taggart brokerage client assets and d Global certificates of deposit held by Wealth Management clients Wealth Management deposits were GEL 1111.0 million in 2017 up 0.8% yoy growing at a compound annual growth rate CAGR of 12.9% over the last fiveyear period.
The cost of deposits stood at 3.8% in 2017 down 70 bps yoy.
Wealth Management deposit balances were negatively impacted by clients switching from deposits to local bonds as Galt and Taggart has offered a number of local bond issuances yielding higher rates than deposits We served 1434 wealth management clients from 75 countries as of 31 December 2017 as compared to 1383 clients from 68 countries as of 31 December 2016 Galt and Taggart which brings under one brand corporate advisory debt and equity capital markets research and brokerage services continues to develop local capital markets in Georgia During 2017 Galt and Taggart acted as a comanager of the Banks inaugural GEL 500 million Laridenominated international bond issuance in June 2017 a lead manager of GEL 108 million local bonds due 2020 of International Finance Corporation in June 2017 a lead manager for Evex Medical Corporation a subsidiary of Georgia Healthcare Group facilitating a private placement of GEL 90 million local bonds due 2022 in July 2017 a lead manager for Georgian Water and Power a subsidiary of Georgia Global Utilities facilitating a private placement of GEL 40 million local bonds with a maturity of six months in August 2017 a lead manager for Georgian Leasing Company a subsidiary of JSC Bank of Georgia facilitating a public placement of US 10mln bonds due 2020 in September 2017 a lead manager of GEL 135 million local bonds due 2022 of European Bank for Reconstruction and Development in December 2017 a lead manager for JSC MFO Crystal facilitating a public placement of GEL 10 million unsubordinated unsecured notes due 2019 in December 2017 During 2Q17 Galt and Taggart was mandated through a competitive tender process to actively manage the private pension fund of a corporate client.
This is the first private pension fund ever established in Georgia by a nonfinancial institution.
The fund is expected to accumulate approximately GEL 3 million contributions annually Galt and Taggart was mandated by a blue chip corporate to restructure its liabilities and the project was successfully completed in 4Q17 Quarterly update on recent developments in the Georgian economy.
In August 2017 Galt and Taggart launched a new research covering the quarterly macroeconomic developments in Georgian economy.
The report was followed by the conference call hosted by Galt and Taggart for interested stakeholders to discuss the developments.
2Q17 and 3Q17 reports are available on the Galt and Taggart website at site Additionally Galt and Taggart continues to provide full coverage of various sectors of the Georgian economy and developments taking place in regional economies through Regional Fixed Income Market Watch and Galt and Taggart macro portal available on its website PERFORMANCE HIGHLIGHTS 64 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC INCOME STATEMENT GEL thousands unless otherwise noted 2017 2016 Change yoy Gross insurance profit 27049 25256 7.1% Gross real estate profit 35367 19066 NMF Gross utility and energy profit 88370 38680 128.5% Gross other investment profit 30583 21334 43.4% REVENUE 181369 104336 73.8% Operating expenses 74792 35893 108.4% EBITDA 106577 68443 55.7% Profit from associates  4074 NMF Depreciation and amortisation 28235 10062 180.6% Net foreign currency loss 4937 3134 57.5% Interest income 12970 4144 NMF Interest expense 30014 13410 123.8% OPERATING INCOME BEFORE COST OF CREDIT RISK 56361 50055 12.6% Cost of credit risk 3415 1004 NMF PROFIT BEFORE NONRECURRING ITEMS AND INCOME TAX 52946 49051 7.9% Net nonrecurring items 623 32673 NMF PROFIT BEFORE INCOME TAX 52323 81724 36.0% Income tax expense 5748 8944 35.7% LOSSPROFIT FROM CONTINUING OPERATIONS 46575 72780 36.0% Profit from discontinued operations 47352 60100 21.2% PROFIT 93927 132880 29.3% Earnings per share basic 1.85 2.75 32.7% Earnings per share diluted 1.77 2.67 33.8% Discussion of Investment Business results The Groups Investment Business is primarily comprised of five segments Utility and Energy Business GGU Real Estate Business m Property and Casualty Insurance Business Aldagi Beverage Business Teliani and Healthcare Business GHG.
The Group has renamed its Investment Business as Georgia Capital.
In line with IFRS requirements the Group reviewed the classification of its operating segments at 31 December 2017.
Given the expectation in line with Georgia Capitals strategy it is highly probable the Group will own less than a 50% stake in its healthcare business GHG at the end 2018.
As a result and in line with IFRS the Group classified GHG as disposal group held for sale and its results of operations are reported under discontinued operations line as a single amount in the consolidated income statement.
Comparative periods have been restated accordingly to reflect reclassification of GHG from continuing operations into discontinued operations.
Assets and liabilities held by GHG are also presented separately in the consolidated balance sheet as of 31 December 2017 under assets of disposal group held for sale and liabilities of disposal group held for sale.
PERFORMANCE HIGHLIGHTS
As a result of strong performance across all segments the Investment Business recorded EBITDA from continuing operations of GEL 106.6 million in 2017 up 55.7% yoy.
Investment Business EBITDA adjusted to include EBITDA of the discontinued operations was GEL 220.0 million in 2017 up 48.2% yoy Aldagi recorded gross insurance profit of GEL 27.0 million in 2017 up 7.1% yoy.
The growth in revenues from introduction of new products enhancements of existing products and strong growth in the retail segment more than outpaced the increased levels of insurance claims expense driving gross profit up 7.1% yoy Gross real estate profit increased significantly as a result of m s strong sales record and revaluation gains from commercial properties during 2017.
629 apartments were sold with a total sales value of US 49.1 million in 2017 compared to 407 apartments sold with a total sales value of US 34.4 million in 2016.
In 2017 gross real estate profit was GEL 35.4 million which was attributable to record sales of apartments and GEL 22.6 million gain from revaluation of investment properties of which GEL 21.4 million was the revaluation of three investment properties under construction high street retail GGU delivered stable organic growth with a 52% EBITDA margin in 2017 54% in 2016.
The yoy increase in gross utility and energy profit in 2017 was driven by higher water supply revenues across both commercial and residential customers which was slightly offset by decreased revenues from electric power generation and sales as a result of exceptionally low levels of water inflow during the year.
In addition 2016 results include consolidation of GGU s gross utility and energy profit since 21 July 2016 while 2017 results include a full year of operations Gross other investment profit increased by 43.4% yoy in 2017.
The growth was largely attributable to significant growth in T eliani s gross profit due to the launch of mainstream beer and lemonade production in 2017 as well as outstanding performance of the wine business where revenues reached GEL 60.3 million in 2017 up 102.5% yoy excluding the IFRS 15 impact.
Additionally
T eliani s 2017 gross profit was positively impacted by continued diversification of its distribution portfolio whereby T eliani tapped into the exclusive right to import and distribute Lavazza coffee in Georgia and won other nonalcoholic beverage distribution contracts in 2017.
We expect to begin reporting separately the results of our beverage business operations in 2018 Increase in operating expenses was significantly impacted by T eliani s launch of beer operations and consolidation of GGU s results for a full year Net nonrecurring items in 2016 primarily relates to GEL 31.8 million gain from the purchase of GGU while no such material nonrecurring items were noted in 2017 2017 profit from discontinued operations which relates to results of GHGs operations decreased yoy by 21.2%.
The decline was mainly due to the absence of GEL 24.0 million oneoff income tax gains recorded in 2016 from the change in Georgian corporate tax legislation The Group held 57% of GHGs equity stake as of 31 December 2017 65% as of 31 December 2016.
The gross real estate profit trend between 2017 and 2016 is not comparable given the early adoption of IFRS 15 from 1 January 2017.
Prior to 1 January 2017 m recognised revenues from sales of residential units upon completion and handover of the units to customers in line with IAS 18 while under IFRS 15 revenue is recognised according to the percentage of completion method.
Accordingly we will not comment on yoy comparisons.
OVERVIEW OF FINANCIAL RESULTS CONTINUED 65 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
Natural monopoly in the water business with upside in electricity generation.
Our
Global Utilities GGU.
GGU has two main business lines  water utility and electric power generation.
In its water utility business GGU is a natural monopoly that supplies water and provides a wastewater service to 1.4 million people more than onethird of Georgias population in three cities Tbilisi Mtskheta and Rustavi.
Portfolio of three hydropower generation facilities an additional facility under management with a total capacity of Average annual production is c.400GWh depending on the level of rainfall during the year.
GGUs average annual electricity selfconsumption is up to 300GWh with a decreasing trend which provides GGU with sufficient internally generated power for water transportation purposes and additional revenue from thirdparty electricity sales.
Over
The involvement in hydropower production also provides revenue diversification.
Investment in additional capacity for electricity generation with the goal to establish a renewable energy platform.
GGU is developing hydro power plants HPP as well as solar and windpower sources in
During 2Q17 GGU commenced construction of 50MW Mestiachala HPPs in the NorthWestern part of Georgia Svaneti region with a target to have the HPPs operational in December 2018.
In 4Q17 GGU commenced construction of a 2.5MW Bodorna HPP on its own infrastructure near Tbilisi which is expected to become fully operational from September 2018.
Additionally a 44.3MW Zoti HPPs located in the Western part of Georgia Guria region officially entered its construction phase based on the construction agreement signed with the Government of Georgia during GGU targets completion of Zoti HPP construction in 4Q20.
100MW wind projects are currently at the feasibility stage and once complete GGU expects to commence construction works.
Room for efficiencies in water business from improving the wornout infrastructure.
The poor condition of pipeline infrastructure is the main reason for leaks and accidents causing on average 70% water loss annually out of which 50% is attributable to technical losses and 20% to commercial losses.
The current level of water losses is higher than the international peer average and represents a strong potential efficiency upside for the business.
GGU owns and operates a water supply network of around 3150km and about 2000km of wastewater pipelines.
It also has 55 pumping stations 101 service reservoirs with a total capacity of 305000 m and a water treatment plant.
Around 560 million m of potable water is supplied from water productiontreatment facilities annually.
By investing in the pipeline infrastructure the depreciated asset base is replaced over time leading to continuous growth in the regulated asset base.
Moreover through the reduction of the water supplied to its customers and respective water losses GGU expects to reduce its own electricity consumption which can be sold to third parties.
Water tariff and regulation.
In December 2017 GNERC Georgian National Energy and Water Supply Regulatory Commission the independent body that regulates GGUs water and wastewater tariffs has approved new tariffs for GGU for a threeyear regulatory period effective from 1 January 2018.
This is the first time the tariff has been set based on the new water and wastewater services tariff methodology adopted by GNERC in August 2017 which is based on international best practice and represents a hybrid method of cost plus and incentive based methodologies.
Revenue is determined based on a companys Regulatory Asset Base RAB and compensates for investment and maintenance of new and existing regulatory assets stimulates efficiency in the network through incentivising reduction in controllable operating expenses and delivers fair returns to investors in the utility business.
The return on investment referred to as WACC in the methodology for the first regulatory period is set at 15.99% up from 13.54% in 2017.
As a result new water and wastewater tariffs for residential customers in Tbilisi the largest contributor to water utility revenue increased by 23.8% to GEL 3.89 per month per capita for nonmetered customers and to GEL 0.33 per m for metered customers.
New tariffs for GGUs commercial customers all of which are metered decreased by 0.4% to GEL 4.40 per m Strong and stable cash flow generation has enabled GGU to distribute dividends of GEL 28.0 million US 11.0 million from its water utility business to the Investment Business during 4Q17.
This was the first dividend distribution since the acquisition of a controlling stake in GGU in July 2016 which has decreased the Groups net investment in GGU excluding the renewable energy business to US 84.0 million.
GWP  a whollyowned subsidiary of GGU which operates the water business in Tbilisi has a credit rating of BB  with stable outlook from Fitch.
Investment Business segment result discussion The segment results discussion is presented for the Utility and Energy Business GGU Real Estate Business m Property and Casualty Insurance Business Aldagi and Healthcare Business GHG.
UTILITY AND ENERGY BUSINESS GEORGIA GLOBAL UTILITIES  GGU Healthcare Business GHG is classified as discontinued operations.
Prior to 2Q17 GGUs standalone results excluded the Groups renewable energy business results due to its absence from GGUs legal structure and insignificant size.
Effective from 2Q17 we are reporting GGU results on a proforma basis together with renewable energy business and have retrospectively revised the comparable information accordingly.
The Group owns 65% of renewable energy business.
66 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Standalone results The Investment Business acquired 75% of GGUs equity interests that it did not own on 21 July 2016 and has consolidated its results since then.
Prior to this the net income from the Groups 25% stake in GGU was reported under profit from associates.
The results below refer to GGUs standalone numbers.
GGUs standalone results including the related comparative information reflect the utility and energy business performance.
INCOME STATEMENT GEL thousands unless otherwise noted 2017 2016 Change yoy Revenue from water supply to legal entities 85983 78140 10.0% Revenue from water supply to individuals 32921 31263 5.3% Revenue from electric power sales 9755 10112 3.5% Revenue from technical support 2604 4571 43.0% Other income 3738 3161 18.3% REVENUE 135001 127247 6.1% Provisions for doubtful trade receivables 1675 2198 23.8% Salaries and benefits 19125 16760 14.1% Electricity and transmission costs 18303 17746 3.1% Raw materials fuel and other consumables 3077 2856 7.7% Infrastructure assets maintenance expenditure 2254 2402 6.2% General and administrative expenses 3881 3125 24.2% Operating taxes 4457 3312 34.6% Professional fees 2698 2502 7.8% Insurance expense 1104 793 39.2% Other operating expenses 7586 7400 2.5% OPERATING EXPENSES 64160 59094 8.6% EBITDA 70841 68153 3.9% EBITDA margin 52% 54% Depreciation and amortisation 20419 17911 14.0% EBIT 50422 50242 0.4% EBIT margin 37% 39% Net interest expense 12354 10201 21.1% Net nonrecurring expenses 1332  NMF Foreign exchange loss gain 580 1076 46.1% EBT 36156 38965 7.2% Income tax expense 934 3671 74.6% PROFIT 35222 35294 0.2% Attributable to Shareholders of the Group 35306 35275 0.1% Noncontrolling interests 84 18 NMF
PERFORMANCE HIGHLIGHTS
GGU recorded total revenue of GEL 135.0 million in 2017 up 6.1% yoy Revenue from the water supply to legal entities and individuals reached GEL 118.9 million in 2017 up 8.7% yoy.
Water supply revenue represented 88.1% of the total revenue in 2017 86.0% in 2016.
Revenue from legal entities is generally the largest element of GGUs total revenue and their water consumption pattern is reflected in GGUs revenues.
The yoy increase in revenue from water supply to both legal entities and individuals in 2017 reflects enhanced measurement results based on an efficient new metering programme the new metering programme entails replacement of amortised or obsolete meters for legal entities metering of residential customers and detection of illegal connections Revenue from electricity power sales amounted to GEL 9.8 million in 2017 down 3.5% yoy.
2017 was characterised by exceptionally low levels of water inflows in Zhinvali reservoir the lowest over the past five years resulting in low electricity generation and respective decline in revenue from electricity power sales compared to The significant yoy decrease in the technical support revenue in 2017 was due to the early adoption of IFRS 15 from 1 January 2017 which led to deferral of revenues from technical support services.
The accounting change was applied prospectively from 1 January 2017 in line with IFRS GGUs operating expenses continued to be well contained in 2017 and amounted to GEL 64.2 million in 2017 up 8.6% yoy Salaries and employee benefits were up 14.1% yoy in 2017.
The increase was primarily driven by recruitment of additional and more qualified personnel in the technical support department as well as increased performancerelated compensation in water utility segment as a result of successfully delivering on all key operational and financial targets for 2017 Starting from 1Q17 as part of an ongoing process of reviewing receivable provisioning methodology GGU revisited certain estimates to enhance the method of provision estimation.
Under the enhanced method GGU was able to identify the customers who were able to pay all their monthly bills on time i. balance.
This change in accounting estimate had a positive impact on the provision of doubtful receivables in 1Q17 resulting in lower receivables provision expenses in 2017 Electricity and transmission costs were up 3.1% yoy in 2017 due to the increased electricity transmission fee guaranteed capacity fee effective from 1 January 2017.
The low yoy growth is attributable to the savings from electricity consumption throughout the year The yoy increase in 2017 in general and administrative expenses is primarily driven by the expenditures on a new OVERVIEW OF FINANCIAL RESULTS CONTINUED 67 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
Operating taxes were up 34.6% yoy in 2017 reflecting an increase in GGUs property tax base due to the companys continued investments in its own infrastructure Professional fees increased in 2017 primarily due to the advisory services received from independent subject matter experts in relation to the assessment of certain operational parameters The yoy decline in income taxes in 2017 reflects the impact of changes in the corporate income tax model As a result of the developments described above GGU reported EBITDA of GEL 70.8 million in 2017 up 3.9% yoy and a profit of GEL 35.2 million in 2017 flat yoy GGU has an outstanding receivables collection rate within the 9598% range from water supply.
During 2017 the collection rate for legal entities and households was 98% and 95% respectively.
As a result GGU had only GEL 6.9 million overdue receivables outstanding at 31 December 2017.
While the Georgian water utility sector has historically had low receivables collection rates as a result of GGUs arrangement with electricity suppliers since 2011 which allows disconnection of nonpaying water customers from the electricity network GGUs collection rates remain very strong at around 96%.
In return electricity suppliers receive flat monetary compensation from GGU In 2017 GGU drew down less expensive funding from international financial institutions in order to finance capital expenditures and refinance more expensive funding from local financial institutions STATEMENT OF CASH FLOW GEL thousands unless otherwise noted 2017 2016 Change yoy Cash received from customers 153937 139886 10.0% Cash paid to suppliers 46069 46106 0.1% Cash paid to employees 16737 18608 10.1% Interest received 1593 216 NMF Interest paid 12831 10388 23.5% Taxes paid 6272 11087 43.4% Restricted cash in Bank  2355 NMF CASH FLOW FROM OPERATING ACTIVITIES 73621 51558 42.8% Maintenance capex 23203 22432 3.4% OPERATING CASH FLOW AFTER MAINTENANCE CAPEX 50418 29126 73.1% Purchase of PPE and intangible assets 190169 35552 NMF Restricted cash in Bank 2399  NMF TOTAL CASH USED IN INVESTING ACTIVITIES 192568 35552 NMF Proceeds from borrowings 314284 45226 NMF Repayment of borrowings 122837 14032 NMF Contributions under sharebased payment plan 4941  NMF Dividends paid 28244 13008 117.1% Capital increase 16801 7331 129.2% TOTAL CASH FLOW FROM FINANCING ACTIVITIES 175063 25517 NMF Effect of exchange rates changes on cash 4969 69 NMF TOTAL CASH INFLOWOUTFLOW 37882 19022 99.1% CASH BALANCE Cash beginning balance 32379 13357 142.4% Cash ending balance 70261 32379 117.0% 68 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC BALANCE SHEET GEL thousands unless otherwise noted Dec17 Dec16 Change yoy Cash and cash equivalents 70261 32379 117.0% Trade and other receivables 23754 26402 10.0% Prepaid taxes other than income tax 4053 3115 30.1% Prepayments 3305 288 NMF Inventories 3787 3048 24.2% Other current assets 4339 240 NMF Current income tax prepayments 62 735 91.6% TOTAL CURRENT ASSETS 109561 66207 65.5% Property plant and equipment 489509 335877 45.7% Investment property 11286 18728 39.7% Intangible assets 2222 1383 60.7% Restructured trade receivables 133 307 56.7% Restricted cash 7657 5094 50.3% Other noncurrent assets 44118 1757 NMF TOTAL NONCURRENT ASSETS 554925 363146 52.8% TOTAL ASSETS 664486 429353 54.8% Current borrowings 3832 22617 83.1% Trade and other payables 33618 25625 31.2% Provisions for liabilities and charges 3102 706 NMF Other taxes payable 391 7101 94.5% TOTAL CURRENT LIABILITIES 40943 56049 27.0% Longterm borrowings 308373 83651 NMF Deferred income 20753  NMF TOTAL NONCURRENT LIABILITIES 329126 83651 NMF TOTAL LIABILITIES 370069 139700 NMF Share capital 17561 8070 117.6% Additional paidin capital 2837 588 NMF Retained earnings 87229 96564 9.7% Other reserve 182338 182417 0.0% TOTAL EQUITY ATTRIBUTABLE TO SHAREHOLDERS OF THE GROUP 284291 286463 0.8% Noncontrolling interest 10126 3190 NMF TOTAL EQUITY 294417 289653 1.6% TOTAL LIABILITIES AND EQUITY 664486 429353 54.8% The increase in property plant and equipment is primarily due to the additional investments into the companys infrastructure carried out during 2016 and 2017 in order to upgrade the network further reduce water losses and achieve cost efficiencies.
Additionally c.
EL 40.0 million increase is attributable to the development and construction of renewable energy projects c.
EL 7.4 million yoy decrease in investment property is related to reclassification of investment properties into property plant and equipment as well as the sale of a land plot The significant increase in other noncurrent assets is driven by additional prepayments to suppliers in relation to the development and construction of 50MW Mestiachala
The increase in borrowings and cash and cash equivalents at 31 December 2017 is due to additional funding obtained from international financial institutions and local banks in order to support the capital expenditures for developments of water supply network and renewable energy projects During 2017 GGU secured longterm financing from international financial institutions IFIs for efficiencyrelated capital expenditures purposes.
In 3Q17 GWP signed longterm loan facility agreements with the European Investment Bank EIB The Netherlands Development Finance Company FMO and German Investment Corporation DEG and attracted c.
UR 81.5 million in total of which c.40% is denominated in local currency.
This was the first IFI financing for GGUs water utility arm and a significant milestone for GGU as it enables the company to develop and modernise the water infrastructure by tapping efficiencies in the network.
GGU utilised the IFI funding from October 2017 In 4Q17 GGU distributed dividends totalling GEL 28.0 million US 11.0 million from its water utility business to the Investment
OVERVIEW OF FINANCIAL RESULTS CONTINUED 69 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
Standalone results Our Real Estate business is operated through the Groups whollyowned subsidiary m which develops residential and commercial properties and hotel properties in Georgia.
Real Estate has historically outsourced the construction and architecture works whilst itself focusing on project management and sales.
In June 2017 m acquired BK Construction LLC a local real estate construction company with the aim of bringing construction works inhouse to achieve cost and project development efficiencies. through its well established branch network and sales force.
Additionally in line with its assets light strategy m targets to transition into a franchise platform and develop thirdparty land plots to generate fee income.
REAL ESTATE BUSINESS m REAL ESTATE OR m INCOME STATEMENT GEL thousands unless otherwise noted 2017 2016 Change yoy Revenue from sale of apartments 92643 96347 NMF Cost of sold apartments 84607 82403 NMF GROSS PROFIT FROM SALE OF APARTMENTS 8036 13944 NMF Revenue from operating leases 3599 2778 29.6% Cost of operating leases 557 224 148.7% GROSS PROFIT FROM OPERATING LEASES 3042 2554 19.1% Revaluation of commercial property 22563 2381 NMF GROSS REAL ESTATE PROFIT 33641 18879 78.2% Gross other profit 277 29 NMF GROSS PROFIT 33918 18908 79.4% Salaries and other employee benefits 2818 1498 88.1% Administrative expenses 5761 4364 32.0% Operating expenses 8579 5862 46.3% EBITDA 25339 13046 94.2% Depreciation and amortisation 508 243 109.1% Net foreign currency gainloss 117 1143 110.2% Interest income 816 715 14.1% Interest expense 186 210 11.4% NET OPERATING INCOME BEFORE NONRECURRING ITEMS 25344 14451 75.4% Net nonrecurring items 128 73 75.3% PROFIT BEFORE INCOME TAX 25216 14378 75.4% Income tax expense 1554 3474 55.3% PROFIT 23662 10904 117.0%
PERFORMANCE HIGHLIGHTS
During 2017 m continued to unlock value through real estate development.
Gross profit from the sale of apartments is by its nature variable and depends on the number of projects underway at a given time.
We also adopted a new accounting treatment in 2017 which applies a completely different basis for recognising revenue.
Accordingly yoy comparisons are not meaningful and will not be commented upon During 2017 m sold a total of 629 apartments with total sales value of US 49.1 million compared to 407 apartments sold with total sales value of US 34.4 million during 2016 Net revenue from operating leases increased by 19.1% yoy in 2017 supported by the growth in the commercial real estate portfolio.
Consequently the portfolio of yielding assets represented 22.0% of m Real Estates total assets at 31 December 2017 compared to 11.2% a year ago During 2017 m recorded a gain from the revaluation of investment property under construction of GEL 21.4 million.
As a result its portfolio of yielding assets including the revaluation gain increased by 85.8% yoy to GEL 77.2 million at 31 December 2017.
Revaluation of commercial property increased materially in 2Q17 primarily due to the GEL 21.4 million revaluation of three investment properties under construction high street retail. fair value measurements.
During 2Q17 management reassessed the approach and concluded that given a the recent transactions of properties under construction on the local market b managements track record in building and renting out commercial properties and c availability of increased statistical information reliable measurement of fair value was warranted.
Accordingly management hired an independent internationally recognised valuation company to determine the fair values of properties under construction in 2017 and recorded a total revaluation gain of GEL 22.6 million on investment properties during 2017 As a result m recognised total gross profit of GEL 33.9 million in 2017 while profit totalled GEL 23.7 million The yoy movement in income tax expense relates to previous period tax return adjustment as a result of submission of final 2016 tax returns during 3Q17 Prior to 2017 m Real Estate results presented were segment results i. including Group elimination and consolidation adjustments.
Effective 2017 and similar to other Investment Business entities we are reporting standalone results for m Real Estate.
The net revenue trend between 2017 and 2016 is not comparable given the early adoption of IFRS 15 from 1 January 2017.
Prior to 1 January 2017 m recognised revenues from sales of residential units upon completion and handover of the units to customers in line with IAS 18 while under IFRS 15 revenue is recognised according to the percentage of completion method.
Accordingly we will not comment on yoy comparisons.
70 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC BALANCE SHEET GEL thousands unless otherwise noted Dec17 Dec16 Change yoy Cash and cash equivalents 34751 93210 62.7% Amounts due from credit institutions 114  NMF Investment securities 3329 2842 17.1% Accounts receivable 1338 703 90.3% Prepayments 34932 20746 68.4% Inventories 59683 113009 47.2% Investment property of which 150143 113829 31.9% Land bank 72902 72251 0.9% Commercial real estate 77241 41578 85.8% Property and equipment 49641 7050 NMF Other assets 16898 20839 18.9% TOTAL ASSETS 350829 372228 5.7% Amounts due to credit institutions 58992 42818 37.8% Debt securities issued 65122 103077 36.8% Deferred income 46660 77925 40.1% Other liabilities 15425 14725 4.8% TOTAL LIABILITIES 186199 238545 21.9% Share capital 4180 4180 Additional paidin capital 82793 85467 3.1% Other reserves 14460 15538 6.9% Retained earnings 52779 28498 85.2% TOTAL EQUITY ATTRIBUTABLE TO SHAREHOLDERS OF THE GROUP 154212 133683 15.4% Noncontrolling interest 10418  NMF TOTAL EQUITY 164630 133683 23.1% TOTAL LIABILITIES AND EQUITY 350829 372228 5.7% continued to have a strong diversified and well managed balance sheet.
At
31 December 2017 total assets were GEL 350.8 million down 5.7% yoy comprising of 9.9% cash 10.0% prepayments 17.0% inventories apartments in development 42.8% investment property 14.1% property plant and equipment including hotel and 6.2% all other assets.
Borrowings which consist of debt raised from Development Financial Institutions DFIs and debt securities issued on the local market represent 35.4% of the total balance sheet has a land bank with a total value of GEL 72.9 million on its balance sheet.
We do not expect the land bank to grow as the companys strategy is to utilise its existing land plots within three to four years and in parallel start development of thirdparty land plots under franchise agreements In December 2017 m acquired a 60% stake from a thirdparty in an upcoming lifestyle boutique hotel in Tbilisi for a total cash consideration of US 6.0 million of which US 4.1 million was paid to acquire a 50% stake from a thirdparty and US 1.9 million was injected into the hotels capital in exchange for an additional 10% stake
OPERATING HIGHLIGHTS
2017 was recordbreaking for m with regard to the number of apartments sold square metres sold and sales revenue.
In 4Q17 all remaining apartments of the Optima line project on Moscow Avenue were sold.
Moreover m continued to build up its portfolio of yielding assets including hotels to match the growing demand for accommodation generated by the robust growth of the tourism sector.
In 3Q17 commenced construction works on a mixeduse development on Melikishvili Avenue where it plans to open a fourstar Ramada hotel which is expected to be the first construction project undertaken inhouse by subsidiary BK Construction LLC.
Existing incomegenerating properties are successfully leased at an 88% occupancy rate with an average yield of 9.1%.
95700 square metres of net sellable area currently under construction across four ongoing projects all of which are on schedule.
As noted above in 4Q17 m acquired a controlling stake in an upcoming lifestyle boutique hotel in a prime location of Tbilisi.
The hotel is expected to add at least 100 rooms to s portfolio and the construction works are being carried out by m s construction arm.
The skeleton of the building is already finished and the full construction completion is expected in the first quarter of 2019.
In December 2017 m signed its largest ever franchise agreement as part of its asset light strategy to construct and develop a residential complex under the m brand name on a thirdparty land plot in a densely populated Tbilisi suburb. economics.
Finally in December 2017 m s construction arm was awarded its first major thirdparty construction agreement to construct the shell and core of a new shopping mall and business centre located in Tbilisis Saburtalo district.
Total amount of the contract is US 11.6 million and is planned to be carried out over the 16 months following the planned project commencement in January 2018.
OVERVIEW OF FINANCIAL RESULTS CONTINUED 71 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
The four ongoing projects have the following characteristics Kartozia Street project the largest ever project carried out by m with a total of 801 apartments in a central location in Tbilisi of which 703 units are sold Kazbegi Avenue II project  a mixeduse development with 303 residential apartments and a hotel has the exclusive right to develop Wyndham Ramada Encore hotels in Georgia with a capacity of 152 rooms.
The construction started in June 2016 with 217 apartments sold to date 50 Chavchavadze Avenue project the project is located in the central part of Tbilisi with a total of 82 apartments of which 69 are sold Melikishvili Avenue project  a mixeduse fourstar development with a capacity of 125 hotel rooms and 16 residential apartments of which 11 are already sold has a very good track record of selling apartments.
Out of the 1691 apartments completed to date since inception only 15 or 0.9% remain in stock as available for sale. in Georgia.
The four ongoing projects have a total capacity of 1202 apartments of which 1000 apartments or 83.2% are sold as of 31 December 2017.
A total of 217 units remain available for sale out of the total of 2893 apartments either already developed or under development phase Since its inception m Real Estate unlocked US 19.5 million in total land value from the seven completed projects while an additional US 14.2 million in land value is expected to be unlocked from the four ongoing projects The number of apartments financed with BOG mortgages in all m projects reached 1181 or GEL 148.6 million at 31 December OPERATING DATA FOR COMPLETED AND ONGOING PROJECTS AS OF 31 DECEMBER 2017 Project name Number of apartments Number of apartments sold Number of apartments sold as % of total Number of apartments available for sale Start date construction
Construction completed % COMPLETED PROJECTS 1691 1676 99.1% 15 1 Chubinashvili Street 123 123 100.0%  Sep10 Aug12 100% 2 Tamarashvili Street 525 523 99.6% 2 May12 Jun14 100% 3 Kazbegi Street 295 295 100.0%  Dec13 Feb16 100% 4 Nutsubidze Street 221 221 100.0%  Dec13 Sep15 100% 5 Tamarashvili Street II 270 266 98.5% 4 Jul14 Jun16 100% 6 Moscow Ave.
238 238 100.0%  Sep14 Jun16 100% 7 Skyline 19 10 52.6% 9 Dec15 Dec17 100% ONGOING PROJECTS 1202 1000 83.2% 202 8 Kartozia Street 801 703 87.8% 98 Nov15 Oct18 78% 9 Kazbegi Street II 303 217 71.6% 86 Jun16 Nov18 43% 10 50 Chavchavadze Ave.
82 69 84.1% 13 Oct16 Oct18 61% 11 Melikishvili Ave.
16 11 68.8% 5 Sep17 May19 6% TOTAL 2893 2676 92.5% 217 FINANCIAL DATA FOR COMPLETED AND ONGOING PROJECTS AS OF 31 DECEMBER 2017 Project name Total sales US million
US million
US million Deferred revenue expected to be recognised as revenue in 2017 Land value unlocked
Realised and expected IRR COMPLETED PROJECTS 144.3 144.3   19.5 1 Chubinashvili street 9.9 9.9   0.9 47% 2 Tamarashvili street 48.6 48.6   5.4 46% 3 Kazbegi Street 27.2 27.2   3.6 165% 4 Nutsubidze Street 17.4 17.4   2.2 58% 5 Tamarashvili Street II 24.3 24.3   2.7 71% 6 Moscow Ave.
12.3 12.3   1.6 31% 7 Skyline 4.6 4.6   3.1 329% ONGOING PROJECTS 78.0 50.2 27.8 21.5 14.2 8 Kartozia Street 48.8 33.4 15.3 13.0 5.8 60% 9 Kazbegi Street II 18.6 10.7 8.0 5.5 4.3 51% 10 50 Chavchavadze Ave.
8.1 5.1 3.0 2.8 3.3 75% 11 Melikishvili Ave.
2.5 1.0 1.5 0.2 0.8 101% TOTAL 222.3 194.5 27.8 21.5 33.7 72 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC
PERFORMANCE HIGHLIGHTS
Aldagi recorded net underwriting profit of GEL 28.6 million in 2017 up 10.8% yoy as a result of the following Net earned premiums.
Net premiums earned reached GEL 62.8 million in 2017 up 24.6% yoy.
The yoy increase in 2017 was supported by organic growth of the motor insurance property insurance and credit life insurance business lines representing approximately 35.0% 24.0% and 10.0% of Aldagi s total insurance portfolio respectively which contributed to approximately 23.0% 21.0% and 15.0% yoy increase in net premiums earned in 2017 respectively.
New product introductions and enhancements of existing products described under Operating Highlights below resulted in a further 4.0% yoy increase to net premiums earned in 2017.
Net premiums earned from agricultural insurance increased by approximately 44.0% on a yoy basis in 2017 leading to a 54.0% market share in this product 37.0% market share in 2016 Net insurance claims.
The net insurance claims amounted to GEL 25.1 million in 2017 up 40.5% yoy.
The yoy increase in net insurance claims expenses in 2017 were primarily driven by property insurance claims following a major fire incident in 1H17 and a number of accidents from flooding and bad weather conditions in Additionally the motor insurance business experienced an overall increase in loss severity and frequency in 2017.
These increases were partially compensated by improved loss ratios in liability insurance life insurance and other insurance products in 2017.
Finally the increase in insurance claims expenses was also driven by the business shift towards the retail segment which is historically characterised by a higher loss ratio than the corporate segment Net acquisition costs were GEL 9.1 million in 2017 up 34.9% yoy.
The yoy increase was attributable to the introduction of new insurance product lines and enhancements of existing ones in 2017 which led to higher average commission rates.
Overall commission ratio was up by 1 ppts yoy in 2017.
Aldagis key ratios remain healthy despite increased number of accidents during 2017 as evidenced by the following closely monitored metrics KEY RATIOS 2017 2016 Combined ratio 75.2% 72.6% Expense ratio 35.2% 37.2% Loss ratio 40.0% 35.4% Net investment profit.
Investment income amounted to GEL 3.0 million in 2017 down 4.9% yoy.
Yoy decrease in investment income in 2017 was primarily driven by the dividend payouts of GEL 7.1 million in 3Q16 and GEL 7.0 million in 2Q17 which were partially compensated by 20.4% yoy increase in AUM fees in 2017.
Investment
Salaries and employee benefits reached GEL 8.7 million in 2017 up 10.0% yoy primarily as a result of the new Strategic Development department as described under Operating Highlights below as well as the organic growth of the property and casualty insurance business and the related increase in headcount Corporate income tax expense.
The yoy decrease in income taxes in 2017 reflects the absence of oneoff impact from changes in the corporate taxation model which were recorded in 2016 GEL 0.8 million writeoff in 2016 Aldagis operating profit reached GEL 19.1 million in 2017 up 9.9% yoy.
Aldagis net profit was GEL 16.3 million in 2017 up 18.6% yoy Aldagi continued to have a very strong balance sheet.
As of 31 December 2017 total assets reached GEL 135.2 million.
The yoy growth in assets was largely driven by 23.9% yoy increase in net insurance premiums receivable and 57.1% yoy increase in ceded share of technical provisions.
The 14.5% yoy increase in total liabilities was driven by two large claims incurred as a result of a a major fire incident in 1Q17 and b floods in 4Q17 both of which contributed to 21.0% yoy increase in gross technical provisions at 31 December 2017 Aldagi has demonstrated outstanding dividend payment track record.
Aldagi has distributed dividends totaling GEL 14.1 million since 1H16 of which GEL 7.1 million was paid in 3Q16 and GEL 7.0 million in 2Q17 Standalone results Our Property and Casualty PandC Insurance business is operated through the Groups whollyowned subsidiary Aldagi which is a leading player in the local PandC insurance market with a market share of 38.6% based on gross premiums earned at 30 September 2017.
The company offers a wide range of insurance products in Georgia to corporate and retail clients covering more than 47000 customers through five business lines motor property credit life liability and other insurance services.
Aldagis insurance products are offered through its offices in Tbilisi and large cities across Georgia a network of insurance agents local partner banks and nonfinancial institutions such as major car dealerships insurance brokers and online portals.
PROPERTY AND CASUALTY BUSINESS ALDAGI OR PandC INCOME STATEMENT GEL thousands unless otherwise noted 2017 2016 Change yoy Gross premiums written 88474 75379 17.4% Earned premiums gross 85922 70937 21.1% EARNED PREMIUMS NET 62770 50390 24.6% Insurance claims expenses gross 40652 25227 61.1% Insurance claims expenses net 25098 17858 40.5% ACQUISITION COSTS NET 9100 6744 34.9% NET UNDERWRITING PROFIT 28572 25788 10.8% Investment income 2965 3118 4.9% Net fee and commission income 525 436 20.4% NET INVESTMENT PROFIT 3490 3554 1.8% Salaries and other employee benefits 8701 7907 10.0% Selling general and administrative expenses 3263 3201 1.9% Depreciation and amortisation 855 774 10.5% Impairment charges 671 808 17.0% Net other operating income 495 698 29.1% OPERATING PROFIT 19067 17350 9.9% Foreign exchange gainloss 208 294 NMF PRETAX PROFIT 19275 17056 13.0% Income tax expense 2975 3318 10.3% NET PROFIT 16300 13738 18.6% OVERVIEW OF FINANCIAL RESULTS CONTINUED 73 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
Aldagis PandC products principally include the following a motor insurance covering vehicle damage and thirdparty liability with 23646 active clients and a 41% market share b property insurance including commercial property coverage contractors performance and damage risks coverage with 12317 active clients and a 37% market share c credit life insurance covering loanlinked life insurance services with a group of three active clients and a 30% market share d liability insurance covering financial risks employers liability professional indemnity general thirdparty liability etc. with 1026 active clients and a 44% market share.
Aldagis other products include agro insurance cargo insurance livestock insurance bankers blanket bond insurance and directors and officers liability insurance services with 13314 active clients and a 38% market share.
Insurance companies in Georgia are subject to regulatory requirements.
Since
31 December 2016 Aldagi is required to maintain a solvency ratio in excess of 100%.
At 31 December 2017 Aldagis solvency ratio was 180% as compared to 160% at 31 December 2016
OPERATING HIGHLIGHTS
Aldagi achieved significant milestones in 2017 as the company managed to exceed its annual targets for new product developments.
Along with tapping into regional markets through launching livestock insurance Aldagi introduced online travel insurance with a unique combination coverage and competitive pricing.
Aldagis product development initiatives resulted in more than 19000 livestock insurance and 3334 travel and trip insurance policies sold across the country.
Aldagi setup a Strategic Development department in 2017 in order to focus on improving market intelligence through more direct communication and targeting of the Georgian insurance markets emerging trends and demands.
These efforts led to a major milestone whereby Aldagi signed an exclusive memorandum with Public Service Hall in 3Q17 which allows customers of the Public Service Hall to electronically acquire affordable insurance products for any type of property registered in the public registry.
Aldagi targets solidifying its market leadership position in digital insurance over the next five years by having all its processes procedures including issuance of epolicies remote claims regulation and building webmobile customer profiles executed principally through digital channels.
As at 31 December 2017 Aldagi had 11044 online agents who sell and promote retail insurance products through unique webportal onjob. helps Aldagi attract new customers.
Through extensive cooperation with the Insurance State Supervision Service of Georgia ISSSG the insurance market regulator in Georgia the Parliament of Georgia approved Border Motor Third Party Liability Insurance MTPL insurance for vehicles visiting Georgia either on a temporary or transit basis in December 2017.
Compulsory MTPL insurance will become mandatory from 1 March 2018.
Aldagi expects that MTPL insurance will increase the size of the existing property and casualty market by approximately GEL 3050 million 1525% of the existing PandC insurance market.
Aldagi is working closely with ISSSG to support drafting of the new law requiring mandatory local MTPL for all vehicles registered in Georgia.
The new law is expected to be launched in 2019 and will be a major boost to retail market penetration.
The current low level of insurance market penetration of 1.1% in Georgia of which 0.6% relates to PandC insurance market penetration and 0.5% to medical insurance market provides highly untapped retail growth potential.
Based on the latest available market data as of 30 September 2017 Aldagi continues to be the most profitable insurance company in the local market with 89.4% share of the insurance industry profit Aldagi continues to lead the market with a powerful distribution network of 284 points of sale and 547 sales agents at 31 December 2017 At 31 December 2017 Aldagi had 47702 insured customers up 36.5% yoy.
The yoy increase in number of insured customers was driven by organic growth of motor insurance and introduction of new product lines in 2017.
The number of new insurance policies written reached 155332 in 2017 112430 policies written in 2016 Aldagi signed major thirdparty partnership agreements with two Georgian banks JSC Liberty Bank and JSC Credo Bank to successfully diversify its multichannel distribution network.
The partnership agreement between Aldagi and JSC Liberty Bank the third largest bank in Georgia by total assets and with the largest branch and service outlet network in the country will enable Aldagi to enhance distribution capabilities of its motor thirdparty liability insurance business.
The threeyear partnership agreement with JSC Credo Bank marks the continuation of already established successful relationship between the companies.
Aldagi will have rights to offer its retail insurance products to the banks retail and small and mediumsized business clients through its wide network of branches which will enable Aldagi to successfully tap Georgias underpenetrated retail insurance segment.
BALANCE SHEET GEL thousands unless otherwise noted Dec17 Dec16 Change yoy Cash and cash equivalents 4186 4349 3.7% Amounts due from credit institutions 25968 24928 4.2% Investment securities availableforsale 4180 3389 23.3% Insurance premiums receivable net 28491 22997 23.9% Ceded share of technical provisions 20671 13161 57.1% Premises and equipment net 10627 8717 21.9% Intangible assets net 1272 1409 9.7% Goodwill 13051 13051 Deferred acquisition costs 3047 1611 89.1% Pension fund assets 18536 16441 12.7% Other assets 5129 4867 5.4% TOTAL ASSETS 135158 114920 17.6% Gross technical provisions 50272 41542 21.0% Other insurance liabilities 11147 8612 29.4% Current income tax liabilities 30 1273 97.6% Pension benefit obligations 18536 16441 12.7% Other liabilities 6426 7611 15.6% TOTAL LIABILITIES 86411 75479 14.5% Share capital 1889 1889 Additional paidin capital 5405 5405 Retained earnings 25153 18409 36.6% Net profit 16300 13738 18.6% TOTAL EQUITY 48747 39441 23.6% TOTAL LIABILITIES AND EQUITY 135158 114920 17.6% 74 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Standalone results GHG is the largest integrated player in the fastgrowing predominantly privatelyowned Georgia Healthcare ecosystem with an aggregated value of GEL 3.5 billion.
GHG is comprised of three different business lines healthcare services business consisting of a hospital business and polyclinics ambulatory clinics pharmacy business and medical insurance business.
BGEO Group owns 57.0% of GHG at 31 December 2017 with the remaining shares being held by the public largely institutional investors.
GHGs shares are listed on the London Stock Exchange.
The results below refer to GHG standalone numbers and are based on GHGs reported results which are published independently of the Group and available on GHGs websitesitege HEALTHCARE BUSINESS GEORGIA HEALTHCARE GROUP OR GHG INCOME STATEMENT GEL thousands unless otherwise noted 2017 2016 Change yoy REVENUE GROSS 747750 426439 75.3% Corrections and rebates 2039 2686 24.1% REVENUE NET 745711 423753 76.0% Revenue from healthcare services 263357 243453 8.2% Revenue from pharmacy 450315 133002 NMF Net insurance premiums earned 53710 61494 12.7% Eliminations 21671 14196 52.7% COSTS OF SERVICES 517712 277735 86.4% Cost of healthcare services 150572 130369 15.5% Cost of pharmacy 340210 105472 NMF Cost of insurance services 48583 55772 12.9% Eliminations 21653 13878 56.0% GROSS PROFIT 227999 146018 56.1% Salaries and other employee benefits 75430 39750 89.8% General and administrative expenses 48618 26149 85.9% Impairment of receivables 4175 2332 79.0% Other operating income 8372 240 NMF EBITDA 108148 78027 38.6% Depreciation and amortisation 25704 19577 31.3% Net interest expense 30941 13736 125.3% Net losses from foreign currencies 397 5657 NMF Net nonrecurring expense income 4780 1118 NMF PROFIT BEFORE INCOME TAX EXPENSE 46326 40175 15.3% Income tax expense benefit 386 21156 NMF of which Deferred tax adjustments  23992 NMF PROFIT FOR THE PERIOD 45940 61331 25.1% Attributable to shareholders of GHG 29050 50203 42.1% noncontrolling interests 16890 11128 51.8% of which Deferred tax adjustments  4541 NMF
PERFORMANCE HIGHLIGHTS
GHG delivered gross revenue of GEL 747.8 million in 2017 up 75.3% yoy.
The yoy revenue growth in 2017 was mainly attributable to the pharmacy business GPC and Pharmadepot were acquired in and consolidated from May 2016 and January 2017 respectively GHG achieved a well diversified revenue mix spread across all three segments of the Georgian healthcare ecosystem.
In 2017 34% of the GHGs revenue came from the healthcare services business 59% from pharmacy business and the remaining 7% from medical insurance business.
The high level of diversification was achieved through GHGs entrance and further expansion into the pharmacy business which is funded almost entirely outofpocket and therefore helped GHG to further diversify its revenue by payment sources.
As a result 54% of total revenue was received from outof pocket payments 24% from Georgias Universal Health Programme and 22% from other sources in 2017 In 2017 GHG continued to focus on extracting operating efficiencies and synergies across the business lines.
The gross margin in the pharmacy business continued to improve in 2017 mainly as a result of realising previously announced procurement synergies as the largest purchaser of pharmaceuticals in Georgia.
The loss ratio of medical insurance business remained largely flat yoy in 2017.
As anticipated healthcare services business margins are temporarily reduced due to launches of new healthcare facilities and services which are currently in their rapid buildout phase.
In 2018 the main goal will be the continued successful rollout of newly launched hospitals and services while at the same time focusing on implementing efficiency measures across healthcare facilities as well as GHGwide GHG reported strong EBITDA of GEL 108.1 million in 2017 up 38.6% yoy.
The EBITDA margin for the GHG is classified as a disposal group held for sale and as a discontinued operation within BGEOs 2017 results.
OVERVIEW OF FINANCIAL RESULTS CONTINUED 75 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
2017 30.2% in 2016.
The temporary yoy reduction in the EBITDA margin in 2017 was due to the launch of new healthcare facilities and services which are currently in their initial rollout phase.
Excluding the dilutive effects of rollouts the healthcare services business EBITDA margin was 29.2% in 2017.
GHG expects further margin improvements gradually GHGs profit amounted to GEL 45.9 million in 2017 up 16.1% yoy on a normalised basis.
The healthcare services business was the main driver of 2017 profit by contributing GEL 27.4 million followed by the pharmacy business with a GEL 21.2 million contribution GHGs balance sheet increased substantially over the last 12 months reaching GEL 1167.8 million as at 31 December 2017 up 27.6% yoy.
The 27.6% yoy growth in total assets was largely driven by the increase in property and equipment reflecting investments in the renovation of hospitals rollout of polyclinics and the consolidation of the pharmacy business Pharmadepot.
The pharmacy businesses consolidation primarily affected inventories and goodwill.
Out of the GEL 118.8 million inventory balance at 31 December 2017 GEL 98.9 million was attributable to the pharmacy business while the balance of goodwill from the acquisitions of the pharmacy businesses amounted to GEL 77.8 million at 31 December 2017.
Borrowed funds increased yoy as a result of the following factors 1 From the first quarter of 2017 GHG sourced longerterm and less expensive funding from both local commercial banks and Development Financial Institutions DFIs and used the proceeds for the development of healthcare facilities 2 At the beginning of 2017 GHG raised GEL 33.0 million from a local commercial bank to pay the first tranche of consideration payable for the Pharmadepot acquisition 3 In 4Q17 GHG raised additional funds from local commercial banks to finance ongoing capital expenditures as well as to pay the second tranche of consideration payable for the Pharmadepot acquisition in the beginning of January 2018.
The yoy increase in accounts payable is also attributable to the pharmacy business.
Out
The yoy increase in other liabilities related to recognition of put option liability GEL 55.0 million present value liability to purchase the remaining 33% shares of Pharmadepot During 2017 GHG continued to invest in the development of its healthcare facilities.
Healthcare services business spent a total of GEL 89.3 million in 2017 on capital expenditures primarily on the extensive renovations of Deka and Tbilisi Referral formerly Sunstone hospitals as well as enhancing the service mix and introducing new services to cater for previously unmet patient needs.
Of this maintenance capex was GEL 9.6 million in 2017 In July 2017 the healthcare services business acquired referral and community hospitals in the Khashuri and Kareli regions together the Hospitals respectively.
The acquisition is in line with the healthcare services businesss strategy to expand its presence across the country especially in underrepresented regions of Georgia.
Following the acquisition of the Hospitals the number of referral and community hospitals increased to 16 and 21 respectively.
The
Hospitals are located in the Khashuri and Kareli regions which have a combined population of c.100000 people and operate with 65 and 25 beds respectively.
These acquisitions further enable GHG to direct patients to its referral hospitals primarily in Kutaisi and Tbilisi thus providing potential for revenue synergies.
The integration of both hospitals is already completed In 4Q17 GHG launched a district polyclinic in Marneuli and acquired two district polyclinics in Tbilisi with a total of c.50000 registered patients.
Polyclinics acquisitions and launches are consistent with the Groups strategy to grow its healthcare services business through rolling out a network of polyclinics across Tbilisi and in other major cities in Georgia.
As a result GHG currently operates a total of 12 polyclinic clusters of which eight are located in Tbilisi and four in the regions GHGs healthcare services market share based on the number of beds was 24.5% at 31 December 2017 Comparison on a normalised basis  2016 net profit was normalised and adjusted for oneoff nonrecurring gainloss due to deferred tax adjustments in the amount of GEL 24.0 million gain in 2016.
The full year 2016 profit is also adjusted for oneoff currency translation loss in June in the amount of GEL 2.1 million which resulted from settlement of the Dollardenominated payable for the acquisition of GPC GHGs pharmacy business.
76 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Dear Shareholders The Board recognises the contribution the corporate governance practices of the Group can make to the Groups overall success.
As the regulatory and governance environment continues to change we will continue to seek to build upon the standards we have set thus far.
Our corporate governance framework extends to the culture we have sought to create and maintain throughout the Group which is characterised by integrity honesty transparency and fairness.
This has enabled us to attract and retain the most talented individuals available whose efforts have contributed to the Groups success.
The Board will continue to lead by example in the year ahead ensuring we act ethically in our relationships with the Groups stakeholders and continue to develop talent in our management team.
SEPARATION OF THE BANK AND INVESTMENT BUSINESSES AND REVIEW OF CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRUCTURE We have discussed the effects the potential changes might have on our governance structures.
Further in the report of the Nomination Committee you will read about the work that has been done repositioning our senior management team ahead of the demerger.
CULTURE AND GOVERNANCE Most recently the Board spent time considering the FRCs proposals for a revised corporate governance code and initiatives regarding increased employee and stakeholder engagement and is considering any changes that may be necessary.
BOARD EVALUATION The Boards belief in the strength of our culture and corporate governance is supported by the results of our externally facilitated Board evaluation.
The external evaluation which was performed by Lintstock concluded that the Board continues to operate and perform effectively.
In particular it was highlighted that the Board has a good balance and mix of expertise and experience which provides diversity of view and perspective.
The progress we felt we have made against our 2017 objectives and our objectives as a Board for 2018 can be found on page 87 in the Corporate Governance Framework.
BOARD CHANGES AND DIVERSITY After a sixmonth period as an advisor to the Board and a member of the Audit Committee Jonathan Muir was appointed as an independent NonExecutive Director.
Jonathans appointment has enhanced a diverse and balanced Board and we look forward to his continuing contribution this year.
We also took the opportunity to review our Diversity Policy and consistent with the Boards determination to lead the Group by example have amended the policy which is now applicable to all employees.
GOVERNANCE FRAMEWORK Our corporate governance framework policies and practices are described in this section of the Report.
This framework provides for the development review implementation and continued oversight of a system of controls policies and procedures that uphold our high governance standards.
This section also covers some of the work we have carried out this year in effecting this framework and preparing the Group for next stages of its development.
Neil Janin David Morrison
Senior Independent
NonExecutive Director 7 March 2018 7 March 2018 NEIL JANIN CHAIRMAN OF THE BOARD DAVID MORRISON SENIOR INDEPENDENT NONEXECUTIVE DIRECTOR UK CORPORATE GOVERNANCE CODE COMPLIANCE STATEMENT Throughout the year we continued to apply the Main Principles and complied with the Provisions of the 2016 UK Corporate Governance Code.
The Code and associated guidance are published by the Financial Reporting Council and are available at www. rc. website at httpsitepageid62ourgovernance is the Boards assessment of its application of the Main Principles of the Code.
DIRECTORS GOVERNANCE OVERVIEW Committed to the highest standards of corporate governance We see robust corporate governance as fundamental to the effective management of our business and a principal contributor to the longterm success of the Group creating trust and engagement between the Group and our stakeholders.
Neil Janin CHAIRMAN OF THE BOARD 77 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
BOARD OF DIRECTORS Diverse and balanced team who govern with experience NEIL JANIN NONEXECUTIVE CHAIRMAN Neil Janin was appointed NonExecutive Chairman on 24 October 2011 and has been reelected by shareholders at each AGM since.
Mr Janin serves as Chairman of BGEOs Nomination Committee and as a member of BGEOs Remuneration Committee.
Mr Janin also serves as a member of the Supervisory Board of the Bank having stepped down as Chairman in July 2015 a position he had held since 2010.
Mr Janin continues to serve as a member of the Banks Remuneration Committee a position he has held since 2010.
Mr Janin also serves as a NonExecutive Director of Georgia Healthcare Group PLC and is a member of the Supervisory Board of JSC Georgia Healthcare Group.
Ahead of the proposed demerger Mr Janin has also been appointed as Chairman of Bank of Georgia Group plc.
Skills and experience Mr Janin serves as counsel to CEOs of both forprofit and nonprofit organisations and continues to provide consulting services to McKinsey and Company.
Prior to joining the Bank in 2010 Mr Janin was a Director of McKinsey and Company based in its Paris office for over 27 years from 1982 until his retirement.
At McKinsey and Company he conducted engagements in the retail asset management and corporate banking sectors and was actively involved in every aspect of organisational practice including design leadership governance performance enhancement and transformation.
In 2009 while serving as a member of the French Institute of Directors Mr Janin authored a position paper on the responsibilities of the Board of Directors with regard to the design and implementation of a companys strategy.
Before joining McKinsey and Company Mr Janin worked for Chase Manhattan Bank now JP Morgan Chase in New York and Paris and Procter and Gamble in Toronto.
Mr Janin has practised in Europe Asia and North America.
Mr Janin is also a Director of Neil Janin Limited a company through which he provides consulting services.
Education
Mr Janin holds an MBA from York University Toronto and a joint honours degree in Economics and Accounting from McGill University Montreal.
IRAKLI GILAURI
Irakli Gilauri was appointed as an Executive Director of BGEO on 24 October 2011 and has been reelected by shareholders at each AGM since.
Mr Gilauri has served as CEO of BGEO since his appointment in 2011 and was appointed Chairman of the Bank in September 2015 having previously served as CEO of the Bank since May 2006.
Mr Gilauri also serves as CEO of JSC BGEO Group JSC BGEO Investment Group and JSC BG Financial Group.
He is currently Chairman of the Board of Georgia Healthcare Group PLC and Chairman of the Supervisory Board for the following subsidiaries JSC Georgia Healthcare Group m Real Estate Georgian Renewable Power Company and Teliani Valley.
He is also a member of the Supervisory Board of Georgia Global Utilities and Agron Group.
Ahead of the proposed demerger Mr Gilauri has also been appointed as CEO and Chairman of Georgia Capital plc.
Skills and experience Before his employment with the Bank Mr Gilauri was a banker at the EBRDs Tbilisi and London offices for five years where he worked on transactions involving debt and private equity investments in Georgian companies.
Education
Mr Gilauri received his undergraduate degree in Business Studies Economics and Finance from the University of Limerick Ireland in 1998.
He was later awarded the Chevening Scholarship granted by the British Council to study at CASS Business School of City University London where he obtained his MSc in Banking and International Finance.
DAVID MORRISON SENIOR INDEPENDENT NONEXECUTIVE
David Morrison was appointed as the Senior Independent NonExecutive Director of BGEO on 24 October 2011 and has been reelected by shareholders at each AGM since.
Mr Morrison assumed the role of Chairman of BGEOs Audit Committee in December 2013 prior to which he had served as a member of the Committee.
Mr Morrison is also a member of BGEOs Remuneration and Nomination Committees and serves on the Banks Supervisory Board and as a member of the Banks Audit and Remuneration Committees positions he has held since 2010.
Mr Morrison is also a Non Executive Director of Georgia Healthcare Group PLC and a member of the Supervisory Board of JSC Georgia Healthcare Group.
Ahead of the proposed demerger Mr Morrison has also been appointed to the Board of Georgia Capital plc.
Skills and experience Mr Morrison is a member of the New York bar and worked for 28 years at Sullivan and Cromwell LLP until he withdrew from the firm in 2007 to pursue his other interests.
At Sullivan and Cromwell he served as Managing Partner of the firms Continental European offices.
His practice focused on advising public companies in a transactional context from capital raisings and IPOs to mergers and acquisitions.
Key clients included investment banks and a wide range of commercial and industrial companies.
He advised on a number of the largest privatisations in Europe and was advisor to Germanys development bank Kreditanstalt fr Wiederaufbau KfW for over 20 years serving on the Board of Directors of KfWs finance subsidiary.
Mr Morrison is the author of several publications on securities law related topics and has been recognised as a leading lawyer in Germany and France.
In 2008 Mr Morrison turned his attention to financing for nature protection.
He became the Founding CEO of the Caucasus Nature Fund CNF a charitable trust fund dedicated to nature conservation in Georgia Armenia and Azerbaijan.
He resigned as CEO in March of 2016 and now serves as Chair of its Board of Directors as well as on the Boards of two new conservation trust funds he helped to create in 2015 and 2016.
Education
Mr Morrison received his undergraduate degree from Yale College received his law degree from the University of California Los Angeles and was a Fulbright scholar at the University of Frankfurt.
78 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Diverse and balanced team who govern with experience continued ALASDAIR AL BREACH INDEPENDENT NONEXECUTIVE
Al Breach was appointed as an Independent NonExecutive Director of BGEO on 24 October 2011 and has been reelected by shareholders at each AGM since.
Mr Breach serves as Chairman of BGEOs Remuneration Committee and serves as a member of BGEOs Risk and Nomination Committees.
Mr Breach also serves as a member of the Banks Supervisory Board and as Chairman of the Banks Remuneration Committee positions he has held since 2010 and has also been a member of the Banks Risk Committee since December 2014.
Ahead of the proposed demerger Mr Breach has also been appointed to the Board of Bank of Georgia Group plc.
Skills and experience In 2013 Mr Breach cofounded Gemsstock Limited a UK FCAregulated fund manager where he also serves as an Executive Director.
In 2010 Mr Breach founded Furka Advisors AG a Swissbased asset management firm and served as an Executive Director until founding Gemsstock Limited which manages the Gemsstock Fund which was previously called the Gemsstock Growth Fund and managed by Mr Breach at Furka Advisors AG.
His previous career was in research in investment banks principally in Russia.
In January 2003 Mr Breach joined Brunswick UBS later UBS Russia as Chief Economist and later was appointed Head of Research and Managing Director until October 2007.
From 1998 to 2002 Mr Breach was a Russia and Former Soviet Union FSU economist at Goldman Sachs based in of current affairs writing established in 2008.
Mr Breach serves as a Director of Gemsstock Limited the Gemsstock Fund The Browser and Furka Holdings AG all of which are private entities.
He is also an advisor to East Capital.
Education
Mr Breach obtained an MSc in Economics from the London School of Economics and an undergraduate degree in Mathematics and Philosophy from Edinburgh University.
KIM BRADLEY INDEPENDENT NONEXECUTIVE
Kim Bradley was appointed as an Independent NonExecutive Director of BGEO on 19 December 2013 and has been reelected by shareholders at each AGM since.
Mr Bradley serves as Chairman of the BGEO Risk Committee and as a member of BGEOs Audit and Nomination Committees.
Mr Bradley was also appointed to the Banks Supervisory Board in December 2013 and serves as Chairman of the Banks Risk Committee and as a member of the Banks Audit Committee.
Ahead of the proposed demerger Mr Bradley has also been appointed to the Board of Georgia Capital plc.
Skills and experience Mr Bradley retired from Goldman Sachs in early 2013 following 15 years as a professional in the Real Estate Principal Investments and Realty Management divisions where he focused on investment in both European real estate and distressed debt.
In addition to his investment activities Mr Bradley led Goldmans asset management affiliates in France Italy and Germany where he was involved in financial and tax audits as well as management of internal audit activities.
He has also served as President of Societa Gestione Crediti a member of the Board of Directors of Capitalia Service Joint Venture in Italy and Chairman of the Shareholders Board at Archon Capital Bank Deutschland in Germany.
Prior to Goldman Sachs he served as a Senior Executive at GE Capital for seven years in both the United States and Europe where his activities included real estate workouts and restructuring as well as acquisitions.
Prior to GE Capital Mr Bradley held senior executive positions at Manufacturers Hanover Trust now part of JP Morgan and Dollar Dry Dock Bank.
He has also served as a Peace Corps volunteer and as a consultant with the US Agency for International Development in Cameroon.
Mr Bradley serves as a Director of a mental health charity.
Education
Mr Bradley holds an MA in International Affairs from the Columbia University School of International Affairs and an undergraduate degree in English Literature from the University of Arizona.
TAMAZ GEORGADZE INDEPENDENT NONEXECUTIVE
Tamaz Georgadze was appointed as an Independent NonExecutive Director of BGEO Group on 19 December 2013 and has been reelected by shareholders at each AGM since.
Mr Georgadze serves as a member of BGEO Groups Risk and Nomination Committees.
Mr Georgadze was also appointed to the Banks Supervisory Board in December 2013.
He serves as a member of the Banks newly established Risk Committee.
Ahead of the proposed demerger Mr Georgadze has also been appointed to the Board of Bank of Georgia Group plc.
Skills and experience In 2013 Mr Georgadze founded Raisin GmbH formerly SavingsGlobal GmbH a company which launched the first global deposit intermediation in Europe and he continues to serve as its Executive Director.
Prior to founding this company Mr Georgadze had a tenyear career at McKinsey and Company in Berlin where he served as a Partner from 2009 to 2013.
At McKinsey and Company he conducted engagements with banks in Germany Switzerland Russia Georgia and Vietnam focusing on strategy risk identification and management deposit and investment products operations and sales.
Prior to joining McKinsey and Company Mr Georgadze worked as an aide to the President of Georgia in the Foreign Relations Department from 1994 to 1995.
Save for his role at Raisin GmbH Mr Georgadze does not hold any other directorships.
Education
Mr Georgadze holds two PhDs one in Economics from Tbilisi State University and the other in Agricultural Economics from JustusLiebig University Gieen Germany.
Mr Georgadze also studied Law at JustusLiebig Universitt Gieen and graduated with honours.
BOARD OF DIRECTORS CONTINUED 79 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
Diverse and balanced team who govern with experience continued HANNA LOIKKANEN INDEPENDENT NONEXECUTIVE DIRECTOR Hanna Loikkanen was appointed as an Independent NonExecutive Director of BGEO by the Board in June 2015 and was elected by shareholders at the 2016 AGM.
Ms Loikkanen is a member of BGEO s Nomination Committee and the Risk Committee and was appointed to BGEO s Audit Committee in March 2016.
Ms Loikkanen was also appointed to the Bank s Supervisory Board in August 2015.
Ms Loikkanen previously served as a Non Executive Director of BGEO from 2011 to 2013 and as a member of the Bank s Supervisory Board from 2010 to 2013.
Ahead of the proposed demerger Ms Loikkanen has also been appointed to the Board of Bank of Georgia Group plc.
Skills and experience Ms Loikkanen has over 20 years of experience working with financial institutions in Russia and Eastern Europe.
She currently serves as an advisor to East Capital Private Equity AB.
Prior to this she served from 2007 to 2012 first as an advisor and then as the Chief Representative and Head of the Private Equity team at East Capital a Swedish asset management company in Moscow.
Prior to joining East Capital Ms Loikkanen held the position of Country Manager and Chief Executive Officer at FIM Group in Russia a Finnish investment bank where she was responsible for setting up and running FIM Group s brokerage and corporate finance operations in Russia.
During her tenure at FIM Group the company advised several large foreign companies in their MandA activities in Russia.
Earlier in her career Ms Loikkanen worked for Nordea Finance in various management positions in Poland the Baltic States and Scandinavia with a focus on business development strategy and business integration for SEB in Moscow where she was responsible for the restructuring of SEB s debt capital market operations in Russia and for MeritaNordbanken in St Petersburg where she focused on trade finance and correspondent banking.
In addition to her directorships at BGEO Group and the Bank Ms Loikkanen serves as a NonExecutive Director and a member of the Audit and Risk Committees of Locko Bank an SMEfocused Russian bank as a NonExecutive Director of AKI Bank in T atarstan and as a NonExecutive Director of Locko Invest Locko Bank s investment banking subsidiary .
Since
2014 she has acted as NonExecutive Chairman of the Board of TandB Capital an independent regulated wealth management company based in Helsinki.
In
2017 she was also appointed as an Independent NonExecutive Director of PJSC Rosbank a universal bank listed on the Moscow Stock Exchange and part of the Socite Gnrale Group.
Education
Ms Loikkanen holds a Master s degree in Economics and Business Administration from the Helsinki School of Economics and was a Helsinki School of Economics scholar at the University of New South Wales.
JONATHAN MUIR INDEPENDENT NONEXECUTIVE
Jonathan Muir was appointed as an advisor to the Board and as a member of the Audit Committee in January 2017 and subsequently appointed as an Independent NonExecutive Director on 20 June 2017 remaining a member of the Audit Committee and joining the Nomination Committee.
Mr Muir is also a member of the Banks Supervisory Board and Audit and Nomination Committees.
Ahead of the proposed demerger Mr Muir has also been appointed to the Board of Bank of Georgia Group plc.
Skills and experience Mr Muir has over 30 years experience working as a professional in accounting and finance.
He is an Executive Director CEO of LetterOne Holdings SA and is CEO of LetterOne Investment
LetterOne is an international investment business consisting of two groups which target investments in the healthcare energy telecoms and technology and retail sectors.
Prior to joining LetterOne Mr Muir was CFO 20082013 and Vice President of Finance and Control 20032008 of TNKBP  which he joined after serving as CFO of SIDANCO one of TNKBPs heritage companies.
Prior to this he was a partner at the global audit and consulting company Ernst and Young 19852000.
Education
Mr Muir graduated with first class honours from St.
Andrews University.
He is a British qualified Chartered Accountant and a member of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of England and Wales.
REBECCA WOOLDRIDGE GROUP COMPANY SECRETARY Rebecca Wooldridge was appointed Company Secretary of BGEO Group PLC in September 2017 having previously acted as the Deputy Group Company Secretary since 2016.
She is additionally the Company Secretary for Georgia Healthcare Group PLC.
She also serves as the secretary to the Audit Nomination Remuneration and Risk Committees.
Ahead of the proposed demerger Ms Wooldridge was appointed as Company Secretary of Bank of Georgia Group plc and Georgia Capital plc.
Skills and experience Ms Wooldridge is a lawyer specialising in corporate governance.
She was previously Principal Counsel for a FTSE 100 top 20 company BG Group PLC where she held a progression of legal roles 20082016 including serving on the Reserves Committee.
Before joining BG Group Ms Wooldridge was a corporate lawyer for leading City firm Allen and Overy LLP 20032008.
Education
Ms Wooldridge is a qualified solicitor in England and Wales.
She holds a Post Graduate Diploma in Law and a Legal Practice Course qualification from Nottingham Law School.
She also holds a Masters degree in English from Cambridge University.
80 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC BGEO Group Executive Management Experienced leadership who deliver our strategy AVTO NAMICHEISHVILI GROUP GENERAL COUNSEL Mr Namicheishvili was appointed as General Counsel of JSC BGEO Group in September 2015.
He previously served as Deputy CEO Legal of the Bank since July 2008 prior to which he served as the Banks General Counsel from March 2007.
Before joining the Bank Mr Namicheishvili was a partner at Begiashvili and Co.
Limited a leading Georgian law firm where he acted as external legal advisor for Bank of Georgia from 2004.
He received his undergraduate degrees in Law and International Economic Relations from Tbilisi State University and a graduate degree LLM in International Business Law from Central European University Hungary.
EKATERINA SHAVGULIDZE GROUP HEAD OF INVESTMENTS AND BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT Ms Shavgulidze was appointed as a Group Head of Investments and Business Development.
Prior to her appointment Ms Shavgulidze served as a Group Head of Investor Relations and
Ms Shavgulidze joined the Group in 2011 and served as the CEO of the healthcare services business.
Before her employment with the Group Ms Shavgulidze was an Associate Finance Director at AstraZeneca UK for two years where she worked on finance projects in Eastern Europe including an assignment as CFO for AstraZeneca Kazakhstan.
Ms Shavgulidze received her undergraduate degree in Business Administration from the European School of Management in Georgia and received her MBA from Wharton Business School majoring in Finance and Entrepreneurship.
GIORGI ALPAIDZE GROUP CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER Mr Alpaidze was appointed as Group CFO in September 2017 prior to which he served as Head of the Groups Finance Funding and Investor Relations.
Mr Alpaidze has extensive international experience in banking accounting and finance.
He joined the Group in August 2016 from Ernst and Young LLPs Greater New York Citys assurance practice where he was a senior manager serving Ernst and Youngs financial services clients.
Mr Alpaidze started his career at Ernst and Young Georgia in 2005 and moved to Ernst and Youngs United States practice in 2010.
Mr Alpaidze is a US Certified Public Accountant and received his undergraduate degree in Business Administration from the European School of Management in Georgia.
EXECUTIVE MANAGEMENT IRAKLI GILAURI GROUP CEO Please see page 77 for his biography.
81 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
Experienced leadership who deliver our strategy JSC Bank of Georgia Executive Management KAKHABER KAHA KIKNAVELIDZE CEO BANK OF GEORGIA Mr Kiknavelidze was appointed as CEO of the Bank in September 2016.
Immediately prior to his appointment Mr Kiknavelidze served as an Independent NonExecutive Director of BGEO Group from October 2011 to September 2016 which included positions on BGEOs Audit Risk and Nomination Committees and he also served as a member of the Banks Supervisory Board and Audit Committee positions he held since 2008.
Mr Kiknavelidze has over 15 years of experience in financial services including a number of roles at UBS and Troika Dialog.
He was the founder and Managing Partner of Rioni Capital Partners LLP  a Londonbased investment management company the role he stepped down from at the end of 2016.
Mr Kiknavelidze received his undergraduate degree in Economics with honours from the Georgian Agrarian University in Tbilisi Georgia and received his MBA from Emory University Atlanta US.
Ahead of the proposed demerger Mr Kiknavelidze has also been appointed as CEO of Bank of Georgia Group plc.
DAVID TSIKLAURI CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER Mr Tsiklauri was appointed as Chief Financial Officer of the Bank in September 2017.
He previously served as a Deputy CEO Corporate Investment Banking since January 2017.
Prior to joining the Bank Mr Tsiklauri served as Deputy CEO in charge of Corporate Banking at TBC Bank a position he held since 2014.
Before TBC Bank Mr Tsiklauri served as the Vice President of the Capital Markets and Treasury Solutions team at Deutsche Bank since 2011 where he started as an associate in the Debt Capital Markets Department in 2008.
Mr Tsiklauri has an MBA degree from London Business School.
LEVAN KULIJANISHVILI DEPUTY CEO OPERATIONS Mr Kulijanishvili was appointed as Deputy CEO Operations of the Bank in September 2017.
Prior to this appointment he served as Group CFO from February 2016 and previously served as Deputy CEO Finance of Bank of Georgia.
He has been with the Bank since 1997.
During his 19 years of service Mr Kulijanishvili has held various senior positions including Head of Compliance and Internal Control from 2009 until his appointment as Deputy CEO Finance Head of the Internal Audit department 2000 to 2009 Manager of the Financial Monitoring Strategy and Planning department 1999 to 2000 and Head of the Financial Analysis division 1997 to1999.
He received his undergraduate degree in Economics and Commerce from Tbilisi State University and received his MBA from Grenoble Graduate School of Business.
MIKHEIL GOMARTELI DEPUTY CEO RETAIL BANKING EXPRESS BANKING AND BRAND
Following the split of Retail Banking into two segments in February 2017 due to significant growth in the Retail Banking business Mr Gomarteli assumed the role of Deputy CEO responsible for Express Banking and Brand
Prior to this Mr Gomarteli had served as the sole Deputy CEO of Retail Banking since February 2009.
He has been with the Bank since December 1997.
During his 20 years of service with the Bank Mr Gomarteli has held various senior positions including CoHead of Retail Banking March 2007 to February 2009 Head of Business Development March 2005 to July 2005 Head of Strategy and Planning 2004 to 2005 Head of Branch Management and Sales Coordination 2003 to 2004 Head of Branch Management and Marketing 2002 to 2003 and Head of Banking Products and Marketing 2000 to 2002.
Mr Gomarteli received an undergraduate degree in Economics from Tbilisi State University.
RAMAZ KUKULADZE DEPUTY CEO MSME AND PREMIUM RETAIL BUSINESS BANKING Mr Kukuladze was appointed as Deputy CEO MSME and Premium Retail Banking in February 2017.
Prior to his current role Mr Kukuladze held the joint role of Chief Commercial Officer and Deputy CEO at Bank Republic since 2013 having previously served as the Chief Commercial Officer since 2011.
Before working at Bank Republic Socit Gnrale Group Mr Kukuladze spent two years working for Silknet as Deputy CEO in charge of commercial business.
Mr Kukuladze first joined the Bank in 2006 and served as a Deputy CEO Corporate Banking until 2009.
Before first joining the Bank Mr Kukuladze served as CEO of BCI Insurance Company a company founded by him in 1998 which later was acquired by the Group.
Mr Kukuladze received his MBA from IE Business School.
82 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC JSC Bank of Georgia Executive Management continued EXECUTIVE MANAGEMENT CONTINUED Experienced leadership who deliver our strategy continued VASIL KHODELI DEPUTY CEO CORPORATE INVESTMENT BANKING Mr Khodeli was appointed as Deputy CEO Corporate Investment Banking in September 2017 having previously served as Head of Corporate Banking of the Bank since 2004.
He has more than 20 years of banking experience and has held various roles with the Bank since 1998.
Mr Khodeli has been actively involved in shaping the Banks Corporate Banking business platform since its launch.
He holds an MBA degree from Grenoble Business School.
GEORGE CHILADZE
DEPUTY CEO CHIEF RISK OFFICER
Mr Chiladze was appointed as Deputy CEO Chief Risk Officer in September 2013.
He rejoined the Bank having already served as Deputy CEO Finance from 2008 to 2012.
From 2012 to 2013 Mr Chiladze was deputy CEO at the Partnership Fund and he served as general director of BTA Bank Georgia from 2005 to 2011.
Prior to joining BTA Bank he was an executive member of the Supervisory Board of JSC Europace Insurance Company and a founding partner of the management consulting firm Altergroup
Mr Chiladze had previously worked in the US at the Programme Trading Desk at Bear Stearns in New York City prior to returning to Georgia in 2003.
Mr Chiladze received a PhD in Physics from Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore Maryland and an undergraduate degree in Physics from Tbilisi State University.
VAKHTANG BOBOKHIDZE CHIEF INFORMATION OFFICER Mr Bobokhidze was appointed as the Head of IT Department in April 2016.
He joined the Bank in late 2005 as a Quality Control Manager through a progression of positions until he joined JSC Bank Republic in 2010.
Mr Bobokhidze made his return to the Bank in December 2010 as IT Business Consultant and he currently holds the position Head of IT DepartmentChief Information
He received his undergraduate and MBA degree from Tbilisi State University.
83 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
Experienced leadership who deliver our strategy continued Investment Business Executive Management NIKOLOZ GAMKRELIDZE CEO GEORGIA HEALTHCARE GROUP Mr Gamkrelidze was appointed as CEO of Georgia Healthcare Group in December 2014 having previously served as Deputy CEO Finance at Bank of Georgia since October 2012 prior to which he was CEO of Aldagi.
Before joining Aldagi Mr Gamkrelidze served as CEO of joint stock company My Family Clinic from October 2005 to October 2007.
Prior to that he served as a consultant at Primary Healthcare Development Project a World Bank Project and worked on the development of pharmaceutical policy and regulation in Georgia.
Prior to joining Primary Healthcare Development Project he served at BCI Insurance Company as Head of the Personal Risks Insurance Department from 2002 to 2003.
Mr Gamkrelidze started his career at the State Medical Insurance Company in 1998 where he worked for two years.
He graduated from the Faculty of General Medicine of Tbilisi with distinctions and holds an MA in International Healthcare Management from the Tanaka Business School of Imperial College London.
ARCHIL GACHECHILADZE CEO GEORGIA GLOBAL UTILITIES Mr Gachechiladze was appointed as CEO of Georgian Global Utilities in January 2017.
He served as Deputy CEO Corporate and Investment Banking from February 2016 until his recent appointment.
Mr Gachechiladze also served as Group CFO 20152016 and Deputy CEO Investment Management since 2013.
He joined the Bank in 2009 as Deputy CEO Corporate Banking.
Prior to this Mr Gachechiladze served as Deputy Director in charge of Corporate Recovery at TBC Bank Georgia a position he took up in August 2008.
From 2006 to 2008 he was an Associate at Lehman Brothers Private Equity currently Trilantic Capital Partners in London.
From 1998 to 2004 Mr Gachechiladze served as a Senior Associate at Salford Equity Partners as a Senior Analyst at EBRD in Tbilisi and London as a Senior Financial Analyst at KPMG Barents in Tbilisi and as a Team Leader for the World Banks CERMA Project in Tbilisi.
Mr Gachechiladze received his undergraduate degree in Economics and Law from Tbilisi State University and his MBA with distinction from Cornell University.
He is also a CFA Charterholder and a member of the CFA Society in the United Kingdom.
IRAKLI BURDILADZE CEO JSC m REAL ESTATE Mr Burdiladze was appointed as CEO of JSC m Real Estate in September 2015 having previously served as Deputy CEO Affordable Housing of JSC Bank of Georgia from 2010.
Prior to this he served as the Banks Chief Operating Officer from March 2007 to June 2010 after having spent a year as CFO.
Prior to joining the Bank he served as CFO of the GMT Group a leading real estate developer and operator in
Mr Burdiladze has a graduate degree in International Economics and International Relations from the Johns Hopkins University School of Advanced International Studies and an undergraduate degree in International Relations from Tbilisi State University.
SHOTA KOBELIA CEO TELIANI VALLEY Mr Kobelia was appointed as CEO of Teliani Valley in January 2010 having previously served as Chief Commercial officer in Pernod Ricard Georgia.
Prior to joining Pernod Ricard Mr Kobelia worked as Head of Sales in several beverage businesses in the United
He received his Bachelor degree in agricultural science at Georgian National Agrarian University and holds a Masters degree in International Sales and Marketing from Bordeaux Business School France.
GIORGI BARATASHVILI CEO ALDAGI Mr Baratashvili was appointed CEO of Aldagi from August 2014 having previously held different positions in Aldagi and has 14 years of experience working in insurance.
He was in charge of strategic management for corporate sales and corporate account management and has also served as corporate sales director.
Mr Baratashvili graduated from Tbilisi State University Faculty of International Law and International Relations in 2006 and holds a Masters Diploma in International Law.
84 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FRAMEWORK OUR GOVERNANCE STRUCTURE NOMINATION COMMITTEE AUDIT COMMITTEE RISK COMMITTEE REMUNERATION COMMITTEE
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER
EXECUTIVE MANAGEMENT KEY RESPONSIBILITIES Ensures the Board has the right balance of skills experience independence and Group knowledge.
Responsible for both Director and management succession planning.
KEY RESPONSIBILITIES Reviews and monitors the integrity of the Groups financial and reporting processes.
Responsible for the governance of both the internal audit function and external auditor.
Works with the Risk Committee in assessing the effectiveness of the risk management and internal control framework.
KEY RESPONSIBILITIES Assists the Board in relation to risk oversight.
Reviews Group risk appetite in line with strategy.
Identifies and monitors risk exposure and the risk management infrastructure.
Assesses the strength and effectiveness of the risk management and internal control framework.
KEY RESPONSIBILITIES Makes recommendations to the Board on the Directors Remuneration Policy.
Determines the remuneration package of the Chief Executive Officer and executive management.
Assesses the performance of executive management against KPIs.
Responsible for design and oversight of the Group employee share schemes.
See pages 91 to 94 for the Audit Committee Report.
See pages 95 to 96 for the Risk Committee Report.
See pages 89 to 90 for the Nomination Committee Report.
See pages 98 to 113 for the
Remuneration Committee Report.
BOARD
BGEO GROUP PLC BOARD OF DIRECTORS The Board is responsible collectively for the longterm success of the Group and for the creation and delivery to shareholders of sustainable value through the management of the Groups businesses.
The Board establishes the Groups core values and leads by example sets and oversees the execution of the Groups strategy within a framework of strong and effective risk management and internal controls and encourages a culture of corporate governance in line with best practice amongst its many other responsibilities.
The Board is composed of eight Directors seven of whom are Independent NonExecutive Directors.
Each of the Chairman CEO and NonExecutive Directors have clearly defined roles within our Board structure.
A description of these roles can be found on our website at httpsitepageid66rolesandresponsibilities.
CHAIRMAN
The principal role of the Chairman Neil Janin is to lead the Board effectively and provide direction and focus to its discussions.
The
Chairman is the guardian of the Boards decisionmaking processes and also promotes high standards of integrity probity and corporate governance throughout the Group and at Board level.
He facilitates effective contributions by the NonExecutive Directors promotes a culture of openness and debate and encourages constructive relations between Executive and NonExecutive Directors.
The Chairman works closely with the CEO to ensure that the actions and strategies proposed and agreed by the Board are implemented effectively.
The Chairmans other significant commitments are indicated in his biography on page 77.
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER CEO
The Group CEO Irakli Gilauri leads the management team manages the business of the Group develops and oversees the implementation of all Board approved actions the strategic direction of the Group and its commercial objectives.
The CEO also supports the Chairman to ensure that appropriate governance standards are spread throughout the Group.
The CEO oversees the executive management team which assists him in managing the business.
Further details on the executive management team can be found on page 80.
SENIOR INDEPENDENT DIRECTOR SID The Senior Independent Director David Morrison provides a sounding board for the Chairman acts as an intermediary for the other Directors when necessary and is available to shareholders if they have concerns that have not been addressed through the normal channels.
Directors are expected to provide rigorous and constructive challenge on matters that owing to their strategic financial or reputational implications or consequences are considered significant to the Group.
SEPARATION OF THE CHAIRMAN AND CEO ROLES There is a clear division of responsibilities between the Chairman and the CEO.
The separation of authority is set out in writing and agreed by the Board.
This enhances independent oversight of executive management by the Board and helps to ensure that no one individual on the Board has unfettered power influence or authority.
The division of responsibilities can be found on the Companys website at httpsiteuploadspagesrolesandresponsibilities68. df.
85 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
GROUP COMPANY SECRETARY The Company Secretary is responsible for providing guidance to the Board collectively and to the Directors individually with regard to their duties responsibilities and powers and for ensuring the proper administration of the proceedings and matters relating to the Board the Company and the shareholders of the Company in accordance with applicable legislation regulation and procedures.
The Board has access to the advice and services of the Company Secretary who advises the Board and the Board Committees on relevant matters including compliance with the Groups policies and procedures the Listing Rules legislation and regulations relevant to the Company and the UK Corporate Governance Code and other governance standards.
BOARD COMMITTEES The Board has delegated authority to the Board Committees to carry out certain tasks on its behalf in order to operate efficiently and give the right level of attention and consideration to relevant matters and to ensure there is independent oversight of financial audit internal control and risk issues review of remuneration as well as oversight and review of Board and executive succession planning while reserving the authority to approve certain key matters as documented in the Companys matters reserved for the Board which is reviewed annually by the Board.
The key responsibilities of the Board Committees are summarised in the individual Committee Reports.
In 2017 the Board had four Committees comprised solely of Independent NonExecutive Directors with the exception of the Audit Committee on which Jonathan Muir served as a member prior to his appointment as an Independent NonExecutive Director on 20 June 2017 the Nomination Committee the Audit Committee the Risk Committee and the Remuneration Committee Later in this section there are reports from the Chairman of each Committee which describe the Committees activities in 2017 and priorities for 2018.
AUDIT COMMITTEE The Audit Committee assists the Board in relation to the oversight of the Groups financial and reporting processes.
It monitors the integrity of the financial statements and is responsible for governance around both the internal audit function and external auditor reporting back to the Board.
It reviews the effectiveness of the policies procedures and systems in place related to among other operational risks compliance IT and information security including cybersecurity and works closely with the Risk Committee in connection with assessing the effectiveness of the risk management and internal control framework.
The Audit Committee oversees and challenges management on its internal control and risk management systems in relation to the financial reporting process.
Full details of the internal control and risk management systems are set out within the Audit Committee Report on pages 91 to 94.
RISK COMMITTEE The main role of the Risk Committee is in relation to the oversight of risk.
It reviews the Groups risk appetite in line with strategy identifies and monitors risk exposure and the risk management infrastructure oversees the implementation of strategy to address risk and in conjunction with the Audit Committee assesses the strength and effectiveness of the risk management and internal control framework.
Read the Risk Committee Report on pages 95 to 96.
NOMINATION COMMITTEE The Nomination Committee ensures that the Board continues to have the right balance of skills experience independence and Group knowledge necessary for the Board to set and monitor the strategic direction of the Group and discharge its responsibilities in accordance with the highest standards of governance and the diversity aspirations of the Board.
It is responsible for both Director and management succession planning.
Read the Nomination Committee Report on pages 89 to 90.
REMUNERATION COMMITTEE The Remuneration Committee reviews and recommends to the Board the Directors Remuneration Policy to ensure that remuneration packages are designed to promote the longterm success of BGEO and to see that management is appropriately rewarded for its contribution to the Groups performance in the context of wider market conditions and shareholder views.
The Committee determines the remuneration packages of the Executive Directors the Chairman and executive management along with their terms of employment and assesses the performance of executive management against KPIs.
It is also responsible for designing and overseeing the administration of Group employee share schemes.
Read the Remuneration Committee Report on pages 98 to 113.
TERMS OF REFERENCE AND REPORTING TO THE BOARD Each Committee has agreed Terms of Reference which are reviewed annually by each Committee and any changes are approved by the
Each Committees Terms of Reference can be found on the Companys website at httpsitepageid70termsofreference.
All NonExecutive Directors have a standing invitation to attend Committee meetings rather than just limiting attendance to Committee members.
THE ROLE OF THE BOARD The Boards principal duty is to promote the longterm success of the Group by directing management towards creating and delivering sustainable shareholder value.
We do this by setting the Groups strategy and overseeing its implementation by management.
The Board is accountable to shareholders for the financial performance of the Group.
We believe that the success of the implementation of the Companys strategy requires the alignment of strategy with the Groups internal governance framework.
We view a strong system of risk management and internal controls as essential to governance in allowing us to pursue our strategy in a way that risk appetite can be set and risks identified assessed managed and reported effectively.
You can read more about our risk management on pages 32 to 43.
By setting the tone at the top establishing the core values of the Group and demonstrating our leadership management is able to implement key policies and procedures we have created in a manner that clearly sets an expectation that every employee acts ethically and transparently in all of his or her dealings.
We also monitor managements execution of strategy and financial performance.
While our ultimate focus is longterm growth the Group also needs to deliver on shortterm objectives and we seek to ensure that management strikes the right balance between the two.
86 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FRAMEWORK CONTINUED We are mindful of our wider obligations and consider the impact our decisions will have on the Groups various stakeholders such as our employees our shareholders our customers and clients the environment and our community as a whole.
You can read more about our sustainability initiatives on pages 44 to 51.
In order to ensure that we meet our responsibilities specific key decisions have been reserved for approval by the Board.
A full formal schedule of matters specifically reserved for the Board can be found on our website at httpsitepageid67scheduleofmatters reservedfortheboard.
OPERATION OF THE BOARD We schedule Board meetings for at least four times a year in Georgia for a period of two days each time.
We also hold meetings at our London offices with Directors either attending in person or via teleconference.
Matters which require decisions outside the scheduled meetings are dealt with through additional ad hoc meetings and conference calls.
In addition in 2017 majority of the Board attended our annual investor day.
In total we met formally as a Board ten times during the year.
The
Board also passed written resolutions on three separate occasions.
A number of the NonExecutive Directors also carry out site visits several times a year.
Examples in 2017 include visits to bank branches Solo lounges real estate sites under construction a wind turbine test water pumping and service facilities hospitals pharmacies and clinics.
At each scheduled meeting we receive reports from the Chairman BGEO CEO CFO and the Bank CEO and Bank CFO on the performance and results of the Group.
The CEOs of our principal subsidiaries and the Deputy CEOs of the Bank regularly update the Board on the performance strategic developments and initiatives in their respective segment throughout the year.
The Banks Chief Risk Officer Group General Counsel and Group Head of Investor Relations regularly present to the full Board.
The Board receives updates from Group operating functions on internal control and risk management compliance internal audit human resources and corporate responsibility matters.
Similarly the Chairman with support from the Company Secretary ensures that time is available during and outside of Board meetings to hold sessions with the NonExecutive Directors without Executives present.
There is an annual schedule of rolling agenda items to ensure that all matters are given due consideration and are reviewed at the appropriate point in the financial and regulatory cycle.
These include the budget quarterly halfyear and full year results the Annual Report and Accounts approval of the final dividend and the Notice of AGM.
A typical quarterly inperson meeting will include discussion on the following topics Updates from Committee Chairmen on matters discussed at the respective Committee meeting held the day before The macroeconomic environment Financial performance Business segment performance and developments A deeper dive into strategy and performance at one or more business units New strategic initiatives and progress against strategy Regulatory legislative and other corporate governance updates Developments in relation to principal risks and risk management Board and management succession planning and talent management are typically discussed at least twice a year.
A comprehensive assessment of the risk management framework and system of internal controls is performed at least twice a year through the Risk and Audit Committees or the full Board.
Board meetings are however flexible to ensure that pressing matters when they arise are addressed as quickly as possible.
In the most recent year the separation of the Bank and Investment Business has been on the agenda at every meeting since March 2017.
The Chairman and CEO seek input from the NonExecutive Directors ahead of each Board meeting.
The Senior Independent Director helps to ensure that any particular matters raised by NonExecutive Directors are included on the agenda for discussion by the Board.
In addition the Chairman meets with the CEO after each meeting to agree the followup actions and to discuss how effective the meeting was.
The Senior Independent Director also serves as a sounding board to the Chairman and the CEO.
The Chairman and CEO maintain frequent contact in person or otherwise with each other and the other Board members throughout the year outside of the formal meetings.
BOARD MEETING ATTENDANCE Details of Board and Committee meeting attendance in 2017 are as follows Board Audit Committee Risk Committee Remuneration Committee Nomination Committee Members Attended
Maximum possible Attended
Maximum possible Attended
Neil Janin 9 10     David Morrison   Kim Bradley   2 2 Al Breach 10 10   Tamaz Georgadze   2 2 Irakli Gilauri 10 10 Hanna Loikkanen   2 2 Jonathan Muir Jonathan Muir was appointed to the Board on 20 June 2017.
Individual Directors and their biographies are set out on pages 77 to 79.
87 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
BOARD SIZE COMPOSITION AND DIVERSITY We consider that a diversity of skills backgrounds knowledge experience outlook and approach geographic location nationalities and gender is important to effectively govern the business.
The Board and its Nomination Committee work to ensure that the Board continues to have the right balance of skills experience independence and Group knowledge necessary to discharge its responsibilities.
As noted later in this Report the Board believes that its size and composition are appropriate.
In particular the Board has determined that each of the NonExecutive Directors is independent in character and judgement.
Each of our NonExecutive Directors occupies andor has previously occupied senior positions in a broad range of relevant associated industries bringing valuable external perspective to the Boards deliberations through their experience and insight enabling them to contribute significantly to decisionmaking.
No individual or group of individuals is able to dominate the decisionmaking process and no undue reliance is placed on any individual.
TENURE AND INDEPENDENCE The average tenure of our NonExecutive Directors is approximately 4.5 years.
We value diversity in all forms.
Currently six different nationalities are represented on our Board of eight Directors.
More information on our approach to diversity can be found on page 89.
We have assessed the independence of each of the seven NonExecutive Directors and are of the opinion that each acts in an independent and objective manner and therefore under the Code is independent and free from any relationship that could affect their judgement.
Each
NonExecutive Director has an ongoing obligation to inform the Board of any circumstances which could impair his or her independence.
The Board is mindful of developing diversity and is aware of various diversity reports and initiatives in the UK such as the Hampton Alexander Review FTSE Women Leaders  Improving Gender Balance in FTSE Leadership 2017 Review published in November 2017 and has noted the recommendations on women on Boards that a target of 33% female Board representation is achieved by FTSE 350 companies by 2021.
The
Board has stated its aim to increase the number of women on the Board to two by mid2018 and further increase this number thereafter.
SUCCESSION PLANNING AND BOARD APPOINTMENTS We believe that effective succession planning mitigates the risks associated with the departure or absence of well qualified and experienced individuals.
We recognise this and our aim is to ensure that the Board and management are always well resourced with the right people in terms of skills and experience in order to effectively and successfully deliver our strategy.
We also recognise that continued tenure brings a depth of Groupspecific knowledge that is important to retain.
Our succession planning model occasionally involves the recruitment of independent external advisors to our Board and Committees.
In this way we receive objective insight into our decision making and can judge whether an individual advisor has the requisite skills  and knowledge and understanding of the Group  to be appointed as an Independent NonExecutive Director.
During the year Jonathan Muir who had been appointed as an advisor on 1 January 2017 to the Board and as a member of the Audit Committee was appointed as NonExecutive Director on 20 June 2017.
Upon his appointment to the Board his advisory agreement was terminated.
As mentioned earlier in this Report the Board Nomination Committee is responsible for both Director and executive management succession planning.
There is a formal rigorous and transparent procedure for the appointment of new Directors to the Board.
EVALUATION OF BOARD PERFORMANCE The Board continually strives to improve its effectiveness and recognises that its annual evaluation process is an important tool in reaching that goal.
Our external evaluator Lintstock was engaged in 2017 to carry out a comprehensive evaluation of our Board Committees and Directors.
Lintstock has no other connection to the Company although it also performs the separate external Board and Committee evaluation of our subsidiary Georgia Healthcare Group PLC.
The outcomes of the evaluation were discussed in detail in a meeting of the Board and the Board set its priorities for the following year.
The 2017 evaluation confirmed that the Board and its Committees continue to perform effectively.
Overall the Board is considered strong bringing a good balance and mix of expertise and experience and offering real diversity of view and perspective.
Progress was felt to have been made against the objectives we set for 2017.
In particular We dedicated significant time to evaluating progress across all of our Investment Businesses and we are pleased with the progress being made in driving improvements to our financial performance and implementing our strategy across the Group.
We continue to dedicate time to discuss risk management and internal control and we were satisfied with how these systems were improved.
Based on the results of the evaluations and continued discussions the Board has set the following objectives for 2018 Overseeing the proposed demerger Overseeing that the proposed demerger and activities surrounding it cause minimum disruption to the running of the separate surviving groups and their business units Strategic focus of the Bank Investigating potential new acquisitions in the Investment Business IT strategy NONEXECUTIVE DIRECTORS TERMS OF APPOINTMENT On appointment our NonExecutive Directors are given a Letter of Appointment that sets out the terms and conditions of their directorship including the fees payable and the expected time commitment.
Each
NonExecutive Director is expected to commit approximately 2535 days per year to the role.
An additional time commitment is required to fulfil their roles as Board Committee members andor Board Committee Chairmen as applicable.
We are satisfied that all NonExecutive Directors dedicate the amount of time necessary to contribute to the effectiveness of the Board.
The Letters of Appointment for our NonExecutive Directors are available for inspection at our registered office during normal business hours and also at the Companys Annual General Meeting for 15 minutes prior to and during that Meeting.
NONEXECUTIVE DIRECTORS EXTERNAL APPOINTMENTS Any external appointment or other significant commitment of the NonExecutive Directors requires the prior approval of the Board.
Our
NonExecutive Directors hold external directorships or other external positions but the Board believes they still have sufficient time to devote to their duties as a Director of the Company and that the other external directorships positions held provide us with valuable expertise.
BOARD INDUCTION ONGOING TRAINING AND PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT On appointment each Director takes part in an induction programme during which he or she meets members of executive management receives information about the role of the Board and individual Directors each Board Committee and the powers delegated to these Committees.
The new Director is also advised of the legal and other duties and obligations of a Director of a premium listed company.
We are committed to the continuing development of our Directors in order that they may build on their expertise and develop an ever more detailed understanding of the business markets and regulatory environment in which Group companies operate and of our evolving corporate governance framework.
All of our Directors participated in ongoing training and professional development throughout 2017 which included briefings site visits development sessions and presentations by our Group Company Secretary members of management external speakers and our professional advisors.
During the year our Group Company Secretary provided updates on legislative changes including the NonFinancial Reporting Directive Diversity initiatives including the HamptonAlexander Review which the Company participated in and refresher training on Directors duties and conflicts of interest section 172 and 175 duties under the Companies Act respectively.
88 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FRAMEWORK CONTINUED In addition amendments to the Disclosure Guidance and Transparency Rules and the FRCs guidance on reporting were presented.
The Group Company Secretary also briefed the Board on proposed changes to the UK Corporate Governance Code.
The Board also received detailed training on and revised our policies and procedures to further address the guidance on the EU Market Abuse Regulation and guidance on the EU Audit Reform which have led to a revision of our NonAudit Services
INDEPENDENT PROFESSIONAL ADVICE We also ensure that all of our Directors have access to the advice of the Group Company Secretary as well as independent professional advice at the Companys expense on any matter relating to their responsibilities.
REELECTION OF DIRECTORS In line with the Codes recommendations Jonathan Muir will stand for election at the AGM in 2018 being the first AGM following his appointment to the Board.
All of our Directors seek reelection every year and therefore all other Directors will stand for reelection at the Companys
The Board has set out in the Notice of the AGM the qualifications of each Director and support for reelection.
GROUP COMPANY SECRETARY The Board appointed Rebecca Wooldridge as the new Group Company Secretary in September 2017.
She was previously Deputy Company Secretary and is an experienced corporate governance lawyer who previously worked at a FTSE 100 top 20 company and before that as corporate lawyer at a leading London City law firm.
ACCOUNTABILITY
INTERNAL CONTROLS AND RISK MANAGEMENT The Group has a comprehensive system of internal controls in place designed to ensure that risks are mitigated and that the Groups objectives are attained.
The Board recognises its responsibility to present a fair balanced and understandable assessment of the Groups position and prospects.
It is accountable for reviewing and approving the effectiveness of internal controls operated by the Group including financial operational and compliance controls and risk management.
The Board recognises its responsibility in respect of the Groups risk management process and system of internal control and oversees the activities of the Groups external auditors and the Groups risk management function which have been delegated to the Audit and Risk Committees.
A review of the Groups risk management approach is further discussed in the Strategic Report on pages 18 to 29.
For detail on the management and mitigation of each principal risk see pages 41 to 43.
The Groups viability statement is detailed on pages 33.
Please refer to pages 91 to 96 for further detail in relation to the Audit and Risk Committees roles.
The Groups governance structure of risk management is illustrated on pages 32 to 43.
89 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
NOMINATION COMMITTEE REPORT Dear Shareholders In 2017 we maintained our focus on succession planning and talent development programmes.
We believe that the skills experience knowledge and attributes of the members of our Board and executive management are the fundamental drivers for successful delivery of our strategic and financial objectives.
In December 2016 the Company appointed Jonathan Muir as an advisor to the Board and member of the Audit Committee such advisory role being for an interim period during which both sides assess suitability for Board membership without voting rights on Board matters.
The
Committee reviewed his performance fit and suitability over the first six months of the year and were very pleased to see the value of his contribution to the Board and the Audit Committee.
The Committee therefore recommended that the Board appoint him as an Independent NonExecutive Director and a member of the Nomination Committee.
Consequently Mr Muir was appointed to the Board and Nomination Committee on 20 June 2017 and continues to sit on the Audit Committee.
During the year the Committee also reviewed the time commitment and length of service of the NonExecutive Directors and facilitated the evaluations of the Board and Committees.
The Committee reported to the Board that it considered the overall size and composition of the Board to continue to be appropriate for the Company.
Taking into account the Companys strategic direction and considering the required skills and competencies required of the Board the Committee recommends that each NonExecutive Director and the Executive Director be reappointed at the 2018 AGM.
We also reviewed our Board Diversity Policy and decided that the principles should be applied at all levels of the Group with appropriate adjustments.
Accordingly an all employee Diversity Policy was updated and approved.
Following an annual external evaluation the results confirmed that the Board and Committees operate effectively and we took the feedback from these evaluations into account for our succession planning exercise.
In addition in light of the Groups demerger the Committee undertook a significant amount of work to separate some of the Investment Businesss and Banking Businesss functions and to reposition the management team.
Prior to recruiting new members members of the Committee performed a skills matrix exercise which included skills competencies cognitive and personality diversity gender and nationality diversity to better understand the present composition of the Board identify gaps and help with succession planning and recruiting.
Members of the Nomination Committee interviewed potential candidates and this process is ongoing.
The Committee sees the demerger as an opportunity to strengthen the demerged Boards and continues to be mindful of its current diversity targets.
We hope to show results.
We would also like to draw your attention to the changes in senior management considered by the Committee which we are pleased in many cases to have developed from within the Group.
I invite you to read more about our work in the following report.
Neil Janin Chairman of the Nomination Committee 7 March 2018 THE ROLE OF THE NOMINATION COMMITTEE The role of the Nomination Committee is to assist in ensuring that the Board comprises individuals who are best able to discharge the responsibilities of Directors having regard to the highest standards of governance the strategic direction of the Group and diversity aspirations of the Board.
We also help to ensure that the Group appoints excellent executive managers capable of successfully executing the Groups strategic objectives.
In summary the Nomination Committee is responsible for Reviewing the composition of the Board and Board Committees to ensure they are appropriately constituted and balanced in terms of size skills experience independence and knowledge.
Identifying suitable candidates for appointment to the Board based on criteria which takes into account the skills experience and diversity required by the Board and the attributes required of Directors.
Developing succession plans for the Chairman CEO NonExecutive Directors and key executive managerial roles.
Evaluating the suitability of Directors standing for election and reelection at the AGM.
Evaluating the independence of the NonExecutive Directors and time required from NonExecutive Directors.
Organising the process for the annual Board and Committee effectiveness reviews and implementing any plan required to address issues identified.
The Nomination Committee undertook its annual review of its Terms of Reference in September and the full Terms of Reference are available on our website httpsiteuploadspagesbgeonomination committeetermsofreference46. df.
COMPOSITION AND MEMBERS MEETING ATTENDANCE The composition of the Nomination Committee and the members meeting attendance for the year 2017 are set out in the Board and Committee Meeting Attendance table on page 86.
In order to get the right balance of skills and knowledge on our Board the Nomination Committee keeps Board composition under review throughout the year.
Each year we ask our Board members to provide feedback on the skills expertise and performance of the other Board members as well as reevaluate their own skills.
For each NonExecutive Director the Nomination Committee reviews the time commitment required by him or her taking into account any external directorships length of service as well as independence of character and integrity.
It then recommends to the Board whether each NonExecutive Director should be reappointed.
DIVERSITY POLICY Our Board embraces diversity in all its forms.
Diversity of skills background experience knowledge outlook approach gender nationality and ethnicity amongst other factors will be taken into consideration when seeking to appoint a new Director to the Board.
Similarly we are clear that diversity of outlook and approach while inevitably being difficult to measure may be equally as important.
Notwithstanding the foregoing any Board appointment will always be made based on merit.
Planning for our future in the best interests of our shareholders NEIL JANIN CHAIRMAN OF THE NOMINATION COMMITTEE 90 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC We continue to be mindful of developing best practice in diversity.
We have noted the voluntary target in the HamptonAlexander Review that FTSE 350 companies should aim for a minimum of 33% womens representation on their Boards by 2020.
The Board has stated its aim to increase the number of women on the Board to two by mid2018 and further increase this number thereafter and hence will continue to prioritise this aim.
Please also see Succession Planning below and also the Chairmans Statement on this matter on page 7.
We have made considerable progress in 2017 in embedding the importance of diversity at all levels of the Company including the development of an allemployee Diversity Policy.
This is an important step not just in terms of making sure that our recruitment and retention procedures are fitforpurpose but also in articulating our conviction that further improving diversity is good for the longterm strength of our Company.
The Diversity Policy was implemented by providing it to the HR team and incorporation into our HR policies.
The HR team also elaunched the Learning Management System which enables all employees to easily access corporate learning opportunities.
This has led to encouraging results during the year we have seen 54% of promotions awarded to female employees and 60% of those employees who enrolled on our Leadership Programmes have been female.
We have also increased our maternity leave benefits and now provide a oneoff bonus for newborn or adopted children.
Other initiatives have focussed on the inclusion aspect of diversity with 40 employees currently learning sign language to ensure smooth dialogue with deaf and hard of hearing individuals.
In June 2017 we held a childrens event the Day of Protection of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities in Georgia which was hosted by Bank employees who assisted and provided care to the events beneficiaries.
Further diversity focussed programmes are intended to take place in 2018 and will be included in next years Annual Report.
The Company participated in the HamptonAlexander Review regarding executives and those reporting to them and were pleased to receive a high performing rating in the report released in November 2017.
SUCCESSION PLANNING The Chairmans letter above sets out the succession planning and ongoing recruitment efforts in respect of the demerger and new Boards of each of the two demerged businesses.
The skills matrix exercise performed in 2017 helped us to review the skills competencies cognitive and personality diversity gender and nationality diversity of the present Board and to identify gaps and areas for improvement including from a diversity perspective and help with succession planning and recruiting.
We did not engage a search consultancy since we were provided with a broad range of candidates from our extended network and also from targeting advertising on websites which produced candidates with particular identified skills.
In 2017 the Nomination Committee recommended and the Board appointed Jonathan Muir as member of the Board.
Candidates who are shortlisted for appointment to the Board are generally seen first by a combination of the Chairman the BGEO CEO and Senior Independent NonExecutive Director although other members of the Nomination Committee may also be involved at this stage.
If the selection process progresses further each potential candidate is invited to meet other members of the Nomination Committee as well as members of management.
We then decide whether to recommend the candidate for appointment as an advisor to the Board.
It is our usual practice to appoint a Board candidate as an advisor prior to offering an appointment to the Board as an extended trial of the candidate who is only paid the equivalent to a Directors fee and whose remit is restricted to Board and Committee matters.
An advisor to the Board may be recommended for a Committee appointment.
Following this trial period the Nomination Committee will agree whether to recommend the advisor for appointment to the Board.
The Board will ultimately resolve whether to make the recommended appointment.
As noted in the letter above Jonathan Muir underwent this process and the Nomination Committee recommended him for appointment to the Board and Nomination Committee alongside his continuing membership of the Audit Committee and the Board approved such appointments.
The agreement with Mr Muir under which he had previously acted as an advisor to the Board was terminated upon his appointment as a Director of the Company.
The fee payable to him under that agreement was equivalent to the fee he receives as a NonExecutive Director.
The Nomination Committee is always mindful of its Diversity Policy when recruiting.
We had considered female candidates for the role early in the process but ultimately determined that Mr Muir was the best candidate for the role based on merit.
SENIOR MANAGEMENT APPOINTMENTS As mentioned in the letter to shareholders above we separated the Investment Businesss and Banking Businesss Chief Financial Officer functions and repositioned some of the Groups management team ahead of the demerger.
It is proposed that those with Group titles will take on the equivalent role in the demerged Investment Business.
Accordingly regulatory approval was received and the Group made the following appointments Giorgi Alpaidze was appointed Group CFO and will become the CFO of Georgia Capital plc following completion of the Groups proposed demerger David Tsiklauri was appointed Chief Financial Officer of the Bank and will become the CFO of the Banking Business following completion of the Groups demerger Levan Kulijanishvili was appointed Deputy CEO Operations of the
Vasil Khodeli was appointed Deputy CEO Corporate Investment Banking of the Bank The Committee oversaw these appointments and notes the high quality of senior management that the current Group and each business emerging from the demerger will have which will give our businesses a distinctive advantage.
The Committee also notes that the fact that all these important appointments were internal shows the strength of our talent pipeline and evidences our commitment to personal development.
TALENT DEVELOPMENT We are committed to talent development programmes and initiatives within the Group.
We increase the skills of our existing executive managers and develop a pipeline of new executive senior and middle managers through coaching mentoring and leadership programmes.
We continue to expand our programme year on year to include management at lower levels.
Career progression is tangible if our managers have the right mindset and work ethic.
The Board also met with members of middle management throughout the year.
Our talent development programmes continue to be characterised by transparency viewing oneself as part of a team of leaders helping others to succeed and honest feedback.
They are also focused on the promotion of teamwork and development of teams aiming to teach managers to Have the courage to give and seek feedback Realise that a stronger me plus a stronger you makes a stronger us Value meritocracy over favouritism Encourage dissent and dialogue instead of authoritative decision making and Favour cooperation over individualistic or heroic behaviour.
EXTERNAL EVALUATION Lintstock performed the effectiveness review of the Committee.
The evaluation concluded that the Committee continues to operate and perform effectively.
Lintstock also performed a case study on the demerger which included how Board members thought Boards and Committees should be composed in the future which allowed the Board to discuss this matter freely and assisted the Nomination Committee in helping to shape the new Boards.
Our priorities for 2018 are the composition of the Board and Committees of the proposed demerged entities and the senior management of the proposed demerged entities.
NOMINATION COMMITTEE REPORT CONTINUED 91 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
AUDIT COMMITTEE REPORT Dear Shareholders This report provides insight into the functioning of the Audit Committee the Committee and its activities during the reporting period including an overview of the key areas of activity and principal topics covered at each meeting of the Committee.
For the financial year 2017 these activities included a review of the performance and effectiveness of the Companys external auditor the Companys internal controls including internal audit risk management and combined assurance systems and a review of the effectiveness of the Committee.
The Committee also continued to exercise its responsibilities for ensuring the integrity of the Companys published financial information and reviewing the judgments made by management and the assumptions and estimates on which they are based.
KEY ACTIVITIES INTERNATIONAL REPORTING STANDARDS The Committee has considered at a number of its meetings the action being taken to prepare for the implementation of the new international reporting standards in particular IFRS 9 but also IFRS 16 and the exercise of appropriate financial judgements that will be required together with the implementation of new systems to support the changes.
The Committee also oversaw the earlyadoption of IFRS 15 effective from 1 January 2017 and received regular updates from management on effective implementation.
ACCOUNTING STANDARDS APPLICATION The Committee has reviewed with management and the external auditors considerations and decisions relating to the proper application of accounting standards to the treatment of the Investment Business in the Companys accounts the valuation of investment property and similar issues.
PROPOSED DEMERGER The financial impact and accounting implications of the proposed separation of the Companys Banking and Investment Businesses has been an important subject considered by the Board and the Committee has devoted significant attention to the topic at each of its meetings in the latter part of the year.
COMMITTEE AND MANAGEMENT CHANGES During the year there were some changes to the Committee and senior management team.
Jonathan Muir was officially appointed to the Board on 20 June 2017 as an Independent NonExecutive Director.
Jonathan had served as an advisor to the Board since January 2017 and during that time had already served as a member of the Audit Committee proposed Board members of our Company typically serve as an advisor for an interim period during which they advise the Board the Board assesses suitability and both sides assess fit.
DAVID MORRISON CHAIRMAN OF THE AUDIT COMMITTEE In preparation for the proposed demerger Giorgi Alpaidze was appointed as Group Chief Finance Officer.
He was previously the Head of the Groups Finance Funding and Investor Relations and has extensive international experience in banking accounting and finance.
Following nine years as Head of Internal Audit David Davitashvili moved into an operational role and a new Head of Internal Audit Nino Gordeladze was appointed from 3 January 2018.
Further details are in the following report.
David Morrison Chairman of the Audit Committee 7 March 2018 COMPOSITION AND OPERATIONS OF THE AUDIT COMMITTEE The composition of the Committee complies with the UK Corporate Governance Code the Code which provides that the Committee should comprise at least three Independent NonExecutive Directors.
The Committee members are David Morrison Chairman Kim Bradley Hanna Loikkanen Tamaz Georgadze and Jonathan Muir all of whom are independent.
The Board is satisfied at least one member of the Audit Committee has recent and relevant financial experience and that the Audit Committee as a whole has competence relevant to the sector in which the Company operates.
Jonathan Muir was appointed as a member of the Committee on 1 January 2017 and was appointed to the Board on 20 June 2017 whereupon his role as an advisor to the Board was terminated.
Mr Muir is a member of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of England and Wales and has both accounting and auditing experience.
The Audit Committee works to a planned programme of activities focused on key events in the annual financial reporting cycle and standing items that it considers regularly under its Terms of Reference reviewed and updated on 11 December 2017.
It also reacts to business developments as they arise.
Attendance at meetings by Committee members can be found on page 86 of the Corporate Governance Framework.
The Company Secretary is Secretary to the Committee and attends all meetings.
The meetings are also attended by
Regular attendee Attends as required CFO of the Group CFO of the Bank Chief Risk Officer of the Bank CEO of the Bank CEO of the Group Head of Internal Audit Head of Compliance General Counsel External auditor The Committee also holds separate meetings which are not attended by management to allow us to discuss any issues of concern in more detail and directly with the external auditor and Head of Internal Audit.
From time to time other members of management are invited to attend these meetings in order to provide a deeper level of insight into key issues and developments.
Mr Morrison attends the AGM to respond to any shareholder questions that may be raised on the Audit Committees activities.
KEY PURPOSE AND RESPONSIBILITIES On behalf of the Board the Audit Committee safeguards high standards of integrity and oversees conduct in financial reporting internal control and risk management together with the Risk Committee and internal audit.
It also supervises the work of our external auditor.
Upholding integrity transparency and accountability 92 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC AUDIT COMMITTEE REPORT CONTINUED The Audit Committee reports to the Board on how it discharges its responsibilities and makes recommendations to the Board all of which have been accepted during the year.
The Committees Terms of Reference which outline its primary roles and responsibilities are available in the governance section of the Companys website at httpsite uploadspagesbgeoauditcommitteetermsofreference65. df.
BUSINESS DEVELOPMENTS The Committee considered the financial implications of a number of business developments during the course of the year including the proposed demerger and related retrospective changes in segment reporting the introduction of a new deposit insurance scheme in Georgia the introduction of a new Tier 1 model by the National Bank developments in relation to a large loan exposure and its provisioning and various acquisitions and disposals.
FINANCIAL REPORTING A principal responsibility of the Audit Committee is to consider the significant areas of complexity management judgement and estimation that have been applied in the preparation of the financial statements.
We spent significant time reviewing the action being taken to prepare for the implementation of the new international reporting standards in particular IFRS 9 but also IFRS 16 and the exercise of appropriate financial judgements that will be required together with the implementation of new systems to support the changes.
The Committee received detailed reporting from the external auditor in respect of key areas of audit focus during the year.
The Committee and the external auditor without management present discussed the key areas of audit focus the suitability of the accounting policies which have been adopted and whether managements key reporting estimates and judgements were appropriate.
Taking into account the external auditors assessment of risk but also using our own independent knowledge of the Group we reviewed and challenged where necessary the actions estimates and judgements of management in relation to the preparation of the financial statements.
Other than the introduction of the new reporting standards the significant accounting matters and financial judgements considered by the Audit Committee in relation to the financial statements are addressed below.
Matter considered Action taken Allowance for loan losses Reviewed reports from management liaised with Risk Committee on provision levels and impairments discussed provisioning models and levels with external auditors and considered impairmentprovisioning levels of several large loan exposures and related accounting matters for one such exposure.
Valuation of investment properties Considered the reports of management prepared based on the thirdparty valuation and the view of the external auditors.
Accounting for the proposed demerger Reviewed with management and our external auditor the financial reporting implications following the announcement of our plans to pursue a demerger and our plan to reduce our stake in GHG to below 50% in 2018.
Change in accounting policy for measurement of office buildings and service centres Reviewed managements paper setting out the rationale for and impact of the proposed change in accounting policy from the revaluation to cost model and considered the external auditors views.
The Committee approved the policy on the basis that it provides more relevant information to users of the financial statements Matter considered Action taken Early adoption of IFRS 15 Received regular updates from management about the early adoption and implementation of IFRS 15 across all Group entities.
Considered reports from the external auditors on the application of IFRS 15 across the Group and noted their conclusion that the standard had been applied appropriately.
Investment property under construction Considered and after discussion with the external auditor agreed a change in estimate to measure certain investment property under construction at fair value at an earlier stage of development as a result of more reliable valuable information being available INTERNAL AUDIT The Audit Committee is responsible on behalf of the Board for overseeing the Internal Audit function which serves as the Groups independent assurance over the adequacy and effectiveness of the systems and processes of risk management and control across the Group.
The Audit Committee monitors the scope extent and effectiveness of the Groups Internal Audit function.
We review and approve the Internal Audit Policy and oversee the Internal Audit Plan which is designed using a riskbased approach aligned with the overall strategy of the Group.
In 2017 the Internal Audit assignments focused on financial reporting operational controls information technology information security systems and risk management processes.
Each review was discussed and presented to the Committee.
In addition the Group engaged PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP to audit the Groups internal controls associated with the information technology and security systems which also helped identify areas for improvement.
Throughout the year we received regular reports from Internal Audit on its audit activities and significant findings as well as the corrective measures recommended to management.
We also reviewed and monitored managements responsiveness to the corrective measures through followup reports provided by Internal Audit.
The Head of Internal Audit has direct access to the Audit Committee and the opportunity to discuss matters with the Audit Committee without other members of management present.
We also monitor the staffing of the Internal Audit department as well as the relevant qualifications and experience of the team.
As mentioned earlier a new Head of Internal Audit was appointed on 3 January 2018.
We reviewed the effectiveness of the Internal Audit department by considering the progress of internal audit against the agreed plan taking into account the need to respond to changes in the Groups business and the external environment.
We also considered the quality of the reporting by Internal Audit to the Audit Committee and the ability of Internal Audit to address unsatisfactory results.
On this basis we concluded that the Internal Audit function is effective and respected by management and that it conforms to the standards set by the Institute of Internal Auditors.
93 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
EXTERNAL AUDIT With respect to our responsibilities for the external audit process on behalf of the Board we approved the annual audit plan which included setting the areas of responsibility scope of the audit and key risks identified oversaw the audit engagement including the degree to which the external auditor was able to assess key accounting and audit judgement reviewed the findings of the external audit with the external auditor including the level of errors identified during the audit monitored managements responsiveness to the external auditors findings and recommendations reviewed the qualifications expertise and resources of the external auditor monitored the external auditors independence objectivity and compliance with ethical professional and regulatory requirement reviewed audit fees monitored the rotation of key partners in accordance with applicable legislation and recommended the appointment reappointment or removal as applicable of the external auditor.
AUDIT TENDER AND LEAD AUDIT PARTNER ROTATION EY was appointed by the Board as our Group statutory auditor in 2012 following a competitive tender process and subsequently reappointed by shareholders at our 2013 AGM.
The Group will be required to put the external audit contract out to tender no later than 2022.
We believe retaining EY as our auditor subject to shareholder approval is in the best interests of shareholders given EYs continued independence objectivity and performance on the audits they have completed following assessment of their effectiveness by the Committee.
The Company complied with the mandatory audit processes and the Committee complied with the responsibility provisions set out in terms of the Competition and Markets Authority Statutory Audit Services Order 2014 CMA Order relating to a putting the audit services engagement on tender every ten years and b strengthening the accountability of the external auditors to the Committee including requiring that only the Committee is permitted to agree to the external auditors fees and scope of services influence the appointment of the audit engagement partner make recommendations regarding the appointment of auditors and authorise the auditors to carry out nonaudit services.
We continue to review the auditor appointment and consider the opportune time to tender the audit.
At this time the Committee intends to put the Audit to tender in 2022 although they may revisit this in light of the proposed demerger or otherwise and will continue to evaluate their options including a tender in 2018 for the financial year 2019 and further the Bank of Georgia Group PLC and Georgia Capital PLC expect separately to consider whether they will tender for audit services for the financial year 2019.
The Committee confirms compliance with the provisions of the CMA Order for the year ended 31 December 2017.
EY appointed John Headley as our lead audit partner in 2016.
The external auditor is required to rotate the audit partner responsible for the Group at least every five years.
AUDITOR INDEPENDENCE The Audit Committee is responsible for the development implementation and monitoring of the policies and procedures on the use of the external auditor for nonaudit services which help to ensure that the external auditor maintains the necessary degree of independence and objectivity.
Further to its work on this in 2016 the Committee continues to take account of the European Union Audit Directive and Regulation in conjunction with the FRCs Ethical Standard for Auditors effective for the Company from 1 January 2017 in respect of prohibitions as well as the provisions set out in the 2016 version of the Code in relation to nonaudit services and updates the Groups nonaudit services policy accordingly.
Any nontrivial work other than for audit or interim statements to be undertaken by the external auditor now requires authorisation by the Audit Committee except in very narrow circumstances.
The Groups Policy on NonAudit Services was revised and approved in December 2017 and can be found on our website at httpsiteuploads pagesbgeononauditservicespolicy65. df.
The Audit Committee has formally assessed the independence of EY which included review of i a report from EY describing their arrangements to identify report and manage any conflicts of interest and their policies and procedures for maintaining independence and monitoring compliance with relevant requirements and ii the value of nonaudit services provided by EY.
EY has also confirmed its independence throughout the year within the meaning of the regulations on this matter and in accordance with their professional standards.
As indicated in Note 28 of the audited IFRS financial statements for 2017 the total fees paid to EY for the year ended 31 December 2017 were GEL 4.61 million of which GEL 603000 related to work other than the audit or review of the interim accounts.
Both EY and the Audit Committee do not consider that this work compromises the independence of the external auditor.
EFFECTIVENESS
We have an established framework for assessing the effectiveness of the external audit process.
This includes a review of the audit plan including the materiality level set by the auditor and the process they have adopted to identify financial statement risks and key areas of audit focus regular communications between the external auditor and both the Committee and management including discussion of regular papers prepared by management and EY regular discussions with EY without management present and management without EY present in order to discuss the external audit process a review of the final audit report noting key areas of auditor judgement and the reasoning behind the conclusions reached a review of EYs 2017 Transparency Report and the annual FRC Audit Quality Inspection Report of EY and a formal questionnaire issued to all Committee members and also to the executive management of the Group leading the audit which covers among other items the quality of the audit and audit team the audit planning approach and execution the presence and capabilities of the lead audit partner the audit teams communication with the Committee and management and the auditors independence and objectivity Following our assessment of the external auditor we formed our own judgement which was consistent with managements view and reported to the Board that the audit team was sound and reliable providing highquality execution and service the quality of the audit work was of a high standard EYs independence and objectivity were affirmed EY was in a position to challenge management on its approach to key judgements and appropriate discussions were held with the Audit Committee during the audit planning process.
EY was reappointed by shareholders at the 2017 AGM and the Board was authorised to set the remuneration of the auditor by 100% and 99.7% votes in favour respectively.
The Committee has recommended to the Board that EY be reappointed under the current external audit contract and EY has expressed its willingness to continue as auditor of the Group.
Separate resolutions proposing EYs reappointment and determination of EYs remuneration by the Committee will be proposed at the 2018 AGM.
WHISTLEBLOWING CONFLICTS OF INTEREST ANTIBRIBERY AND ANTICORRUPTION AND DATA PROTECTION POLICIES AND PROCEDURES The Audit Committee ensures that there are effective procedures relating to whistleblowing.
In particular we have developed a Whistleblowing Policy which allows staff to confidentially raise any concerns about business practices.
We keep this policy under review and receive regular updates from management as to any issues raised by employees.
The Group implementation of Whistle B an advanced independent whistleblowing reporting channel and case management tool to replace its existing whistleblowing platform was completed in 2017.
94 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC AUDIT COMMITTEE REPORT CONTINUED We have developed a Conflicts Authorisation Policy through which we assess actual and potential conflicts of interest and assist the Board in its review of the permissibility of such conflicts.
The Audit Committee keeps under review the Groups AntiBribery and AntiCorruption Policy and procedures and receives reports from management on a regular basis in relation to any actual or potential wrongdoing.
There were no significant findings in 2017 but both policies were updated and implemented during the year.
The Audit Committee considered the applicability and implications for the Group of the new General Data Protection Regulation effective from May 2018.
An action plan is being put in place.
RISK MANAGEMENT AND INTERNAL CONTROLS Although the Board assumes the ultimate responsibility for the Groups risk management and internal control framework its work is supported by both our Committee and the Risk Committee.
Since the Bank is the Groups largest business and operates in the complex financial services sector its risk management framework and internal control processes are key to that of the Group.
In relation to risk management and internal financial control the Audit Committee assists the Board in fulfilling its responsibility to review the adequacy and effectiveness of the controls over financial reporting and certain types of operational risk IT and information security including cybersecurity corporate security and similar areas of operational risk and internal and external fraud or misconduct.
The Committee also monitors the Groups compliance with the corporate governance policies and procedures related to antibribery and anticorruption conflicts of interest and whistleblowing.
The Audit Committee is supported by a number of sources of internal assurance within the Group in order to discharge its responsibilities.
This includes reports from and regular discussions with the Group executives with whom it regularly meets.
We receive Internal Audits reports on the control environment and as mentioned earlier in this report we approve the Internal Audit Plan which is riskbased and aligned with the Groups strategy.
For 2017 the Internal Audit Plan included a thorough risk management and internal control assessment including compliance with corporate governance policies and procedures.
During 2017 and up to the date of this Annual Report and Accounts Internal Audit did not find any significant weaknesses in risk management or internal controls.
We challenged the reports by management and Internal Audit and requested data regarding compliance with key policies and procedures related to operational risk.
With respect to external assurance the Audit Committee reviews the external auditors reports to the Audit Committee which include the external auditors observations on risk management and internal financial controls identified as part of its audit.
Without management present the Committee and EY discussed the key areas of audit focus the suitability of the accounting policies which have been adopted and whether managements key reporting estimates and judgements were appropriate.
In 2017 our risk management and internal control processes continued to evolve in line with the strategy of the Group.
Set out below are a few examples of changes made in 2017.
FINANCE
The Finance department continued to build on the progress they made in 2016 in creating uniform accounting policies across the Group completed a project to standardise the Groups ledgers and improved Group covenant management while also leading the finance workstream of the proposed demerger.
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND INFORMATION SECURITY SYSTEMS Following the information technology and information security systems audit undertaken by Price Waterhouse Coopers LLP improvements have been made to policies and procedures.
The Audit Committee has also considered and confirmed to the Board that its work is performed in accordance with the provisions in the Code and the Financial Reporting Councils FRC associated Guidance on Risk Management Internal Control and Related Financial and Business
Based on the above we are satisfied that our overall internal control framework is effective.
CONTINUING EDUCATION AND TRAINING Throughout the year the Audit Committee received presentations and training from the Company Secretary in respect of the guidance from the Financial Reporting Council which included the letter to Audit Committee Chairs the NonFinancial Reporting Directive and the Audit Directive and Regulation in conjunction with the FRCs Ethical Standard for Auditors.
The whole Board also received training on the current and proposed changes to the UK Corporate Governance Code affecting the Audit Committee and other areas.
VIABILITY STATEMENT In accordance with the Code the Directors are required to assess the viability of the Group.
In collaboration with the Risk Committee and also considering the recommendations of the FRC guidance we spent time considering the timeframe over which the viability statement should be made as well as an assessment underlying the period of coverage which we agreed should be three years.
In addition to aligning with the period covered by the Groups strategy and financial forecasts this threeyear period seems particularly appropriate for a Company whose business model continues to evolve in a rapidly developing frontier market like Georgias.
In particular we looked closely at the Groups principal risks and uncertainties including those that will threaten its business model future performance and solvency or liquidity the current financial position of the Group including future cash flows allocated capital expenditure and funding requirements future prospects and downside stress testing.
We discussed our analysis with the Risk Committee management and full Board.
FAIR BALANCED AND UNDERSTANDABLE REPORTING The Committee reviewed the 2017 Annual Report and Accounts to consider whether it is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Groups performance business model and strategy.
We did this by satisfying ourselves that there was a robust process of review and challenge at different levels within the Group to ensure balance and consistency.
We reviewed several drafts of the 2017 Annual Report and Accounts and directly reviewed the overall messages and tone of the Annual Report with the CEOs and CFO.
We also considered other information regarding the Groups performance and business presented to the Board during the period both from management and the external auditor.
After consideration of all of this information we are satisfied that when taken as a whole the Annual Report and Accounts is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Groups performance business model and strategy.
COMMITTEE EFFECTIVENESS REVIEW As part of their evaluation of the Board and Committees Lintstock assisted the Board in reviewing the Committees performance over the financial year.
This external review found that the Committees performance was rated highly by respondents and highlighted particular areas that had helped improve the Committees discussion such as the formation of an IFRS desk by the Finance department and a new format for reviewing audit issues.
Our priorities for 2018 include among others continued focus on the implementation of legal and governance structures and financial reporting of the proposed demerger of the Group risks around the proposed demerger of the Group the successful implementation of IFRS 9 and preparation for IFRS 16 implementation in 2019 and implementing the improvements in IT audit internal controls.
95 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
KIM BRADLEY CHAIRMAN OF THE RISK COMMITTEE RISK COMMITTEE REPORT Dear Shareholders In 2017 the Risk Committee built on the progress made last year in strengthening our risk management framework and internal controls.
The Committee has assisted the Board in providing oversight of the Groups overall risk appetite in a dynamic risk environment and has helped ensure that we achieve our strategic objectives through effective risk management.
As reported last year part of our strategy to achieve a 20% Return on Equity in the Banking Business included enhancing an already prudent risk management process.
This has led to a decrease in our Banking Business cost of risk ratio for 2017 to 2.2%. with recovery timeframes.
The Committee was particularly pleased to oversee the Groups successful efforts in reducing borrower concentration.
This included discussions and review of strategies and actions by management covering lending and NPL to improve asset quality through structure renegotiations principal reductions and other qualitative measurements.
The Committee also continues to monitor the dedollarisation programme which has particular relevance to borrowers of Dollars who earn revenues in Georgian Lari and the mitigation of the impact of any depreciation of the Lari.
We followed through with each of the priorities we set for 2017.
As above we continued to focus heavily on our loan portfolio and strategy to mitigate risks associated with the dollarisation of our loan book the depreciation of the Lari and the concentration of borrowers.
Furthermore other main areas of risk mitigation on which the Committee focused in the year were expansion of the business continuity programme by developing proactive plans for business units  this covered the entities that were part of the Banking Business review of the risk mitigation tools and control functions that are used to assess the effectiveness of existing controls in credit underwriting extension of the use of data analytics and implemented model validation process use of quantitative assessment of credit for corporate borrowers devised counterparty limit monitoring and management based on our existing credit scoring model and aggregating the Groups foreign currency exposure management.
I invite you to read more about our work in the following report.
Kim Bradley Chairman of the Risk Committee 7 March 2018 KEY PURPOSE AND RESPONSIBILITIES The purpose of the Risk Committee is to assist the Board in fulfilling its responsibilities in relation to the oversight of risk and to provide advice in relation to current and potential future risk exposures.
This includes reviewing the Groups risk appetite and risk profile the desired culture and how it has been embedded assessing the effectiveness of the risk management framework and systems of internal control and the Companys capability to identify and manage new types of risk.
The key responsibilities of the Risk Committee are to support the Board to ensure that risk appetite and exposure are addressed as part of strategy oversee the risk management infrastructureprocess and effectiveness support the Board in monitoring risk exposure and the implementation of our strategy to address risk oversee support and evaluate the risk management roles of our executive management risk team encourage and ensure open and broad discussion on perceived risk concerns and responsive efforts to mitigate when necessary assess the adequacy and quality of the risk management function in conjunction with the Audit Committee and the effectiveness of risk reporting within the Group and in collaboration with the Audit Committee review the principal risks and uncertainties disclosures in the HalfYear and Annual Reports.
The principal risk categories overseen by the Risk Committee include currency and macroeconomic regional instability regulatory cyber security information systems and financial crime Investment Business strategy demerger and future performance risk and certain operational risks other than those overseen by the Audit Committee within the Group.
We reviewed the Committees Terms of Reference and updated them in September 2017 to reflect current best practice.
The Risk Committees full Terms of Reference are available on our website at httpsiteuploadspagesbgeoriskcommitteeterms ofreference98. df.
COMPOSITION OF THE RISK COMMITTEE AND MEETINGS Our Risk Committee is comprised solely of Independent NonExecutive
The Committee members are Kim Bradley Chairman Al Breach Tamaz Georgadze and Hanna Loikkanen.
Each members attendance is shown in the Board and Committee attendance table on page 86.
During 2017 the Chief Risk Officer BGEO Group CFO Bank CEO Bank CFO and Jonathan Muir regularly attended our meetings.
From time to time other members of management are invited to attend meetings in order to provide a deeper level of insight into key issues and developments.
In addition nonCommittee Board members are also invited to attend.
At each meeting the Risk Committee receives detailed reporting which provides an analysis of the Groups overall risk profile using both quantitative models and risk analytics loan portfolio dynamics key risk exposures and management actions performance against risk appetite the emerging and potential risks the Group may face the drivers of risk throughout the Group as well as analysis of down side stress testing scenarios.
The underlying assumptions methodology applied and results of such stress testing are challenged by the Risk Committee.
Meetings of the Risk Committee take place prior to the Board meeting in order for the Risk Committee to report its activities and matters of particular relevance to the Board.
Safeguarding shareholder value 96 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC RISK COMMITTEE FOCUS DURING 2017 We continued to focus on our remit as set out above.
As mentioned in last years Annual Report our 2017 priorities were to continue focusing on the reduction of our overall corporate credit exposure and Dollar denominated loan book and insuring that our risk teams within the Bank as well as our Investment Business executed on their objectives.
On the macro economic front we focused on various interest rate and currency scenarios given the strengthened Dollar and interest rate increases by the Federal Reserve.
We also monitored potential policy shifts towards the region following the 2016 US elections.
Further focus of the Risk Committee in 2017 is set out in the Chairmans Statement above.
OUR LOAN BOOK Macroeconomic conditions in Georgia during the year were affected by low economic growth within the region commodity price fluctuations and the depreciation of the Lari particularly against the Dollar.
The Group saw an increase in NPLs and changes in debtservice coverage ratios with respect to Dollardenominated loans covered by Lari income as a result of these conditions which in turn increased our cost of credit risk.
We monitored this very closely and conducted creditspecific reviews on the top 20 corporate exposures both in formal Committee meetings and on informal interim calls with management.
We worked closely with management throughout the year to formulate strategies to mitigate risk which included the continued drive to increase local currency loans and analysis of retail borrowers debt bearing capacity amongst other topics.
Retail Banking successfully increased its local currency loans by nearly 68.7% between 2016 and 2017.
Despite approximately 83.1% of our corporate investment loan book being denominated in Dollars more than 43% of corporate investment customers with Dollar loans have income in Dollars.
The vast majority of our corporate customers were able to continue servicing their loans.
The
Committee regularly monitors the corporate loan book.
In 2017 we have achieved a significant improvement in the dedollarisation of our Banking Business loan portfolio with the share of local currency loans increasing by 9.6 percentage points and reaching 61.7%.
The Georgian governments dedollarisaton initiatives and our ability to attract local currency funding have been primary drivers of this.
We do not expect the dedollarisation to continue at the same rate but we do expect local currency loans to increase at a faster rate than foreign currency denominated loans as other government initiatives e. we continue to attract local currency funding from institutional investors.
Throughout the year we reviewed managements quantitative assessments of credit for corporate borrowers and monitored the implementation by management of the corporate loan book risk deconcentration strategy.
We were pleased that management continued to deliver on this strategy by reducing the concentration of our top ten Corporate and Investment Business clients to 10.7% at the end of 2017 down from 11.8% at the end of 2016.
On the overall balance sheet level the risk deconcentration strategy involves a focus on retail versus corporate credit growth as well as our previously communicated steps to increase overall NPL coverage ratio.
At corporate level specifically our deconcentration measures include reducing our corporate guarantee exposure to certain sectors and focus on further developing our corporate credit syndication activities.
This strategy takes time and corporate credit risk reduction will remain one of our risk priorities in 2018.
We closely monitored NPL levels and management actions to assure adequate coverage of our loan loss exposure.
Our NPL coverage ratio was successfully increased from 86.7% at 31 December 2016 to 92.7% at 31 December 2017.
RISK MANAGEMENT
In 2017 we continued to assist the Board in setting the Groups risk appetite and exposure in line with the Groups strategic objectives and in making any necessary modifications as strategy evolves and when the risk environment changes.
We also monitored the Groups risk exposure and actions to address risk which included oversight and support of our executive management risk team.
We continued to work closely with the Audit Committee to ensure that our risk management framework and systems of internal control operate effectively and in compliance with the Code and FRC guidance.
We also worked through the processes supporting the assessment of the Groups longerterm solvency and liquidity which underlie the viability statement.
During the year management reviewed the risk mitigation tools and control functions and reported to the Committee and to the Audit Committee on their assessment of the effectiveness of these controls.
Key changes during 2017 to our control framework included the management and monitoring of counterparty limits based on our previously implemented credit scoring model the aggregation of the Groups foreign currency exposure management and the extension of artificial intelligence and machine learning algorithms in our model validation process for credit underwriting.
In 2017 we discussed how we could improve the approach to incorporating the cost of risk into the pricing of corporate credits.
The management team developed a new model which allowed this to be estimated over a 12month period and adjusted if necessary throughout the period and revised the limits for single borrower exposures.
We also considered how our stress testing could be augmented to factor in extended periods of stress and expanded the business continuity programme by developing proactive business continuity plans to cover other Banking Business companies.
During the year we also monitored the implementation of the Bank Compliance Policy the development of our Data Protection Policy and reviewed managements antimoney laundering assessments in respect of correspondent banks.
We also carried out a robust review of the principal risks and uncertainties disclosure and other relevant risk management disclosures and reported to the Board with our recommendation on their inclusion in this Annual Report and the HalfYear Report.
We continued to assist formulating the Group viability statement in conjunction with the Audit Committee and management.
The viability statement can be found on page 33.
COMMITTEE EFFECTIVENESS REVIEW Lintstock an external evaluator performed the review of the Committee focusing on its overall performance and with all Board members identifying and discussing their views on what they would consider as the most significant risks to the Company.
The effectiveness evaluation concluded that the Committee continues to operate and perform effectively.
Our main priorities for 2018 are to formalise the Banks risk appetite in meeting our strategic objectives to confirm the Banks tolerance levels for all risk types.
During the year the processes whereby the Banks risk function provides services to Group companies was identified and we will continue to redesign these processes to accommodate the new structure of the Group following the demerger.
An overview of our risk management framework is set out on pages 32 to 33.
A description of these principal risks and uncertainties in addition to recent trends and outlook as well as mitigation efforts can be found on pages 34 to 37.
An overview of the Bank risk management framework is set out on pages 38 to 43.
RISK COMMITTEE REPORT CONTINUED 97 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
SHAREHOLDER ENGAGEMENT The Company has a comprehensive shareholder engagement programme and maintains an open and transparent dialogue with existing and potential shareholders a responsibility that the Company takes very seriously.
The Boards primary contact with institutional shareholders is through the Chairman Independent NonExecutive Directors CEO and Head of Investor Relations each of whom provide a standing invitation to shareholders to meet and discuss any matters they wish to raise.
Our Committee Chairmen also make themselves available to answer questions from investors.
We formally communicate with our shareholders via our AGM Annual Report and Accounts HalfYear Report and Interim Management
These are supported by a combination of presentations and telephone briefings.
Over the course of the year we met with some 400 institutional investors and participated in more than 20 investor conferences and road shows.
Throughout the year our Directors and management met with shareholders in Georgia the United Kingdom Europe the United States Singapore and South Africa.
In November 2017 BGEO hosted an investor day in Tbilisi which was open to all investors and analysts.
This investor day provided the opportunity for investors to receive an update from the Board and executive management on strategy and performance as well as meet informally with Board members and raise matters of interest.
BGEO was pleased to host approximately 60 investors and analysts at the investor day.
In addition to our shareholders we meet and present to analysts throughout the year hold regular meetings with the Groups existing lenders and actively engage with potential lenders to discuss our funding strategy.
Our Group Company Secretary also has ongoing communication with the shareholders advisory groups.
The Chairman has overall responsibility for ensuring that the Board understands the views of major stakeholders.
The full Board is regularly kept informed of these views by the Chairman as well as executive management and the Investor Relations team and to the extent deemed appropriate issues raised at these meetings have been adopted by the Group.
Informal feedback from analysts and the Groups corporate advisors is also shared with the Board.
Our website site provides our stakeholders with access to the Groups results press releases investor presentations analyst reports details on our corporate governance and corporate and social responsibility framework our leadership as well as other information relevant to our stakeholders.
We also ensure that shareholders can access details of the Groups results and other news releases through the London Stock Exchanges Regulatory News Service.
Fostering open and honest communication 98 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC
DIRECTORS REMUNERATION REPORT
Dear Shareholders On behalf of the Board I am pleased to present our Directors Remuneration Report for 2017 comprising this statement the Remuneration Report for the year ended 31 December 2017 which is subject to an advisory vote at the forthcoming AGM and our Remuneration Policy as approved at the 2017 Annual General Meeting which applies to the Companys remuneration arrangements for the period up until the Companys 2020 AGM.
The Remuneration Committee was encouraged by the strong shareholder approval of the Remuneration Policy with over 94% of voting in favour of the Policy at the 2017 AGM.
This letter summarises the remuneration decisions taken in the year and in the remainder of the report I aim to set these decisions in the context of the Companys performance this year.
During the year the Committee continued to seek to align remuneration targets with the Companys strategic priorities and shareholder returns.
In preparation for the demerger of the Company and the Investment Business the Committee has reviewed and enhanced the self development and mentoring of KPIs and the scope of the management performance evaluation.
The Committee also made its annual determination of the discretionary remuneration for our CEO Irakli Gilauri and the executive management team.
I would remind shareholders that the majority of Mr Gilauris salary is awarded in deferred shares which vest over a period of five years.
This structure provides alignment with the Company and its shareholders over the long term.
WHAT IS IN THIS REPORT This Directors Remuneration Report describes the implementation of BGEO Directors Remuneration Policy and discloses the amounts earned relating to the year ended 31 December 2017.
The report complies with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006 and Schedule 8 of The Large and Mediumsized Companies and Groups Accounts and Reports Regulations 2008.
The report has been prepared in line with the recommendations of the Code and the requirements of the UKLA Listing Rules.
The Directors Remuneration Policy was approved by shareholders in a binding vote at the 2017 AGM and took formal effect from the date of approval and will apply until the 2020 AGM at which time we will be required to submit our Directors Remuneration Policy for approval by shareholders.
Our Directors Remuneration Policy has again been included in this report set out on pages 105 to 111 for the purposes of clarity and transparency.
The Annual Report on Remuneration set out on pages 98 to 113 which includes the Annual Statement by the Chairman of the Remuneration Committee set out on this page will be subject to an advisory vote at the 2018 AGM.
2017 was a year of exceptional performance for the Group.
The banking business outperformed against all of its targets and many of the groups investments demonstrated outstanding performance.
Mr Gilauri met or exceeded expectations in respect of his KPIs and oversaw a significant new strategic initiative in relation to the demerger whilst still ensuring significant growth in total shareholder return.
The Committee and the Board rated Mr Gilauris overall performance in 2017 as exceptional and consequently the Committee were of the strong opinion that he deserved the maximum bonus that we awarded him.
We also considered the performance against KPIs of the appropriate bonuses of senior management.
The Committee also received training from the Company Secretary on the recent developments in remuneration in the industry and in governance.
The priorities for 2018 will be setting remuneration for the Company in respect of the demerger of the Bank and the Investment Business.
If the planned demerger goes ahead it is envisaged that the separate companies would seek shareholder approval for their remuneration policies at the general meetings after the demerger in 2019.
In the meantime the companies intend to keep to the principles set out in the current shareholder approved policy with appropriate changes.
Further details will be set out in the shareholder circular regarding the demerger.
Al Breach Chairman of the Remuneration Committee 7 March 2018 Aligning incentivisation with the longterm success of the Group AL BREACH CHAIRMAN OF THE REMUNERATION COMMITTEE 99 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
COMPOSITION OF THE REMUNERATION COMMITTEE AND ADVISORS The Committee is comprised of three members Al Breach Chairman an independent NonExecutive Director David Morrison our Senior Independent Director and Neil Janin who was independent on appointment.
The members attendance is shown in the Board and Committee Meetings Attendance table on page 86.
In addition to the formal meetings held during the year the Committee participated in various discussions by telephone outside of these meetings.
Other attendees at Committee meetings who provided advice or assistance to the Committee on remuneration matters from time to time included the CEO Bank CEO the other Board members General Counsel and Group Company Secretary.
Attendees at Committee meetings do not participate in discussions or decisions related to their own remuneration.
The Committee received advice from Baker and McKenzie LLP  its legal advisors on compliance and best practice.
The Committee continues to remain of the view that the advice received from Baker and McKenzie LLP is objective and independent and that the fees and the basis upon which they are charged remain commensurate.
KEY PURPOSE AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE REMUNERATION COMMITTEE The Remuneration Committee is principally responsible to the Board for establishing the remuneration policy for the Executive Directors Chairman and designated executive management to reward them fairly and responsibly and is designed to promote the longterm success of the Group.
The Remuneration Committees full Terms of Reference were reviewed and updated in September 2017 and are available on our website at httpsiteuploadspagesbgeoremunerationcommitteetermsofreference29. df.
SHAREHOLDER CONTEXT The Directors Remuneration Policy applicable to this section of the Annual Report on Remuneration was approved by shareholders at our AGM on 1 June 2017 the 2017 Policy.
The Directors Remuneration Policy received the following votes from shareholders Resolution Votes for % Votes against % Total votes cast Votes withheld Approval of the Directors Remuneration Policy 30701505 94.49 1791428 5.51 32492933 40400 Set out below are the shareholder voting figures for the Directors Remuneration Report including the Annual Statement of the Chairman of the Remuneration Committee presented at our 2017 AGM.
Resolution Votes for % Votes against % Total votes cast Votes withheld Approval of the Directors Remuneration Report 30694906 94.47 1798027 5.53 32492933 40400 SINGLE TOTAL FIGURE OF REMUNERATION FOR THE SOLE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR AUDITED The table below sets out the remuneration received by BGEOs sole Executive Director Irakli Gilauri for 2017 and 2016 in respect of his employment with the Group.
Mr Gilauri receives no additional remuneration for any role at a subsidiary or affiliate within the Group.
Mr Gilauris current service agreements provide for salary in the form of cash and deferred shares.
In addition Mr Gilauri is eligible to receive discretionary deferred share remuneration up to a maximum of 75% of total salary cash and deferred shares.
Approximately 85% of Mr Gilauris remuneration for 2017 set forth in the table below is in the form of deferred shares for which the average vesting period exceeds four years.
Cash salary
Deferred share salary
Total salary
Discretionary deferred share remuneration
Taxable benefits
Pension benefits
Dividend equivalents
Total
US
2017 437500 2288700 2726200 2044650 1860 1875 322248 5096833 2016 437500 2177342 2614842 1307313 1239 1698 389793 4314885
Expressed in Dollars but paid in British Pounds and Lari as applicable converted into the respective currency as at the date of payment.
Accordingly there may be variations in the numbers above and those provided in the accounts.
Deferred share salary.
The figures show the value of the BGEO shares underlying nilcost options granted in respect of the relevant year.
For both 2017 and 2016 the award was 90000 BGEO shares.
A new service agreement that Mr Gilauri signed on 24 August 2015 came into effect on 1 May 2016.
For 2016 the value of the deferred share salary payable is calculated as follows a from 1 January 2016 until 1 May 2016 when the prior service agreement was in effect the share price used is at the date the prior service agreement was signed being US 21.71 per share based on the official share price of GBP 14.06 per share converted into Dollars using an exchange rate of 1.5443 being the official exchange rate published by the Bank of England on the same date and b from 1 May 2016 until 31 December 2016 when the new service agreement was in effect the share price used is at the date the new service agreement was signed being US 25.43 per share the official share price of GBP 16.16 per share as at 24 August 2015 converted into Dollars using an exchange rate of 1.5738 being the official exchange rate published by the Bank of England on the same date.
For 2017 the new service agreement continues and therefore the figures in part b of the previous sentence apply.
Under the deferred share programme the option awards in respect of deferred share salary are formally granted in January of the year following the year to which the award relates the work year even though the number of deferred salary shares is fixed in the contract.
The terms and conditions applying to deferred share salary are described in section 1a of the 2017 Policy available at httpsiteuploadsannualreports2016804. consistent with the Policy table on page 100 and Note 1 to the Policy table on pages 101 to 102.
Discretionary deferred share remuneration.
The figures show the value of BGEO shares underlying nilcost options granted in respect of bonus awards in the relevant year.
For 2017 options were awarded over 45548 BGEO shares.
The discretionary remuneration in respect of 2017 is deferred and vests over three years in equal amounts in each of the second third and fourth years following the work year.
The value was calculated by reference to the share price on 8 December 2017 the working day before the meeting at which the award was determined which was US 44.89 based on the official share price of GBP 33.56 per share converted into Dollars using an exchange rate of 1.3376 being the official exchange rate published by the Bank of England on the same date.
For 2016 options were awarded over 37450 BGEO shares.
The value was calculated by reference to the share price on 28 February 2017 which was US 34.91based on the official share price of GBP 28.05 per share converted into Dollars using an exchange rate of 1.2445 being the official exchange rate published by the Bank of England on the same date.
The discretionary remuneration in respect of 2016 is deferred and vests over three years in equal amounts beginning in January of the second year following the work year.
Both the 2017 and 2016 awards are subject to the leaver provisions described on pages 105 to 106 of the 2017 Policy available at httpsiteuploadsannualreports2016804. df.
The means of determining the number of shares underlying this remuneration and the terms and conditions are described in Note 2 of the 2017 Policy on page 102 and available at httpsiteuploadsannualreports2016804. df.
The basis for determining Mr Gilauris 2017 discretionary award is described on the next two pages.
Benefits.
The figures show the gross taxable value of health life and personal accident insurance.
Pensions.
The figures show the aggregate employer contributions for the relevant years into the Groups defined contribution pension scheme.
Under the Groups defined contribution pension scheme normal retirement age is 65.
Dividend equivalents.
The figure shows the dividend value paid in respect of nilcost options exercised in the relevant years.
Mr Gilauri was reimbursed for reasonable business expenses on provision of valid receipts.
No money or other assets are received or receivable by Mr Gilauri in respect of a period of more than one financial year where final vesting is determined by reference to achievement of performance measures or targets relating to the relevant period.
100 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC The following table sets out details of total remuneration for Mr Gilauri for the period from 1 January 2012 to 31 December 2017 and his discretionary remuneration as a percentage of maximum opportunity.
The Company does not have a LTIP and therefore the table does not include longterm incentive vesting rates against maximum opportunity.
Single figure of total remuneration US 2002386 3488463 3142021 3690642 4314885 5096833 Discretionary remuneration as a percentage of maximum opportunity % 94.9% 83.2% 54.7% 91.9% 100% 100% BASIS FOR DETERMINING MR GILAURIS DISCRETIONARY DEFERRED SHARE REMUNERATION IN RESPECT OF 2017 Mr Gilauris KPIs include both objective and nontangible components.
The objective elements largely track the Groups KPIs as he is expected to deliver on the Groups strategy but the KPIs also include nontangible factors such as leadership strategy development and implementation as well as corporate and social responsibility.
Strict weighting is not imposed on the KPIs below for the reasons mentioned in Note 2 of the 2017 Policy table on page 102 available at httpsiteuploadsannualreports2016804. df.
The following table sets out the objective KPIs set for Mr Gilauri in respect of 2017 as well as Mr Gilauris performance against them.
Key Performance Indicator 2017 Target 2017 Performance Committee evaluation BANKING BUSINESS Return on average equity 20% 25.2% Exceeded expectations Retail loan book growth 20% 29.3% Exceeded expectations INVESTMENT BUSINESS Value of our Investment Business Yearon yeargrowth Combined revenue and net profit increased by 70.5% and 25.2% yoy respectively All businesses showed growth in line with or exceeding expectations with the exception of Georgia Healthcare Group PLC.
High overall combined revenue and net profit normalised growth.
Investment Business management teams Continued enhancement Strong additions to the Investment Business management teams Enhancement includes recruitment and appointment of Shota Berekashvili and Giorgi Natroshvili as Deputy CEO Construction Management and CFO of m respectively.
Ahead of the demerger Mr Gilauri has also positioned the Investment Business well including with the appointment of Giorgi Alpaidze as Group CFO to become CFO of the Investment Business.
GROUPWIDE
Management team Coaching and mentoring Met expectations Mr Gilauri has enhanced the management development programmes.
He has rolled out across the Group the Leadership Organisational Learning and Graham Ward Ph. leadership levels.
Selfdevelopment Continued selfdevelopment Met expectations Mr Gilauri has continued to prioritise his selfdevelopment through feedback received from the Board and his peers.
In terms of objective KPIs Mr Gilauri met or exceeded all KPIs as described on the previous page.
In addition to the preset KPIs Mr Gilauris key accomplishments in 2017 include The outperformance of the Banking Business against the targets set out above The good performance of many of the Groups investments together with the ongoing strategic development of all businesses and Overseeing a period of significant growth in total shareholder return.
In addition to these preset KPIs Mr Gilauri has instigated and been preparing the Group for the demerger of the Banking and Investment Businesses which the Committee recognises as a huge project and a pivotal point in the Groups development.
The project involves a massive reorganisation of the businesses and people in addition to stringent regulatory requirements.
The project ran on schedule through the second half of 2017 and was generally well received by shareholders and stakeholders.
DIRECTORS REMUNERATION REPORT CONTINUED 101 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
2017 BUSINESS HIGHLIGHTS 2017 business highlights include Outperformance of the banking business against its targets Excellent performance of many of the groups investments together and Ongoing strategic development of all underlying businesses For 2017 the Committee found that Mr Gilauris overall performance was exceptional.
As a result the Committee determined that Mr Gilauri should be awarded discretionary deferred share remuneration at maximum opportunity 75% of total salary being total cash salary and total deferred share salary as listed in the table above based on the share price when it made its determination.
The Committee therefore agreed to award Mr Gilauri 45548 shares.
MR GILAURIS 2018 KPIS  DISCRETIONARY DEFERRED SHARE REMUNERATION For 2018 in respect of objective KPIs we plan to continue measuring Mr Gilauris performance against KPIs which reflect the separation of our Banking and Investment Businesses as well as the strategy of the Group as a whole.
BANKING BUSINESS Return on Average equity as targeted Total banking business loan book growth as targeted NIM as targeted CostIncome as targeted Dividend Payout Ratio  2540% Longer Term Indicator Product to client ratio in mass retail as targeted Banks visibilityimportance as a private banking hub as targeted Cost of risk and NPL Coverage Ratio in line with strategy INVESTMENT BUSINESS  2018 INDICATOR Growth of NAV of portfolio companies in line with strategy Achieve strategic priorities of portfolio companies in line with strategy Active and disciplined pursuit of new investment opportunities Diversify funding base for portfolio companies Longer Term Indicator Progress towards exit on investments in line with strategy Average return on combined exits in line with strategy OTHER KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS Active mentoring and development of Senior Management Personal development In the event of the demerger it was expected that the Investment Business KPIs would remain with Irakli Gilauri and the Banking Business KPIs would transfer to the CEO of the Bank but the Remuneration Committees of Bank of Georgia PLC and Georgia Capital would have the discretion to consider appropriate adjustments to the KPIs.
PERCENTAGE CHANGE IN REMUNERATION OF CEO The following table sets out details of the percentage change in the remuneration awarded to the CEO between 2016 and 2017 compared with the average percentage change in the per capita remuneration awarded to the Groups employees as a whole between 2016 and 2017.
See the Single Total Figure Remuneration Table on page 102 for an explanation of cash salary deferred share salary taxable benefits and discretionary deferred remuneration of Mr Gilauri.
Percentage change for the CEO between 2016 and 2017 Average percentage change for the Groups employees as a whole excluding Mr Gilauri between 2016 and 2017 Total cash salary 0% 41% Total deferred share salary 5.1% 12% Taxable benefits 50.1% 18% Total bonus discretionary deferred share remuneration in the case of Mr Gilauri and deferred discretionary share remuneration plus cash bonus in the case of other employees of the Group 56.4% 39% FURTHER DETAILS OF FIXED AND DISCRETIONARY CONTINGENT DEFERRED SHARE REMUNERATION GRANTED DURING 2017 AUDITED The following table sets out details of the nilcost options over BGEO shares which have been granted to Mr Gilauri in 2017 in respect of the year ended 31 December 2016.
Please note that the information presented in this section is for the 2016 financial year.
Deferred share salary Discretionary deferred share remuneration Number of underlying shares and basis on which award was made 90000 granted on the basis described in the table in section 1a of the 2014 Policy available at httpbgeo. comuploadspagesremunerationpolicy86. df.
37450 granted on the basis described in section 1b of the 2014 Policy available at httpsite uploadspagesremunerationpolicy86. df.
Type of interest Nilcost option Nilcost option Cost to Group as reflected in accounts US 2177342 US 1307313 Face value US 2177342 Cash payments equal to the dividends paid on the underlying shares will be made upon vesting.
US 1307313 Cash payments equal to the dividends paid on underlying shares will be made upon vesting.
Percentage of award receivable if minimum performance achieved 100% of the award will be receivable since the award is part of the Executives salary set out in the 2015 contract and accordingly is not subject to performance measures or targets over the vesting period.
100% of the award will be receivable since the award is based on 2016 performance and is not a LTIP award and accordingly is not subject to performance measures or targets over the vesting period.
102 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Deferred share salary Discretionary deferred share remuneration Exercise price Nil.
The options form part of the Executive Directors salary under the Policy and so no payment is required upon exercise.
Nil.
The options make up the entirety of the Executive Directors performancebased remuneration and so no payment is required upon exercise.
Vesting period 20% in each of 2018 2019 and 2020 and 40% in 2021.
33.3% in each of 2018 2019 and 2020.
Performance measures None.
See section 1a of the 2014 Policy available at httpsiteuploadspagesremuneration policy86. df.
See section 1b of the 2014 Policy available at httpsiteuploadspagesremunerationpolicy86. df.
Notes
Deferred share salary.
The figures show the value of the BGEO shares underlying nilcost options granted in respect of year ended 31 December 2016.
The award was 90000 BGEO shares and the value of the deferred share salary is calculated as follows a from 1 January 2016 until 1 May 2016 when the prior service agreement was in effect the share price used is at the date the prior service agreement was signed being US 21.71 per share based on the official share price of GBP 14.06 per share converted into Dollars using an exchange rate of 1.5443 being the official exchange rate published by the Bank of England on the same date and b from 1 May 2016 until 31 December 2016 when the new service agreement was in effect the share price used is at the date the new service agreement was signed being US 25.43 per share the official share price of GBP 16.16 per share as at 24 August 2015 converted into Dollars using an exchange rate of 1.5738 being the official exchange rate published by the Bank of England on the same date. httpsiteuploadspagesremunerationpolicy86. df.
Discretionary deferred share remuneration.
For 2016 options were awarded over 37450 BGEO shares.
The value is calculated by reference to the share price on 28 February 2017 which was US 34.91 based on the official share price of GBP 28.05 per share converted into Dollars using an exchange rate of 1.2445 being the official exchange rate published by the Bank of England on the same date.
The means of determining the number of shares underlying this award and the terms and conditions are described in section 1b of the 2014 Policy available at httpsiteuploadspagesremunerationpolicy86. df.
SINGLE TOTAL FIGURE OF REMUNERATION FOR NONEXECUTIVE DIRECTORS AUDITED The table below sets out the remuneration received by each NonExecutive Director in 2017 and 2016.
BGEO fees US Bank fees US Total fees USteltel Neil Janin Chairman 103587 107500 210313 107500 313900 215000 David Morrison 80015 83500 124100 72500 204115 156000 Al Breach 64070 67000 94973 56000 159043 123000 Kim Bradley 66751 70500 103546 59500 170298 130000 Tamaz Georgadze 64070 59046 94973 47531 159043 106577 Hanna Loikkanen 64070 56077 94973 37500 159043 93577 Jonathan Muir 29621  37776  67398 TOTAL 472185 443623 760654 380531 1232839 824154
On 4 September 2015 Mr Janin was appointed as an Independent NonExecutive Director of GHG PLC.
He also served as Chairman of both its Nomination and Remuneration Committees resigning in May 2017 and was appointed to its Clinical Quality and Safety Committee in February 2017 until resigning his membership in June 2017.
Mr Janin serves on the Supervisory Board and Committees of JSC Georgia Healthcare Group.
In 2017 and 2016 Neil Janin received remuneration of US 102119 and US 111000 respectively from GHG PLC and JSC Georgia Healthcare Group in respect of his services.
On 4 September 2015 Mr Morrison was appointed as an Independent NonExecutive Director of GHG PLC.
He also serves as Chairman of its Audit Committee and is a member of its Nomination Committee.
He stepped down from its Clinical Quality and Safety Committee in February 2017.
Mr Morrison serves on the Supervisory Board and Committees of JSC Georgia Healthcare Group.
In 2017 and 2016 respectively Mr Morrison received remuneration of US 156000 and US 156000 from GHG PLC and JSC Georgia Healthcare Group together in respect of his services.
Mr Muir was appointed to the Board of BGEO on 20 June 2017 and therefore the fees reflected in respect of 2017 have been prorated from the date of appointment until 31 December 2017.
The maximum amount for BGEO base fees including the Chairman as provided for in BGEOs Articles of Association is GBP 750000.
The new Directors Remuneration Policy was approved at the AGM of 1 June 2017 by shareholders and includes revised fees for NonExecutive Directors and a topup payment in 2017 to allow the NonExecutive Directors to reach the level of fees indicated for the financial year.
The increased proportion payable by the Bank reflects the increased work performed for the Georgian entities.
See the NonExecutive Directors Remuneration Policy reproduced later in this section on page 113.
In 2017 no payments were made to past Directors nor were payments made for loss of office.
TOTAL SHAREHOLDER RETURN BGEO GROUP PLC TSR VS.
THE FTSE INDICES TSR The following graph compares the Total Shareholder Return TSR of BGEO Group PLC with the companies comprising the FTSE 250 Index and FTSE 100 Index for the period since BGEOs listing on the Premium Segment of the LSE on 28 February 2012 until 31 December 2017.
BGEO
Group PLC has been a member of the FTSE 250 since 15 June 2012.
For further context and comparison our TSR performance is also compared to that of the FTSE 100 Index as it has consistently outperformed the FTSE 100 over the past four years.
BGEO FTSE 100 FTSE 250 Dec 12 Dec 13 Dec 14 Dec 15 Dec 16 Dec 17 Source Thomson Reuters Datastream.
DIRECTORS REMUNERATION REPORT CONTINUED 103 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
RELATIVE IMPORTANCE OF SPEND ON PAY The following table shows the difference in remuneration paid to all employees of the Group between 2016 and 2017 as well as the difference in value of distributions paid to shareholders by way of dividends between 2016 and 2017.
Remuneration paid to all employees of the Group Distributions to shareholders by way of dividends Year ended 31 December 2016 US dividend for 2015 83805260 36876228 Year ended 31 December 2017 US dividend for 2016 117671232 39156315 Percentage change 40.4% 6.2% DIRECTORS INTERESTS IN SHARES AUDITED The following table sets forth the respective holdings of BGEO shares of each Director as at 31 December 2016 and 2017.
As at 31 December 2016 As at 31 December 2017 Number of BGEO shares held directly Number of vested but unexercised BGEO shares held under option through deferred share salary and discretionary deferred share remuneration all nilcost options with no performance conditions Number of unvested and unexercised BGEO shares held under option through deferred share salary and discretionary deferred share remuneration all nilcost options with no performance conditions Total number of interests in BGEO shares Number of BGEO shares held directly Number of vested but unexercised BGEO shares held under option through deferred share salary and discretionary deferred share remuneration all nilcost options with no performance conditions Number of unvested and unexercised BGEO shares held under option through deferred share salary and discretionary deferred share remuneration all nilcost options with no performance conditions Total number of interests in BGEO shares Irakli Gilauri 202315  311500 513815 303115  312950 Neil Janin 35729 NA NA 35729 39229 NA NA 39229 David Morrison 26357 NA NA 26357 26357 NA NA 26357 Al Breach 16400 NA NA 16400 16400 NA NA 16400 Kim Bradley 1250 NA NA 1250 1250 NA NA 1250 Tamaz Georgadze  NA NA   NA NA Hanna Loikkanen  NA NA   NA NA Jonathan Muir  NA NA   NA NA
In the Annual Report for the year ended 31 December 2016 we presented Mr Gilauris unvested and unexercised shares inclusive of all options granted in respect of that work year.
In the above table we have presented only the number of unvested and unexercised shares as at 31 December 2016 and 31 December 2017.
Further details of the awards made and determined in respect of those work years up to 6 March 2018 are in Notes 2 and 3 below.
In 2017 Mr Gilauri received awards of 90000 salary deferred shares and 37450 discretionary deferred shares for the 2016 work year.
In March 2017 Mr Gilauri exercised options in respect of 126000 BGEO shares of which 25200 were withheld to satisfy tax liabilities.
The net gain on exercise of these share options was US2395190.
In January 2018 Mr Gilauri was granted 90000 nil cost options in respect of deferred salary shares for the 2017 work year pursuant to the executive equity compensation plan.
On
20 February 2018 Mr Gilauri exercised options in respect of 125983 BGEO shares of which 25197 BGEO shares were withheld to satisfy tax liabilities.
Whilst the Remuneration Committee has determined the award for discretionary deferred share compensation being options over 45548 shares to be received as per Note 3 to the single total figure of remuneration table above this will be reported in the 2018 Annual Report and Accounts and is not included in the table above which is as at 31 December 2017.
At 2017 yearend NeilCo Limited a company whollyowned by Mr Janin held 10000 BGEO shares.
At 2017 yearend Gemsstock Growth Fund which Mr Breach manages held 20000 BGEO shares.
On 28 February 2018 Al Breach personally purchased 7600 BGEO shares.
The Remuneration Policy is heavily weighted towards remuneration in deferred salary shares and deferred discretionary shares.
In respect of 2017 85% of Mr Gilauris compensation was in the form of deferred shares.
The long vesting periods particularly for deferred salary shares five years result in executive management having large holdings of shares.
Accordingly the Group does not apply a shareholding guideline or impose a holding period on Mr Gilauris shares.
The Policy naturally results in our executives holding a significant number of unvested shares and achieves a delay between performance and vesting.
We believe these results are consistent with the principles of the Investment Management Association.
As at the date of this Annual Report Mr Gilauris vested and unvested shareholding is 680868 BGEO shares representing approximately 1.73% of the share capital of BGEO.
The vesting period for the majority of unvested shares exceeds three years.
None of Mr Gilauris connected persons have interests in any BGEO shares.
The Group does not require NonExecutive Directors to hold a specified number of shares in BGEO.
Notwithstanding this some NonExecutive Directors have chosen to become shareholders.
Several of our Directors chose to subscribe for shares in the GHG IPO on 12 November 2015.
The following table sets forth the respective holdings of GHG shares of each Director as at 31 December 2017.
As at 31 December 2017 Shares held at GHG directly Irakli Gilauri 411700 Neil Janin 88000 David Morrison 116600 Al Breach 30000 Kim Bradley 19000 104 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC MR GILAURIS INTERESTS IN GROUP DEBT SECURITIES REAL ESTATE AND AMEX CARD Directors and executive management of the Group from time to time will purchase securities or real estate from Group entities on an arms length basis.
In the interest of transparency such transactions entered into by our sole Executive Director Mr Gilauri are described below.
Mr Gilauri participated in the US 25 million threeyear bond offering by m Real Estate.
Both bonds are listed on the Georgian Stock Exchange.
As at the date of this Annual Report Mr Gilauri holds US 41240 worth of m Real Estate bonds.
Mr Gilauri also purchased US 3372 worth of Teliani Valley shares.
On 24 December 2015 and 3 October 2016 Mr Gilauri purchased an apartment in the m Real Estate Skyline project to the amount of US 519220 and US 416239 respectively.
Mr Gilauri purchased these apartments on an arms length basis.
During the year Mr Gilauri obtained and fully repaid an Amex card loan in the amount of GEL 136761 granted at market terms.
DETAILS OF NONEXECUTIVE DIRECTORS TERMS OF APPOINTMENT Letters of Appointment are entered into by BGEO with each NonExecutive Director generally for a threeyear term and subject to our succession plan which permits service for a sixyear period.
However at the discretion of the Board if the NonExecutives continued membership is in the best interests of the Group he may be reoffered membership to the Board pursuant to a letter of appointment for an additional oneyear term which may be renewed no more than two times.
All NonExecutive Directors are proposed for annual reelection at the AGM.
The Letters of Appointment require NonExecutive Directors to provide one months notice prior to termination and the Company may terminate their appointment on one months notice or less in certain circumstances.
The table below shows each NonExecutive Directors date of appointment to the Board of BGEO.
Director Appointed on NEIL JANIN NonExecutive Chairman 24 October 2011 IRAKLI GILAURI CEO 24 October 2011 DAVID MORRISON Senior Independent NonExecutive Director 24 October 2011 ALASDAIR AL BREACH Independent NonExecutive Director 24 October 2011 KIM BRADLEY Independent NonExecutive Director 19 December 2013 TAMAZ GEORGADZE Independent NonExecutive Director 19 December 2013 HANNA LOIKKANEN Independent NonExecutive Director 12 June 2015 JONATHAN MUIR Independent NonExecutive Director 20 June 2017 SHAREHOLDINGS OF EXECUTIVE MANAGEMENT Similar to Executive Directors the remuneration of executive management is characterised by a heavily weighted salary in the form of longterm deferred share remuneration rather than cash and performancebased remuneration in the form of deferred shares only and no cash.
The following table sets forth the respective holdings of BGEO shares by several members of executive management as at 31 December 2017 which reflects the predominance of unvested shares.
As at 31 December 2017 Number of vested BGEO shares Number of unvested BGEO shares Total vested and unvested BGEO shares Avto Namichieshvili 61895 125000 186895 Nikoloz Gamkrelidze  79000 79000 Kaha Kiknavelidze 26337 21667 48004 Ekaterina Shavgulidze  41250 41250 Giorgi Alpaidze  5867 5867 David Tsiklauri  62500 62500 COMMITTEE EFFECTIVENESS REVIEW Lintstock performed the external review of the Committee this year focusing on its overall performance with all Board members identifying and discussing their views on the Committees effectiveness and how the 2017 Policy has been implemented.
The effectiveness evaluation concluded that the Committee continues to operate and perform effectively and that its structure and membership remain appropriate.
DIRECTORS REMUNERATION REPORT CONTINUED 105 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
DIRECTORS REMUNERATION POLICY Our Directors Remuneration Policy was approved by our shareholders in June 2017 the 2017 Policy with a vote of 94% in favour.
The
Remuneration Committee appreciated the support of shareholders in approving the Policy and the Annual Report on Remuneration will outline how we have implemented the Policy in 2017.
The principles of our Policy as it applies to Executive Directors are i heavily weighting salary to longterm deferred share remuneration rather than cash and ii paying performancebased remuneration in the form of deferred shares only and no cash.
Pension and benefits are only a very small part of the remuneration package less than 5%.
These key principles have remained the same since 2010.
Our simple and strategically aligned remuneration structure means that Executive Directors are completely focused on delivering shareholder value.
Mr Gilauri continues to be BGEOs sole Executive Director.
Mr Gilauri entered into a new threeyear service agreement with JSC Bank of Georgia the Bank on 24 August 2015 which became effective on 1 May 2016 consistent with the terms of the 2014 Policy.
In connection with the Board adopting the new Policy Mr Gilauri agreed to amend this service agreement to extend the reflected vesting period for discretionary shares to three years after award which he has also voluntarily agreed to apply to the 2016 work year and which is reflected in an amendment to his service agreement.
As to remuneration of our NonExecutive Directors our Policy moderately increased the fees solely cash payable commensurate with the increased volume of work and time commitment required in respect of the growing business now diversified in various sectors.
Fees for NonExecutive Directors had remained static since listing in 2012 while the business had tripled in size and expanded into different industries through our Investment Business.
The Policy took effect from the date of the 2017 AGM and is intended to apply until the earlier of Mr Gilauri entering into a new service agreement with any principal subsidiary of BGEO the terms of which differ from the Policy or the 2020 AGM at which time we will seek shareholder approval.
Please also refer to the 2016 Annual Report for the full text of the approved Directors Remuneration Policy which is also available on our website httpsiteannualreports.
SALARY IN THE FORM OF CASH AND LONGTERM DEFERRED SHARES PURPOSE AND LINK TO STRATEGY OPERATION OPPORTUNITY To reflect the role and required duties skills experience and individual contribution to the
To recruit and retain talent.
To promote longterm value creation and share price growth.
To encourage longterm commitment to the Group.
To closely align the Executive Director and shareholders interests.
The level of base salary for an Executive Director is fixed in his or her service agreement.
The level of salary is reviewed by the Remuneration Committee when a service agreement is up for renewal.
Salary is comprised principally of longterm deferred shares deferred share salary complemented by a modest cash sum which when combined with the remainder of the components of the remuneration package is competitive enough to attract retain and develop highcalibre talent who buy into a remuneration structure that supports reward over the long term.
Deferred share salary is awarded in the form of nilcost options awarded at the beginning of the year following the calendar year when the Executive worked to earn such salary the work year.
Deferred share salary in respect of a work year will vest as follows 20% in each of the second third and fourth years following the work year and 40% in the fifth year following the work year.
At vesting upon exercise of the nilcost options the Executive Director receives in addition to the vested shares cash payments equal to the dividends paid on the underlying shares between the date the award was made and the vesting date.
No malus or clawback provisions apply to base salary because natural malus and clawback are built into the structure as described in the Notes to the Policy table.
There is no set maximum monetary value for the salary of Executive Directors.
However the maximum level of salary set for an Executive Director will be no more than the Remuneration Committee considers reasonable based on his or her duties skills and experience provided that his or her salary will not exceed the salary currently awarded to Executives at the equivalent level of seniority.
The salary of our sole Executive Director CEO of BGEO can be found on page 99 of the Annual Report on Remuneration.
106 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC PERFORMANCEBASED REMUNERATION  DISCRETIONARY DEFERRED SHARES PURPOSE AND LINK TO STRATEGY OPERATION OPPORTUNITY To motivate and reward an Executive Director that meets or exceeds the KPIs set for him or her.
Performancebased remuneration solely in the form of deferred shares no cash Closely aligns the interests of an Executive Director with shareholders Minimises risk taking for shortterm gain Encourages longterm commitment to the Group.
Performancebased remuneration is awarded entirely in the form of nilcost options over BGEO shares which are deferred no cash bonus.
Deferred shares in respect of a work year vest 33.33% in each of the second third and fourth years following the work year.
At vesting upon exercise of the nilcost options the Executive Director receives in addition to the vested shares cash payments equal to the dividends paid on the underlying shares between the date the award was made and the vesting date.
KPIs for the Executive Director are set at the start of each work year and reflect the Executive Directors targeted contribution to the Groups overall key strategic and financial objectives for the work year.
KPIs may also include nontangible factors such as selfdevelopment mentoring and social responsibility.
Early in the year following the work year the Remuneration Committee will determine whether an award is merited based on the Executive Directors achievement of the KPIs set for the work year and the performance of the Group during the work year.
In appropriate cases where a strategic change or change in business circumstances has made one or more KPI an inaccurate gauge of performance the Remuneration Committee may base its assessment on alternative measures.
The outcome of the Executive Directors performance and the Committees determination will be reported in the Directors Remuneration Report for the work year in consideration.
There is no contractual right to discretionary remuneration and the Remuneration Committee reserves the right to award no discretionary deferred share remuneration if the Groups performance is unsatisfactory.
Malus applies under the circumstances as set out in the Notes to this Policy table.
For an Executive Director other than Mr Gilauri maximum opportunity in respect of the previous work year is 125% of total salary.
For Mr Gilauri maximum opportunity in respect of the previous work year is fixed at 75% of total salary.
However for an Executive Director other than Mr Gilauri whose performance has resulted in outstanding benefits for shareholders the Remuneration Committee has reserved the right to increase the maximum opportunity in respect of the previous work year to 150% of total salary.
PENSION
PURPOSE AND LINK TO STRATEGY OPERATION OPPORTUNITY The provision of a retirement benefit helps to attract and retain highcalibre talent.
Pension contributions not exceeding a percentage of the Executive Directors gross monthly cash salary are payable into a defined contribution scheme.
Additional contributions of the Executive Director will be matched in a proportion of 1.2 to 1 but only up to a maximum of 1% of gross monthly salary where the Executive Director makes additional contributions of up to 5% of gross monthly salary.
BENEFITS
PURPOSE AND LINK TO STRATEGY OPERATION OPPORTUNITY Noncash benefits are in line with Georgian market practice and are designed to be sufficient to attract and retain highcalibre talent.
Benefits consist of life insurance health insurance incapacitydisability insurance directors and officers liability insurance physical examinations tax grossups company car and driver mobile phone including agreement charges and costs of calls made during business trips abroad personal security arrangements if requested by the Executive Director and assistance with completing tax returns where required.
A tax equalisation payment may be paid to an Executive Director if any part of his or her remuneration becomes subject to double taxation.
The Remuneration Committee determines the maximum amount payable.
The maximum amount payable depends on the cost of providing such benefits to an employee in the location at which the Executive Director is based.
Shareholders should note that the cost of providing comparable benefits in different jurisdictions may vary widely.
Disclosure of amounts paid will be provided in the implementation report and will be explained where the cost of benefits is significant.
DIRECTORS REMUNERATION REPORT CONTINUED 107 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
NOTES TO THE 2017 POLICY  EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS 1 Salary Deferred share salary is the most important element of the Executive Directors fixed annual remuneration and is commensurate with his or her role within the Group.
By heavily weighting salary to deferred share remuneration that vests over five years rather than cash the Executive Directors daytoday actions are geared towards achievement of the Groups strategic goals and sustained Group performance over the long term.
The deferred share salary component is neither a bonus nor an LTIP it is salary fixed at the outset of each threeyear service agreement and is therefore not subject to performance targets or measures.
That salary 40% of which vests a full five years after the work year increases or declines in value depending on Group performance over the fiveyear vesting period aligning the Executive Directors interests directly and naturally with those of shareholders.
Specific malus and clawback are not applied to salary.
Natural clawback and malus are built in to the structure given that shares are deferred over a long period and are subject to a number of vesting conditions which if breached would result in the Executive Directors salary shares fully lapsing unless the Board otherwise agrees.
An Executive Directors service agreement may be terminated for cause a definition which is broadly defined and extends beyond standard malus and clawback triggers to include for example gross and wilful misconduct having a material adverse effect on the Group fraud material repeated failure to perform duties breach of obligations or conviction of a felony.
An Executive Directors unvested shares may also lapse if they terminate their service agreement early in the absence of repeated material wrongdoing by the company.
By way of example an Executive Director terminated by the Board for cause in 2018 would normally give up because their shares would fail to vest their entire deferred share salary for 2018 and 2017 and 80% 60% and 40% of their deferred share salary for 2016 2015 and 2014 respectively.
As a result an Executive Director is motivated to perform to the best of their ability and to act in the longterm interest of  and remain with  the Group to ensure that salary shares vest.
2 Performancebased remuneration The Group does not operate an LTIP because it believes there is sufficient longterm incentive built into its deferred share salary and discretionary deferred share remuneration.
No cash bonuses are paid to Executive Directors.
Instead individual and Group performance are rewarded through an award of discretionary deferred share remuneration that vests over three years beginning in the second year following the work year.
As discretionary deferred share remuneration is awarded to reward past performance over the work year it is not subject to any performance measures over the period from award to vesting.
After the end of each work year the Remuneration Committee will determine the aggregate number of shares based on the share price at the time of the award if any available to award in respect of discretionary deferred share remuneration for all members of executive management including Executive Directors in relation to the defined maximum opportunity and based on the Groups performance and the individuals KPIs.
The Remuneration Committee does not utilise strict weighting of performance measures to ensure that flexibility is encouraged if for example strategic objectives evolve as the Group does or business circumstances change during the year.
The Remuneration Committee believes that this flexibility ensures that the Board can work with an Executive Director so that they do not take excessive risk to achieve KPIs when for example markets have turned.
Even in a good year for an Executive Director e.
Group e.
Executive Director.
If at any time after awarding discretionary deferred share remuneration it has been determined that there was a material misstatement in the financial results for the work year in respect of which the award was formally granted the Board has the right to cause some or all of the Executives unvested discretionary deferred shares at the time of its determination not to vest and to lapse.
Similar to deferred share salary natural clawback and malus this measure.
Discretionary deferred shares are also subject to vesting conditions which if breached would result in the Executive Directors salary shares fully lapsing unless the Board otherwise agrees.
3 Discretion The Committee retains certain discretion in relation to discretionary share remuneration.
This includes The determination of the award if any Selection of KPIs which may vary from year to year in order to align with strategy and financial objectives and Any adjustments required to an Executive Directors KPIs during the work year when for example there has been a change in strategy or business circumstances which results in one or more of the KPIs becoming an inaccurate gauge of performance.
EQUITY COMPENSATION TRUST AND DILUTION LIMITS An equity compensation trust Trust was established for the purposes of satisfying deferred share remuneration awarded to Executive Directors and members of executive management.
In 2017 the Group provided additional funding of US 30543886 to enable Sanne Fiduciary Services Limited Sanne acting as trustee of the Trust to purchase shares in the market to satisfy awards in respect of the 2016 and 2017 work years.
In 2017 a total of 784084 shares were purchased in the market for the Trust.
We intend for Sanne to continue purchasing additional shares in the market but may need to issue new shares in order to ensure that there are a sufficient number of shares committed to the Trust in order to satisfy awards.
The Group continues to commit to shareholders that new shares issued in satisfaction of deferred share remuneration from the time of the Companys listing on the premium segment of the LSE will not exceed 10% of BGEOs ordinary share capital over any tenyear period.
LEGACY ARRANGEMENTS It is a provision of this Policy that the Group will honour all preexisting obligations and commitments that were entered into prior to this Policy taking effect.
The terms of those preexisting obligations and commitments may differ from the terms of the Policy and may include without limitation obligations and commitments under service agreements deferred share remuneration schemes and pension and benefit plans.
CONSIDERATION OF SHAREHOLDER VIEWS The Remuneration Committee considers shareholder feedback received on our remuneration structure each year as well as guidance from shareholder representative bodies as we view shareholder input as key when shaping remuneration policy.
In 2014 2015 and 2016 we met with a number of our significant shareholders to discuss our remuneration structure and engaged directly with several shareholder advisory groups.
The feedback we received was positive and our shareholders were widely supportive of our executive remuneration structure understanding that although it varies from a typical UK remuneration structure in that we do not operate an LTIP or give cash bonuses the absence of cash bonuses and the dominance of deferred share remuneration in the overall remuneration package create a direct and natural alignment of shareholder and executive management interests.
108 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC CONSIDERATION OF EMPLOYMENT CONDITIONS ELSEWHERE IN THE GROUP When determining an Executive Directors remuneration the Remuneration Committee considers i the pay and employment conditions of executive management other than Directors ii any changes in pay and employment conditions across the Group as a whole iii whether employees across the Group are personally satisfied with the way they are remunerated and iv any feedback received during the year from the Human Resources department executive management and other employees on the executive remuneration structure.
We frequently benchmark remuneration at all levels within the Group in order to ensure that our remuneration is competitive so as to attract the right candidates and remain competitive in order to motivate satisfy and retain our talent.
The remuneration of employees in the Group other than Executive Directors and executive management is benchmarked against the Georgian labour market as this is the most relevant comparator.
Each year the Bank participates in the largest salary survey in Georgia.
Survey results are used to offer competitive remuneration packages when recruiting as well as benchmark the salaries of the Groups employees on an annual basis in order for the Group to upwardly adjust the remuneration of current employees and remain competitive.
Our employees remuneration packages are comprised of cash salary bonus opportunity benefits as well as the opportunity to participate in the pension scheme on the same terms as applicable to Mr Gilauri and executive management.
For a FTSE 250 company of our size and depth our Executive Directors and executive management must have the skills experience work ethic and attitude required to successfully execute our strategy meet our objectives and create value for shareholders over the long term.
In order to recruit and retain this talent we must benchmark the value of remuneration against other FTSE companies of similar size and sector in the UK.
Our executives are not paid cash bonuses and therefore remuneration in the form of deferred shares will comprise nearly all of total remuneration.
As it is not possible for a direct comparison to be made between executive remuneration and remuneration of other employees in the Group the most important consideration for us is whether other employees are satisfied with their remuneration packages.
In 2015 2016 and 2017 employee surveys were conducted by the Human Resources department targeting a large number of employees of varying skill seniority department among other factors.
The results confirmed that employees consulted were satisfied with the manner in which they were compensated.
Our retention rate of employees is high and in 2017 the survey also confirmed that we remain a competitive employer.
COMPARISON WITH REMUNERATION POLICY FOR EMPLOYEES GENERALLY As mentioned above the components of the remuneration package for Executive Directors as provided for by the Policy are broadly the same as those for nonBoard members of the executive management team.
Members of senior management below the executive management level and middle management receive their entire salary in cash and do not receive a deferred share salary.
Their bonuses may be either in the form of cash andor shares which vest over a threeyear period following the award.
All other employees within the Group receive a cash salary and may be eligible to receive cash bonuses portions of which may be deferred until the publication of the audited annual results for the work year andor based on continuous employment with the Group.
The deferred portion of the cash bonus may also be reduced if it is revealed upon completion of the annual audit that the annual results published by the department where the employee works were incorrect in any material respect.
Natural clawback including normal lapse of shares upon termination for cause also applies.
All employees receive a competitive benefit package in line with Georgian market practice and are entitled to participate in the pension scheme on the same terms as applicable to Executive Directors.
TOTAL REMUNERATION OPPORTUNITY FOR OUR SOLE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR The chart below shows the remuneration which Mr Gilauri our sole Executive Director could receive in respect of 2018 under the Policy at three different performance levels.
It should be noted that at the maximum level 91% of Mr Gilauris 2018 remuneration will be in the form of deferred shares for which the average vesting period exceeds four years.
At the minimum level 84% of Mr Gilauris 2018 remuneration will be in the form of deferred shares.
A full explanation of the demerger and any changes to the total remuneration of the sole executive director will be provided in the circular to be announced shortly after the release of this report.
Maximum
Target
Minimum
US 4774585 US 4161190 US 2729935 Discretionary deferred shares compensation Fixed share salary Fixed cash salary 9% 48% 43% 11% 55% 34% 16% 84%
Salary is comprised of cash and deferred share salary.
Mr Gilauris total cash salary in 2018 in respect of his service agreements with the Group will be US 437450.
The value of the deferred share salary payable is US 2288700 calculated by reference to the share price as at the date Mr Gilauris most recent service agreement with the Group was signed on 24 August 2015 being US 25.43 per share the official share price of GBP 16.16 per share converted into Dollars using an exchange rate of 1.5738 being the official exchange rate published by the Bank of England on the same date.
The price is the value at which the shares were committed to the Trust and underlies the determination of remuneration expense in the Groups accounts.
Deferred share salary in respect of 2018 will be formally granted in 2019 and will vest in January 2020 2021 2022 and 2023.
For the purposes of this graph we have added the value of pension and benefits only about 0.1% of total salary to cash salary.
The value used is the same as 2017 as we assume pension and benefits in 2018 will be substantially the same.
The means of determining the number of shares underlying the discretionary deferred share remuneration and terms and conditions applicable to this remuneration are described in the Policy table.
Discretionary deferred shares in respect of 2018 will be formally granted in 2019 and will vest in January 2020 2021 and 2022.
Minimum opportunity reflects a scenario whereby Mr Gilauri receives only fixed remuneration which is salary cash and deferred shares pension contributions and benefits and the Remuneration Committee considers that the Groups andor Mr Gilauris performance in 2017 does not warrant any award of discretionary deferred shares.
Ontarget opportunity reflects a scenario where Mr Gilauri receives fixed remuneration and discretionary deferred shares with a value of US 1431255 being 70% of the maximum opportunity as described in 5 below.
In this scenario the Remuneration Committee considers that the Groups and Mr Gilauris performance in 2018 are in line with the Groups expectation which is excellent performance.
Maximum opportunity reflects a scenario where Mr Gilauri receives fixed remuneration as described in iii above and discretionary deferred shares with a value of US 2044650 being 75% of total salary.
In this scenario the Remuneration Committee considers that the Groups and Mr Gilaurils performance in 2018 warrant the highest possible level of discretionary deferred share remuneration.
The value of deferred shares does not take into account any increase or decrease in share price over the vesting period or any dividend equivalents payable on vesting upon exercise of the nilcost options.
DIRECTORS REMUNERATION REPORT CONTINUED 109 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
NONEXECUTIVE DIRECTORS REMUNERATION POLICY Our 2017 Policy proposed the increase of NonExecutive Directors fees which had remained static since BGEOs listing in February 2012.
Since listing the market capitalisation of BGEO has more than tripled and the Groups business has expanded in both size and scope.
Each Non Executive Director also serves as a member of the Supervisory Board of the Bank and since 2016 each has devoted an increasing amount of time to the Investment Business arm through JSC BGEO Group.
The Policy reflects a moderate increase in fees to reflect the volume of work and time commitment required for the complexity of our Group.
The Policy will apply in each year that the Policy operates from the date of approval of the
In the second half of 2017 a topup payment was made to NonExecutive Directors to increase the level of fees to those in the 2017 Policy.
PURPOSE AND LINK TO STRATEGY OPERATION OPPORTUNITY To attract and retain high performing NonExecutive Directors with the requisite skills knowledge experience independence and other attributes to add value to the Group.
To reflect the time commitment dedicated by NonExecutive
All fees are paid in cash.
Fees will be reviewed the year we propose a new Policy to shareholders taking into account the time commitment responsibilities and the technical skills required to make a valuable contribution to the Board and by reference to comparators benchmarking results of the annual review and other guidance.
Additional fees are payable to compensate for the skill provided and time spent discharging JSC BGEO Group Bank Supervisory Board and Committee duties.
There is no remuneration in the form of deferred share salary or discretionary deferred share remuneration pensions benefits or any variable or performancelinked remuneration or incentives.
NonExecutive Directors are reimbursed for reasonable business expenses including travel and accommodation which are incurred in the course of carrying out duties under their Letters of Appointment on provision of valid receipts.
The maximum amount payable depends on the cost of providing such expenses in the location at which the NonExecutive Director is based.
Shareholders should note that the cost of providing comparable expenses in different jurisdictions may vary widely.
Aggregate BGEO and subsidiaries base fees for NonExecutive Directors excluding the Chairman and Senior Independent Director are US 109500.
The Chairman and Senior Independent Director receive higher base fees which reflect increased responsibilities and time commitment.
The Chairman will receive an aggregate flat fee of US 313900 and our Senior Independent Director will receive an aggregate base fee of US 146000.
Committee fees range from US 6570 to US 17520.
POLICY ON THE APPOINTMENT OF EXTERNAL HIRES AND INTERNAL APPOINTMENTS The Policy provides for a new Executive Directors remuneration package to be comprised of the elements set out below.
ELEMENT POLICY AND OPERATION Overall  The Committee intends that the components of remuneration set out in the above Policy tables and the approach to those components as set out in the Policy tables will subject to the remainder of this recruitment policy be equally applicable to the annual package provided to new recruits.
Any new Executive Director would be paid no more than the Committee considers reasonably necessary to attract a candidate with the relevant skills and experience taking into account where appropriate either the annual total monetary value or the total number of shares awarded to executives at an equivalent level of seniority.
Relocation benefits and buyout awards may also be required to recruit the right candidate subject to the conditions and restrictions outlined below.
For internal promotions any commitments made prior to the appointment may continue to be honoured as the executive is transitioned to new remuneration arrangements.
Any pay element awarded in respect of the prior role may either continue on its original terms or be adjusted to reflect the new appointment as appropriate within the parameters set out in the Policy tables.
The rationale for the compensation package offered will be explained in the Annual Report on Remuneration published after commencement of the appointment.
Base salary  In accordance with the Policy and the Overall summary above.
Discretionary deferred shares In accordance with the Policy and the Overall summary above.
Malus andor clawback would operate in respect of discretionary share remuneration.
Pension  Pension provision would be in line with normal policy and the Overall summary above.
Benefits  In accordance with the Policy and the Overall summary above.
Relocation support for an incoming Executive Director and where relevant his or her family may be provided depending on the individuals circumstances.
BGEO has not set a maximum aggregate amount that may be paid in respect of any individuals relocation support but it will aim to provide support of an appropriate level and quality on the best terms that can reasonably be obtained.
The Group may make a contribution towards legal fees in connection with agreeing employment terms.
The Group may also agree to pay certain expenses and taxes should an Executive Director be asked to relocate to a different country such that they pay no more than would have been required in the home location.
Buyout awards  In addition to other elements of remuneration described above buyout awards may be made to reflect value forfeited through an individual leaving their current employer.
If a buyout award is required the Committee would aim to reflect the nature timing and value of awards forgone in any replacement awards.
Awards will only take the form of deferred shares.
The value of these deferred shares would be capped to be no higher on recruitment than the awards which the individual had to surrender in order to be recruited and the vesting period of such deferred shares would be a similar timeframe to the awards being bought out.
The application of performance conditions andor clawback provisions may also be considered where appropriate.
110 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC SERVICE AGREEMENTS AND POLICY ON PAYMENTS FOR LOSS OF OFFICE FOR OUR DIRECTORS The following paragraphs 1 to 2 summarise the termination and payments for loss of office provisions pursuant to Mr Gilauris service agreements with BGEO and the Bank.
In 2017 and as of the date of this Annual Report Mr Gilauri remained the sole Executive Director on the BGEO Board.
The termination provisions of NonExecutive Director Letters of Appointment is described in paragraph 3 and our approach to termination and payments for loss of office for future Executive Directors is described in paragraph 4.
The Directors service agreements and Letters of Appointment are kept for inspection by shareholders at BGEOs registered office.
1 BGEO service agreement dated 15 December 2011 Mr Gilauris service agreement with BGEO is for an indefinite term subject to annual reelection at the AGM and is terminable by either party on four months written notice.
Where the service agreement is terminated on notice BGEO may put Mr Gilauri on garden leave for some or all of the notice period and continue to pay his cash salary under the BGEO service agreement provided that any accrued and unused holiday entitlement shall be deemed to be taken during the garden leave period.
BGEO may terminate Mr Gilauris employment early with immediate effect and without notice and pay in lieu of notice in the case of among other circumstances his dishonesty gross misconduct conviction of an offence other than trafficrelated or becoming of unsound mind.
BGEO may also terminate the agreement with immediate effect by payment in lieu of notice in which case the payment in lieu of notice shall be solely in respect of cash salary due under the BGEO service agreement as at the date of termination of employment.
2 Bank service agreement dated 24 August 2015 Mr Gilauris service agreement with the Bank is for an initial term of three years expiring on 1 May 2019 and was amended on 16 March 2017 to extend the vesting period of discretionary deferred shares to three years which is applicable in respect of the 2016 work year onwards.
The service agreement may be renewed by agreement between the parties or terminated prior to the expiry of the term by either Mr Gilauri or the
The Bank may terminate the service agreement immediately without notice subject to the terms set out below whereas Mr Gilauri may terminate the agreement upon three months written notice or such shorter period as is agreed with the Supervisory Board of the Bank and CEO of the Bank.
SEPARATION PAYMENTS i Mr Gilauri will be entitled to only accrued and unpaid cash salary holiday pay reimbursement of business expenses accrued but not yet paid dividend equivalents and benefits upon termination of the service agreement in the following circumstances By the Bank for cause cause being defined as gross and wilful misconduct in the course of his duties having a material adverse effect on the Group fraud material repeated failure to perform his duties or breach of his obligations or conviction of a felony among other circumstances By reason of death or disability in which case he receives life or disability insurance benefits or By Mr Gilauri other than for good reason.
See the discussion below for the treatment of unvested share awards in the above circumstances.
Good reason is defined as an uncorrected material breach of a material provision of the service agreement by the Bank which is not cured within 45 days upon Mr Gilauri serving notice of breach or material and unremedied illegal or unethical behaviour by Bank employees which has been notified to the Board by Mr Gilauri and the Board failing to react and cooperate with Mr Gilauri in addressing the behaviour.
By Mr Gilauri for good reason By the Bank for any other reason excluding a voluntary termination by Mr Gilauri b termination for cause or c death or permanent disability fully covered by insurance or If the service agreement is not renewed on substantially similar terms on expiry.
If the service agreement is terminated for any of the reasons set out directly above the Bank may assign Mr Gilauri garden leave for a period of up to four months following the termination of his employment during which time the Bank will compensate him only in the form of his regular cash salary with all other benefits bonuses incentives or reimbursements excluded.
Mr Gilauri will be required to adhere to noncompete and nonsolicitation restrictions for a period of six months following termination.
In addition the Bank may impose a twoyear noncompete period subject to a materiality threshold in exchange for accelerated vesting of his deferred share remuneration as described below.
DEFERRED SHARE REMUNERATION ON TERMINATION Mr Gilauri will be entitled to an award of his deferred share salary in respect of any incomplete calendar year which he has worked.
He may also be awarded discretionary deferred share remuneration if His service agreement expires and is not renewed upon substantially similar terms He does not accept a new service agreement but continues as a member of the BGEO Board andor becomes a member of the JSC BGEO Group Board as the case may be or His service agreement is terminated before its expiry date but he continues as a member of the BGEO Board andor becomes a member of the JSC BGEO Group Board as the case may be.
Mr Gilauri will not be entitled to any deferred share salary for calendar years covered by the agreement period during which he has not worked.
DIRECTORS REMUNERATION REPORT CONTINUED 111 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
VESTING AND LAPSE OF EXISTING AWARDS Unvested deferred share remuneration granted in respect of the 2015 work year and all prior work years Unvested deferred share remuneration granted in respect of the 2015 work year and all prior work years will vest upon termination of the service agreement save for in the following circumstances If Mr Gilauris service agreement is terminated for cause unless otherwise agreed with the Board his unvested deferred share remuneration will lapse.
If Mr Gilauri terminates his service agreement for any reason other than good reason unless otherwise agreed with the Board in favour of Mr Gilauri 50% of his unvested deferred share remuneration will vest immediately and the remaining 50% will at his discretion either continue to vest as normal or he may acquire some or all of his unvested deferred share remuneration at the price per share recorded in the IFRS accounts on the respective grant dates plus a 10% annual increase from the respective grant date until the date of purchase if any by Mr Gilauri.
Unvested deferred share remuneration granted in respect of the 2016 work year and beyond Any unvested deferred share remuneration will unless otherwise agreed with the Board lapse on the termination date if Mr Gilauris service agreement is terminated by The Bank for cause or Mr Gilauri for any reason other than for good reason.
Any unvested deferred share remuneration will vest immediately if The Bank terminates the service agreement other than for cause Mr Gilauri terminates the service agreement for good reason The service agreement expires and neither is a renewed agreement on substantially similar terms offered nor does BGEO andor JSC BGEO Group Board membership continue Mr Gilauri ceases to be an Executive Director by reason of death disability injury redundancy or retirement at normal retirement age or There is a change of control of the Bank BGEO or any intermediary holding company of the Bank as appropriate If Mr Gilauris service agreement expires and he refuses to continue as a member of the BGEO andor JSC BGEO Group Board 50% of his unvested deferred share remuneration will vest immediately and the remaining 50% will at his discretion either continue to vest as normal or he may acquire some or all of the underlying shares of his unvested deferred share remuneration at the price per share recorded in the IFRS accounts on the respective grant dates plus a 10% annual increase from the respective grant date until the date of purchase if any by Mr Gilauri.
In consideration for this vesting treatment Mr Gilauri will be bound by a twoyear noncompete period during which he may not be employed by provide consultancy services to or otherwise found or be a partner or associate of a commercial bank in Georgia save that he may hold less than 5% of shares of a publicly listed bank.
If Mr Gilauris service agreement expires and i is not renewed upon substantially similar terms or ii he does not accept a new service agreement but he continues as a member of the BGEO andor JSC BGEO Group Board 50% of his unvested shares vest immediately and the remaining 50% shall continue to vest as normal.
If he subsequently ceases to be a member of the Bank andor BGEO Board at Mr Gilauris discretion unvested shares either continue to vest as normal or he may acquire some or all of the underlying shares for the specified price as described above.
MALUS
If at any time after awarding discretionary deferred share remuneration it has been determined that there was a material misstatement in the financial results for the work year in respect of which the award was formally granted the Board has the right to cause some or all of the Executives unvested discretionary deferred shares at the time of its determination not to vest and to lapse.
3 Termination of NonExecutive Directors appointments The Letters of Appointment for NonExecutive Directors provide for a onemonth notice period although BGEO may terminate the appointment with immediate effect without notice or pay in lieu of notice if the NonExecutive Director has committed any serious breach or nonobservance of his or her obligations to BGEO is guilty of fraud or dishonesty brings BGEO or himherself into disrepute or is disqualified as acting as a NonExecutive Director among other circumstances.
Upon termination the only remuneration a NonExecutive Director is entitled to is accrued fees as at the date of termination together with reimbursement of properly incurred expenses incurred prior to the termination date.
4 Approach to termination and payments for loss of office for new Executive Directors Any payment upon termination of a new Executive Directors service agreement would not exceed 12 months cash salary under the relevant service agreement plus any accrued and unpaid cash salary benefits and holiday pay and reimbursement of any business expenses.
The Group may assign the Executive Director garden leave for a period of up to four months following the termination of their employment during which they will be compensated only in the form of regular cash salary with all other benefits bonuses incentive or reimbursements excluded.
The Executive Director may also be required to adhere to noncompete and nonsolicitation restrictions for a period of six months following termination.
It is expected that the vesting provisions listed below will apply to deferred share remuneration in the case of termination of a new Executive Directors service agreement.
Unvested deferred share remuneration would lapse upon termination of the service agreement by BGEO or material subsidiary of BGEO for cause or if the Executive Director terminated their employment for any other reason than good reason.
Unvested deferred share remuneration would continue to vest in the normal way during the respective vesting periods upon termination by BGEO or material subsidiary of BGEO without cause if the Executive Directors service agreement expired and they were not offered a new service agreement on substantially similar terms on expiration or if the Executive Director ceased to be an Executive Director by reason of injury disability redundancy or retirement at normal retirement age.
Unvested deferred share remuneration would vest immediately upon death of the Executive Director termination of the service agreement by the Executive Director for good reason or a change of control.
Notwithstanding the above vesting terms for current and future Executive Directors the Board reserves the right to permit unvested deferred share remuneration to vest irrespective of the Executive Directors departure when such Executive Director departs on good terms with the Group.
Share ownership guidelines The Company has not put in place share ownership guidelines due to the significant portion of the CEOs remuneration being in deferred shares.
112 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC IMPLEMENTATION OF REMUNERATION POLICY FOR 2018 Details of how the Policy will be implemented for the 2018 financial year are set out below.
A full explanation of the demerger and any changes to the implementation of the Remuneration Policy will be provided in the circular to be announced shortly after the release of this report.
FOR IRAKLI GILAURI FIXED PAY Total cash salary combined BGEO and Bank US 437500 Total deferred share salary Bank US 2288700 Pension and other benefits No change from the stated Policy value is expected to be substantially similar to 2017.
Please refer to demerger information as above.
There are circumstances in which unvested deferred shares may lapse and narrow circumstances in which such shares may vest immediately are set out in the Policy.
2018 DISCRETIONARY DEFERRED SHARE REMUNERATION Opportunity Maximum is 75% of total salary total cash salary and total deferred share salary as listed in the table above.
Deferral terms Early in 2019 the Committee will determine whether an award is merited based on the Executive Directors achievement of the KPIs set for the work year and the performance of the Group during the work year.
If Mr Gilauri is awarded discretionary deferred shares the award will vest 33.33% in each of 2020 2021 and 2022.
At vesting upon exercise of the nilcost options Mr Gilauri will receive in addition to the vested shares cash payments equal to the dividends paid if any on the underlying shares between the date the award was made and the vesting date.
Performance measures and targets For 2018 the Committee has determined that the performance measures will be based on KPIs subject to the terms of the Policy.
BANKING BUSINESS Return on Average equity as targeted Total banking business loan book growth as targeted NIM as targeted CostIncome as targeted Dividend Payout Ratio  2540% Longer Term Indicator Product to client ratio in mass retail as targeted Banks visibilityimportance as a private banking hub as targeted Cost of risk and NPL Coverage Ratio in line with strategy INVESTMENT BUSINESS  2018 INDICATOR Growth of NAV of portfolio companies in line with strategy Achieve strategic priorities of portfolio companies in line with strategy Active and disciplined pursuit of new investment opportunities Diversify funding base for portfolio companies Longer Term Indicator Progress towards exit on investments in line with strategy Average return on combined exits in line with strategy OTHER KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS Active mentoring and development of Senior Management Personal development In the event of the demerger it was expected that the Investment Business KPIs would remain with Irakli Gilauri and the Banking Business KPIs would transfer to the CEO of the Bank but the Remuneration Committees of Bank of Georgia PLC and Georgia Capital would have the discretion to consider appropriate adjustments to the KPIs.
DIRECTORS REMUNERATION REPORT CONTINUED 113 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
Natural clawback and further malus are built in to the structure of Mr Gilauris remuneration above given that both salary shares and discretionary shares are deferred and are subject to a number of vesting conditions which if breached would result in Mr Gilauris salary shares fully lapsing unless the Board otherwise agrees.
His service agreement may be terminated for cause a definition which is broadly defined and extends beyond standard malus and clawback triggers to include for example gross and wilful misconduct having a material adverse effect on the Group fraud material repeated failure to perform his duties breach of his obligations or conviction of a felony.
His unvested shares may also lapse if he terminates his service agreement early in the absence of repeated material wrongdoing by the Company.
Further malus applies to discretionary deferred shares if it is determined that there was a material misstatement in the financial results.
In this case the Board has the right to cause some or all of the award for that financial year or for any subsequent financial year that is unvested at the time of its determination not to vest and to lapse as set out in the Policy.
NONEXECUTIVE DIRECTOR REMUNERATION The table below shows the fee structure for NonExecutive Directors for 2018.
All fees to NonExecutive Directors are paid in cash and reflect work performed for BGEO JSC BGEO Group the Bank Supervisory Board and its subsidiaries.
Role 2018 fees Chairman aggregate allinclusive fee US 313900 Senior Independent Director base fee aggregate US 146000 NonExecutive Director excluding Chairman and Senior Independent Director base fee aggregate US 109500 Additional Committee fees Range from US 6570 to US 17520 depending on whether the NonExecutive serves as Chairman or Member of a Committee.
Notes
The term aggregate refers to work in respect of BGEO JSC BGEO Group and the Bank.
The allocation of base fees to BGEO does not and will not exceed the maximum amount of GBP 750000 as set out in our Articles.
Signed on behalf of the Board of Directors.
Al Breach Chairman of the Remuneration Committee 7 March 2018 114 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC STATEMENT OF DIRECTORS RESPONSIBILITIES The Directors are responsible for preparing the Annual Report and the consolidated and stand alone Financial Statements in accordance with applicable law and regulations.
Company law requires us to prepare financial statements for each financial year.
As required we have prepared the accompanying consolidated and separate statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS as adopted by the European Union and applicable law.
We must not approve the accompanying consolidated and stand alone financial statements unless we are satisfied that they give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Group and the Company and of the profit or loss of the Group and the Company for that period.
In preparing the accompanying consolidated and separate financial statements we are required to Select suitable accounting policies and then apply them consistently Make judgements and estimates that are reasonable and prudent State whether they have been prepared in accordance with IFRS as adopted by the European Union subject to any material departures disclosed and explained in the financial statements and Prepare the financial statements on the going concern basis unless it is inappropriate to presume that the Company will continue in business.
We are also responsible for keeping adequate accounting records that are sufficient to show and explain the Companys and the Groups transactions to disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the financial position of the Company and the Group and to enable us to ensure that the consolidated and stand alone financial statements and the Directors Remuneration Report comply with the Companies Act 2006 and as regards the consolidated and stand alone financial statements Article 4 of the IAS Regulation.
We have further responsibility for safeguarding the assets of the Company and the Group and for taking reasonable steps for the prevention and detection of fraud and other irregularities.
We are also responsible for the maintenance and integrity of the Companys website.
Legislation in the UK governing the preparation and dissemination of financial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
We confirm that to the best of our knowledge The consolidated and standalone financial statements prepared in accordance with IFRS as adopted by the European Union give a true and fair view of the assets liabilities financial position and profit or loss of the Company and the Group taken as a whole.
The Strategic Report and Directors Report contained in this Annual Report include a fair review of the development and performance of the business and the position of the Company and the Group together with a description of the principal risks and uncertainties that it faces.
We consider that the Annual Report and Accounts taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and gives shareholders the information needed to assess the Groups position and performance business model and strategy.
By order of the Board Neil Janin Irakli Gilauri
CEO
7 March 2018 7 March 2018 115 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
DIRECTORS REPORT STRATEGIC REPORT The Strategic Report on pages 1 to 75 was approved by the Board of Directors on 7 March 2018 and signed on its behalf by Irakli Gilauri
Chief Executive Officer.
MANAGEMENT REPORT This Directors Report together with the Strategic Report on pages 1 to 75 form the Management Report for the purposes of DTR 4.1.5 R.
INFORMATION CONTAINED ELSEWHERE IN THE ANNUAL REPORT Information required to be part of this Directors Report can be found elsewhere in the Annual Report as indicated in the table below and is incorporated into this report by reference Information Location in Annual Report Future developments Pages 2 to 75 BGEO risk management Pages 32 to 33 Going concern statement Page 33 Viability statement Page 33 Bank risk management Pages 38 to 43 Principal risks and uncertainties Pages 34 to 37 Directors Governance Statement Page 76 The Board of Directors Pages 77 to 79 Nomination Committee Report Pages 89 to 90 Audit Committee Report Pages 91 to 94 Risk Committee Report Pages 95 to 96 Greenhouse gas emissions Page 51 Employee matters Page 48 Environmental matters Pages 50 to 51 Share capital Note 21 on Page 189 Information on the Groups financial risk management objectives and policies and its exposure to credit risk liquidity risk interest rate risk foreign currency risk and financial instruments Note 31 on Pages RESULTS AND DIVIDENDS The Group Board expects to recommend a regular annual dividend for 2017 totalling c.
EL 120 million.
This is in the range of our regular dividend payout ratio target of 2540% paid from the Banking Business profits.
Since 2010 the Group has grown its annual dividend per share by 40% CAGR on a GEL basis and by 32% CAGR on a USD basis.
If the expected demerger is successfully implemented as planned it is intended that Bank of Georgia PLC the then new parent company of the Banking Business will instead shortly after the demerger is completed declare and pay a dividend in a similar or the same aggregate amount to shareholders then on the record.
In the event that the demerger is for any reason not completed it is intended subject to shareholder approval that the Board would implement the payment of this dividend which would represent a payment of GEL 3.1 per share payable in British Pounds Sterling at the prevailing rate a 19.2% increase over the 2016 dividend.
As BGEO is a holding company BGEO relies primarily on dividends and other statutorily if any and contractually permissible payments from its subsidiaries to generate the funds necessary to meet its obligations and pay dividend to its shareholders.
ARTICLES OF ASSOCIATION BGEOs Articles of Association may be amended by a special resolution at a general meeting of shareholders.
The process for the appointment and removal of Directors is included in our Articles of Association.
The BGEO Articles of Association are available on BGEOs website httpsiteuploadspagesbgeogroupplcarticlesof association91. df.
SHARE CAPITAL AND RIGHTS ATTACHING TO THE SHARES Details of the movements in share capital during the year are provided in Note 21 to the consolidated financial statements on page 189.
As at the date of this Annual Report there was a single class of 39384712 ordinary shares of one pence each in issue each with one vote.
The rights and obligations attaching to BGEOs ordinary shares are set out in its Articles of Association.
Holders of ordinary shares are entitled subject to any applicable law and BGEOs Articles of Association to have shareholder documents made available to them including the notice of any general meeting attend speak and exercise voting rights at general meetings either in person or by proxy and participate in any distribution of income or capital.
At the 2017 AGM the Directors were given a the power to allot shares up to a maximum nominal amount of GBP 131564.40 representing approximately a third of the Companys issued share capital as at 31 March 2017 in addition to b the power to allot equity securities up to an aggregate nominal amount of GBP 131564.40 in connection with an offer by way of a rights issue i to holders of shares in proportion as nearly as may be practicable to their existing holdings and ii to holders of other equity securities as required by the rights of those securities or if the Directors consider it necessary as permitted by the rights of those securities such amount to be reduced by the aggregate nominal amount of shares allotted or rights to subscribe for or to convert any securities into shares granted under paragraph a and subject to the Directors having the right to make such exclusions or other arrangements as they may deem necessary or expedient in relation to treasury shares fractional entitlements record dates or legal regulatory or practical problems in or under the laws of any territory.
These authorities will expire at the conclusion of the 2018 AGM or if earlier at the close of business on 1 September 2018 and approval will be sought at that meeting to renew a similar authority for a further year.
In addition at the 2017 AGM shareholders authorised the Board to allot shares up to a maximum nominal amount of GBP 19734.66 for cash without first offering them to existing shareholders in proportion to their existing holdings in connection with a rights issue or otherwise up to a maximum nominal amount of GBP 19734.66.
None of the ordinary shares carry any special rights with regard to control of BGEO.
The Companys Articles of Association provide that unless the Directors determine otherwise a shareholder shall not be entitled to vote either personally or by proxy at any general meeting or to exercise any other right conferred by membership if any call or other sum payable to the Company in respect of that share remains unpaid or such shareholder having been duly served with a notice to provide the Company with information under section 793 of the UK Companies Act has failed to do so within 14 days of such notice for so long as the default continues.
There are no other restrictions on transfers of shares other than certain restrictions which may from time to time be imposed by laws or regulations.
BGEO SHARE BUYBACK AND CANCELLATION PROGRAMME Authority to make market purchases of up to 3946932 approximately 10% of BGEOs shares up to a maximum consideration of US50 million over a twoyear period was granted to the Directors at the 2017 AGM the Buyback.
This authority will expire at the conclusion of the Companys AGM in 2018 or if earlier at the close of business on 1 September 2018.
Authority to make market purchases of up to 3950032 approximately 10% of BGEOs shares had previously been granted to the Directors at the 2016 AGM which expired at the 2017
The Company entered into an agreement with Numis Securities Limited Numis on 7 March 2017 to enable Numis to purchase Shares over a twoyear period in accordance with the terms of the general authority granted to the Company by shareholders at the 2017 AGM and subject to its shareholders approval of a similar buyback resolution at the 2018 AGM in respect of any purchases to be made after the date of that meeting.
Any shares repurchased have been or will be immediately cancelled.
Any purchase of shares pursuant to the agreement with Numis have been or will be carried out on the London Stock Exchange.
116 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC The Buyback is a result of the Groups very strong capital position excess levels of liquidity and high level of internal capital generation.
Furthermore the Board believes the Buyback is likely to promote the success of the Company is for the benefit of the shareholders as a whole and will result in an increase in the EPS.
During 2017 US 5.0 million was returned to shareholders by way of the buyback and cancellation of 115608 shares representing 0.29% of the issued share capital as at the date of this Annual Report.
EQUITY SETTLED OPTION PLAN ESOP FUNDING The Company operates an employee benefit trust EBT the ESOP which holds ordinary shares on trust for the benefit of employees and former employees of the Group and their dependents and which is used in conjunction with the Groups employee share schemes.
Whilst ordinary shares are held in the EBT the voting rights in respect of these ordinary shares are exercised by the trustees of the EBT.
In 2017 the Group provided additional funding to enable Sanne Fiduciary Services Limited acting as trustee of the Trust to purchase more shares in the market to satisfy upcoming employee share scheme awards.
During the year Sanne Fiduciary Services Limited acting as trustee to the ESOP  purchased 784084 shares in the market for a total consideration of US 34.1 million.
In accordance with a request issued by BGEO Sanne Fiduciary Services Limited has waived its right to receive any dividends.
This waiver will remain in place indefinitely unless otherwise instructed by BGEO.
The Group previously committed that new shares issued in satisfaction of deferred share compensation from the time of the Companys listing on the premium segment of the LSE will not exceed 10% of BGEOs ordinary share capital over any tenyear period.
PROPOSED DEMERGER A summary of the proposed demerger can be found on page 19 in the Strategic Report.
POWERS OF DIRECTORS The Directors may exercise all powers of BGEO subject to applicable legislation and regulation and BGEOs Articles of Association.
CONFLICTS OF INTEREST In accordance with the Companies Act 2006 the Directors have adopted a policy and procedure for the disclosure and authorisation if appropriate of conflicts of interest and these have been followed during 2017.
BGEOs
Articles of Association also contain provisions to allow the Directors to authorise potential conflicts of interest so that a Director is not in breach of his or her duty under company law.
DIRECTORS INTERESTS The Directors beneficial interests in ordinary shares of BGEO as at 31 December 2017 are shown on page 102 together with any changes in those interests between the financial yearend and the date on which this Directors Report was approved by the Board.
INDEMNITY
Subject to applicable legislation every current and former Director or other officer of BGEO other than any person engaged by the Company as auditor shall be indemnified by BGEO against any liability in relation to BGEO other than broadly any liability to BGEO or a member of the Group or any criminal or regulatory fine.
Accordingly the Company has provided for both indemnities and directors and officers insurance to the Directors in connection with their duties and responsibilities.
RELATED PARTY DISCLOSURES Details of related party disclosures are set out in Note 34 to the consolidated financial statements on page 210.
SIGNIFICANT AGREEMENTS On 23 October 2015 BGEO entered into a Relationship Agreement with GHG and JSC BGEO Investments which regulates the degree of control that BGEO and its associates may exercise over the management and business of GHG.
The principal purpose of the Relationship Agreement is to ensure that GHG and its subsidiaries are capable at all times of carrying on their business independently of BGEO and its associates.
The Relationship Agreement took effect on 12 November 2015 and will continue until the earlier of i GHG shares ceasing to be admitted to listing on the Official List and ii BGEO together with its associates ceasing to own or control directly or indirectly 20% or more of the voting share capital of GHG.
If BGEO ceases to be a controlling shareholder as defined in the Listing Rules it may terminate the Relationship Agreement by giving one months written notice to GHG.
Under the Relationship Agreement for so long as BGEO and its associates together hold 20% or more of the voting share capital of GHG BGEO and its associates shall amongst other things Conduct all transactions agreements or arrangements entered into between i BGEO and its associates and ii GHG or any of its subsidiaries on an arms length basis and on normal commercial terms and in accordance with the related party transaction rules set out in the Listing Rules Not take any action that has or would have the effect of preventing GHG or any of its subsidiaries from complying with their obligations under the Listing Rules Not propose or procure the proposal of any resolution of the shareholders or any class thereof which is intended or appears to be intended to circumvent the proper application of the Listing Rules andor Abstain from voting on any resolution required by LR 11.1.7R3 of the Listing Rules to approve a transaction with a related party involving BGEO.
The Relationship Agreement entitles BGEO to appoint one person to be a NonExecutive Director of GHG for so long as it together with its associates holds at least 20% of the voting share capital of GHG.
The
Relationship Agreement also provides that subject to permitted exceptions neither BGEO nor its associates shall compete with the business of GHG nor use any names associated with GHG and that GHG shall not use any names associated with BGEO or its associates.
A copy of the Relationship Agreement is available to view at the Companys registered office.
JSC ABC PHARMACIA ACQUISITION On 6 January 2017 Georgia Healthcare Group through one of its subsidiaries acquired 67% of the shares of JSC ABC Pharmacy a pharmaceuticals company operating in Georgia from individual investors for GEL 73.8 million see page 162 Note 5 regarding Business Combinations in the Financial Statements .
The outstanding amount is due within tranches within 5 years and the Group has a call option and the managing shareholders a put option in regard of the 33% non controlling interest in the combined pharmacy business GEPHA.
GEORGIAN WATER AND POWER LOAN AGREEMENT WITH THE EUROPEAN INVESTMENT BANK On 28 July 2017 Georgian Water and Power LLC GWP entered into a EUR 21.5 million Finance Contract with the European Investment Bank to finance the rehabilitation and modernisation of the Groups water supply and waste treatment facilities in Georgia.
GWP LOAN AGREEMENT WITH FMO AND DEG On 15 August 2017 GWP entered into a ten year EUR 25 million and US40 million term facility agreement with Nederlandse Financierings Maatschappij Voor Ontwikkelingslanden N.
Und Entwicklungsgesellschaft MBH.
The loan is being used to finance the refinancing of existing loans capital expenditure in connection with rehabilitation and modernisation of the water supply and waste water treatment facilities including the Gardabani Sewage Treatment Plant and the rehabilitation of the Gardabani Wastewater Treatment.
JSC SVANETI HYDRO CIVIL WORKS CONTRACT WITH SYNERGY JSC Svaneti Hydro entered into a civil works contract for the construction of Mestiachala 1 and 2 HPPs on 1 March 2017 with Synergy Construction LLC a subsidiary of Romania based Synergy Construction SRL.
GEORGIA GLOBAL UTILITIES SHAREHOLDERS AGREEMENT OF JSC GEORGIAN RENEWABLE POWER COMPANY In June 2017 JSC Georgia Capital and RP Global Investment GmbH an Austrian company shareholders of JSC Georgian Renewable Power Company signed a shareholders agreement.
The agreement sets out the rights and obligations of the shareholders with respect to the development of a renewable energy projects in Georgia including the ongoing project of 50MW HPPs construction in Mestia and 56MW HPP project in Zoti.
DIRECTORS REPORT CONTINUED 117 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
At no time during 2017 did any Director hold a material interest in any contracts of significance with BGEO or any subsidiary of the Group.
The Company is not party to any significant agreements apart from the Relationship Agreement that would take effect alter or terminate following a change of control of the Company.
There are no agreements between the Company and any Director or employee that would provide compensation for loss of office or loss of employment that occurs because of a takeover bid.
However under the plans and provisions of the Companys share schemes including for deferred share salary and discretionary share compensation and certain service agreements entered into between the Company and the Executives as described in further detail in the Directors Remuneration Report and between the Company and certain senior managers certain awards granted to the Executive and senior management will vest on a takeover or other change of control.
PRESENCE OUTSIDE OF GEORGIA We have representative offices in London Budapest Istanbul and Tel Aviv and our Group office is in London.
See pages 4 and 63.
EMPLOYEE DISCLOSURES Our disclosures relating to the number of women in senior management employee engagement and policies as well as human rights including employment of disabled persons are included in Employee matters on page 48.
POLITICAL DONATIONS The Group did not make any political donations or expenditures during 2017.
Authority to make political donations and incur political expenditure will be put to shareholders vote at the AGM in 2018.
CODE OF CONDUCT AND ETHICS The Board has adopted a Code of Conduct relating to the lawful and ethical conduct of the business supported by the Groups core values.
The Code of Conduct has been communicated to all Directors and employees all of whom are expected to observe high standards of integrity and fair dealing in relation to customers staff and regulators in the communities in which the Group operates.
Our Code of Conduct is available on our website httpsiteuploadspagescodeof conductandethics58. df.
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS A resolution to reappoint Ernst and Young LLP as auditors of BGEO will be put to shareholders at the upcoming AGM.
MAJOR INTERESTS IN SHARES The table below lists shareholders with voting rights of more than 3% as of 31 December 2017.
As of 31 December 2017
Number of voting rights % of voting rights Harding Loevner LP 3275324 8.32 Sanne Fiduciary Services 1942308 4.93 Schroder Investment Management 1914428 4.86 LGIM 1290202 3.28 Norges Bank Investment Management 1224590 3.11 Source Georgeson Computershare.
The table below shows the changes in voting rights which have been notified to the Company for the period 1 January 2018 up to and including 6 March 2018.
As of 6 March 2018
Number of voting rights % of voting rights Standard Life Aberdeen plc 1965927 4.99 Sanne Fiduciary Services 1714220 4.35 It should be noted that these holdings are likely to have changed since the Company was notified.
However notification of any change is not required until the next notifiable threshold is crossed.
The respective regulatory filings by shareholders are available on the BGEO website httpsiteregulatoryannouncements and the London Stock Exchange website httpsiteexchange newsmarketnewsmarketnewshome. tml.
POST BALANCE SHEET EVENTS IMPLEMENTATION OF THE DEMERGER On 12 February 2018 the Board approved the implementation of the demerger subject to shareholder approval at the Annual General Meeting.
The Company stated its reasons for the demerger in accordance with its announcement of 3 July 2017 and further announced that the Board had decided to increase the stake that Georgia Capital PLC will have in Bank of Georgia PLC to 19.9%.
The Company continues to implement the demerger.
More detail is expected to be included in the circular to be sent to shareholders relating to the demerger.
ACQUISITION OF BLACK LION LLC In February 2018 JSC Georgia Capital acquired 100% of Black Lion LLC a craft beer producer operating in Georgia for a total consideration of USD 3.2 million.
ISSUE OF USD 300 MILLION NOTES DUE IN 2024 BY JOINT STOCK COMPANY GEORGIA CAPITAL On 5 March 2018 JSC Georgia Capital successfully priced a US 300 million offering of 6.125% notes due March 2024 denominated in US Dollars which are expected to settle on 9 March 2018.
Please also see page 212 Note 36 regarding Events After the Reporting Period in the Financial Statements.
STATEMENT OF DISCLOSURE OF INFORMATION TO THE AUDITOR We confirm that so far as we are aware there is no relevant audit information of which the Companys auditors are unaware and we have taken all steps that we reasonably should have taken as Directors in order to make ourselves aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that the Companys statutory auditors are aware of such information.
INFORMATION TO BE DISCLOSED IN ACCORDANCE WITH LISTING RULE 9.8.4R The following information required to be disclosed in terms of Listing Rule 9.8.4R is not applicable unless stated otherwise The amount of interest capitalised during the period under review and details of any related tax relief.
Information in relation to the publication of unaudited financial information.
Any arrangements under which a Director has waived emoluments or agreed to waive any future emoluments from the Company.
Details of any nonpreemptive issues of equity for cash.
Any nonpreemptive issues of equity for cash by the Company or by any unlisted major subsidiary undertaking.
Parent participation in a placing by a listed subsidiary.
Any contract of significance in which a Director is or was materially interested.
Any waiver of dividends by a shareholder.
By order of the Board Rebecca Wooldridge Group Company Secretary 7 March 2018 118 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC
In our opinion BGEO Group PLCs Group financial statements and Parent Company financial statements the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the Groups and of the Parent Companys affairs as at 31 December 2017 and of the Groups profit for the year then ended the Group financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union the Parent Company financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union as applied in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006 and the financial statements have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006 and as regards the Group financial statements Article 4 of the IAS Regulation.
We have audited the financial statements of BGEO Group PLC which comprise Group Parent Company consolidated statement of financial position as at 31 December 2017 consolidated income statement for the year then ended consolidated statement of comprehensive income for the year then ended consolidated statement of changes in equity for the year then ended consolidated statement of cash flows for the year then ended related notes 1 to 36 to the consolidated financial statements including a summary of significant accounting policies separate statement of financial position as at 31 December 2017 separate statement of changes in equity for the year then ended separate statement of cash flows for the year then ended related notes 1 to 36 to the effect they apply to the Parent Company financial statements including a summary of significant accounting policies The financial reporting framework that has been applied in their preparation is applicable law and International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and as regards the Parent Company financial statements as applied in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006.
BASIS FOR OPINION We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing UK ISAs UK and applicable law.
Our responsibilities under those standards are further described in the Auditors responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements section of our report below.
We are independent of the Group and Parent Company in accordance with the ethical requirements that are relevant to our audit of the financial statements in the UK including the FRCs Ethical Standard as applied to listed public interest entities and we have fulfilled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with these requirements.
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion.
USE OF OUR REPORT This report is made solely to the companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006.
Our audit work has been undertaken so that we might state to the companys members those matters we are required to state to them in an auditors report and for no other purpose.
To the fullest extent permitted by law we do not accept or assume responsibility to anyone other than the company and the companys members as a body for our audit work for this report or for the opinions we have formed.
CONCLUSIONS RELATING TO PRINCIPAL RISKS GOING CONCERN AND VIABILITY STATEMENT We have nothing to report in respect of the following information in the annual report in relation to which the ISAs UK require us to report to you whether we have anything material to add or draw attention to the disclosures in the annual report set out on pages 34 to 37 that describe the principal risks and explain how they are being managed or mitigated the Directors confirmation set out on page 96 in the annual report that they have carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the entity including those that would threaten its business model future performance solvency or liquidity the Directors statement set out on page 140 in the financial statements about whether they considered it appropriate to adopt the going concern basis of accounting in preparing them and their identification of any material uncertainties to the entitys ability to continue to do so over a period of at least twelve months from the date of approval of the financial statements whether the Directors statement relating to going concern required under the Listing Rules in accordance with Listing Rule 9.8.6R3 is materially inconsistent with our knowledge obtained in the audit or the Directors explanation set out on page 33 in the annual report as to how they have assessed the prospects of the entity over what period they have done so and why they consider that period to be appropriate and their statement as to whether they have a reasonable expectation that the Group will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the period of their assessment including any related disclosures drawing attention to any necessary qualifications or assumptions.
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT
TO THE MEMBERS OF BGEO GROUP PLC 119 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
OVERVIEW OF OUR AUDIT APPROACH Key audit matters  Monitoring of credit quality and appropriateness of allowance for loan losses Revenue recognition including the application of IFRS 15 Revenue from contracts with customers to the Banking Business JSC m Real Estate Georgia Healthcare Group PLC and Georgian Global Utilities Ltd Valuation of land and office buildings hospitals and clinics infrastructure assets and investment properties Audit scope We performed an audit of the complete financial information of five components and audit procedures on specific balances for a further one component.
The components where we performed full or specific audit procedures accounted for 98% of Profit before nonrecurring items and tax 91% of Revenue and 96% of Total assets.
Materiality Overall Group materiality of GEL 25 million which represents 5% of pretax profit adjusted for nonrecurring items.
KEY AUDIT MATTERS Key audit matters are those matters that in our professional judgment were of most significance in our audit of the financial statements of the current period and include the most significant assessed risks of material misstatement whether or not due to fraud that we identified.
These matters included those which had the greatest effect on the overall audit strategy the allocation of resources in the audit and directing the efforts of the engagement team.
These matters were addressed in the context of our audit of the financial statements as a whole and in forming our opinion thereon and we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters.
Risk Our response to the risk Key observations communicated to the Audit Committee MONITORING OF CREDIT QUALITY AND APPROPRIATENESS OF ALLOWANCE FOR LOAN LOSSES LOAN LOSS ALLOWANCE GEL 279.3M 2016 GEL 255.3M INCLUDING GEL 2.4M ATTRIBUTABLE TO FINANCE LEASE RECEIVABLE 31 DECEMBER 2016 GEL 2.5M The allowance for loan losses is highly judgmental and changes in assumptions could have a material impact on reported profits.
The allowance for loan losses is calculated using a combination of a collective provisioning model and specific loan provisions based on discounted cash flow analyses.
Both collective and specific provisions depend on a number of assumptions and judgments the most important of which are managements assessment of credit risk estimates of future cash flows and valuations of collateral.
As a consequence of the judgment involved in establishing the allowance there is a greater risk of misstatement in this balance either by fraud or error including through the potential override of controls by management.
The level of risk is consistent with the prior year.
Refer to the Audit Committee Report page 92 Accounting policies page 147 and Note 11 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
We performed a walkthrough of the loan loss allowance process and assessed the design and operating effectiveness of key controls.
We tested key controls over the collective loan loss provision which included controls over the identification of loans to be included in the collective assessment collective provisioning model inputs key model assumptions and calculations.
We tested key controls over the specific loan loss provision which addressed aspects such as the classification of borrowers into their respective risk grades calculation of days past due and the recalculation of the loan loss allowance including the valuation of collateral.
For the collective loan loss provision we critically assessed the appropriateness of the collective provisioning methodology as well as the assumptions and data inputs into the model with reference to our understanding of the business relevant accounting standards and market practices recalculated the collective loan loss provision on a sample basis and analysed the sensitivity of provisions to changes in key model inputs.
For specific loan loss provisions we assessed the recoverability of loan exposures on a sample basis and ensured the appropriateness of the provision as at the balance sheet date including reviewing the Groups documented credit assessment of the borrowers challenging assumptions relating to future cash flow projections and the valuation of collateral held.
We verified the appropriate restriction of the property pledged as collateral to the Georgian public real estate register.
For real estate collateral where the valuation changed by more than 10% compared to the prior year and for new real estate collateral we reviewed the details of the current year valuation and validated the reasonableness of the new value by benchmarking major inputs to publicly available market data.
For equipment pledged which is considered by the Group as a source of cash flows for loan repayment in certain cases for individually significant borrowers we reconciled the values to the supporting documentation and compared to market values of such equipment.
We compared the valuation of collateral to the actual values of sales of similar repossessed properties by the Group.
We analysed a sample of restructured loans and the Groups documented assessment to provide assurance that any loans that have been subject to forbearance have been appropriately classified and reported.
Although the loan loss allowance is by nature highly judgmental based on the results of our audit procedures we concluded that the loan loss allowance is in the middle of a reasonable range as at 31 December 2017.
120 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Risk Our response to the risk Key observations communicated to the Audit Committee REVENUE RECOGNITION INCLUDING THE APPLICATION OF IFRS 15 REVENUE FROM CONTRACTS WITH CUSTOMERS TO THE BANKING BUSINESS JSC M REAL ESTATE GEORGIA HEALTHCARE GROUP PLC AND GEORGIAN GLOBAL UTILITIES LTD GROSS REVENUE GEL 2482M INCLUDING GEL 763M ATTRIBUTABLE TO DISCONTINUED OPERATIONS 2016 GEL 1816M INCLUDING GEL 422M ATTRIBUTABLE TO DISCONTINUED
The separate listing of Georgia Healthcare Group PLC GHG and the announced demerger of Banking and Investment Businesses of the Group could potentially result in pressure on management to report strong financial performance including revenue growth.
The Group has early adopted IFRS 15 for the current year.
As allowed by the standard it is applied prospectively from 1 January 2017 with no restatement of comparatives.
In applying IFRS 15 judgement is required to be exercised by management in determining the point at which it is appropriate to recognise revenue and in particular the nature of performance obligations and the allocation of the contract price to those obligations.
Specific considerations include The timing of recognition of revenue in respect of card servicing fees bundled products and customer loyalty schemes in the Banking
The treatment of corrections and rebates in GHGs hospital business The measurement of revenue in respect of loyalty schemes and exchange transactions in GHG The manner in which revenue is recognised over the period of constructionsale of apartments in JSC m Real Estate The timing of recognition of revenue arising from upfront connection and water meter installation fees in GGU The total adjustment in respect of the above as at 1 January 2017 was a deferral of revenue of GEL 29m.
As with any major new accounting standard there is a risk that the Group does not apply IFRS 15 appropriately.
The Groups accounting systems are not configured to allow automated IFRS 15 accounting for revenue and the adjustments to conform to the requirements of IFRS 15 are booked as an overlay.
These factors mean that there is a greater risk of misstatement in revenue balances either by fraud or error including through the potential override of controls by management.
The risk has increased in the current year as a result of the announced demerger and the early adoption of IFRS 15.
Refer to the Audit Committee Report page 92 the Accounting policies pages 152154 and Notes 3 6 22 23 24 25 26 to the Consolidated Financial
We gained an understanding of the revenue processes and assessed the design and operating effectiveness of key controls.
We performed substantive testing of revenue transactions at the Banking and the Investment Businesses including key items testing and representative sampling where we agreed transactions to the underlying documentation testing manual and topside adjustments and cutoff testing by selecting a sample of transactions either side of yearend.
We agreed transactions on a sample basis in each of the inscope components to supporting evidence including underlying contracts and cash receipts to determine whether revenue had been recognised in accordance with the Groups accounting policies and IFRS.
Where appropriate we recomputed revenue and compared to reported amounts.
The samples used for this testing were increased to reflect that revenue recognition is a significant risk.
We performed contract reviews with respect to products of the Banking Business m Real Estate GGU and GHG and validated the identification of performance obligations.
We performed substantive audit procedures over the IFRS 15 adjustments covering the timing of satisfaction of performance obligations allocation of transaction price to each performance obligation and estimation of variable consideration amounts if applicable including analytical procedures testing of key items and representative sample testing.
We performed analytical procedures for revenue at legal entity level to consider unusual trends that could indicate material misstatements including monthly fluctuations analysis and analysis of changes in key drivers of revenue.
We performed journal entry testing in order to identify and test the risk of misstatement arising from management override of controls.
We considered whether the presentation and disclosure of revenue in the financial statements is in accordance with relevant accounting standards.
Based on the results of our audit procedures we concluded that revenue for the year ended 31 December 2017 has been recognised in accordance with IFRS.
In particular we concluded that the Group applied IFRS 15 appropriately in all material respects as at 1 January 2017 31 December 2017 and for the year ended 31 December 2017.
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT CONTINUED 121 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
Risk Our response to the risk Key observations communicated to the Audit Committee VALUATION OF LAND AND OFFICE BUILDINGS HOSPITALS AND CLINICS INFRASTRUCTURE ASSETS AND INVESTMENT PROPERTIES NET BOOK VALUE OF GEL 1352M INCLUDING GEL 429M ATTRIBUTABLE TO ASSETS OF DISPOSAL GROUPS AND DISCONTINUED OPERATIONS 2016 GEL 1188M The Group applies the revaluation model for the measurement of its infrastructure assets and hospitals and clinics and the fair value model for investment properties.
During the year the Group voluntarily changed the accounting policy for subsequent measurement of its office buildings and service centres including related land from the revaluation model to the cost model.
The Group restated each of the affected historical financial statement line items for the prior periods as if the cost model in respect of that class of property and equipment had been always applied.
Individual items of investment properties and GHG hospitals and clinics were revalued as at the year end.
The fair value of the GGU infrastructure assets as at 31 December 2017 was determined using the income approach.
Based on the analysis performed by the independent valuer management concluded that this fair value for the period since the last valuation date did not significantly change.
Real estate valuations are inherently uncertain and subject to an estimation process.
Furthermore the Groups real estate properties and infrastructure assets are located primarily in Georgia where the secondary market is relatively illiquid particularly in respect of hospitals and clinics.
Although the valuations are performed by appropriately qualified valuers there remains a risk that individual assets might be inappropriately valued.
The risk reduced slightly in the current year as a result of the change in the accounting policy in respect of subsequent measurement of office buildings and service centres from the revaluation model to the cost model.
Refer to the Audit Committee Report page 92 Accounting policies pages 149150 157 and 158 and Notes 3 12 and 13 to the Consolidated Financial
We engaged our real estate specialists to evaluate the appropriateness of the Groups valuations of investment properties of the Banking Business and m infrastructure assets of GGU and hospitals and clinics of GHG including the following we evaluated the competence professional qualifications and objectivity of the external valuers engaged by the Group through reading the valuation reports and discussion with management and the valuers we obtained an understanding of the objectives and scope of the valuers work the methods and assumptions that they had used and the conclusions that they had reached we challenged the methods and assumptions used in the valuation reports including consideration as to whether there was contrary market intelligence that had not been taken into account in the valuers analyses for a sample of 69 items for which specific valuations were performed we verified the data and assessed the appropriateness of the methods and assumptions logic and reasoning applied by the valuers.
To the extent possible we compared this information to norms and benchmarks in the Georgian market and in respect of the valuation of infrastructure assets we involved our valuation specialists and challenged managements key assumptions their consistency with GGUs business plans and externally available information.
We tested the underlying calculations verified the validity of the data inputs and the appropriateness of assumptions applied.
We ensured the appropriate recognition of the results of the valuations in accordance with IAS 16 Property Plant and Equipment and IAS 40 Investment Property.
We challenged managements justification for a change in the accounting policy in respect of subsequent measurement of office buildings and service centres analysed it for conformity with the requirements of IFRSs and ensured the appropriateness of proposed accounting treatment including the adjustments made by management to restate the prior periods balances in that respect.
Based on the results of our audit procedures we concluded that The voluntary change in the accounting policy for subsequent measurement of office buildings and service centres from the revaluation model to the cost model is justified as it results in financial statements providing more relevant and reliable information to users in particular it improves the comparability of the financial information with other banking groups.
In respect of the valuation of investment properties hospitals and clinics and infrastructure assets certain assumptions and consequently the valuations as a whole were towards the less conservative end of but within a reasonable range as at 31 December 2017.
In the prior year our auditors report included a key audit matter in relation to the accounting for oneoff and complex transactions including business combinations.
In the current year there were no such transactions comparable by size significance or complexity to those occurring in the prior year and accordingly we have not included this risk above as it was no longer a risk that had a significant effect on our overall audit strategy the allocation of resources in the audit and the direction of the efforts of the audit team.
AN OVERVIEW OF THE SCOPE OF OUR AUDIT TAILORING THE SCOPE Our assessment of audit risk our evaluation of materiality and our allocation of performance materiality determine our audit scope for each entity within the Group.
Taken together this enables us to form an opinion on the consolidated financial statements.
We take into account size risk profile the organisation of the Group and effectiveness of Groupwide controls changes in the business environment and other factors such as recent Internal Audit findings when assessing the level of work to be performed at each entity.
In assessing the risk of material misstatement to the Group financial statements and to ensure we had adequate quantitative coverage of significant accounts in the financial statements of the 30 reporting components of the Group we selected six components covering entities within the UK and Georgia which represent the principal business units within the Group.
122 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Of the six components selected we performed an audit of the complete financial information of five components full scope components which were selected based on their size or risk characteristics.
For the remaining one component specific scope component we performed audit procedures on specific account balances within that component that we considered had the potential for the greatest impact on the significant accounts in the financial statements either because of the size of these accounts or their risk profile.
The reporting components where we performed audit procedures accounted for 98% 2016 95% of the Groups Profit before nonrecurring items and tax 91% 2016 91% of the Groups Revenue and 96% 2016 95% of the Groups Total assets.
The table below illustrates the coverage obtained from the work we performed 2017 2016
Revenue Profit Total Assets No.
Revenue Profit Total Assets Full scope 5 88% 93% 94% 3 85% 86% 88% Specific scope 1 3% 5% 2% 3 6% 9% 7% Full and Specific scope coverage 6 91% 98% 96% 6 91% 95% 95% Remaining components 24 9% 2% 4% 21 9% 5% 5% Total reporting components 30 100% 100% 100% 27 100% 100% 100% We audited the complete financial information.
We audited specific account balances within these components.
The audit scope of these components may not have included testing of all significant accounts of the components but will have contributed to the coverage of significant accounts tested for the Group.
We performed other procedures including analytical review and testing of consolidation journal entries and intercompany eliminations to respond to any potential risks of material misstatement to the Group financial statements.
Profit before nonrecurring items and tax.
The components for which we performed full or specific scope procedures are set out below Component Scope Locationteam BGEO Group PLC Full Londonprimary team JSC Bank of Georgia Full Georgiaprimary team Georgia Healthcare Group PLC consolidated Full London and Georgiacomponent team Georgian Global Utilities Limited Full Georgiacomponent team JSC BGEO Group Full Georgiaprimary team JSC m Real Estate Specific Georgiacomponent team CHANGES FROM THE PRIOR YEAR For the year ended 31 December 2017 we changed the scope for Georgian Global Utilities limited and JSC BGEO Group from specific scope to full scope because of the increase in the size and risk characteristics of these components.
INVOLVEMENT WITH COMPONENT TEAMS In establishing our overall approach to the Group audit we determined the type of work that needed to be undertaken at each of the components by us as the primary audit engagement team or by component auditors from other EY global network firms operating under our instruction.
Of the five full scope components audit procedures were performed on three of these directly by the primary audit team.
For the specific scope component where the work was performed by component auditors we determined the appropriate level of involvement to enable us to determine that sufficient audit evidence had been obtained as a basis for our opinion on the Group as a whole.
The Group audit team continued to follow a programme of planned visits that has been designed to make sure that the Senior Statutory Auditor visits the principal components of the Group.
The Senior Statutory Auditor is based in the UK but since Group management and operations reside in Georgia the Group audit team operates as an integrated primary team including members from the UK Georgia Russia and the CIS.
The Senior Statutory Auditor visited Georgia five times during the current years audit and there was regular interaction between team members in each jurisdiction.
During the current years audit cycle visits were undertaken by the Senior Statutory Auditor and other members of the primary audit team to the components in Georgia.
These visits involved discussing the audit approach with the component teams and any issues arising from their work as well as meeting with local management.
In addition the primary team participated in planning and closing meetings and reviewed selected audit working papers.
The primary team interacted regularly with the component teams where appropriate during various stages of the audit and were responsible for the scope and direction of the audit process.
This together with the additional procedures performed at Group level gave us appropriate evidence for our opinion on the Group financial statements.
OUR APPLICATION OF MATERIALITY We apply the concept of materiality in planning and performing the audit in evaluating the effect of identified misstatements on the audit and in forming our audit opinion.
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT CONTINUED 123 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
MATERIALITY
The magnitude of an omission or misstatement that individually or in the aggregate could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of the users of the financial statements.
Materiality provides a basis for determining the nature and extent of our audit procedures.
We determined materiality for the Group to be GEL 25 million 2016 GEL 20 million which is approximately 5% 2016 5% of profit before tax and nonrecurring items.
We consider that this adjusted profit figure best represents the results of the underlying operations of the Group and as such provides us with an appropriate basis for determining the nature timing and extent of risk assessment procedures identifying and assessing the risk of material misstatement and determining the nature timing and extent of further audit procedures.
Materiality
Profit before tax GEL 482.0m continuing operations GEL 435.8m discounted operations GEL 46.2m Nonrecurring items GEL 9.7m continuing operations GEL 4.9m discounted operations GEL 4.8m Totals GEL 491.8m materiality basis Materiality of GEL 25.0m approx.
5% of materiality basis Starting basis
We determined materiality for the Parent Company to be GEL 20 million 2016 GEL 20 million which is approximately 2% 2016 2% of equity.
We consider that in respect of the Parent Company equity is most relevant to the stakeholders and is best representative of the economic size of the entity and as such provides us with an appropriate basis for determining the nature timing and extent of risk assessment procedures identifying and assessing the risk of material misstatement and determining the nature timing and extent of further audit procedures.
Materiality
Equity GEL 988.3m No adjustments Materiality of GEL 20.0m approx.
2% of materiality basis Starting basis
PERFORMANCE MATERIALITY The application of materiality at the individual account or balance level.
It is set at an amount to reduce to an appropriately low level the probability that the aggregate of uncorrected and undetected misstatements exceeds materiality.
On the basis of our risk assessments together with our assessment of the Groups overall control environment our judgment was that performance materiality was 50% 2016 50% of our planning materiality namely GEL 12.5 million 2016 GEL 10.0 million.
Audit work at component locations for the purpose of obtaining audit coverage over significant financial statement accounts is undertaken based on a percentage of total performance materiality.
The performance materiality set for each component is based on the relative scale and risk of the component to the Group as a whole and our assessment of the risk of misstatement at that component.
In the current year the performance materiality allocated to components was as follows BGEO Group PLC GEL 10.0m JSC BGEO Group GEL 10.0m JSC Bank of Georgia GEL 10.0m Georgia Healthcare Group PLC GEL 3.75m Georgian Global Utilities Ltd GEL 3.125m JSC m Real Estate GEL 2.5m REPORTING THRESHOLD An amount below which identified misstatements are considered as being clearly trivial.
We agreed with the Audit Committee that we would report to them all uncorrected audit differences in excess of GEL 1.25 million 2016 GEL 1 million which is set at 5% of planning materiality as well as differences below that threshold that in our view warranted reporting on qualitative grounds.
We evaluate any uncorrected misstatements against both the quantitative measures of materiality discussed above and in light of other relevant qualitative considerations in forming our opinion.
124 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC OTHER INFORMATION The other information comprises the information included in the annual report other than the financial statements and our auditors report thereon including the following sections of the annual report Strategic Report set out on pages 2 to 75 Governance section including Directors Governance Overview Board of Directors Executive Management Corporate Governance Framework Nomination Committee Report Audit Committee Report Risk Committee Report Shareholder engagement Annual Statement by the Chairman of the Remuneration Committee Directors Remuneration Policy Annual Report on Remuneration Statement of Directors Responsibilities and Directors Report set out on pages 76 to 117 Additional information including Abbreviations Glossary and Shareholder information set out on pages 213 to 216.
The Directors are responsible for the other information.
Our opinion on the financial statements does not cover the other information and except to the extent otherwise explicitly stated in our report we do not express any form of assurance conclusion thereon.
In connection with our audit of the financial statements our responsibility is to read the other information and in doing so consider whether the other information is materially inconsistent with the financial statements or our knowledge obtained in the audit or otherwise appears to be materially misstated.
If we identify such material inconsistencies or apparent material misstatements we are required to determine whether there is a material misstatement in the financial statements or a material misstatement of the other information.
If based on the work we have performed we conclude that there is a material misstatement of the other information we are required to report that fact.
We have nothing to report in this regard.
In this context we also have nothing to report in regard to our responsibility to specifically address the following items in the other information and to report as uncorrected material misstatements of the other information where we conclude that those items meet the following conditions Fair balanced and understandable set out on page 114  the statement given by the Directors that they consider the annual report and financial statements taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Groups performance business model and strategy is materially inconsistent with our knowledge obtained in the audit or Audit Committee reporting set out on pages 91 to 94  the section describing the work of the Audit Committee does not appropriately address matters communicated by us to the Audit Committee or Directors statement of compliance with the UK Corporate Governance Code set out on page 76  the parts of the Directors statement required under the Listing Rules relating to the companys compliance with the UK Corporate Governance Code containing provisions specified for review by the auditor in accordance with Listing Rule 9.8.10R2 do not properly disclose a departure from a relevant provision of the UK Corporate Governance Code.
OPINIONS ON OTHER MATTERS PRESCRIBED BY THE COMPANIES ACT 2006 In our opinion the part of the Directors remuneration report to be audited has been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 2006.
In our opinion based on the work undertaken in the course of the audit the information given in the Strategic Report and the Directors Report for the financial year for which the financial statements are prepared is consistent with the financial statements and the Strategic Report and the Directors Report have been prepared in accordance with applicable legal requirements.
MATTERS ON WHICH WE ARE REQUIRED TO REPORT BY EXCEPTION In the light of the knowledge and understanding of the Group and the Parent Company and its environment obtained in the course of the audit we have not identified material misstatements in the Strategic Report or the Directors Report.
We have nothing to report in respect of the following matters in relation to which the Companies Act 2006 requires us to report to you if in our opinion adequate accounting records have not been kept by the Parent Company or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or the Parent Company financial statements and the part of the Directors remuneration report to be audited are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns or certain disclosures of Directors remuneration specified by law are not made or we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit.
RESPONSIBILITIES OF DIRECTORS As explained more fully in the Directors Responsibilities Statement set out on page 114 the Directors are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements and for being satisfied that they give a true and fair view and for such internal control as the Directors determine is necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error.
In preparing the financial statements the Directors are responsible for assessing the Groups and the Parent Companys ability to continue as a going concern disclosing as applicable matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless the Directors either intend to liquidate the Group or the Parent Company or to cease operations or have no realistic alternative but to do so.
AUDITORS RESPONSIBILITIES FOR THE AUDIT OF THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error and to issue an auditors report that includes our opinion.
Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with ISAs UK will always detect a material misstatement when it exists.
Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if individually or in the aggregate they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these financial statements.
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT CONTINUED 125 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
Financial
Statements
EXPLANATION AS TO WHAT EXTENT THE AUDIT WAS CONSIDERED CAPABLE OF DETECTING IRREGULARITIES INCLUDING FRAUD The objectives of our audit in respect to fraud are to identify and assess the risks of material misstatement of the financial statements due to fraud to obtain sufficient appropriate audit evidence regarding the assessed risks of material misstatement due to fraud through designing and implementing appropriate responses and to respond appropriately to fraud or suspected fraud identified during the audit.
However the primary responsibility for the prevention and detection of fraud rests with both those charged with governance of the entity and management and in respect to irregularities considered to be noncompliance with laws and regulations are to obtain sufficient appropriate audit evidence regarding compliance with the provisions of those laws and regulations generally recognised to have a direct effect on the determination of material amounts and disclosures in the financial statements direct laws and regulations and perform other audit procedures to help identify instances of noncompliance with other laws and regulations that may have a material effect on the financial statements.
We are not responsible for preventing noncompliance with laws and regulations and our audit procedures cannot be expected to detect noncompliance with all laws and regulations.
Our approach was as follows We obtained a general understanding of the legal and regulatory frameworks that are applicable to the company and determined that the relevant laws and regulations related to elements of company law and tax legislation and the financial reporting framework.
Our considerations of other laws and regulations that may have a material effect on the financial statements included permissions and supervisory requirements of the Prudential Regulation Authority PRA the Financial Conduct Authority FCA and the UK Listing Authority UKLA and the various Georgian legal and regulatory requirements applying to the components of the Group of which the most material are the regulations of the National Bank of Georgia relating to the Banking Business water regulations and healthcare regulations.
We obtained a general understanding of how the Group complies with these legal and regulatory frameworks by making enquiries of management internal audit and those responsible for legal and compliance matters.
We also reviewed correspondence between the Group and its regulators reviewed minutes of the Board and Executive Risk Committee and gained an understanding of the Groups approach to governance demonstrated by the Boards approval of the Groups governance framework and the Boards review of the Groups risk management framework RMF and internal control processes.
For direct laws and regulations we considered the extent of compliance with those laws and regulations as part of our procedures on the related financial statement items.
For both direct and other laws and regulations our procedures involved making enquiry of those charged with governance and senior management for their awareness of any noncompliance of laws or regulations inquiring about the policies that have been established to prevent noncompliance with laws and regulations by officers and employees inquiring about the companys methods of enforcing and monitoring compliance with such policies inspecting significant correspondence with the regulators.
We instructed component teams to communicate to the primary team any identified instances of noncompliance with laws and regulations.
There were no such instances identified and communicated by and to components.
The Group operates across various industries some of which including banking insurance public utilities and healthcare are highly regulated environments.
As such the Senior Statutory Auditor considered the experience and expertise of the engagement team to ensure that the team had the appropriate competence and capabilities which included the use of specialists where appropriate.
We assessed the susceptibility of the Groups financial statements to material misstatement including how fraud might occur by considering the controls that the Group has established to address risks identified by the entity or that otherwise seek to prevent deter or detect fraud.
We also considered areas of significant judgment complex transactions performance targets economic or external pressures and the impact these have on the control environment.
Where this risk was considered to be higher we performed audit procedures to address each identified fraud risk which included management internal audit and legal enquiries testing of internal control journal entry testing analytical procedures tests of detail and focused testing as referred to in the Key Audit Matters section above.
These procedures were designed to provide reasonable assurance that the financial statements were free from fraud or error.
A further description of our responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements is located on the Financial Reporting Councils website at httpswww. rc. iteauditorsresponsibilities.
This description forms part of our auditors report.
OTHER MATTERS WHICH WE ARE REQUIRED TO ADDRESS Following the tender process and the subsequent recommendation of the Audit Committee to the Board we were appointed by the Board on 16 April 2012 to audit the financial statements for the first accounting period ending 31 December 2012 and subsequent financial periods.
We were reappointed by shareholders at the Companys 2013 Annual General Meeting and at each subsequent Annual General Meeting.
The period of total uninterrupted engagement is six years covering the first financial period ending 31 December 2012 and subsequent annual periods ending 31 December 2013 to 31 December 2017.
The nonaudit services prohibited by the FRCs Ethical Standard were not provided to the Group or the Parent Company and we remain independent of the Group and the Parent Company in conducting our audit.
Our audit opinion is consistent with the additional report to the Audit Committee.
John Headley Senior Statutory Auditor for and on behalf of Ernst and Young LLP  Statutory Auditor
7 March 2018
The maintenance and integrity of the BGEO Group PLCs website is the responsibility of the Directors the work carried out by the auditors does not involve consideration of these matters and accordingly the auditors accept no responsibility for any changes that may have occurred to the financial statements since they were initially presented on the website.
Legislation in the United Kingdom governing the preparation and dissemination of financial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
126 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF FINANCIAL POSITION AS AT 31 DECEMBER 2017 THOUSANDS OF GEORGIAN LARI 2017 2016 2015
Banking
Business
Investment
Business Eliminations Total
Business
Investment
Business Eliminations Total
Business
Investment
Business Eliminations Total
Cash and cash equivalents 8 1516401 374301 308267 1582435 1480783 401969 309142 1573610 1378299 292956 238321 1432934 Amounts due from credit institutions 9 1216349 38141 28543 1225947 940485 178425 63927 1054983 718677 34068 21380 731365 Investment securities 10 1613759 33059 81949 1564869 1283903 3672 1572 1286003 904146 1785 2064 903867 Loans to customers and finance lease receivables 11 7741420  50970 7690450 6681672  33190 6648482 5366764  44647 5322117 Accounts receivable and other loans 3572 35446 74 38944 55377 125962 52833 128506 3777 86881 2686 87972 Insurance premiums receivable  30854 281 30573  48390 1967 46423  40880 1654 39226 Prepayments 61501 88057  149558 18716 58161 600 76277 20330 37998  58328 Inventories 20086 80108  100194 8809 179535  188344 9319 117708  127027 Investment properties 12 202533 155367 4335 353565 152597 135630  288227 135453 110945  246398 Property and equipment 13 322925 661176 4335 988436 296791 991803  1288594 293244 464783  758027 Goodwill 14 33351 21925  55276 33453 73533  106986 33453 39531  72984 Intangible assets 55525 5455  60980 39941 18966  58907 33976 6540  40516 Income tax assets 15 919 1374  2293 19325 4718  24043 14759 6791  21550 Other assets 16 119337 73468 4073 188732 111506 86305 13020 184791 139200 100276 2696 236780 Assets of disposal group held for sale 6  1165182 28765 1136417 TOTAL ASSETS 12907678 2763913 502922 15168669 11123358 2307069 476251 12954176 9051397 1341142 313448 10079091
Client deposits and notes 17 7078058  365576 6712482 5755767  373069 5382698 5011269  259882 4751387 Amounts owed to credit institutions 18 2778338 377501  3155839 3067651 435630 33190 3470091 1692557 142460 45955 1789062 Debt securities issued 19 1386412 357442 34702 1709152 858036 404450 6843 1255643 961944 82522 4662 1039804 Accruals and deferred income 42207 90462  132669 21778 161893 53352 130319 17549 129303  146852 Insurance contract liabilities  46402  46402  67871  67871  55845  55845 Income tax liabilities 15 20100 859  20959 22528 5190  27718 84960 34333  119293 Other liabilities 16 49861 92553 281 142133 45096 196324 9797 231623 34391 103314 2949 134756 Liabilities of disposal group held for sale 6  619026 102363 516663 TOTAL LIABILITIES 11354976 1584245 502922 12436299 9770856 1271358 476251 10565963 7802670 547777 313448 8036999 EQUITY 21 Share capital 1151   1151 1154   1154 1154   1154 Additional paidin capital  106086  106086 45072 138800  183872 101793 138800  240593 Treasury shares 66   66 54   54 44   44 Other reserves 74046 196128  122082 57485 131884  74399 87561 95862  8301 Retained earnings 1618775 561640  2180415 1344144 528352  1872496 1215693 355572  1571265 Reserves of disposal group held for sale  10934  10934 TOTAL EQUITY ATTRIBUTABLE TO SHAREHOLDERS OF BGEO 1545814 874788  2420602 1332831 799036  2131867 1231035 590234  1821269 Noncontrolling interests 6888 304880  311768 19671 236675  256346 17692 203131  220823 TOTAL EQUITY 1552702 1179668  2732370 1352502 1035711  2388213 1248727 793365  2042092 TOTAL LIABILITIES AND EQUITY 12907678 2763913 502922 15168669 11123358 2307069 476251 12954176 9051397 1341142 313448 10079091 Certain amounts do not correspond to the 2016 consolidated financial statement as they reflect the adjustments made for change in accounting policy as described in Note 3 and change in the composition of Investment Business and Banking Business as described in Note 7.
The financial statements on pages 126 to 212 were approved by the Board of Directors on 7 March 2018 and signed on its behalf by Irakli Gilauri
Chief Executive Officer
BGEO Group PLC 7 March 2018 Registered No.
The accompanying Notes on pages 139 to 212 are an integral part of these financial statements.
127 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
Financial
Statements
2017 2016 2015
Banking
Business
Investment
Business Eliminations Total
Business
Investment
Business Eliminations Total
Business
Investment
Business Eliminations Total
Cash and cash equivalents 8 1516401 374301 308267 1582435 1480783 401969 309142 1573610 1378299 292956 238321 1432934 Amounts due from credit institutions 9 1216349 38141 28543 1225947 940485 178425 63927 1054983 718677 34068 21380 731365 Investment securities 10 1613759 33059 81949 1564869 1283903 3672 1572 1286003 904146 1785 2064 903867 Loans to customers and finance lease receivables 11 7741420  50970 7690450 6681672  33190 6648482 5366764  44647 5322117 Accounts receivable and other loans 3572 35446 74 38944 55377 125962 52833 128506 3777 86881 2686 87972 Insurance premiums receivable  30854 281 30573  48390 1967 46423  40880 1654 39226 Prepayments 61501 88057  149558 18716 58161 600 76277 20330 37998  58328 Inventories 20086 80108  100194 8809 179535  188344 9319 117708  127027 Investment properties 12 202533 155367 4335 353565 152597 135630  288227 135453 110945  246398 Property and equipment 13 322925 661176 4335 988436 296791 991803  1288594 293244 464783  758027 Goodwill 14 33351 21925  55276 33453 73533  106986 33453 39531  72984 Intangible assets 55525 5455  60980 39941 18966  58907 33976 6540  40516 Income tax assets 15 919 1374  2293 19325 4718  24043 14759 6791  21550 Other assets 16 119337 73468 4073 188732 111506 86305 13020 184791 139200 100276 2696 236780 Assets of disposal group held for sale 6  1165182 28765 1136417 TOTAL ASSETS 12907678 2763913 502922 15168669 11123358 2307069 476251 12954176 9051397 1341142 313448 10079091
Client deposits and notes 17 7078058  365576 6712482 5755767  373069 5382698 5011269  259882 4751387 Amounts owed to credit institutions 18 2778338 377501  3155839 3067651 435630 33190 3470091 1692557 142460 45955 1789062 Debt securities issued 19 1386412 357442 34702 1709152 858036 404450 6843 1255643 961944 82522 4662 1039804 Accruals and deferred income 42207 90462  132669 21778 161893 53352 130319 17549 129303  146852 Insurance contract liabilities  46402  46402  67871  67871  55845  55845 Income tax liabilities 15 20100 859  20959 22528 5190  27718 84960 34333  119293 Other liabilities 16 49861 92553 281 142133 45096 196324 9797 231623 34391 103314 2949 134756 Liabilities of disposal group held for sale 6  619026 102363 516663 TOTAL LIABILITIES 11354976 1584245 502922 12436299 9770856 1271358 476251 10565963 7802670 547777 313448 8036999 EQUITY 21 Share capital 1151   1151 1154   1154 1154   1154 Additional paidin capital  106086  106086 45072 138800  183872 101793 138800  240593 Treasury shares 66   66 54   54 44   44 Other reserves 74046 196128  122082 57485 131884  74399 87561 95862  8301 Retained earnings 1618775 561640  2180415 1344144 528352  1872496 1215693 355572  1571265 Reserves of disposal group held for sale  10934  10934 TOTAL EQUITY ATTRIBUTABLE TO SHAREHOLDERS OF BGEO 1545814 874788  2420602 1332831 799036  2131867 1231035 590234  1821269 Noncontrolling interests 6888 304880  311768 19671 236675  256346 17692 203131  220823 TOTAL EQUITY 1552702 1179668  2732370 1352502 1035711  2388213 1248727 793365  2042092 TOTAL LIABILITIES AND EQUITY 12907678 2763913 502922 15168669 11123358 2307069 476251 12954176 9051397 1341142 313448 10079091 Certain amounts do not correspond to the 2016 consolidated financial statement as they reflect the adjustments made for change in accounting policy as described in Note 3 and change in the composition of Investment Business and Banking Business as described in Note 7.
The financial statements on pages 126 to 212 were approved by the Board of Directors on 7 March 2018 and signed on its behalf by Irakli Gilauri
Chief Executive Officer
BGEO Group PLC 7 March 2018 Registered No.
The accompanying Notes on pages 139 to 212 are an integral part of these financial statements.
128 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC 2017 2016 2015
Banking
Business
Investment
Business Eliminations Total
Business
Investment
Business Eliminations Total
Business
Investment
Business Eliminations Total Banking interest income 1140292  8378 1131914 932063  6034 926029 870712  11972 858740 Banking interest expense 468192  8813 459379 378452  544 377908 360115  1798 358317 NET BANKING INTEREST INCOME 22 672100  435 672535 553611  5490 548121 510597  10174 500423 Fee and commission income 192499  2107 190392 172630  3049 169581 161574  3810 157764 Fee and commission expense 61025  683 60342 47720  616 47104 40355  687 39668 NET FEE AND COMMISSION INCOME 23 131474  1424 130050 124910  2433 122477 121219  3123 118096 Net banking foreign currency gain 86060  6954 79106 83203  6277 89480 75933   75933 Net other banking income 19701  1056 18645 12183  1516 10667 19399  1864 17535 Net insurance premiums earned  52147 216 52363  43094 687 42407  40856 1133 39723 Net insurance claims incurred  25098  25098  17838  17838  20114  20114 GROSS INSURANCE PROFIT 24  27049 216 27265  25256 687 24569  20742 1133 19609 Real estate revenue  121132 977 120155  100164 581 99583  53882  53882 Cost of real estate  85765  85765  81098  81098  39721  39721 GROSS REAL ESTATE PROFIT 25  35367 977 34390  19066 581 18485  14161  14161 Utility and energy revenue  127568 360 127208  56486 139 56347 Cost of utility and energy  39198  39198  17806  17806 GROSS UTILITY AND ENERGY PROFIT 26  88370 360 88010  38680 139 38541 Gross other investment profit 27  30583 47 30630  21334 46 21288  18677 296 18381 REVENUE 909335 181369 10073 1080631 773907 104336 4615 873628 727148 53580 16590 764138 Salaries and other employee benefits 28 198213 34548 2219 230542 168374 16279 1800 182853 148923 11801 1296 159428 Administrative expenses 28 100291 38350 2464 136177 82113 17751 2835 97029 72789 10974 2399 81364 Banking depreciation and amortisation 40974   40974 37207   37207 33365   33365 Other operating expenses 3458 1894  5352 3854 1863  5717 3210 367  3577 OPERATING EXPENSES 342936 74792 4683 413045 291548 35893 4635 322806 258287 23142 3695 277734 OPERATING INCOME BEFORE COST OF CREDIT RISKEBITDA 566399 106577 5390 667586 482359 68443 20 550822 468861 30438 12895 486404 Profit from associates 1311   1311  4074  4074  4050  4050 Depreciation and amortisation of investment business  28235  28235  10062  10062  2393  2393 Net foreign currency loss gain of investment business  4937  4937  3134  3134  8157  8157 Interest income from investment business 22  12970 7555 5415  4144 399 3745  2513 1014 1499 Interest expense from investment business 22  30014 354 29660  13410 2190 11220  2115 1818 297 OPERATING INCOME BEFORE COST OF CREDIT RISK 567710 56361 12591 611480 482359 50055 1811 534225 468861 40650 12091 497420 Certain amounts included in Banking Business and Investment Business do not correspond to the 2016 consolidated financial statement as they reflect the adjustments made for change in the composition of segments as described in Note 7 and discontinued operations described in Note 6 .
The accompanying Notes on pages 139 to 212 are an integral part of these financial statements.
CONSOLIDATED INCOME STATEMENT FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 THOUSANDS OF GEORGIAN LARI 129 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
Financial
Statements
2017 2016 2015
Banking
Business
Investment
Business Eliminations Total
Business
Investment
Business Eliminations Total
Business
Investment
Business Eliminations Total Banking interest income 1140292  8378 1131914 932063  6034 926029 870712  11972 858740 Banking interest expense 468192  8813 459379 378452  544 377908 360115  1798 358317 NET BANKING INTEREST INCOME 22 672100  435 672535 553611  5490 548121 510597  10174 500423 Fee and commission income 192499  2107 190392 172630  3049 169581 161574  3810 157764 Fee and commission expense 61025  683 60342 47720  616 47104 40355  687 39668 NET FEE AND COMMISSION INCOME 23 131474  1424 130050 124910  2433 122477 121219  3123 118096 Net banking foreign currency gain 86060  6954 79106 83203  6277 89480 75933   75933 Net other banking income 19701  1056 18645 12183  1516 10667 19399  1864 17535 Net insurance premiums earned  52147 216 52363  43094 687 42407  40856 1133 39723 Net insurance claims incurred  25098  25098  17838  17838  20114  20114 GROSS INSURANCE PROFIT 24  27049 216 27265  25256 687 24569  20742 1133 19609 Real estate revenue  121132 977 120155  100164 581 99583  53882  53882 Cost of real estate  85765  85765  81098  81098  39721  39721 GROSS REAL ESTATE PROFIT 25  35367 977 34390  19066 581 18485  14161  14161 Utility and energy revenue  127568 360 127208  56486 139 56347 Cost of utility and energy  39198  39198  17806  17806 GROSS UTILITY AND ENERGY PROFIT 26  88370 360 88010  38680 139 38541 Gross other investment profit 27  30583 47 30630  21334 46 21288  18677 296 18381 REVENUE 909335 181369 10073 1080631 773907 104336 4615 873628 727148 53580 16590 764138 Salaries and other employee benefits 28 198213 34548 2219 230542 168374 16279 1800 182853 148923 11801 1296 159428 Administrative expenses 28 100291 38350 2464 136177 82113 17751 2835 97029 72789 10974 2399 81364 Banking depreciation and amortisation 40974   40974 37207   37207 33365   33365 Other operating expenses 3458 1894  5352 3854 1863  5717 3210 367  3577 OPERATING EXPENSES 342936 74792 4683 413045 291548 35893 4635 322806 258287 23142 3695 277734 OPERATING INCOME BEFORE COST OF CREDIT RISKEBITDA 566399 106577 5390 667586 482359 68443 20 550822 468861 30438 12895 486404 Profit from associates 1311   1311  4074  4074  4050  4050 Depreciation and amortisation of investment business  28235  28235  10062  10062  2393  2393 Net foreign currency loss gain of investment business  4937  4937  3134  3134  8157  8157 Interest income from investment business 22  12970 7555 5415  4144 399 3745  2513 1014 1499 Interest expense from investment business 22  30014 354 29660  13410 2190 11220  2115 1818 297 OPERATING INCOME BEFORE COST OF CREDIT RISK 567710 56361 12591 611480 482359 50055 1811 534225 468861 40650 12091 497420 Certain amounts included in Banking Business and Investment Business do not correspond to the 2016 consolidated financial statement as they reflect the adjustments made for change in the composition of segments as described in Note 7 and discontinued operations described in Note 6 .
The accompanying Notes on pages 139 to 212 are an integral part of these financial statements.
130 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC 2017 2016 2015
Banking
Business
Investment
Business Eliminations Total
Business
Investment
Business Eliminations Total
Business
Investment
Business Eliminations Total OPERATING INCOME BEFORE COST OF CREDIT RISK 567710 56361 12591 611480 482359 50055 1811 534225 468861 40650 12091 497420 Impairment charge on loans to customers 11 155210   155210 158892   158892 142819   142819 Impairment charge on finance lease receivables 11 496   496 777   777 1958   1958 Impairment charge on other assets and provisions 11590 3415  15005 8083 1004  9087 6031 1121  7152 COST OF CREDIT RISK 167296 3415  170711 167752 1004  168756 150808 1121  151929 NET OPERATING INCOME BEFORE NONRECURRING ITEMS 400414 52946 12591 440769 314607 49051 1811 365469 318053 39529 12091 345491 Net nonrecurring items 29 4300 623  4923 45355 32673  12682 12344 556  12900 PROFIT BEFORE INCOME TAX EXPENSE FROM CONTINUING OPERATIONS 396114 52323 12591 435846 269252 81724 1811 352787 305709 38973 12091 332591 Income tax expense gain 15 26592 5748  32340 26444 8944  17500 43917 4500  48417 PROFIT LOSS FOR THE YEAR FROM CONTINUING OPERATIONS 369522 46575 12591 403506 295696 72780 1811 370287 261792 34473 12091 284174 Profit from discontinued operations 6  47352 12591 59943  60100 1811 58289  14680 12091 26771 PROFIT FOR THE YEAR 369522 93927  463449 295696 132880  428576 261792 49153  310945 TOTAL PROFIT ATTRIBUTABLE TO shareholders of BGEO 367832 69783  437615 293173 105365  398538 258001 45693  303694 noncontrolling interests 1690 24144  25834 2523 27515  30038 3791 3460  7251 369522 93927  463449 295696 132880  428576 261792 49153  310945 PROFIT FROM CONTINUING OPERATIONS ATTRIBUTABLE TO shareholders of BGEO 367832 50385 12591 405626 293173 72641 1811 367625 258001 36221 12091 282131 noncontrolling interests 1690 3810  2120 2523 139  2662 3791 1748  2043 369522 46575 12591 403506 295696 72780 1811 370287 261792 34473 12091 284174 PROFIT FROM DISCONTINUED OPERATIONS ATTRIBUTABLE TO shareholders of BGEO  19398 12591 31989  32724 1811 30913  9472 12091 21563 noncontrolling interests  27954  27954  27376  27376  5208  5208 47352 12591 59943  60100 1811 58289  14680 12091 26771 BASIC EARNINGS PER SHARE 21 11.6086 10.4148 7.9264 earnings per share from continuing operations 10.7600 9.6070 7.3636 earnings per share from discontinued operations 0.8486 0.8078 0.5628 DILUTED EARNINGS PER SHARE 21 11.0724 10.0895 7.9264 earnings per share from continuing operations 10.2631 9.3069 7.3636 earnings per share from discontinued operations 0.8093 0.7826 0.5628 Certain amounts included in Banking Business and Investment Business do not correspond to the 2016 consolidated financial statement as they reflect the adjustments made for change in the composition of segments as described in Note 7 and discontinued operations described in Note 6.
The accompanying Notes on pages 139 to 212 are an integral part of these financial statements.
CONSOLIDATED INCOME STATEMENT CONTINUED FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 THOUSANDS OF GEORGIAN LARI 131 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
Financial
Statements
2017 2016 2015
Banking
Business
Investment
Business Eliminations Total
Business
Investment
Business Eliminations Total
Business
Investment
Business Eliminations Total OPERATING INCOME BEFORE COST OF CREDIT RISK 567710 56361 12591 611480 482359 50055 1811 534225 468861 40650 12091 497420 Impairment charge on loans to customers 11 155210   155210 158892   158892 142819   142819 Impairment charge on finance lease receivables 11 496   496 777   777 1958   1958 Impairment charge on other assets and provisions 11590 3415  15005 8083 1004  9087 6031 1121  7152 COST OF CREDIT RISK 167296 3415  170711 167752 1004  168756 150808 1121  151929 NET OPERATING INCOME BEFORE NONRECURRING ITEMS 400414 52946 12591 440769 314607 49051 1811 365469 318053 39529 12091 345491 Net nonrecurring items 29 4300 623  4923 45355 32673  12682 12344 556  12900 PROFIT BEFORE INCOME TAX EXPENSE FROM CONTINUING OPERATIONS 396114 52323 12591 435846 269252 81724 1811 352787 305709 38973 12091 332591 Income tax expense gain 15 26592 5748  32340 26444 8944  17500 43917 4500  48417 PROFIT LOSS FOR THE YEAR FROM CONTINUING OPERATIONS 369522 46575 12591 403506 295696 72780 1811 370287 261792 34473 12091 284174 Profit from discontinued operations 6  47352 12591 59943  60100 1811 58289  14680 12091 26771 PROFIT FOR THE YEAR 369522 93927  463449 295696 132880  428576 261792 49153  310945 TOTAL PROFIT ATTRIBUTABLE TO shareholders of BGEO 367832 69783  437615 293173 105365  398538 258001 45693  303694 noncontrolling interests 1690 24144  25834 2523 27515  30038 3791 3460  7251 369522 93927  463449 295696 132880  428576 261792 49153  310945 PROFIT FROM CONTINUING OPERATIONS ATTRIBUTABLE TO shareholders of BGEO 367832 50385 12591 405626 293173 72641 1811 367625 258001 36221 12091 282131 noncontrolling interests 1690 3810  2120 2523 139  2662 3791 1748  2043 369522 46575 12591 403506 295696 72780 1811 370287 261792 34473 12091 284174 PROFIT FROM DISCONTINUED OPERATIONS ATTRIBUTABLE TO shareholders of BGEO  19398 12591 31989  32724 1811 30913  9472 12091 21563 noncontrolling interests  27954  27954  27376  27376  5208  5208 47352 12591 59943  60100 1811 58289  14680 12091 26771 BASIC EARNINGS PER SHARE 21 11.6086 10.4148 7.9264 earnings per share from continuing operations 10.7600 9.6070 7.3636 earnings per share from discontinued operations 0.8486 0.8078 0.5628 DILUTED EARNINGS PER SHARE 21 11.0724 10.0895 7.9264 earnings per share from continuing operations 10.2631 9.3069 7.3636 earnings per share from discontinued operations 0.8093 0.7826 0.5628 Certain amounts included in Banking Business and Investment Business do not correspond to the 2016 consolidated financial statement as they reflect the adjustments made for change in the composition of segments as described in Note 7 and discontinued operations described in Note 6.
The accompanying Notes on pages 139 to 212 are an integral part of these financial statements.
132 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Notes 2017 2016 2015 PROFIT FOR THE YEAR 463449 428576 310945 OTHER COMPREHENSIVE LOSS INCOME FROM CONTINUING OPERATIONS Other comprehensive loss income from continuing operations to be reclassified to profit or loss in subsequent periods Unrealised revaluation of availableforsale securities 3862 86245 30928 Realised gain loss on availableforsale securities reclassified to the consolidated income statement 2060 28325 84 Loss gain from currency translation differences 10233 12517 11590 Income tax impact 15 549 2274 283 NET OTHER COMPREHENSIVE LOSS INCOME FROM CONTINUING OPERATIONS TO BE RECLASSIFIED TO PROFIT OR LOSS IN SUBSEQUENT PERIODS 8980 68163 42151 Other comprehensive income from continuing operations not to be reclassified to profit or loss in subsequent periods Revaluation of property and equipment 13 3483 Income tax impact 15 779 Impact of income tax changes on associates  5580 NET OTHER COMPREHENSIVE INCOME FROM CONTINUING OPERATIONS NOT TO BE RECLASSIFIED TO PROFIT OR LOSS IN SUBSEQUENT PERIODS 2704 5580 Other comprehensive loss income for the year from discontinued operations not to be reclassified to profit or loss in subsequent periods 6 4564 20804 OTHER COMPREHENSIVE LOSS INCOME FOR THE YEAR NET OF TAX 10840 94547 42151 Total comprehensive income for the year from continuing operations 397230 444030 242023 Total comprehensive income for the year from discontinued operations 55379 79093 26771 TOTAL COMPREHENSIVE INCOME FOR THE YEAR 452609 523123 268794 TOTAL COMPREHENSIVE INCOME ATTRIBUTABLE TO shareholders of BGEO 429916 486799 264070 noncontrolling interests 22693 36324 4724 452609 523123 268794 TOTAL COMPREHENSIVE INCOME FROM CONTINUING OPERATIONS ATTRIBUTABLE TO shareholders of BGEO 398681 442879 240763 noncontrolling interests 1451 1151 1260 397230 444030 242023 TOTAL COMPREHENSIVE INCOME FROM DISCONTINUED OPERATIONS ATTRIBUTABLE TO shareholders of BGEO 31235 43920 23307 noncontrolling interests 24144 35173 3464 55379 79093 26771 Certain amounts do not correspond to the 2016 consolidated financial statement as they reflect the adjustments made for change in accounting policy as described in Note 3 and discontinued operations described in Note 6.
The accompanying Notes on pages 139 to 212 are an integral part of these financial statements.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 THOUSANDS OF GEORGIAN LARI 133 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
Financial
Statements
Attributable to shareholders of BGEO
Total equity
Additional paidin capital
Other
Reserves of disposal group held for sale
31 DECEMBER 2014 1143 245305 46 22574  1350258 1574086 60007 1634093 Change in accounting policy Note 3    37217  857 38074 2123 40197 1 JANUARY 2015 RESTATED 1143 245305 46 59791  1349401 1536012 57884 1593896 Profit for the year      303694 303694 7251 310945 Other comprehensive loss for the year    29486  10138 39624 2527 42151 TOTAL COMPREHENSIVE INCOME FOR THE YEAR    29486  293556 264070 4724 268794 Increase in equity arising from sharebased payments  22483 15    22498 897 23395 GBPGEL translation effect 11 1737  10467  8719 Dividends to shareholders of BGEO Note 21      80411 80411  80411 Dilution of interests in subsidiaries    109435   109435 125163 234598 Transactions costs recognised directly in equity    13379   13379  13379 Acquisition and sale of noncontrolling interests in existing subsidiaries    11989   11989 2369 14358 Noncontrolling interests arising on acquisition of subsidiary        29786 29786 Purchase of treasury shares  28932 13    28945  28945 31 DECEMBER 2015 1154 240593 44 8301  1571265 1821269 220823 2042092 Profit for the year      398538 398538 30038 428576 Other comprehensive income for the year    87964  297 88261 6286 94547 TOTAL COMPREHENSIVE INCOME FOR THE YEAR    87964  398835 486799 36324 523123 Increase in equity arising from sharebased payments  42365 14    42379 3816 46195 Dividends to shareholders of BGEO Note 21      97604 97604  97604 Dilution of interests in subsidiaries    2785   2785 2406 379 Dividends of subsidiaries to noncontrolling shareholders        936 936 Acquisition of noncontrolling interests in existing subsidiaries    19081   19081 6087 25168 Purchase of treasury shares  99086 24    99110  99110 31 DECEMBER 2016 1154 183872 54 74399  1872496 2131867 256346 2388213 Effect of early adoption of IFRS 15 Note 3     29050 29050  29050 1 JANUARY 2017 1154 183872 54 74399  1843446 2102817 256346 2359163 Profit for the year      437615 437615 25834 463449 Other comprehensive loss for the year    7868  169 7699 3141 10840 TOTAL COMPREHENSIVE INCOME FOR THE YEAR    7868  437784 429916 22693 452609 Depreciation of property and equipment revaluation reserve net of tax    686  686 Discontinued operations Note 6    10934 10934 Increase in equity arising from sharebased payments  59262 17    59279 1495 60774 Buyback and cancellation of own shares Note 21 3 12183     12186  12186 Dividends to shareholders of BGEO Note 21      101501 101501  101501 Dilution of interests in subsidiaries    331   331 1714 2045 Increase in share capital of subsidiaries        14493 14493 Sale of interests in existing subsidiaries    70333   70333 38234 108567 Acquisition of noncontrolling interests in existing subsidiaries Notes 5 21    3493   3493 58443 61936 Noncontrolling interests arising on acquisition of subsidiary Note 5        35236 35236 Purchase of treasury shares  124865 29    124894  124894 31 DECEMBER 2017 1151 106086 66 122082 10934 2180415 2420602 311768 2732370 Certain amounts do not correspond to the 2016 consolidated financial statement as they reflect the adjustments made for change in accounting policy as described in Note 3.
The Group sold approximately 7% equity interests in Georgia Healthcare Group PLC its healthcare subsidiary without losing control.
The accompanying Notes on pages 139 to 212 are an integral part of these financial statements.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 THOUSANDS OF GEORGIAN LARI 134 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Notes 2017 2016 2015 CASH FLOWS FROM USED IN OPERATING ACTIVITIES Interest received 1117016 916585 861288 Interest paid 487462 421318 338934 Fees and commissions received 185974 165603 153046 Fees and commissions paid 60807 47079 39475 Insurance premiums received 40677 38497 38488 Insurance claims paid 22325 19195 17937 Utility and energy revenue received 133728 58714 Cost of utility services paid 36616 19156 Net cash inflow outflow from real estate 20943 24271 24946 Net realised gain loss from trading securities  944 655 Net realised loss from investment securities availableforsale   84 Net realised gain from foreign currencies 65948 64504 65040 Recoveries of loans to customers previously written off 11 52792 36244 33685 Other income received expense paid 622 32847 3178 Salaries and other employee benefits paid 163057 143209 127873 General and administrative and operating expenses paid 111084 61968 87769 CASH FLOWS FROM OPERATING ACTIVITIES FROM CONTINUING OPERATIONS BEFORE CHANGES IN OPERATING ASSETS AND LIABILITIES 735105 512048 566944 Net increase decrease in operating assets Amounts due from credit institutions 210929 233829 182155 Loans to customers and Finance lease receivables 1420567 1004520 183614 Prepayments and other assets 76186 38182 17760 Net increase decrease in operating liabilities Amounts due to credit institutions 121234 1381622 164764 Debt securities issued 459802 150957 92181 Client deposits and notes 1415765 240586 349420 Other liabilities 3818 29338 17160 NET CASH FLOWS FROM OPERATING ACTIVITIES FROM CONTINUING OPERATIONS BEFORE INCOME TAX 777938 1114384 955486 Income tax paid 16111 37726 28925 NET CASH FLOWS FROM OPERATING ACTIVITIES FROM CONTINUING OPERATIONS 761827 1076658 926561 Net cash flows from operating activities of discontinued operations 175360 56901 24638 NET CASH FLOW FROM OPERATING ACTIVITIES 937187 1133559 901923 CASH FLOWS USED IN INVESTING ACTIVITIES Acquisition of subsidiaries net of cash acquired 5 17844 160453 22620 Repayment of remaining holdback amounts from previous year acquisitions  8768 Net purchase of investment securities availableforsale 273630 313318 157509 Purchase of investments in associates  819 3092 Proceeds from sale of investment properties 12 11469 8599 19815 Purchase of investment properties 12 17187 9799 18873 Proceeds from sale of property and equipment and intangible assets 8018 6806 5561 Purchase of property and equipment and intangible assets 336379 152859 63713 Dividends received  3230 NET CASH FLOWS USED IN INVESTING ACTIVITIES FROM CONTINUING OPERATIONS 625553 627381 195191 Net cash flows used in investing activities of discontinued operations 143851 176142 121881 NET CASH FLOWS USED IN INVESTING ACTIVITIES 769404 803523 317072 Certain amounts do not correspond to the 2016 consolidated financial statement as they reflect the adjustments made for discontinued operations described in Note 6.
The accompanying Notes on pages 139 to 212 are an integral part of these financial statements.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 THOUSANDS OF GEORGIAN LARI 135 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
Financial
Statements
Notes 2017 2016 2015 CASH FLOWS USED IN FROM FINANCING ACTIVITIES Buyback and cancellation of own shares 21 12186 Dividends paid 101714 97106 82015 Purchase of treasury shares 124894 99110 28945 Increase in share capital of subsidiaries 14493 Purchase of proceeds from sale of interests in existing subsidiaries 86866  17076 NET CASH USED IN FINANCING ACTIVITIES FROM CONTINUING OPERATIONS 137435 196216 93884 Net cash from used in financing activities of discontinued operations  2072 218501 NET CASH USED IN FINANCING ACTIVITIES 137435 198288 124617 Effect of exchange rates changes on cash and cash equivalents 925 8928 13322 NET INCREASE IN CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTS 31273 140676 722790 CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTS BEGINNING OF THE YEAR 8 1573610 1432934 710144 CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTS OF DISPOSAL GROUP HELD FOR SALE 22448 CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTS END OF THE YEAR 8 1582435 1573610 1432934 Certain amounts do not correspond to the 2016 consolidated financial statement as they reflect the adjustments made for discontinued operations described in Note 6.
The accompanying Notes on pages 139 to 212 are an integral part of these financial statements.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS CONTINUED FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 THOUSANDS OF GEORGIAN LARI 136 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC
ASSETS
Cash and cash equivalents 8 2688 105248 32435 Investments in subsidiaries 2 993853 1003578 950290 Investments in associates   53458 Other assets 3703 557 305 TOTAL ASSETS 1000244 1109383 1036488
Other liabilities 11982 10083 9740 TOTAL LIABILITIES 11982 10083 9740
Share capital 21 1151 1154 1154 Additional paidin capital 196438 208621 208621 Retained earnings 790636 723211 793397 Net profit for the period 37 166314 23576 TOTAL EQUITY 988262 1099300 1026748 TOTAL LIABILITIES AND EQUITY 1000244 1109383 1036488 Total parent company distributable reserves as at 31 December 2017 were GEL 790673 31 December 2016 GEL 889525 31 December 2015 GEL 816973.
The financial statements on page 126 to 212 were approved by the Board of Directors on 7 March 2018 and signed on its behalf by Irakli Gilauri
Chief Executive Officer
BGEO Group PLC 7 March 2018 Registered No.
The accompanying Notes on pages 139 to 212 are an integral part of these financial statements.
SEPARATE STATEMENT OF FINANCIAL POSITION AS AT 31 DECEMBER 2017 THOUSANDS OF GEORGIAN LARI 137 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
Financial
Statements
Share capital
Other
Retained earnings
31 DECEMBER 2014 1143 206884 328 861026 1068725 Total comprehensive income    23576 23576 GBPGEL translation effect 11 1737 328 12782 14858 Dividends to shareholders of BGEO Note 21    80411 80411 31 DECEMBER 2015 1154 208621  816973 1026748 Total comprehensive income    166314 166314 Dividends to shareholders of BGEO Note 21    93762 93762 31 DECEMBER 2016 1154 208621  889525 1099300 Total comprehensive income    37 37 Increase in equity arising from sharebased payments  118   118 Purchase of treasury shares  118   118 Buyback and cancellation of own shares Note 21 3 12183   12186 Dividends to shareholders of BGEO Note 21    98889 98889 31 DECEMBER 2017 1151 196438  790673 988262 The accompanying Notes on pages 139 to 212 are an integral part of these financial statements.
SEPARATE STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 THOUSANDS OF GEORGIAN LARI 138 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLCtel NET CASH FLOWS FROM USED IN OPERATING ACTIVITIES Interest income received 5432 98 1146 Fees and commissions paid 435 467 484 Salaries and other employee benefits paid 2144 2165 1920 General and administrative expenses paid 3998 2335 2073 CASH FLOWS USED IN OPERATING ACTIVITIES BEFORE CHANGES IN OPERATING ASSETS AND LIABILITIES 1145 4869 3331 Net decrease in operating assets   56658 Net decrease increase in operating liabilities 190 163 2976 NET CASH FLOWS USED IN FROM OPERATING ACTIVITIES 1335 5032 56303 NET CASH FLOWS USED IN FROM INVESTING ACTIVITIES Purchase of investments in associates   3092 Increase of investments in subsidiaries   45125 Capital redemption from subsidiaries 9725 Dividends received  169666 NET CASH FLOWS FROM USED IN INVESTING ACTIVITIES 9725 169666 48217 NET CASH FLOWS USED IN FROM FINANCING ACTIVITIES Buyback and cancellation of own shares Note 21 12186 Purchase of treasury shares 118 Dividends paid 98889 93762 80411 NET CASH FLOWS USED IN FROM FINANCING ACTIVITIES 111193 93762 80411 Effect of exchange rates changes on cash and cash equivalents 243 1941 16755 NET DECREASE INCREASE IN CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTS 102560 72813 55570 CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTS BEGINNING OF THE YEAR 105248 32435 88005 CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTS END OF THE YEAR 2688 105248 32435 The accompanying Notes on pages 139 to 212 are an integral part of these financial statements.
SEPARATE STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 THOUSANDS OF GEORGIAN LARI 139 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
Financial
Statements
PRINCIPAL ACTIVITIES BGEO Group PLC BGEO formerly known as Bank of Georgia Holdings PLC is a public limited liability company incorporated in England and Wales with registered number .
BGEO holds 99.55% of the share capital of the JSC Bank of Georgia the Bank as at 31 December 2017 representing the Banks ultimate parent company.
Together with the Bank and other subsidiaries BGEO makes up a group of companies the Group that provide banking insurance real estate utility leasing beverage production and distribution brokerage and investment management services to corporate and individual customers.
The Group currently consolidates the healthcare and pharmacy business which has been classified as discontinued operations of the Group.
The list of the companies included in the Group is provided in Note 2.
The shares of BGEO BGEO Shares are admitted to the premium listing segment of the Official List of the UK Listing Authority and admitted to trading on the London Stock Exchange PLCs Main Market for listed securities effective 28 February 2012.
The Bank is the Groups main operating unit and accounts for most of the Groups activities.
On 3 July 2017 BGEO announced its intention to demerge BGEO Group PLC into a Londonlisted banking business the Banking Business Bank of Georgia Group PLC and a Londonlisted investment business the Investment Business Georgia Capital PLC by the end of the first half of 2018.
JSC Bank of Georgia was established on 21 October 1994 as a joint stock company JSC under the laws of Georgia.
The Bank operates under a general banking license issued by the National Bank of Georgia NBG the Central Bank of Georgia on 15 December 1994.
The Bank accepts deposits from the public and extends credit transfers payments in Georgia and internationally and exchanges currencies.
Its main office is in Tbilisi Georgia.
At 31 December 2017 the Bank has 286 operating outlets in all major cities of Georgia 31 December 2016 278 31 December 2015 266.
The Banks registered legal address is 29a Gagarini Street Tbilisi 0160 Georgia.
The Group completed legal restructuring in August 2015 undertaken in accordance with the National Bank of Georgias intention to regulate banks in Georgia on a standalone basis and thereby limit investments in nonbanking subsidiaries by locally regulated banking entities.
BGEOs registered legal address is 84 Brook Street London W1K 5EH England.
As at 31 December 2017 31 December 2016 and 31 December 2015 the following shareholders owned more than 3% of the total outstanding shares of the Group.
Other shareholders individually owned less than 3% of the outstanding shares.
Shareholder
31 December 31 December 31 December Harding Loevner Management LP 8.32% 9.63% 9.09% Schroders Investment Management 4.86% 5.36% 10.30% LGM Investments Ltd 3.28% 2.53% 2.70% Norges Bank Investment Management 3.11% 2.31% 1.36% Westwood International Advisors 2.69% 3.49% 4.05% Firebird Management LLC 2.22% 2.62% 3.04% Artemis Investment Management 1.45% 4.47% 3.57% Others 74.07% 69.59% 65.89% TOTAL 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% For the purposes of calculating percentage of shareholding the denominator includes total number of issued shares which includes shares held in the trust for the sharebased compensation purposes of the Group.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 140 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC PRINCIPAL ACTIVITIES CONTINUED As at 31 December 2017 the members of the Board of Directors of BGEO owned 386351 shares or 1.0% 31 December 2016 308388 shares or 0.8% 31 December 2015 356392 shares or 0.9% of BGEO.
Interests of the members of the Board of Directors of BGEO Group PLC were as follows
31 December 2017 shares held 31 December 2016 shares held 31 December 2015 shares held Irakli Gilauri 303115 202315 250319 Neil Janin 39229 35729 35729 David Morrison 26357 26357 26357 Kaha Kiknavelidze  26337 26337 Al Breach 16400 16400 16400 Kim Bradley 1250 1250 1250 Tamaz Georgadze Hanna Loikkanen Jonathan Muir TOTAL 386351 308388 356392 Stepped down from the Board on 6 September 2016 and assumed the role of CEO of the Bank.
Was appointed as an Independent NonExecutive Director on 20 June 2017.
BASIS OF PREPARATION
In accordance with the exemption permitted under section 408 of the Companies Act 2006 the standalone income statement of BGEO is not presented as part of these financial statements.
BGEOs income for the year is disclosed within the separate statement of financial position and the separate statement of changes in equity.
The financial statements have been prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS as adopted by the European Union EU and International Financial Reporting Interpretations Committee IFRIC interpretations issued by the International Accounting Standards Board IASB effective for 2017 reporting and with those parts of the Companies Act 2006 applicable to companies reporting under IFRS.
These financial statements are prepared under the historical cost convention except for the measurement at fair value of financial assets and investment securities derivative financial assets and liabilities investment properties and revalued property and equipment the measurement of inventories at lower of cost and net realisable value and the measurement of noncurrent assets classified as held for sale at lower of cost and fair value less costs to sell.
The financial statements are presented in thousands of Georgian Lari GEL except pershare amounts and unless otherwise indicated.
GOING CONCERN The Board of Directors of BGEO has made an assessment of the Groups ability to continue as a going concern and is satisfied that it has the resources to continue in business for a period of at least 12 months from the date of approval of the financial statements.
Furthermore management is not aware of any material uncertainties that may cast significant doubt upon the Groups ability to continue as a going concern for the foreseeable future.
Therefore the financial statements continue to be prepared on the going concern basis.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 141 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
Financial
Statements
BASIS OF PREPARATION CONTINUED SUBSIDIARIES AND ASSOCIATES Total amount of investment in subsidiaries in BGEOs separate statement of financial position as at 31 December 2017 was GEL 993853 31 December 2016 GEL 1003578 31 December 2015 GEL 950290 represented by direct investment in JSC BGEO Group.
The consolidated financial statements as at 31 December 2017 31 December 2016 and 31 December 2015 include the following subsidiaries and associates Proportion of voting rights and ordinary share capital held
December
December
December
Country of incorporation Address Industry Date of incorporation Date of acquisition JSC BGEO Group 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% Georgia 29a Gagarini street Tbilisi 0105 Investment 2852015 JSC Bank of Georgia 99.55% 99.55% 99.52% Georgia 29a Gagarini street Tbilisi 0105 Banking 21101994 Bank of Georgia Representative Office UK Limited 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% United
84 Brook Street London W1K 5EH Information sharing and market research Tree of Life Foundation NPO formerly known as Bank of Georgia Future Foundation NPO 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% Georgia 3 Pushkin Street Tbilisi 0105 Charitable activities 2582008 Bank of Georgia Representative Office Hungary 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% Hungary 1054 Budapest Szabadsg tr 7 Bank Center
Representative Office of JSC Bank of Georgia in Turkey 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% Turkey Sleyman Seba Caddesi No48 A Blok Daire 82 Akaretler Beikta  34357 Istanbul
Georgia Financial Investments LLC 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% Israel 7 Menahem Begin Ramat Gan 52681 Israel Information sharing and market research Professional Basketball Club Dinamo Tbilisi LLC 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% Georgia Digomi District Block III Lot 383 Tbilisi 0159 Sport 1012011 Teaching University of Georgian Bank LLC 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% Georgia 29 Mitskevichi Street Tbilisi Education 15102013 Privat Guard LLC   100.00% Georgia DidubeChughureti district No 114 Ak.
Tsereteli ave.
Tbilisi.
Security  2112015 Benderlock Investments Limited 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% Cyprus Arch.
Makariou III 58 IRIS TOWER 8th floor FlatOffice 1075 Nicosia Investment 1252009 13102009 JSC Belarusky Narodny Bank 99.98% 79.99% 79.99% Belarus Nezavisimosty ave.
87A Minsk Banking 1641992 362008 BNB Leasing LLC 99.90% 99.90% 99.90% Belarus Nezavisimosty ave.
87A room 3
Leasing 3032006 362008 Georgian Leasing Company LLC 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% Georgia 35 Kazbegi Str.
Tbilisi Leasing 29102001 31122004 Prime Leasing 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% Georgia DidubeChughureti district No 114 Ak.
Tsereteli ave.
Tbilisi
Leasing 2712012 2112015 JSC BGEO Investments 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% Georgia Kazbegi Str.
35 Tbilisi Investment 782015 JSC m Real Estate 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% Georgia 4 Freedom Square Tbilisi 0105 Real estate 2792006 Residential LLC 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% Georgia 35 Kazbegi st.
Tbilisi 0179 Real estate 1782015 Optima ISANI LLC 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% Georgia 16 a Moscow ave.
Tbilisi Real estate 2572014 Tamarashvili 13 LLC 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% Georgia 13 Tamarashvili Str.
Tbilisi 0179 Real estate 3112011 Hypodrome LLC 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% Georgia 10 Givia Kartozia st.
Tbilisi Real estate 672015 Skyline LLC 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% Georgia 3 Maro Makashvili st.
Tbilisi Real estate 2372015 at Kazbegi LLC 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% Georgia 25 Kazbegi Ave.
Tbilisi 0160 Real estate 2152013 at Tamarashvili LLC 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% Georgia 6 Tamarashvili Str.
Tbilisi 0177 Real estate 2152013 at Nutsubidze LLC 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% Georgia 71 Vaja Pshavela Ave.
0186 Real estate 2152013 M Square Park LLC 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% Georgia 1 Marshal Gelovani ave.
Tbilisi Real estate 1592015 Optima Saburtalo LLC 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% Georgia 2 Mikheil Shavishvili st Tbilisi Real estate 1592015 at Vake LLC 100.00% 100.00%  Georgia 50 I.
Chavchavadze ave.
Tbilisi Real estate 382016 Hospitality LLC 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% Georgia 35 Kazbegi st.
Tbilisi 0179 Real estate 1782015 LLC formerly JSC m 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% Georgia 35 Kazbegi Street Tbilisi Real estate 1222014 Kutaisi LLC 100.00%   Georgia 10 Melikishvili ave.
Tbilisi Real estate 1752017 at Melikishvili LLC 100.00%   Georgia 10 Melikishvili ave.
Tbilisi Real estate 1752017 Kass 1 LLC 60.00%   Georgia 20 Merab Kostava st.
Tbilisi Real estate 16102014 27122017 at Chavchavadze LLC 100.00% 100.00%  Georgia 50 I.
Chavchavadze ave.
Tbilisi Real estate 592016 Commercial Properties LLC 100.00% 100.00%  Georgia 77 Zh.
SHartavai st Tbilisi Real estate 132016 Caucasus Autohouse LLC 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% Georgia 80 Aghmashenebeli ave.
Tbilisi
Real estate 2932011 Land LLC 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% Georgia Between university and Kavtaradze st.
Tbilisi
Real estate 3102014 BK Construction LLC 100.00%   Georgia 80 Agmashenebeli ave.
Tbilisi Real estate 1852017 262017 JSC Georgian Renewable Power Co.
65.00% 100.00% 100.00% Georgia 79 David Agmashenebeli Ave 0102 Tbilisi Renewable Energy 1492015 JSC Geohydro 85.00% 85.00% 85.00% Georgia 79 d. gmashenebeli ave.
Tbilisi 0102 Renewable Energy 11102013 JSC Svaneti Hydro 100.00% 65.00% 65.00% Georgia 29a Gagarin Street Tbilisi 0160 Renewable Energy 6122013 JSC Zoti Hydro 100.00% 65.00% 100.00% Georgia 79 d. gmashenebeli ave.
Tbilisi 0102 Renewable Energy 2082015 JSC Caucasian Wind Company 100.00% 100.00%  Georgia 79 D.
Tbilisi 0102 Renewable Energy 1492016 JSC Caucasian Solar Company 100.00% 100.00%  Georgia 79 D.
Tbilisi 0102 Renewable Energy 27102016 JSC Insurance Company Aldagi 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% Georgia 9 Ana Politkovskaya str.
Tbilisi Insurance 3172014 JSC Insurance Company Tao 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% Georgia Old Tbilisi Pushkini str 3 Tbilisi Insurance 2282007 2112015 142 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Proportion of voting rights and ordinary share capital held
December
December
December
Country of incorporation Address Industry Date of incorporation Date of acquisition Aliance LLC 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% Georgia 1 Sanapiro Str.
Tbilisi Various 312000 512012 Green Way LLC 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% Georgia Village Ratevani Bolnisi District Various 982008 512012 Premium Residence LLC 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% Georgia King Parmavaz Str.
48 Batumi Hotel 972010 152012 JSC AMF 100.00%   Georgia 20 I.
Chavchavadze Ave.
Tbilisi Insurance 17112017 JSC Pediatria 76.00% 76.00%  Georgia U.
Chkeidze Str.
N10 Tbilisi Medical services 592003 572016 Emergency Service LLC 100.00% 100.00%  Georgia 2 D.
Uznadze Str.
Tbilisi Medical services 2872009 612016 JSC Poti Central Hospital 100.00% 100.00%  Georgia Guria Str.
171 Poti Medical services 29102014 112016 Deka LLC 97.20% 95.00% 95.00% Georgia Bakhtrioni Str.
8B Tbilisi Medical services 1212012 1162015 EVEXLogistics LLC 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% Georgia Vazha Pshavela Ave.
40 Tbilisi Medical services 222015 EVEX Collection LLC 100.00% 100.00% 0.00% Georgia Vazha Pshavela Ave.
40 Tbilisi Medical services 2532016 Unimed Achara LLC 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% Georgia Vazha Pshavela Ave.
40 Tbilisi Medical services 2962010 152012 Unimedi Samtskhe LLC 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% Georgia Vazha Pshavela Ave.
40 Tbilisi Medical services 2962010 152012 Unimedi Kakheti LLC 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% Georgia 20 Chavchvadze Ave.
Tbilisi Medical services 2962010 152012
Iashvili Childrens Central Hospital LLC 100.00% 100.00% 66.70% Georgia 26 Lubliana Str.
Tbilisi Medical Services 352011 1922014 Institute of Pediatrics Alergology and Rheumatology Centre LLC 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% Georgia 5 Lubliana Str.
Tbilisi Medical Services 632000 1922014 Iv Bokeria Tbilisi Referral Hospital 100.00%   Georgia Kindzmarauli I turn N1 IsanSamgori Tbilisi Medical Service 1632017 Referral Centre of Pathology LLC 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% Georgia 40 VazhaPshavela Ave.
Tbilisi Medical services 29122014 EVEX Learning Centre 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% Georgia 83A Javakhishvili Str.
Tbilisi Education 20122013 JSC MegaLab 100.00%   Georgia 23 Kavtaradze Str.
Tbilisi Medical services 662017 New Clinic LLC 100.00%   Georgia Vazha Pshavela Ave.
40 Tbilisi Medical services 132013 2672017 Alliance Medi LLC 100.00%   Georgia Vazha Pshavela Ave.
40 Tbilisi Medical services 772015 2672017 Medical Centre Alimedi LLC 100.00%   Georgia 17 R.
Tabukashvili Str.
Tbilisi Medical services 2792003 8112017 JSC Polyclinic Vere 97.80%   Georgia 1820 Kiacheli Str.
Tbilisi Medical services 22112017 25122017 Georgian Global Utilities LLC 100.00% 100.00% 25.00% British
Islands
33 Porter Road PO Box 3169 PMB 103 Road Town Tortola Utilities 16082007 31122014 Georgian Water and Power LLC 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% Georgia 33 Kostava Str.
1st Lane Tbilisi Utilities 25061997 31122014 Rustavi Water LLC 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% Georgia 5 St.
Nino Str.
Rustavi Utilities 31081999 31122014 Gardabani Sewage Treatment LLC 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% Georgia 33 Kostava Str.
1st Lane Tbilisi Utilities 20121999 31122014 Mtskheta Water LLC 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% Georgia 1 Gvinjilia Str.
Mtskheta Utilities 191999 31122014 Georgian Engineering and Management Company GEMC LLC 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% Georgia 3 Tkekultura Str.
Tbilisi Utilities 20032011 31122014 JSC Saguramo Energy 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% Georgia 33 Kostava Str.
1st Lane Tbilisi Utilities 11122008 31122014 JSC Teliani Valley 75.75% 71.66% 71.44% Georgia 3 Tbilisi Highway Telavi Winery 3062000 2822007 Teliani Trading Georgia LLC 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% Georgia 2 Marshal Gelovani Str.
Tbilisi Distribution 1012006 2732007 Teliani Trading Ukraine LLC 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% Ukraine 1814 Khvoiki Str.
Kiev Distribution 3102006 31122007 Le Caucase LLC 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% Georgia 2 Marshal Gelovani Str.
Tbilisi Cognac production 2392006 2032007 Kupa LLC 70.00% 70.00% 70.00% Georgia 3 Tbilisi Highway Telavi Oak barrel production 12102006 2032007 Global Beer Georgia LLC 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% Georgia Vazisubani IV MR I KV Building N21 App.
N12 Tbilisi Production and distribution of alcohol and nonalcohol beverages JSC Liberty Consumer 98.28% 98.25% 87.64% Georgia 74a Chavchavadze Ave.
Tbilisi 0162 Investments 2452006 JSC Intertour 99.94% 99.94% 99.94% Georgia 49a Chavchavadze Ave.
Tbilisi 0162 Travel agency 2931996 2542006 JSC Prime Fitness 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% Georgia 78 Chavchavadze Ave.
Tbilisi 0162 Fitness centre 732006 Global Coffee Georgia LLC 100.00%   Georgia 29a Gagarini Str.
Tbilisi Coffee distribution 26122016 1522017 New Coffee Company LLC 100.00%   Georgia Tskneti Highway No 1618 App.
Coffee distribution 2392009 1522017 JSC BG Financial 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% Georgia 79 David Agmashenebeli Ave.
0102 Tbilisi Investment 782015 JSC Galt and Taggart 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% Georgia 79 David Agmashenebeli Ave.
0102 Tbilisi Brokerage and asset management 19121995 28122004 Branch Office of BG Kapital JSC in
100.00% 100.00% 100.00% Azerbaijan 1C Mikayil Mushvig Kempinski Hotel Badamdar 6th floor
AZ1006 Baku
Galt and Taggart Holdings Limited 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% Cyprus Arch.
Makariou III 58 IRIS Tower 8th floor FlatOffice 702 P.
Nicosia
Investment 372006 BG Capital Belarus LLC 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% Belarus 5A3H K.
Minsk
Brokerage 1922008 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED BASIS OF PREPARATION CONTINUED SUBSIDIARIES AND ASSOCIATES 143 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
Financial
Statements
Proportion of voting rights and ordinary share capital held
December
December
December
Country of incorporation Address Industry Date of incorporation Date of acquisition Solo LLC 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% Georgia 79 David Agmashenebeli Ave.
Tbilisi
Trade 2242015 JSC United Securities Registrar of
100.00% 100.00% 100.00% Georgia 74a Chavchavadze Ave.
Tbilisi Registrar 2952006 JSC Express Technologies 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% Georgia 1b Budapest Str.
Tbilisi Investment 29102007 JSC Georgian Card 99.48% 99.47% 99.47% Georgia 221 Nutsubidze Str.
Tbilisi Card processing 1711997 20102004 Direct Debit Georgia LLC 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% Georgia Luxemburg 25 Tbilisi Electronic payment services LLC Didi Digomi Research Centre 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% Georgia 8082 David Agmashenebeli
Tbilisi
Communication services Metro Service  LLC 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% Georgia 74a Chavchavadze Ave Tbilisi Business servicing 1052006 Express Technologies CEE LLC b 100.00% 100.00% Hungary H1054 Budapest Szabadsagter 7.
Bank Centre Platina Tower 2nd floor Other financial service activities 532014 NA JSC Agron Group 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% Georgia 35 Kazbegi Str.
Tbilisi Agro Trade 3112014 Premium Compliance Advisory LLC 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% Georgia 35 Kazbegi Str.
Tbilisi Various 1722012 JSC Georgia Capital 100.00%   Georgia 35 Kazbegi Str.
Tbilisi Investment 22122017 JSC Credit info 21.08% 19.11% 16.63% Georgia 2 Tarkhnishvili Str.
Tbilisi Financial
1422005 1422005 5 Clinic hospital LLC 35.00% 35.00%  Georgia Temka XI MD Q.1 Tbilisi Healthcare 1691999 822016 JSC Tbilisi Stock Exchange 21.59% 21.59%  Georgia 72 Vazha Pshavela Ave.
Tbilisi Financial intermediation 852015 23122016 a Georgia Healthcare Group PLC and its subsidiaries are classified as disposal group held for sale. b Was liquidated in 2017.
BASIS OF PREPARATION CONTINUED SUBSIDIARIES AND ASSOCIATES 144 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC SUMMARY OF SELECTED SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES BASIS OF CONSOLIDATION The consolidated financial statements comprise the financial statements of the Group and its subsidiaries as at 31 December 2017.
The Group consolidates a subsidiary when it controls it.
Control is achieved when the Group is exposed or has rights to variable returns from its involvement with the investee and has the ability to affect those returns through its power over the investee.
Specifically the Group controls an investee if and only if the Group has power over the investee i. the ability to use its power over the investee to affect its returns.
When the Group has less than a majority of the voting or similar rights of an investee the Group considers all relevant facts and circumstances in assessing whether it has power over an investee including the contractual arrangement with the other vote holders of the investee rights arising from other contractual arrangements and the Groups voting rights and potential voting rights.
The Group reassesses whether or not it controls an investee if facts and circumstances indicate that there are changes to one or more of the three elements of control.
Consolidation of a subsidiary begins when the Group obtains control over the subsidiary and ceases when the Group loses control of the subsidiary.
Income and expenses of a subsidiary acquired or disposed of during the year are included in the statement of comprehensive income from the date the Group gains control until the date the Group ceases to control the subsidiary.
Profit or loss and each component of other comprehensive income are attributed to the equity holders of the parent of the Group and to the non controlling interests even if this results in the noncontrolling interests having a deficit balance.
When necessary adjustments are made to the financial statements of subsidiaries to bring their accounting policies into line with the Groups accounting policies.
All intraGroup assets and liabilities equity income expenses and cash flows relating to transactions between members of the Group are eliminated in full on consolidation.
A change in the ownership interest of a subsidiary without a loss of control is accounted for as an equity transaction.
If the Group loses control over a subsidiary it derecognises the assets including goodwill and liabilities of the subsidiary derecognises the carrying amount of any noncontrolling interests derecognises the cumulative translation differences recorded in equity recognises the fair value of the consideration received recognises the fair value of any investment retained recognises any surplus or deficit in profit or loss and reclassifies the parents share of components previously recognised in other comprehensive income to profit or loss or retained earnings as appropriate as would be required if the Group had directly disposed of the related assets or liabilities.
BUSINESS COMBINATIONS AND GOODWILL Business combinations are accounted for using the acquisition method.
The cost of an acquisition is measured as the aggregate of the consideration transferred measured at acquisition date fair value and the amount of any noncontrolling interests in the acquiree.
For each business combination the Group elects whether to measure the noncontrolling interests in the acquiree at fair value or at the proportionate share of the acquirees identifiable net assets and other components of noncontrolling interests at their acquisition date fair values.
Acquisitionrelated costs are expensed as incurred and included in administrative expenses.
When the Group acquires a business it assesses the financial assets and liabilities assumed for appropriate classification and designation in accordance with the contractual terms economic circumstances and pertinent conditions as at the acquisition date.
This includes the separation of embedded derivatives in host contracts by the acquiree.
If the business combination is achieved in stages any previously held equity interest is remeasured at its acquisition date fair value and any resulting gain or loss is recognised in profit or loss.
It is then considered in the determination of goodwill.
Any contingent consideration to be transferred by the acquirer will be recognised at fair value at the acquisition date.
Contingent consideration classified as an asset or liability that is a financial instrument and within the scope of IAS 39 Financial Instruments Recognition and Measurement is measured at fair value with changes in fair value recognised either in profit or loss or as a change to other comprehensive income.
If the contingent consideration is not within the scope of IAS 39 it is measured in accordance with the appropriate IFRS.
Contingent consideration that is classified as equity is not remeasured and subsequent settlement is accounted for within equity.
Goodwill is initially measured at cost being the excess of the aggregate of the consideration transferred and the amount recognised for noncontrolling interests and any previous interest held over the net identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed.
If the fair value of the net assets acquired is in excess of the aggregate consideration transferred the Group reassesses whether it has correctly identified all of the assets acquired and all of the liabilities assumed and reviews the procedures used to measure the amounts to be recognised at the acquisition date.
If the reassessment still results in an excess of the fair value of net assets acquired over the aggregate consideration transferred then the gain is recognised in profit or loss.
After initial recognition goodwill is measured at cost less any accumulated impairment losses.
For the purpose of impairment testing goodwill acquired in a business combination is from the acquisition date allocated to each of the Groups cashgenerating units that are expected to benefit from the combination irrespective of whether other assets or liabilities of the acquiree are assigned to those units.
Where goodwill has been allocated to a cashgenerating unit and part of the operation within that unit is disposed of the goodwill associated with the disposed operation is included in the carrying amount of the operation when determining the gain or loss on disposal.
Goodwill disposed in these circumstances is measured based on the relative values of the disposed operation and the portion of the cashgenerating unit retained.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 145 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
Financial
Statements
SUMMARY OF SELECTED SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED INVESTMENTS IN ASSOCIATES Associates are entities in which the Group generally has between 20% and 50% of the voting rights or is otherwise able to exercise significant influence but which it does not control or jointly control.
Investments in associates are accounted for under the equity method and are initially recognised at cost including goodwill.
Subsequent changes in the carrying value reflect the postacquisition changes in the Groups share of net assets of the associate.
The Groups share of its associates profits or losses is recognised in the consolidated income statement and its share of movements in reserves is recognised in other comprehensive income.
However when the Groups share of losses in an associate equals or exceeds its interest in the associate the Group does not recognise further losses unless the Group is obliged to make further payments to or on behalf of the associate.
Unrealised gains on transactions between the Group and its associates are eliminated to the extent of the Groups interest in the associates unrealised losses are also eliminated unless the transaction provides evidence of an impairment of the asset transferred.
When availableforsale investment becomes an associate the investment is remeasured to fair value and any gain or loss previously recognised in other comprehensive income is reclassified in profit or loss.
INVESTMENTS IN SUBSIDIARIES AND ASSOCIATES IN PARENT COMPANY FINANCIAL STATEMENTS For the purposes of parent company financial statements investments in subsidiaries and associates are accounted at cost.
Investments in subsidiaries and associates are accounted in accordance with IFRS 5 Noncurrent Assets Held for Sale and Discontinued Operations when they are classified as held for sale or distribution.
Dividends from a subsidiary or an associate are recognised in the parent company financial statements when the parents right to receive the dividend is established.
FAIR VALUE MEASUREMENT The Group measures financial instruments such as trading and investment securities derivatives and nonfinancial assets such as investment properties at fair value at each balance sheet date.
Also fair values of financial instruments measured at amortised cost are disclosed in Note 32.
Fair value is the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date.
The fair value measurement is based on the presumption that the transaction to sell the asset or transfer the liability takes place either in the principal market for the asset or liability or in the absence of a principal market in the most advantageous market for the asset or liability.
The principal or the most advantageous market must be accessible by the Group.
The fair value of an asset or a liability is measured using the assumptions that market participants would use when pricing the asset or liability assuming that market participants act in their economic best interest.
A fair value measurement of a nonfinancial asset takes into account a market participants ability to generate economic benefits by using the asset in its highest and best use or by selling it to another market participant that would use the asset in its highest and best use.
The Group uses valuation techniques that are appropriate in the circumstances and for which sufficient data are available to measure fair value maximising the use of relevant observable inputs and minimising the use of unobservable inputs.
All assets and liabilities for which fair value is measured or disclosed in the financial statements are categorised within the fair value hierarchy described as follows based on the lowest level input that is significant to the fair value measurement as a whole Level 1  Quoted unadjusted market prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
Level 2  Valuation techniques for which the lowest level input that is significant to the fair value measurement is directly or indirectly observable.
Level 3  Valuation techniques for which the lowest level input that is significant to the fair value measurement is unobservable.
For assets and liabilities that are recognised in the financial statements on a recurring basis the Group determines whether transfers have occurred between Levels in the hierarchy by reassessing categorisation based on the lowest level input that is significant to the fair value measurement as a whole at the end of each reporting period.
FINANCIAL ASSETS INITIAL RECOGNITION Financial assets in the scope of IAS 39 are classified as either financial assets at fair value through profit or loss loans and receivables or availablefor sale financial assets as appropriate.
The Group determines the classification of its financial assets upon initial recognition.
DATE OF RECOGNITION All regular way purchases and sales of financial assets are recognised on the trade date i. asset.
Regular way purchases or sales are purchases or sales of financial assets that require delivery of assets within the period generally established by regulation or convention in the marketplace.
LOANS AND RECEIVABLES Loans and receivables are nonderivative financial assets with fixed or determinable payments that are not quoted in an active market.
They are not entered into with the intention of immediate or shortterm resale and are not classified as trading securities or designated as investment securities.
Such assets are carried at amortised cost using the effective interest method.
This calculation includes all fees paid or received between parties to the contract that are an integral part of the effective interest rate transaction costs and all other premiums and discounts.
Gains and losses are recognised in the consolidated income statement when the loans and receivables are derecognised or impaired as well as through the amortisation process.
146 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC SUMMARY OF SELECTED SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED AVAILABLEFORSALE FINANCIAL ASSETS Availableforsale financial assets are those nonderivative financial assets that are designated as availableforsale or are not classified in any other categories.
After initial recognition availableforsale financial assets are measured at fair value with gains or losses being recognised in other comprehensive income until the investment is derecognised or until the investment is determined to be impaired at which time the cumulative gain or loss previously reported in other comprehensive income is reclassified to the consolidated income statement.
However interest calculated using the effective interest method is recognised in the consolidated income statement.
DERIVATIVE FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS In the normal course of business the Group enters into various derivative financial instruments including forwards swaps and options in foreign exchange and capital markets.
Such financial instruments are initially recognised in accordance with the policy for initial recognition of financial instruments and are subsequently measured at fair value.
The fair values are estimated based on quoted market prices or pricing models that take into account the current market and contractual prices of the underlying instruments and other factors.
Derivatives are carried as assets when their fair value is positive and as liabilities when it is negative.
Gains and losses resulting from these instruments are included in the consolidated income statement as net foreign currency gain loss.
MEASUREMENT OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS AT INITIAL RECOGNITION When financial instruments are recognised initially they are measured at fair value adjusted in the case of instruments not at fair value through profit or loss for directly attributable fees and costs.
The best evidence of the fair value of a financial instrument at initial recognition is normally the transaction price.
If the Group determines that the fair value at initial recognition differs from the transaction price then if the fair value is evidenced by a quoted price in an active market for an identical asset or liability i. and the transaction price.
After initial recognition the Group recognises that deferred difference as a gain or loss only when the inputs become observable or when the instrument is derecognised.
OFFSETTING
Financial assets and liabilities are offset and the net amount is reported in the consolidated statement of financial position when there is a legally enforceable right to set off the recognised amounts and there is an intention to settle on a net basis or to realise the asset and settle the liability simultaneously.
CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTS Cash and cash equivalents consist of cash on hand amounts due from central banks excluding obligatory reserves with central banks and amounts due from credit institutions that mature within 90 days of the date of origination and are free from contractual encumbrances and readily convertible to known amounts of cash.
BORROWINGS
Issued financial instruments or their components are classified as liabilities where the substance of the contractual arrangement results in the Group having an obligation either to deliver cash or another financial asset to the holder or to satisfy the obligation other than by the exchange of a fixed amount of cash or another financial asset for a fixed number of own equity instruments.
Such instruments include amounts due to credit institutions and amounts due to customers including promissory notes issued.
These are initially recognised at the fair value of the consideration received less directly attributable transaction costs.
After initial recognition borrowings are subsequently measured at amortised cost using the effective interest method.
Gains and losses are recognised in the consolidated income statement when the borrowings are derecognised as well as through the amortisation process.
If the Group purchases its own debt it is removed from the statement of financial position and the difference between the carrying amount of the liability and the consideration paid is recognised in the consolidated income statement.
Borrowing costs directly attributable to the acquisition construction or production of an asset that necessarily takes a substantial period of time to get ready for its intended use or sale are capitalised as part of the cost of the asset.
All other borrowing costs are expensed in the period in which they occur.
Borrowing costs consist of interest and other costs that an entity incurs in connection with the borrowing of funds.
SUBORDINATED DEBT Subordinated debt represents longterm funds attracted by the Bank on the international financial markets or domestic market.
The holders of subordinated debt would be subordinate to all other creditors to receive repayment of debt in case of the Banks liquidation.
Subordinated debt is carried at amortised cost.
LEASES
I.
FINANCE  GROUP AS LESSOR Leases that transfer substantially all the risks and benefits incidental to ownership of the lease item to the lessee are classified as finance leases.
The Group recognises finance lease receivables in the consolidated statement of financial position at a value equal to the net investment in the lease starting from the date of commencement of the lease term.
In calculating the present value of the minimum lease payments the discount factor used is the interest rate implicit in the lease.
Initial direct costs are included in the initial measurement of the finance lease receivables.
Lease payments received are apportioned between the finance income and the reduction of the outstanding lease receivable.
Finance income is based on a pattern reflecting a constant periodic rate of return on the net investment outstanding.
II.
OPERATING  GROUP AS LESSEE Leases of assets under which the risks and rewards of ownership are effectively retained by the lessor are classified as operating leases.
Lease payments under an operating lease are recognised as expenses on a straightline basis over the lease term and included in other administrative and operating expenses.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 147 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
Financial
Statements
SUMMARY OF SELECTED SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED
OPERATING  GROUP AS LESSOR The Group presents assets subject to operating leases in the consolidated statement of financial position according to the nature of the asset.
Lease income from operating leases is recognised in the consolidated income statement on a straightline basis over the lease term as other income.
The aggregate cost of incentives provided to lessees is recognised as a reduction of rental income over the lease term on a straightline basis.
Initial direct costs incurred specifically to earn revenues from an operating lease are added to the carrying amount of the leased asset.
IMPAIRMENT OF FINANCIAL ASSETS The Group assesses at each reporting date whether there is any objective evidence that a financial asset or group of financial assets is impaired.
A financial asset or a group of financial assets is deemed to be impaired if and only if there is objective evidence of impairment as a result of one or more events that has occurred after the initial recognition of the asset an incurred loss event and that loss event or events has an impact on the estimated future cash flows of the financial asset or the group of financial assets that can be reliably estimated.
Evidence of impairment may include indications that the borrower or a group of borrowers is experiencing significant financial difficulty default or delinquency in interest or principal payments the probability that they will enter bankruptcy or other financial reorganisation and where observable data indicate that there is a measurable decrease in the estimated future cash flows such as changes in arrears or economic conditions that correlate with defaults.
AMOUNTS DUE FROM CREDIT INSTITUTIONS LOANS TO CUSTOMERS AND FINANCE LEASE RECEIVABLES For amounts due from credit institutions loans to customers and finance lease receivables carried at amortised cost the Group first assesses whether objective evidence of impairment exists individually for financial assets that are individually significant or collectively for financial assets that are not individually significant.
If the Group determines that no objective evidence of impairment exists for an individually assessed financial asset whether significant or not it includes the asset in a group of financial assets with similar credit risks characteristics and collectively assesses them for impairment.
Assets that are individually assessed for impairment and for which an impairment loss is or continues to be recognised are not included in a collective assessment of impairment.
If there is objective evidence that an impairment loss has been incurred the amount of the loss is measured as the difference between the assets carrying amount and the present value of estimated future cash flows excluding future expected credit losses that have not yet been incurred.
The carrying amount of the asset is reduced through the use of an allowance account and the amount of the loss is recognised in the consolidated income statement.
Interest income continues to be accrued on the reduced carrying amount based on the original effective interest rate of the asset.
Loans together with the associated allowance are written off when there is no realistic prospect of future recovery and all collateral has been realised or has been transferred to the Group.
If in a subsequent year the amount of the estimated impairment loss increases or decreases because of an event occurring after the impairment was recognised the previously recognised impairment loss is increased or reduced by adjusting the allowance account.
If a future writeoff is later recovered the recovery is credited to the consolidated income statement in the respective impairment line with a negative sign as a reversal of impairment.
The present value of the estimated future cash flows is discounted at the financial assets original effective interest rate.
If a loan has a variable interest rate the discount rate for measuring any impairment loss is the current effective interest rate.
The calculation of the present value of the estimated future cash flows of a collateralised financial asset reflects the cash flows that may result from foreclosure less costs for obtaining and selling the collateral whether or not foreclosure is probable.
For the purpose of a collective evaluation of impairment financial assets are grouped on the basis of the Groups internal credit grading system that considers credit risk characteristics such as asset type industry geographical location collateral type pastdue status and other relevant factors.
Future cash flows on a group of financial assets that are collectively evaluated for impairment are estimated on the basis of historical loss experience for assets with credit risk characteristics similar to those in the group.
Historical loss experience is adjusted on the basis of current observable data to reflect the effects of current conditions that did not affect the years on which the historical loss experience is based and to remove the effects of conditions in the historical period that do not exist currently.
Estimates of changes in future cash flows reflect and are consistent with changes in related observable data from year to year such as changes in unemployment rates property prices commodity prices payment status or other factors that are indicative of incurred losses in the group or their magnitude.
The methodology and assumptions used for estimating future cash flows are reviewed regularly to reduce any differences between loss estimates and actual loss experience.
WRITEOFF OF LOANS TO CUSTOMERS All retail loans except mortgages are written off when overdue by more than 150 days.
Retail mortgage loans are written off when overdue by more than 365 days.
Write off of corporate loans overdue by more than 150 days is subject to management discretion and is evaluated on a case by case basis taking into account the current and expected positions of the loanborrower.
AVAILABLEFORSALE FINANCIAL ASSETS For availableforsale financial investments the Group assesses at each reporting date whether there is objective evidence that an investment or a group of investments is impaired.
In the case of equity investments classified as availableforsale objective evidence would include a significant or prolonged decline in the fair value of the investment below its cost.
Where there is evidence of impairment the cumulative loss  measured as the difference between the acquisition cost and the current fair value less any impairment loss on that investment previously recognised in the consolidated income statement  is reclassified from other comprehensive income to the consolidated income statement.
Impairment losses on equity investments are not reversed through the consolidated income statement increases in their fair value after impairment are recognised in other comprehensive income.
In the case of debt instruments classified as availableforsale impairment is assessed based on the same criteria as financial assets carried at amortised cost.
However the amount recorded for impairment is the cumulative loss measured as the difference between the amortised cost and the current fair value less any impairment loss on that investment previously recognised in the consolidated income statement.
Future interest income is based on the reduced carrying amount and is accrued using the rate of interest used to discount the future cash flows for the purpose of measuring the impairment loss.
The interest income is recorded in the consolidated income statement.
If in a subsequent year the fair value of a debt instrument increases and the increase can be objectively related to an event occurring after the impairment loss was recognised in the consolidated income statement the impairment loss is reversed through the consolidated income statement.
148 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC SUMMARY OF SELECTED SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED RENEGOTIATED LOANS A renegotiated loan is a loan for which the terms have been modified or for which additional collateral has been requested that was not contemplated in the original contract in response to a customers financial difficulties.
The contractual terms of a loan may be modified for a number of reasons including changing market conditions customer retention and other factors not related to the current or potential credit deterioration of a customer.
When the contractual payment terms of a loan are modified because we have significant concerns about the borrowers ability to meet contractual payments when due these loans are classified as renegotiated loans.
Indicators of financial difficulties include defaults on covenants significant arrears for 30 days or more in a threemonth period or concerns raised by the Credit Risk Department.
Typical key features of terms and conditions granted through renegotiation to avoid default include special interest rates postponement of interest or amortisation payments modification of the schedule of repayments or amendment of loan maturity.
Once the terms have been renegotiated any impairment is measured using the original EIR as calculated before the modification of terms.
For the purposes of measuring credit losses within the collective loan loss assessment these loans are not segregated from other loans which have not been renegotiated.
Management regularly reviews all loans to ensure that all criteria according to the loan agreement continue to be met and that future payments are likely to occur.
Loans subject to individual impairment assessment whose terms have been renegotiated are subject to ongoing review to determine whether they remain impaired.
Once a loan in the retail book is identified as renegotiated it remains within this category until maturity or derecognition from the balance sheet unless the customer is able to cure the break by making six regular payments on time.
Corporate loans retain renegotiated loan designation until maturity or derecognition unless borrowers experience significant credit improvement during the remaining life of the loan.
Any new loans that arise following derecognition events will continue to be disclosed as renegotiated loans and are assessed for impairment as above.
DERECOGNITION OF FINANCIAL ASSETS AND LIABILITIES FINANCIAL ASSETS A financial asset or where applicable a part of a financial asset or part of a group of similar financial assets is derecognised where the rights to receive cash flows from the asset have expired or the Group has transferred its rights to receive cash flows from the asset or retained the right to receive cash flows from the asset but has assumed an obligation to pay them in full without material delay to a third party under a passthrough arrangement and the Group either a has transferred substantially all the risks and rewards of the asset or b has neither transferred nor retained substantially all the risks and rewards of the asset but has transferred control of the asset.
Where the Group has transferred its rights to receive cash flows from an asset and has neither transferred nor retained substantially all the risks and rewards of the asset nor transferred control of the asset the asset is recognised to the extent of the Groups continuing involvement in the asset.
Continuing involvement that takes the form of a guarantee over the transferred asset is measured at the lower of the original carrying amount of the asset and the maximum amount of consideration that the Group could be required to repay.
Where continuing involvement takes the form of a written andor purchased option including a cashsettled option or similar provision on the transferred asset the extent of the Groups continuing involvement is the amount of the transferred asset that the Group may repurchase except that in the case of a written put option including a cashsettled option or similar provision on an asset measured at fair value the extent of the Groups continuing involvement is limited to the lower of the fair value of the transferred asset and the option exercise price.
FINANCIAL LIABILITIES A financial liability is derecognised when the obligation under the liability is discharged or cancelled or expires.
Where an existing financial liability is replaced by another from the same lender on substantially different terms or the terms of an existing liability are substantially modified such an exchange or modification is treated as a derecognition of the original liability and the recognition of a new liability and the difference in the respective carrying amounts is recognised in the consolidated income statement.
FINANCIAL GUARANTEES In the ordinary course of business the Group gives financial guarantees consisting of letters of credit guarantees and acceptances.
Financial guarantees are initially recognised in the consolidated financial statements at fair value in other liabilities being the premium received.
Subsequent to initial recognition the Groups liability under each guarantee is measured at the higher of the amortised premium and the best estimate of expenditure required to settle any financial obligation arising as a result of the guarantee.
Any increase in the liability relating to financial guarantees is taken to the consolidated income statement.
The premium received is recognised in the consolidated income statement on a straightline basis over the life of the guarantee.
INVENTORIES
Inventories are valued at the lower of cost and net realisable value.
Net realisable value is the estimated selling price in the ordinary course of business less estimated costs of completion and the estimated costs necessary to make the sale.
The cost of inventory includes expenditure incurred in acquiring inventory and bringing it to its existing location and condition including borrowing costs.
The cost of inventory is determined on a weighted average basis for beverages and in healthcare and on a firstinfirstout basis FIFO in the pharma segment.
The cost of inventory in the real estate segment is determined with reference to the specific costs incurred on the property sold and allocated nonspecific costs based on the relative size of the property sold.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 149 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
Financial
Statements
SUMMARY OF SELECTED SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED NONCURRENT ASSETS HELD FOR SALE AND DISCONTINUED OPERATIONS The Group classifies noncurrent assets and disposal groups as held for sale if their carrying amounts will be recovered principally through a sale transaction rather than through continuing use.
Noncurrent assets and disposal groups classified as held for sale are measured at the lower of their carrying amount and fair value less costs to sell.
Costs to sell are the incremental costs directly attributable to the disposal of an asset disposal group excluding finance costs and income tax expense.
The criteria for held for sale classification is regarded as met only when the sale is highly probable and the asset or disposal group is available for immediate sale in its present condition.
Actions required to complete the sale should indicate that it is unlikely that significant changes to the sale will be made or that the decision to sell will be withdrawn.
Management must be committed to the plan to sell the asset and the sale expected to be completed within one year from the date of the classification.
Property plant and equipment and intangible assets are not depreciated or amortised once classified as held for sale.
Assets and liabilities classified as held for sale are presented separately from other assets and liabilities in the statement of financial position.
A disposal group qualifies as discontinued operation if it is a component of an entity that either has been disposed of or is classified as held for sale and represents a separate major line of business or geographical area of operations is part of a single coordinated plan to dispose of a separate major line of business or geographical area of operations or is a subsidiary acquired exclusively with a view to resale.
Discontinued operations are excluded from the results of continuing operations and are presented as a single amount as profit or loss after tax from discontinued operations in the statement of profit or loss.
Net cash flows attributable to the operating investing and financing activities of discontinued operations are presented separately in the statement of cash flows.
TAXATION
The current income tax expense is calculated in accordance with the regulations in force in the respective territories in which BGEO and its subsidiaries operate.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are calculated in respect of temporary differences using the liability method.
Deferred income taxes are provided for all temporary differences arising between the tax bases of assets and liabilities and their carrying values for financial reporting purposes except where the deferred income tax arises from the initial recognition of goodwill or of an asset or liability in a transaction that is not a business combination and at the time of the transaction affects neither the accounting profit nor taxable profit or loss.
A deferred tax asset is recorded only to the extent that it is probable that taxable profit will be available against which the deductible temporary differences can be utilised.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured at tax rates that are expected to apply to the period when the asset is realised or the liability is settled based on tax rates that have been enacted or substantively enacted at the reporting date.
Deferred tax liabilities are provided on temporary differences arising on investments in subsidiaries associates and joint ventures except where the timing of the reversal of the temporary difference can be controlled and it is probable that the temporary difference will not reverse in the foreseeable future.
Georgia and Belarus also have various operating taxes that are assessed on the Groups activities.
These taxes are included as a component of other operating expenses.
INVESTMENT PROPERTIES Investment property is land or building or a part of a building held to earn rental income or for capital appreciation and which is not used by the Group or held for sale in the ordinary course of business.
Property that is being constructed or developed or redeveloped for future use as an investment property is also classified as an investment property.
Investment property is initially recognised at cost including transaction costs and subsequently remeasured at fair value reflecting market conditions at the end of the reporting period.
Fair value of the Groups investment property is determined on the basis of various sources including reports of independent appraisers who hold a recognised and relevant professional qualifications and who have recent experience in valuation of property of similar location and category.
Investment property that is being redeveloped for continuing use as investment property or for which the market has become less active continues to be measured at fair value.
Earned rental income is recorded in the income statement within net other banking income for Banking Business companies and within real estate revenue for Investment Business companies.
Gains and losses resulting from changes in the fair value of investment property are recorded in the income statement within net other banking income for Banking Business companies and within real estate revenue or gross other investment profit for Investment Business companies depending on whether the gains derive from active property development or passive appreciation respectively.
Subsequent expenditure is capitalised only when it is probable that future economic benefits associated with it will flow to the Group and the cost can be measured reliably.
All other repairs and maintenance costs are expensed when incurred.
If an investment property becomes owner occupied it is reclassified to property and equipment and its carrying amount at the date of reclassification becomes its deemed cost to be subsequently depreciated.
150 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC SUMMARY OF SELECTED SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED PROPERTY AND EQUIPMENT Property and equipment except for infrastructure assets is carried at cost less accumulated depreciation and any accumulated impairment in value.
Such cost includes the cost of replacing part of the equipment when that cost is incurred if the recognition criteria are met.
Infrastructure assets are measured at fair value less depreciation and impairment charged subsequent to the date of the revaluation.
Infrastructure assets comprise a network of systems consisting of raw water aqueducts mains and sewers impounding and pumped raw water storage reservoirs and sludge pipelines.
Investment expenditure on infrastructure assets relating to increase in capacity or enhancements of the network and asset replacements to maintain the operating capability of the network is treated as an addition and initially recorded at cost whilst repair and maintenance expenditure which does not enhance the asset base is charged as an operating cost.
The carrying values of property and equipment are reviewed for impairment when events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable.
Following initial recognition at cost infrastructure assets are carried at a revalued amount which is the fair value at the date of the revaluation less any subsequent accumulated depreciation and subsequent accumulated impairment losses.
Valuations are performed once every three years unless there is a sign of material change in fair values on the market.
Accumulated depreciation as at the revaluation date is eliminated against the gross carrying amount of the asset and the net amount is restated to the revalued amount of the asset.
Any revaluation surplus is credited to the revaluation reserve for property and equipment included in other comprehensive income except to the extent that it reverses a revaluation decrease of the same asset previously recognised in the consolidated income statement in which case the increase is recognised in the consolidated income statement.
A revaluation deficit is recognised in the consolidated income statement except that a deficit directly offsetting a previous surplus on the same asset is directly offset against the surplus in the revaluation reserve for property and equipment.
An annual transfer from the revaluation reserve for property and equipment to retained earnings is made for the difference between depreciation based on the revalued carrying amount of the assets and depreciation based on the assets original cost.
Additionally accumulated depreciation as at the revaluation date is eliminated against the gross carrying amount of the asset and the net amount is restated to the revalued amount of the asset.
Upon disposal any revaluation reserve relating to the particular asset being sold is transferred to retained earnings.
Depreciation of an asset commences from the date the asset is ready and available for use.
Depreciation is calculated on a straightline basis over the following estimated useful lives
Office buildings and service centres Up to 100 Infrastructure assets 1040 Factory and equipment 730 Furniture and fixtures 10 Computers and equipment 510 Motor vehicles 5 The assets residual values useful lives and methods are reviewed and adjusted as appropriate at each financial yearend.
Assets under construction are stated at cost and are not depreciated until the time they are available for use and reclassified to respective group of property and equipment.
Leasehold improvements are depreciated over the life of the related leased asset or the expected lease term if lower.
Costs related to repairs and renewals are charged when incurred and included in other operating expenses unless they qualify for capitalization.
GOODWILL IMPAIRMENT Goodwill is reviewed for impairment annually or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may be impaired.
For the purpose of impairment testing goodwill acquired in a business combination is from the acquisition date allocated to each of the Groups cashgenerating units or groups of cashgenerating units that are expected to benefit from the synergies of the combination irrespective of whether other assets or liabilities of the Group are assigned to those units or groups of units.
Each unit or group of units to which the goodwill is so allocated represents the lowest level within the Group at which the goodwill is monitored for internal management purposes and is not larger than a segment as defined in IFRS 8 Operating Segments.
Impairment is determined by assessing the recoverable amount of the cashgenerating unit group of cashgenerating units to which the goodwill relates.
Where the recoverable amount of the cashgenerating unit group of cashgenerating units is less than the carrying amount an impairment loss is recognised.
Impairment losses cannot be reversed in future periods.
INTANGIBLE ASSETS The Groups intangible assets include computer software and licenses.
Intangible assets acquired separately are measured on initial recognition at cost.
The cost of intangible assets acquired in a business combination is fair value as at the date of acquisition.
Following initial recognition intangible assets are carried at cost less any accumulated amortisation and any accumulated impairment losses.
The economic lives of intangible assets are assessed to be finite and amortised over four to ten years and assessed for impairment whenever there is an indication that the intangible asset may be impaired.
Amortisation periods and methods for intangible assets are reviewed at least at each financial yearend.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 151 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
Financial
Statements
SUMMARY OF SELECTED SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED INTANGIBLE ASSETS CONTINUED Costs associated with maintaining computer software programmes are recorded as an expense as incurred.
Software development costs relating to the design and testing of new or substantially improved software are recognised as intangible assets only when the Group can demonstrate the technical feasibility of completing the software so that it will be available for use or sale its intention to complete the asset and its ability to use or sell the asset how the asset will generate future economic benefits the availability of resources to complete the asset and the ability to measure reliably the expenditure during the development.
Other software development costs are recognised as an expense as incurred.
INSURANCE AND REINSURANCE RECEIVABLES Insurance and reinsurance receivables are recognised based upon insurance policy terms and measured at cost.
The carrying value of insurance and reinsurance receivables is reviewed for impairment whenever events or circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable with any impairment loss recorded in the consolidated statement of income.
Reinsurance receivables primarily include balances due from both insurance and reinsurance companies for ceded insurance liabilities.
Premiums on reinsurance assumed are recognised as revenue in the same manner as they would be if the reinsurance were considered direct business taking into account the product classification of the reinsured business.
Amounts due to reinsurers are estimated in a manner consistent with the associated reinsured policies and in accordance with the reinsurance contract.
Premiums ceded and claims reimbursed are presented on a gross basis.
An impairment review is performed on all reinsurance assets when an indication of impairment occurs.
Reinsurance receivables are impaired only if there is objective evidence that the Group may not receive all amounts due to it under the terms of the contract and that this can be measured reliably.
INSURANCE LIABILITIES GENERAL INSURANCE LIABILITIES General insurance contract liabilities are based on the estimated ultimate cost of all claims incurred but not settled at the reporting date whether reported or not together with related claims handling costs and reduction for the expected value of salvage and other recoveries.
Significant delays can be experienced in the notification and settlement of certain types of general insurance claims particularly in respect of liability business environmental and pollution exposures  therefore the ultimate cost of which cannot be known with certainty at the reporting date.
PROVISION FOR UNEARNED PREMIUMS The proportion of written premiums gross of commission payable to intermediaries attributable to subsequent periods is deferred as unearned premium.
The change in the provision for unearned premium is taken to the consolidated income statement in order that revenue is recognised over the period of risk or for annuities the amount of expected future benefit payments.
LIABILITY ADEQUACY TEST At each reporting date a liability adequacy test is performed to ensure the adequacy of unearned premiums net of related deferred acquisition costs.
In performing the test current best estimates of future contractual cash flows claims handling and policy administration expenses as well as investment income from assets backing such liabilities are used.
Any inadequacy is immediately charged to the consolidated income statement by establishing an unexpired risk provision.
PROVISIONS
Provisions are recognised when the Group has a present legal or constructive obligation as a result of past events and it is probable that an outflow of resources embodying economic benefits will be required to settle the obligation and a reliable estimate of the amount of obligation can be made.
Provisions for the risk of incurring losses on offbalance sheet commitments are estimated regularly based on the past history of actual losses incurred on these commitments.
RETIREMENT AND OTHER EMPLOYEE BENEFIT OBLIGATIONS The Group provides management and employees of the Group with private pension plans.
These are defined contribution pension plans covering substantially all fulltime employees of the Group.
The Group collects contributions in the size of 2% of fulltime employees salaries of which 1% is deducted from the salaries and the other 1% is additionally paid by the Group.
When an employee reaches pension age aggregated contributions plus any earnings earned on the employees behalf are paid to the employee according to the schedule agreed with the employee.
Aggregated amounts are distributed during the period when the employee will receive accumulated contributions.
Respective pension benefit obligations are recorded within other liabilities Note 16.
Respective pension costs are recognised in consolidated income statement as salaries and other employee benefits.
SHAREBASED PAYMENT TRANSACTIONS Employees including senior executives of the Group receive sharebased remuneration whereby they render services and receive equity instruments of the Group equitysettled transactions as consideration for the services provided.
EQUITYSETTLED TRANSACTIONS The cost of equity settled transactions with employees is measured by reference to the fair value at the date on which they are granted.
The cost of equitysettled transactions is recognised together with the corresponding increase in equity over the period in which the performance andor service conditions are fulfilled ending on the date when the relevant employee is fully entitled to the award the vesting date.
The cumulative expense recognised for equitysettled transactions at each reporting date until the vesting date reflects the extent to which the vesting period has expired and the Groups best estimate of the number of equity instruments that will ultimately vest.
The consolidated income statement charge or credit for the period represents the movement in cumulative expense recognised as at the beginning and end of that period.
152 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC SUMMARY OF SELECTED SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED SHAREBASED PAYMENT TRANSACTIONS CONTINUED No expense is recognised for the awards that do not ultimately vest except for the awards where vesting is conditional upon market conditions a condition linked to the price of BGEOs shares which are treated as vesting irrespective of whether the market condition is satisfied provided that all other performance conditions are satisfied.
Where the terms of an equitysettled award are modified the minimum expense is recognised as if the terms had not been modified.
An additional expense is recognised for any modification which increases the total fair value of the sharebased payment arrangement or is otherwise beneficial to the employee as measured at the date of the modification.
Where an equitysettled award is cancelled it is treated as if it has vested on the date of cancellation and any expense not yet recognised for the award is recognised immediately.
However if a new award is substituted for the cancelled award and designated as the replacement award on the date that it is granted the cancelled and the new awards are treated as if they were a modification of the original award as described in the previous paragraph.
SHARE CAPITAL SHARE CAPITAL Ordinary shares are classified as equity.
External costs directly attributable to the issue of new shares other than on a business combination are shown as a deduction from the proceeds in equity.
Any excess of the fair value of consideration received over the par value of shares issued is recognised as additional paidin capital.
TREASURY SHARES Where BGEO or its subsidiaries purchase BGEOs shares the consideration paid including any attributable transaction costs net of income taxes is deducted from total equity as treasury shares until they are cancelled or reissued.
Where such shares are subsequently sold or reissued any consideration received is included in equity.
Treasury shares are stated at par value with adjustment of premiums against additional paidin capital.
DIVIDENDS
Dividends are recognised as a liability and deducted from equity at the reporting date only if they are declared before or on the reporting date.
Dividends are disclosed when they are proposed before the reporting date or proposed or declared after the reporting date but before the consolidated financial statements are authorised for issue.
All expenses associated with dividend distribution are added to the dividend amount and recorded directly through equity.
CONTINGENCIES
Contingent liabilities are not recognised in the consolidated statement of financial position but are disclosed unless the possibility of any outflow in settlement is remote.
A contingent asset is not recognised in the consolidated statement of financial position but disclosed when an inflow of economic benefits is probable.
INCOME AND EXPENSE RECOGNITION Revenue is recognised to the extent that it is probable that the economic benefits will flow to the Group and the revenue can be reliably measured.
The following specific recognition criteria must also be met before revenue and expense are recognised INTEREST AND SIMILAR INCOME AND EXPENSE For all financial instruments measured at amortised cost and interest bearing securities classified as trading or availableforsale interest income or expense is recorded at the effective interest rate which is the rate that exactly discounts estimated future cash payments or receipts through the expected life of the financial instrument or a shorter period where appropriate to the net carrying amount of the financial asset or financial liability.
The calculation takes into account all contractual terms of the financial instrument for example prepayment options and includes any fees or incremental costs that are directly attributable to the instrument and that are an integral part of the effective interest rate but not future credit losses.
The carrying amount of the financial asset or financial liability is adjusted if the Group revises its estimates of payments or receipts.
The adjusted carrying amount is calculated based on the original effective interest rate and the change in carrying amount is recorded as interest income or expense.
Once the recorded value of a financial asset or a group of similar financial assets has been reduced due to an impairment loss interest income continues to be recognised using the original effective interest rate applied to the new carrying amount.
FEE AND COMMISSION INCOME The Group earns fee and commission income from a diverse range of services it provides to its customers.
Fee and commission income is recognised when the Group satisfies a performance obligation.
Fee income can be divided into the following categories FEE INCOME EARNED FROM SERVICES THAT ARE PROVIDED OVER A CERTAIN PERIOD OF TIME Fees earned for the provision of services over a period of time are accrued over that period.
These fees include commission incomes and asset management custody package services on bundled products and other management and advisory fees.
Loan commitment fees for loans that are likely to be drawn down and other credit related fees are deferred together with any incremental costs and recognised as an adjustment to the effective interest rate on the loan.
CUSTOMER LOYALTY PROGRAMME Customer loyalty programme points accumulated in the business are treated as deferred revenue and recognised in revenues gradually as they are earned.
The Group recognises gross revenue earned from customer loyalty programme when the performance obligation is satisfied i. the customer redeems the points or the points expire where the Group acts as a principal.
Conversely the Group measures its revenue as the net amount retained on its account representing the difference between the consideration allocated to the award credits and the amount payable to the third party for supplying the awards as soon as the award credits are granted where the Group acts as an agent.
At each reporting date the Group estimates a portion of accumulated points that is expected to be utilised by customers based on statistical data.
These points are treated as liability in the statement of financial position and are only recognised in revenue when points are earned or expired.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 153 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
Financial
Statements
SUMMARY OF SELECTED SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED INCOME AND EXPENSE RECOGNITION CONTINUED FEE INCOME FROM PROVIDING TRANSACTION SERVICES Fees arising from negotiating or participating in the negotiation of a transaction for a third party  such as the arrangement of the acquisition of shares or other securities or the purchase or sale of businesses  are recognised upon satisfaction of performance obligation on completion of the underlying transaction.
Fees or components of fees that are linked to a certain performance are recognised after fulfilling the corresponding criteria.
DIVIDEND INCOME Dividend revenue is recognised when the Groups right to receive the payment is established.
INSURANCE PREMIUM INCOME For the property and casualty and health insurance business premiums written are recognised at policy inception and earned on a pro rata basis over the term of the related policy coverage.
Estimates of premiums written as at the reporting date but not yet received are assessed based on estimates from underwriting or past experience and are included in premiums earned.
INSURANCE CLAIMS General insurance claims incurred include all claim losses occurring during the year whether reported or not including the related handling costs and reduction for the value of salvage and other recoveries and any adjustments to claims outstanding from previous years.
HEALTHCARE REVENUE DISCONTINUED OPERATIONS The Group recognises healthcare revenue when the Group satisfies a performance obligation at an amount that reflects the consideration to which the Group expects to be entitled in exchange for transferring the goods and services to a customer.
Healthcare revenue is recognised net of corrections and rebates that occasionally arise as a result of reconciliation of detailed bills with counterparties mostly with the state to recognise revenue to the extent that it is highly probable that a significant reversal in the amount of cumulative revenue recognised will not occur when the uncertainty associated with the corrections and rebates is subsequently resolved.
Healthcare revenue comprises the fair value of the consideration received or receivable for providing inpatient and outpatient services and includes the following components Healthcare revenue from insurance companies  The Group recognises revenue from the individuals who are insured by various insurance companies based on the completion of the actual medical service and agreedupon terms between the counterparties.
Healthcare revenue from state  The Group recognises the revenue from the individuals who are insured under the state programmes based on the completion of the actual medical service and the agreedupon terms between the counterparties.
Healthcare revenue from outofpocket and other  The Group recognises the revenue from noninsured individuals based on the completion of the actual medical service and approved prices by the Group.
Sales are usually in cash or by credit card.
Other revenue from medical services includes revenue from municipalities and other hospitals with which the Group has contractual relationships.
Sales of services are recognised in the accounting period in which the services are rendered calculated according to contractual tariffs.
Revenue from pharma comprises the fair value of the consideration received or receivable both from wholesale and retail sales and drug exchange transactions.
The pharma business sometimes receives drugs in exchange for sale of drugs from other wholesalers.
The consideration received is assessed with reference to its actual wholesale price which is deemed fair value of consideration received.
UTILITY AND ENERGY REVENUE The Group recognises revenue from utility when the Group satisfies a performance obligation at an amount that reflects the consideration to which the Group expects to be entitled in exchange for transferring the goods and services to a customer.
The following specific recognition criteria must be met before revenue is recognised Revenue from water supply  includes amounts billed to customers based on the metered or estimated usage of water by legal entities and by application of the relevant tariff for services set per unit of water supplied.
Meters are read on a cyclical basis and the Group recognises revenue for unbilled amounts based on estimated usage from the last billing through to the end of the financial year.
Revenue from water supply to population  includes amounts billed on a monthly basis to residential customers with meter based on the metered usage of water and by application of the relevant tariff for services set per unit of water supplied or based on the number of individuals person registered by respective city municipality per each residential address without meter by application of the relevant tariff set per capita per month for the general population.
Revenue from connection and water meter installation  includes nonrefundable amounts billed upfront for connecting customers to the water system and providing them with access to the water supply.
Revenue from connection and water meter installation is recognised over the time in line with the satisfaction of performance obligation over the life of water meters.
Revenue from electric power sales is recognised on the basis of metered electric power transferred.
GROSS REAL ESTATE PROFIT Gross real estate profit comprises revenue from sale of developed real estate property and revaluation gains on such developed properties.
Revenue from sale of developed real estate property is recognised over the time based on the progress towards complete satisfaction of a performance obligation using input method proportion of costs incurred up to date to total expected project cost.
Percentage of completion calculated based on total costs of the building is applied to apartment selling price to recognise revenue from apartment sales.
Payment arrangements of the sale of developed real estate property usually include advance payment of part of the transaction price and progress payments by the customer during the construction such payments are recognised as deferred income.
Significant financing component is usually immaterial.
GROSS OTHER INVESTMENT PROFIT Gross other investment profit comprises revenue from sale of other finished goods and revaluation of other investment properties that were not developed by the Group.
154 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC SUMMARY OF SELECTED SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED INCOME AND EXPENSE RECOGNITION CONTINUED Revenue from the sale of other finished goods is recognised the Group satisfies the performance obligation i. passed to the buyer usually on delivery of the goods.
For finished goods sold on a consignment basis revenue is recognised when the goods are transferred to the endcustomer or on expiration of a specified period.
Revenue recognised in connection with the sale of finished goods reflects an adjustment for the consideration payable to the customer cash amounts that the Group pays or expects to pay to a customer.
EBITDA
The Group separately presents EBITDA on the face of income statement for the Investment Business.
EBITDA is defined as earnings before interest taxes depreciation and amortisation as well as cost of credit risk and net nonrecurring items for the Investment Business.
NONRECURRING ITEMS The Group separately classifies and discloses those income and expenses that are nonrecurring by nature.
The Group defines nonrecurring income or expense as an income or expense triggered by or originated from an economic business or financial event that is not inherent to the regular and ordinary business course of the Group and is caused by uncertain or unpredictable external factors that cannot be reasonably expected to occur in the future and thus they should not be taken into account when making projections of future results.
FUNCTIONAL REPORTING CURRENCIES AND FOREIGN CURRENCY TRANSLATION The consolidated financial statements are presented in Georgian Lari which is the Groups presentation currency.
BGEOs and the Banks functional currency is Georgian Lari.
Each entity in the Group determines its own functional currency and items included in the financial statements of each entity are measured using that functional currency.
Transactions in foreign currencies are initially recorded in the functional currency converted at the rate of exchange ruling at the date of the transaction.
Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are retranslated into functional currency at the functional currency rate of exchange ruling at the reporting date.
Gains and losses resulting from the translation of foreign currency transactions are recognised in the consolidated income statement as gains less losses from foreign currencies  translation differences.
Nonmonetary items that are measured in terms of historical cost in a foreign currency are translated using the exchange rates as at the dates of the initial transactions.
Nonmonetary items measured at fair value in a foreign currency are translated using the exchange rates at the date when the fair value was determined.
When a gain or loss on a nonmonetary item is recognised in other comprehensive income any exchange component of that gain or loss is recognised in other comprehensive income.
Conversely when a gain or loss on a nonmonetary item is recognised in profit or loss any exchange component of that gain or loss is recognised in profit or loss.
Differences between the contractual exchange rate of a certain transaction and the NBG exchange rate on the date of the transaction are included in gains less losses from foreign currencies dealing.
The official NBG exchange rates at 31 December 2017 31 December 2016 and 31 December 2015 were GEL to GBP GEL to USD GEL to EUR Lari to BYN 31 December 2017 3.5005 2.5922 3.1044 1.3083 31 December 2016 3.2579 2.6468 2.7940 1.3532 31 December 2015 3.5492 2.3949 2.6169 1.2904 As at the reporting date the assets and liabilities of the entities whose functional currency is different from the presentation currency of the Group are translated into Georgian Lari at the rate of exchange ruling at the reporting date and their income statements are translated at the weighted average exchange rates for the year.
The exchange differences arising on the translation are taken to other comprehensive income.
On disposal of a subsidiary or an associate whose functional currency is different from the presentation currency of the Group the deferred cumulative amount recognised in other comprehensive income relating to that particular entity is recognised in the consolidated income statement.
Any goodwill arising on the acquisition of a foreign operation and any fair value adjustments to the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities arising on the acquisition are treated as assets and liabilities of the foreign operations and translated at the rate at the reporting date.
ADOPTION OF NEW OR REVISED STANDARDS AND INTERPRETATIONS AND VOLUNTARY CHANGES IN ACCOUNTING POLICIES The nature and the effect of these changes are disclosed below.
IFRS 15 REVENUE FROM CONTRACTS WITH CUSTOMERS In May 2014 the IASB issued IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers effective for the periods beginning on 1 January 2018 with early adoption permitted.
IFRS 15 defines principles for recognising revenue and is applicable to all contracts with customers.
However interest and fee income integral to financial instruments and leases continue to fall outside the scope of IFRS 15 and are regulated by the other applicable standards.
Under IFRS 15 revenue is recognised at an amount that reflects the consideration to which an entity expects to be entitled in exchange for transferring goods or services to a customer.
The standard also specifies a comprehensive set of disclosure requirements regarding the nature extent and timing as well as any uncertainty of revenue and corresponding cash flows with customers.
IFRS 15 can be adopted using either a full retrospective or a modified retrospective approach.
The Group early adopted the new revenue recognition standard effective from 1 January 2017 using the modified retrospective approach.
The impact of early adoption was GEL 29050 decrease to retained earnings with a corresponding increase of other liabilities inventories income tax liabilities and accounts receivables and other loans.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 155 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
Financial
Statements
SUMMARY OF SELECTED SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED ADOPTION OF NEW OR REVISED STANDARDS AND INTERPRETATIONS AND VOLUNTARY CHANGES IN ACCOUNTING POLICIES
The Groups revenue streams affected by transition to IFRS 15 included fee and commission income from credit card transaction fee and commission income under certain transactions involving loyalty programme real estate revenue and connection fees from utility services.
For these revenue streams part of the revenue was deferred under IFRS 15 requirements until satisfaction of the respective performance obligations which are expected over the anticipated term of credit cards issued settlement or expiration of bonus points under loyalty programme residential construction completion progress and estimated connection service periods The details of adjustments to opening retained earnings and other account 31Dec16 Effect of IFRS 15 adoption 01Jan17
Accounts receivable and other loans 128506 2041 126465 Inventories 188344 30578 157766 Other 12637326  12637326 TOTAL ASSETS 12954176 32619 12921557
Accruals and deferred income 130319 1658 128661 Income tax liabilities 27718 1911 25807 Other 10407926  10407926 TOTAL LIABILITIES 10565963 3569 10562394
Retained earnings 1872496 29050 1843446 Other 515717  515717 TOTAL EQUITY 2388213 29050 2359163 TOTAL LIABILITIES AND EQUITY 12954176 32619 12921557 In accordance with new revenue standard requirements the disclosure of the impact of adoption on the Groups consolidated income statement and financial position for the year ended 31 December 2017 were as follows Extract from Consolidated Income Statement for the year ended 31 December 2017 As reported Amount without IFRS 15 adoption Effect of change Fee and commission income 190392 195324 4932 Fee and commission expense 60342 60342 NET FEE AND COMMISSION INCOME 130050 134982 4932 Real estate revenue 120155 43699 76456 Cost of real estate 85765 16274 69491 GROSS REAL ESTATE PROFIT 34390 27425 6965 Gross other investment profit 30630 38106 7476 Other 885561 885561 REVENUE 1080631 1086074 5443 Administrative expenses 136177 142108 5931 Other 276868 276868 OPERATING INCOME BEFORE COST OF CREDIT RISKEBITDA 667586 667098 488 PROFIT FOR THE YEAR FROM CONTINUING OPERATIONS 403506 403018 488 PROFIT FROM DISCONTINUED OPERATIONS 59943 59658 285 Healthcare and pharma revenue 691971 691686 285 Cost of healthcare and pharma services 491733 491733 GROSS HEALTHCARE AND PHARMA PROFIT 200238 199953 285 Other 140295 140295 PROFIT FOR THE YEAR 463449 462676 773 156 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC SUMMARY OF SELECTED SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED ADOPTION OF NEW OR REVISED STANDARDS AND INTERPRETATIONS AND VOLUNTARY CHANGES IN ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Extract from Consolidated Statement of Financial Position as at 31 December 2017 As reported Amount without IFRS 15 adoption Effect of change
Accounts receivable and other loans 38944 40737 1793 Inventories 100194 199792 99598 Assets of disposal group held for sale Accounts receivable and other loans 125393 126148 755 Other 14904138 14904138 TOTAL ASSETS 15168669 15270815 102146
Accruals and deferred income 132669 204627 71958 Income tax liabilities 20959 22870 1911 Other 12282671 12282671 TOTAL LIABILITIES 12436299 12510168 73869
Retained earnings 2180415 2208692 28277 Other 551955 551955 TOTAL EQUITY 2732370 2760647 28277 TOTAL LIABILITIES AND EQUITY 15168669 15270815 102146 REVENUE FROM CUSTOMERS The Group has recognised the following amounts relating to revenue from contracts with customers in the income statement Total revenue from contracts with customers from continuing operations 448123 Total revenue from contracts with customers from discontinued operations 691971 TOTAL REVENUE FROM CONTRACTS WITH CUSTOMERS 1140094 CONTRACT ASSETS AND LIABILITIES The Group has recognised the following revenuerelated contract assets and liabilities 31Dec17 01Jan17 Accruals and deferred income 89052 85568 Accounts receivable and other loans i 116669 103326 Includes GEL 82169 as at 31 December 2017 and GEL 71343 as at 1 January 2017 presented in disposal group held for sale. all of its three main segments.
Accounts receivable are recognised when the right to consideration becomes unconditional.
Deferred revenue is recognised as revenue as we perform under the contract.
The Group does not adjust the promised amount of consideration for the effects of a significant financing component if the Group expects at contract inception that the period between when the Group transfers a promised good or service to a customer and when the customer pays for that good or service will be one year or less.
The Group recognised GEL 56804 revenue in the current reporting period that relates to carriedforward contract liabilities and is included in the deferred income.
Disaggregation of revenue is presented in the following Notes net fee and commission income Note 23 Gross real estate profit Note 25 Gross utility profit Note 26 and Gross other investment profit Note 27.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 157 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
Financial
Statements
SUMMARY OF SELECTED SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED CONTRACT ASSETS AND LIABILITIES CONTINUED TRANSACTION PRICE ALLOCATED TO THE REMAINING PERFORMANCE OBLIGATIONS The following table includes revenue expected to be recognised in the future related to performance obligations that are unsatisfied at the reporting date In the year ending 31 December 2018 In the year ending 31 December 2019 In the year ending 31 December 2020 In 3 to 5 years In 5 to 10 years Total Revenue expected to be recognised on active contracts with customers from continuing operations 67657 19489 6219 10359 3485 107209 Revenue expected to be recognised on active contracts with customers from discontinued operations 906 1042 1046 3100 5000 11094 The Group applies the practical expedient in paragraph 121 of IFRS 15 and does not disclose information about remaining performance obligations that have original expected durations of one year or less.
AMENDMENTS TO IAS 7 STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS DISCLOSURE INITIATIVE The amendments require entities to provide disclosure of changes in their liabilities arising from financing activities including both changes arising from cash flows and noncash changes such as foreign exchange gains or losses.
The Group has provided the information for the current period in Note 18.
AMENDMENTS TO IAS 12 INCOME TAXES RECOGNITION OF DEFERRED TAX ASSETS FOR UNREALISED LOSSES The amendments clarify that an entity needs to consider whether tax law restricts the sources of taxable profits against which it may make deductions on the reversal of deductible temporary difference related to unrealised losses.
Furthermore the amendments provide guidance on how an entity should determine future taxable profits and explain the circumstances in which taxable profit may include the recovery of some assets for more than their carrying amount.
The Group evaluated the impact and concluded that the amendment has no effect on the Groups financial position and performance.
AMENDMENTS TO IFRS 12 DISCLOSURE OF INTERESTS IN OTHER ENTITIES CLARIFICATION OF THE SCOPE OF DISCLOSURE
The amendments clarify that certain disclosure requirements in IFRS 12 apply to an entitys interest in a subsidiary a joint venture or an associate or a portion of its interest in a joint venture or an associate that is classified as held for sale or included in a disposal group.
These amendments did not affect Groups consolidated financial statements.
IAS 16 PROPERTY  PLANT AND EQUIPMENT In 2017 the Group changed its accounting policy with respect to office buildings and service centres.
The Group now applies the cost model where assets are carried at cost less accumulated depreciation and any accumulated impairment.
Prior to this change in policy the Group applied the revaluation model where office buildings and service centres were carried at the fair value at the date of the revaluation less any subsequent accumulated depreciation and subsequent accumulated impairment losses.
The Group believes that cost model provides more reliable and more meaningful presentation for investors because 1 it enhances comparability for the investors as the application of the cost model is a market practice across the banking industry and 2 it more closely aligns the accounting with the business model around these asset categories.
The cost model has been applied by restating each of the affected consolidated financial statement line items for the prior periods as follows Impact on equity increasedecrease in equity 31Dec16 31Dec15 01Jan15
Property and equipment 35278 36648 46653
Income tax liabilities 73 5102 6456
Retained earnings 6449 5785 857 Other reserves 27870 24543 37217 Noncontrolling interests 886 1218 2123 NET IMPACT ON EQUITY 35205 31546 40197 158 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC SUMMARY OF SELECTED SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED CONTRACT ASSETS AND LIABILITIES CONTINUED Impact on other comprehensive income 2016 2015 OTHER COMPREHENSIVE INCOME TO BE RECLASSIFIED TO PROFIT OR LOSS IN SUBSEQUENT PERIODS Gain loss from currency translation differences 735 2782 Income tax impact 82 993 OTHER COMPREHENSIVE INCOME NOT TO BE RECLASSIFIED TO PROFIT OR LOSS IN SUBSEQUENT PERIODS Revaluation of property and equipment 2105 7223 Income tax impact 4947 361 NET IMPACT ON OTHER COMPREHENSIVE INCOME 3659 8651 The change in accounting policy of office buildings and service centres did not have a material impact on the Groups consolidated income statement for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015.
CHANGE IN SEGMENT REPORTING At 31 December 2017 and in light of the proposed demerger refer to Note 1 for detail the Group changed the composition and presentation of its reportable segments.
In line with IFRS 8 requirements the change was applied retrospectively for comparable periods.
The change primarily related to the presentation of JSC Insurance Company Aldagi the Groups property and casualty insurance business which was reclassified from the banking business to the investment business segment.
The Group believes that the revised composition and presentation of its reportable segments provides more relevant information to the financial statement users as it better aligns financial reporting with managements views of operations within the Group and decisionmaking about resource allocations.
RECLASSIFICATIONS
As at 31 December 2017 the Group changed the composition of its reportable segments and corresponding reclassifications have also been made to the consolidated income statement without any impact on total balances on the consolidated statement of financial position.
The following reclassifications were made to year ended 31 December 2016 and 31 December 2015 consolidated income statement to conform to the year ended 31 December 2017 presentation requirements.
Management believes that current period presentation provides a better view of the consolidated income statement of the Group Consolidated income statement for the year ended 31 December 2016 As previously reported Reclassification As reclassified Banking interest income 927316 1287 926029 Interest income from investment business 2458 1287 3745 Fee and commission income 170063 482 169581 Fee and commission expense 47150 46 47104 Real estate revenue 99549 34 99583 Banking depreciation and amortisation 37981 774 37207 Depreciation and amortisation of investment business 9288 774 10062 Net banking foreign currency gain 82909 6571 89480 Net other banking income 11773 1106 10667 Net foreign currency gain loss from investment business 3437 6571 3134 Gross other investment profit 19780 1508 21288 Consolidated income statement for the year ended 31 December 2015 As previously reported Reclassification As reclassified Banking interest income 859778 1038 858740 Interest income from investment business 461 1038 1499 Banking interest expense 358388 71 358317 Interest expense from investment business 226 71 297 Fee and commission income 158158 394 157764 Fee and commission expense 39752 84 39668 Real estate revenue 53853 29 53882 Banking depreciation and amortisation 34199 834 33365 Depreciation and amortisation of investment business 1559 834 2393 Net banking foreign currency gain 76926 993 75933 Net other banking income 18528 993 17535 Net foreign currency gain loss from investment business 7164 993 8157 Gross other investment profit 17107 1274 18381 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 159 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
Financial
Statements
SUMMARY OF SELECTED SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED STANDARDS ISSUED BUT NOT YET EFFECTIVE Up to the date of approval of the consolidated financial statements certain new standards interpretations and amendments to existing standards have been published that are not yet effective for the current reporting period and which the Group has not early adopted.
Such standards that are expected to have an impact on the Group or the impacts of which are currently being assessed are as follows IFRS 9 FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
In July 2014 the IASB issued the final version of IFRS 9 Financial Instruments that replaces IAS 39 Financial Instruments Recognition and Measurement and all previous versions of IFRS 9 for annual periods on or after 1 January 2018 with early application permitted.
In 2016 the Group set up a multidisciplinary implementation team with members from Risk Finance and Operations teams and hired an external consultant to initiate the implementation of IFRS 9.
The project was sponsored by the Chief Risk and Chief Financial Officers who provided regular updates to the Groups Management Board.
Implementation consisted of six key phases the initial assessment and analysis design build testing parallel running and go live.
Currently the Group has completed the IFRS 9 implementation programme including building of the new expected credit loss model and approving the IFRS 9 accounting policy across the Group.
The Group will adopt the new standard from the effective date by recognising the estimated impact from adoption in opening retained earnings on 1 January 2018 and as allowed by IFRS 9 will not restate comparative information.
Based on the data as at 31 December 2017 the Group estimates that the adoption of IFRS 9 will result in a pretax decrease in shareholders equity as at 1 January 2018 of approximately GEL 45144.
IFRS 9 is not expected to have an impact on regulatory capital and capital adequacy ratios regulatory capital requirements in Georgia are set by the National Bank of Georgia and are applied to the Bank on a standalone basis.
A CLASSIFICATION AND MEASUREMENT From a classification and measurement perspective the new standard will require all financial assets except equity instruments and derivatives to be assessed based on a combination of the entitys business model for managing the assets and the instruments contractual cash flow characteristics.
The IAS 39 measurement categories will be replaced by Fair value through profit or loss FVPL fair value through other comprehensive income FVOCI with recycling to profit or loss upon disposal for debt instruments fair value through other comprehensive income FVOCI without recycling to profit or loss for equity instruments and amortised cost.
IFRS 9 will allow entities to continue to irrevocably designate instruments that qualify for amortised cost or fair value through OCI instruments as FVPL if doing so eliminates or significantly reduces a measurement or recognition inconsistency.
Equity instruments that are not held for trading may be irrevocably designated as FVOCI with no subsequent reclassification of gains or losses to the income statement.
The accounting treatment for financial liabilities will largely be the same as the requirements of IAS 39 except for the treatment of gains or losses arising from an entitys credit risk relating to liabilities designated at FVPL.
Such movements will be presented in OCI with no subsequent reclassification to the income statement unless an accounting mismatch in profit or loss would arise.
The Group expects to continue measuring at fair value all financial assets currently held at fair value.
Investments in debt securities and equity shares currently held as availableforsale with gains and losses recorded in other comprehensive income will continue to be measured at fair value through other comprehensive income.
The vast majority of loans are expected to satisfy the SPPI criterion and will continue to be measured at amortised cost.
B IMPAIRMENT OF FINANCIAL ASSETS IFRS 9 requires the Group to record an allowance for expected credit losses ECL on all of its debt financial assets at amortised cost or FVOCI as well as loan commitments and financial guarantees.
The allowance is based on the ECL associated with the probability of default in the next 12 months unless there has been a significant increase in credit risk since origination in which case the allowance is based on the ECL over the life of the asset.
If the financial asset meets the definition of purchased or originated credit impaired the allowance is based on the change in the lifetime
The Group has determined that the allowance for impairment will increase by GEL 31197.
The Group will apply the simplified approach for trade and other receivables and record lifetime expected losses on all trade and other receivables.
The Group has determined that due to the unsecured nature of its trade and other receivables the loss allowance will increase by GEL 13627 of which GEL 6962 relates to assets of disposal group held for sale.
In summary the pretax impact of IFRS 9 adoption is expected to be as follows Pretax impact on equity increasedecrease as of 31 December 2017 Adjustment Amount
Cash and cash equivalents B 80 Amounts due from credit institutions B 598 Loans to customers and finance lease receivables B 30519 Accounts receivable and other loans B 6665 Assets of disposal group held for sale B 6962 TOTAL ASSETS 44824
Other liabilities  provisions B 320 NET IMPACT ON EQUITY INCLUDING Retained earnings B 48270 Other components of equity B 3255 Noncontrolling interests B 129 TOTAL EQUITY 45144 160 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC SUMMARY OF SELECTED SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED STANDARDS ISSUED BUT NOT YET EFFECTIVE CONTINUED IFRS 2 CLASSIFICATION AND MEASUREMENT OF SHAREBASED PAYMENT TRANSACTIONS  AMENDMENTS TO IFRS 2 The IASB issued amendments to IFRS 2 Sharebased Payments that address three main areas the effects of vesting conditions on the measurement of a cashsettled sharebased payment transaction the classification of a sharebased payment transaction with net settlement features for withholding tax obligations and accounting where a modification to the terms and conditions of a sharebased payment transaction changes its classification from cashsettled to equitysettled.
On adoption entities are required to apply the amendments without restating prior periods but retrospective application is permitted if elected for all three amendments and other criteria are met.
The amendments are effective for annual periods beginning on or after 1 January 2018 with early application permitted.
The Group is currently evaluating the impact.
IFRS 16 LEASES IFRS 16 was issued in January 2016 and it replaces IAS 17 Leases IFRIC 4 Determining whether an Arrangement contains a Lease SIC15 Operating LeasesIncentives and SIC27 Evaluating the Substance of Transactions Involving the Legal Form of a Lease.
IFRS 16 sets out the principles for the recognition measurement presentation and disclosure of leases and requires lessees to account for all leases under a single onbalance sheet model similar to the accounting for finance leases under IAS 17.
The standard includes two recognition exemptions for lessees  leases of lowvalue assets and shortterm leases i. leases with a lease term of 12 months or less.
At the commencement date of a lease a lessee will recognise a liability to make lease payments i. the lease liability and an asset representing the right to use the underlying asset during the lease term i. asset.
Lessees will be required to separately recognise the interest expense on the lease liability and the depreciation expense on the rightofuse asset.
Lessees will also be required to remeasure the lease liability upon the occurrence of certain events e. future lease payments resulting from a change in an index or rate used to determine those payments.
The lessee will generally recognise the amount of the remeasurement of the lease liability as an adjustment to the rightofuse asset.
Lessor accounting under IFRS 16 is substantially unchanged from todays accounting under IAS 17.
Lessors will continue to classify all leases using the same classification principle as in IAS 17 and distinguish between two types of leases operating and finance leases.
IFRS 16 also requires lessees and lessors to make more extensive disclosures than under IAS 17.
IFRS 16 is effective for annual periods beginning on or after 1 January 2019.
Early application is permitted but not before an entity applies IFRS 15.
A lessee can choose to apply the standard using either a full retrospective or a modified retrospective approach.
The standards transition provisions permit certain reliefs.
In 2018 the Group will continue to assess the potential effect of IFRS 16 on its consolidated financial statements.
TRANSFERS OF INVESTMENT PROPERTY  AMENDMENTS TO IAS 40 The amendments clarify when an entity should transfer property including property under construction or development into or out of investment property.
The amendments state that a change in use occurs when the property meets or ceases to meet the definition of investment property and there is evidence of the change in use.
A mere change in managements intentions for the use of a property does not provide evidence of a change in use.
Entities should apply the amendments prospectively to changes in use that occur on or after the beginning of the annual reporting period in which the entity first applies the amendments.
An entity should reassess the classification of property held at that date and if applicable reclassify property to reflect the conditions that exist at that date.
Retrospective application in accordance with IAS 8 is only permitted if it is possible without the use of hindsight.
Amendment is effective for annual periods beginning on or after 1 January 2018.
The Group is currently assessing the impact.
IFRS 17 INSURANCE CONTRACTS In May 2017 the IASB issued IFRS 17 Insurance Contracts a new accounting standard for insurance contracts covering recognition and measurement presentation and disclosure.
Once effective it will replace IFRS 4 Insurance Contracts that was issued in 2005.
In contrast to the requirements in IFRS 4 IFRS 17 provides a comprehensive model for insurance contracts covering all relevant accounting aspects.
IFRS 17 is effective for reporting periods starting on or after 1 January 2021 with comparative figures required.
Early application is permitted using either a full retrospective or a modified retrospective approach provided the entity also applies IFRS 9 and IFRS 15 on or before the date it first applies IFRS 17.
The Group is currently evaluating the impact.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 161 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
Financial
Statements
SUMMARY OF SELECTED SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED ANNUAL IMPROVEMENTS 20142016 CYCLE IAS 28 INVESTMENTS IN ASSOCIATES AND JOINT VENTURES  CLARIFICATION THAT MEASURING INVESTEES AT FAIR VALUE THROUGH PROFIT OR LOSS IS AN INVESTMENTBYINVESTMENT CHOICE The amendments clarify that An entity that is a venture capital organisation or other qualifying entity may elect at initial recognition on an investmentbyinvestment basis to measure its investments in associates and joint ventures at fair value through profit or loss.
If an entity that is not itself an investment entity has an interest in an associate or joint venture that is an investment entity the entity may when applying the equity method elect to retain the fair value measurement applied by that investment entity associate or joint venture to the investment entity associates or joint ventures interests in subsidiaries.
This election is made separately for each investment entity associate or joint venture at the later of the date on which a the investment entity associate or joint venture is initially recognised b the associate or joint venture becomes an investment entity and c the investment entity associate or joint venture first becomes a parent.
The amendments should be applied retrospectively and are effective from 1 January 2018.
The Group does not expect a material effect from application of these amendments.
IFRIC INTERPRETATION 22 FOREIGN CURRENCY TRANSACTIONS AND ADVANCE CONSIDERATION The Interpretation clarifies that in determining the spot exchange rate to use on initial recognition of the related asset expense or income or part of it on the derecognition of a nonmonetary asset or nonmonetary liability relating to advance consideration the date of the transaction is the date on which an entity initially recognises the nonmonetary asset or nonmonetary liability arising from the advance consideration.
The Interpretation is effective for annual periods beginning on or after 1 January 2018.
Since the Groups current practice is in line with the Interpretation the Group does not expect any effect on its consolidated financial statements.
IFRIC INTERPRETATION 23 UNCERTAINTY OVER INCOME TAX TREATMENT The Interpretation addresses the accounting for income taxes when tax treatments involve uncertainty that affects the application of IAS 12 and does not apply to taxes or levies outside the scope of IAS 12 nor does it specifically include requirements relating to interest and penalties associated with uncertain tax treatments.
An entity must determine whether to consider each uncertain tax treatment separately or together with one or more other uncertain tax treatments.
The approach that better predicts the resolution of the uncertainty should be followed.
The Interpretation also addresses the assumptions an entity makes about the examination of tax treatments by taxation authorities as well as how it considers changes in facts and circumstances.
The interpretation is effective for annual reporting periods beginning on or after 1 January 2019 but certain transition reliefs are available.
The Group is currently assessing the impact.
SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING JUDGEMENTS AND ESTIMATES In the process of applying the Groups accounting policies the Board of Directors and management use their judgement and make estimates in determining the amounts recognised in the consolidated financial statements.
The most significant judgements and estimates are as follows FAIR VALUE OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS Where the fair values of financial assets and financial liabilities recorded in the consolidated statement of financial position cannot be derived from active markets they are determined using a variety of valuation techniques that include the use of mathematical models.
The input to these models is taken from observable markets where possible but where this is not feasible a degree of judgement is required in establishing fair values Note 32.
MEASUREMENT OF FAIR VALUE OF INVESTMENT PROPERTIES AND PROPERTY AND EQUIPMENT The fair value of investment properties and infrastructure assets included in property and equipment is determined by independent professionally qualified appraisers.
Fair value is determined using a combination of the internal capitalisation method also known as discounted future cash flow method and the sales comparison method.
The Group performs valuation of its investment properties and infrastructure assets included in property and equipment with a sufficient regularity to ensure that the carrying amount does not differ materially from that which would be determined using fair value at the end of the reporting period.
Results of this valuation are presented in Notes 12 and 13 while valuation inputs and techniques are presented in Note 32.
The Groups properties are specialised in nature and spread across different parts of the country.
While the secondary market in Georgia provides adequate market information for fair value measurements for small and mediumsized properties valuation of large and unique properties involves application of various observable and unobservable inputs to determine adjustments to the available comparable sale prices.
These estimates and assumptions are based on the best available information however actual results could be different.
162 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING JUDGEMENTS AND ESTIMATES CONTINUED ALLOWANCE FOR IMPAIRMENT OF LOANS AND FINANCE LEASE RECEIVABLES The Group regularly reviews its loans and finance lease receivables to assess impairment.
The Group uses its judgement to estimate the amount of any impairment loss in cases where a borrower is in financial difficulties and there are few available sources of historical data relating to similar borrowers.
Similarly the Group estimates changes in future cash flows based on the observable data indicating that there has been an adverse change in the payment status of borrowers in a group or national or local economic conditions that correlate with defaults on assets in the group.
Management uses estimates based on historical loss experience for assets with credit risk characteristics and objective evidence of impairment similar to those in the group of loans and finance lease receivables.
The Group uses its judgement to adjust observable data for a group of loans and finance lease receivables to reflect current circumstances.
The Group considers the fair value of collateral when estimating the amount of impairment loss for collateralised loans and finance lease receivables.
Management monitors market value of collateral on a regular basis.
Management uses its expert judgement or independent opinion to adjust the fair value to reflect current conditions.
The amount and type of collateral required depends on the assessment of credit risk of the counterparty.
Information about allowance for impairment of loans and finance lease receivables is presented in Note 11.
BUSINESS COMBINATIONS ACQUISITIONS IN YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 JSC ABC PHARMACY On 6 January 2017 JSC GEPHA GEPHA a whollyowned subsidiary of GHG classified as a disposal group held for sale acquired 67% of LTD ABC Pharmacy ABC a pharmaceutical company operating in Georgia from individual investors.
The fair values of aggregate identifiable assets and liabilities of ABC as at the date of acquisition was Fair value recognised on acquisition Cash and cash equivalents 4184 Accounts receivable Prepayments 1413 Inventories 44572 Property and equipment 10986 Intangible assets 322 Other assets 1316 Accounts payable 27525 Accruals and deferred income 1861 Other liabilities 1122 TOTAL IDENTIFIABLE NET ASSETS 40335 Noncontrolling interests Goodwill arising on business combination 46796 CONSIDERATION GIVEN The fair value of the receivables from sales of pharmaceuticals amounted to GEL 8050.
The gross amount of receivables is GEL 9452.
GEL 1402 of the receivables has been impaired.
Consideration for the acquisition was GEL 73819 of which a GEL 10347 was fair value of 33% equity shares of JSC GPC transferred to former shareholders of ABC b GEL 32501 was cash payment and c GEL 30971 holdback amount at fair value.
As part of the acquisition the selling shareholders have a put option to sell their 33% share in the combined pharma business to GHG.
The Group recognised a GEL 55 million liability to purchase the remaining 33% share and the noncontrolling interest arising from the consolidated pharma business of GHG was fully derecognised.
The difference between the redemption liability and noncontrolling interest was recognised in equity through other reserves.
The redemption liability is carried at amortised cost and interest is unwound on each reporting date.
The net cash outflow on acquisition was as follows 31 December Cash paid 32501 Cash acquired with the subsidiary 4184 NET CASH OUTFLOW 28317 The Group decided to increase its presence and investment in the pharmaceuticals segment through the acquisition of ABC.
Management considers that the deal will have a positive impact on the value of the Group.
Since the acquisition ABC has recorded GEL 139812 and GEL 15354 of revenue and profit respectively.
As the acquisition took place on 6 January 2017 it would not have material effect on the Groups profit if the combination had taken place at the beginning of the period.
Since GHG is classified as a disposal group held for sale the acquisition did not have an impact on the Groups revenues from continued operations.
The primary factor that contributed to the cost of the business combination that resulted in the recognition of goodwill on acquisition is the positive synergy that is expected to be brought into the Groups operations.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 163 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
Financial
Statements
BUSINESS COMBINATIONS CONTINUED ACQUISITIONS IN YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 CONTINUED LLC NEW COFFEE GEORGIA On 15 February 2017 JSC BGEO Investments BGEO Investment a 100% owned subsidiary of the Group acquired 100% of the shares of LLC New Coffee Georgia New Coffee Georgia a coffee distribution company which has exclusive rights to import and distribute Lavazza coffee in Georgia from individual investors.
The fair values of aggregate identifiable assets and liabilities of New Coffee Georgia as at the acquisition date were Fair value recognised on acquisition Cash and cash equivalents 208 Accounts receivable Property and equipment 895 Intangible assets arising on acquisition 1120 Other assets 776 Accounts payable 67 Amounts due to credit institutions 651 TOTAL IDENTIFIABLE NET ASSETS 2881 Goodwill arising on business combination 2836 CONSIDERATION GIVEN The fair value of the receivables amounted to GEL 600.
The gross amount of receivables is GEL 764.
GEL 164 of the receivables was impaired as at the acquisition date.
Consideration comprised GEL 5717 which consists of cash payment of GEL 5304 and a holdback amount with a fair value of GEL 413.
The net cash outflow on acquisition was as follows 31 December 2017 Cash paid 5304 Cash acquired with the subsidiary 208 NET CASH OUTFLOW 5096 The Group decided to increase its presence in the beverage market by acquiring New Coffee Georgia.
Management considers that the purchase will have a positive impact on the value of the Groups beverage business.
Since the acquisition New Coffee Georgia recorded GEL 2405 and GEL 20 of revenue and loss respectively.
If the combination had taken place at the beginning of the period the Group would have recorded GEL 1081042 and GEL 463512 of revenue and profit respectively.
164 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC BUSINESS COMBINATIONS CONTINUED ACQUISITIONS IN YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 CONTINUED LLC BK CONSTRUCTION On 2 June 2017 JSC m Real Estate m a 100% owned subsidiary of the Group acquired 100% of the shares of LLC BK Construction BK Construction a construction company operating in Georgia from individual investors.
The fair values of aggregate identifiable assets and liabilities of BK Construction as at the date of acquisition were Fair value recognised on acquisition Property and equipment 2446 TOTAL IDENTIFIABLE NET ASSETS 2446 Gain on bargain purchase 260 CONSIDERATION GIVEN Consideration was paid in cash.
The net cash outflow on acquisition was as follows 31 December Cash paid 2186 Cash acquired with the subsidiary NET CASH OUTFLOW 2186 The Group decided to vertically integrate real estate operations by acquiring LLC BK Construction.
Management considers that the deal will have a positive impact on the value of the Group.
Acquisition of BK did not have material impact on revenue and profit of the Group.
LLC KASS 1 On 26 December 2017 m Hospitality LLC m a 100% owned subsidiary of the Group signed a share purchase agreement with JSC Kass Group to acquire 50% of the shares of LLC Kass 1 Kass.
Kass is currently developing a boutique hotel in Tbilisi aiming to complete the construction in 2019.
Further m made an additional investment in Kass of the amount of GEL 4921 resulting in increase in equity interests in Kass to 60%.
The provisional fair values of aggregate identifiable assets and liabilities of Kass as at the date of acquisition were Provisional fair value recognised on acquisition Accounts receivable 14 Property and equipment 20409 Prepayments 803 Accounts payable 103 TOTAL IDENTIFIABLE NET ASSETS 21124 Noncontrolling interests 10562 CONSIDERATION GIVEN Consideration given comprises of cash payment.
The net cash outflow on acquisition was as follows 31 December Cash paid 10562 Cash acquired with the subsidiary NET CASH OUTFLOW 10562 The acquisition is in line with m s strategy to pursue hotel development and capitalise on growing tourist activities in Georgia.
Management considers that the deal will have a positive impact on the value of the Group.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 165 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
Financial
Statements
BUSINESS COMBINATIONS CONTINUED ACQUISITIONS IN YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 CONTINUED The net assets presented above are estimated provisionally as at the acquisition date.
The Group continues a thorough examination of these net assets and if identified adjustments will be made to the net assets and amount of the goodwill during the 12month period from the acquisition date as allowed by IFRS 3 Business Combinations.
As the acquisition took place on 26 December 2017 it did not have material effect on Groups revenue and profit.
If the combination had taken place at the beginning of the period it would not have material effect on the Groups revenue profit.
ACQUISITION OF HEALTHCARE SUBSIDIARIES BY GHG CLASSIFIED AS A DISPOSAL GROUP HELD FOR SALE During the year ended 31 December 2017 JSC Medical Corporation EVEX Acquirer made the following acquisitions On 8 November 2017 acquired 100% of the shares of LLC Medical Center Almedi MCA a healthcare company operating in Georgia from individual investors and signed a contract On 25 December 2017 acquired 98% of the shares of JSC Policlinic Vere Vere a healthcare company operating in Georgia from individual investors and signed a contract On 20 July 2017 acquired 100% of the shares of LLC New Clinic NC a healthcare company operating in Georgia from individual investors.
On 20 July 2017 acquired 100% of the shares of LLC Aliance Med AM a healthcare company operating in Georgia from individual investors.
The fair values of aggregate identifiable assets and liabilities of the acquirees as at the date of acquisition were Fair value recognised on acquisition Cash and cash equivalents 4 Accounts receivable Property and equipment 3034 Other assets 4 Amounts due to credit institutions 103 Accounts payable 301 Accruals and deferred income 500 Income tax liabilities 18 Other liabilities 167 TOTAL IDENTIFIABLE NET ASSETS 2413 Goodwill arising on business combination 10506 CONSIDERATION GIVEN The fair value of the receivables amounted to GEL 460.
The gross amount of receivables is GEL 460.
Consideration given comprises of cash payment.
The net cash outflow on acquisition was as follows 31 December 2017 Cash paid 12919 Cash acquired with the subsidiary 4 NET CASH OUTFLOW 12915 Since the acquisition acquirees have recorded GEL 3159 and GEL 1260 of revenue and profit respectively.
Since GHG is classified as a disposal group held for sale the acquisitions did not have an impact on the Groups revenues from continuing operations.
The net assets presented above are estimated provisionally as at the acquisition date.
The Group continues a thorough examination of these net assets and if identified adjustments will be made to the net assets and amount of the goodwill during the 12month period from the acquisition date as allowed by IFRS 3 Business Combinations.
DISCONTINUED OPERATIONS AND ASSETS AND LIABILITIES OF DISPOSAL GROUP HELD FOR SALE ASSETS AND LIABILITIES OF DISPOSAL GROUP HELD FOR SALE AND DISCONTINUED OPERATIONS Given the expectation in line with Georgia Capitals strategy that it is highly probable the Group will own less than a 50% stake in its healthcare business consisting of a Georgia Healthcare Group GHG at the end 2018 the Group classified GHG as a disposal group held for sale and its results of operations are reported under discontinued operations line as a single amount in the consolidated income statement.
The Group determined that GHG met the criteria to be classified as held for sale as at 31 December 2017 due to the following reasons GHG was available for immediate sale and could be sold to the buyer in its current condition The actions to complete the sale were initiated and expected to be completed within one year from the date of initial classification Management was committed to the plan to sell At 31 December 2017 GHG was classified as a disposal group held for sale and as a discontinued operation.
166 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC DISCONTINUED OPERATIONS AND ASSETS AND LIABILITIES OF DISPOSAL GROUP HELD FOR SALE CONTINUED ASSETS AND LIABILITIES OF DISPOSAL GROUP HELD FOR SALE AND DISCONTINUED OPERATIONS CONTINUED Below are presented income statement line items of the Group attributable to discontinued operations for the years ended 31 December 2017 31 December 2016 and 31 December 2015tel Net insurance premiums earned 50367 57052 55029 Net insurance claims incurred 35153 45564 42881 GROSS INSURANCE PROFIT 15214 11488 12148 Healthcare and pharma revenue 691971 362586 183993 Cost of healthcare and pharma services 479185 227724 103055 GROSS HEALTHCARE AND PHARMA PROFIT 212786 134862 80938 GROSS REAL ESTATE PROFIT 729 1316 556 Gross other profit 20377 927 3188 REVENUE 249106 148593 96830 Salaries and other employee benefits 75429 39749 26573 Administrative expenses 50783 27894 10352 Other operating expenses 10945 963 709 OPERATING EXPENSES 137157 68606 37634 EBITDA 111949 79987 59196 Profit from associates 376 254 Depreciation and amortisation 25795 19577 12666 Net foreign currency gain loss 5907 6810 6513 Interest income 2111 1841 2677 Interest expense 27543 15576 22899 NET OPERATING INCOME BEFORE NONRECURRING ITEMS AND IMPAIRMENT 55191 40119 19795 Impairment charge on insurance premiums receivable accounts receivable other assets and provisions 4175 2332 3448 Net nonrecurring items 4779 1157 1676 PROFIT BEFORE INCOME TAX EXPENSE 46237 38944 14671 Income tax expense benefit 387 21156 9 PROFIT FOR THE YEAR 45850 60100 14680 The difference between profit for the year and profit from discontinued operations presented in consolidated income statements is due to intra Group eliminations in amount of GEL 14093 net expenses for the year ended 31 December 2017 2016 GEL 1811 net income 2015 GEL 12091 net expenses.
Below are presented other comprehensive statement line items of the Group attributable to discontinued operations for the years ended 31 December 2017 31 December 2016 and 31 December 2015tel OTHER COMPREHENSIVE LOSS INCOME Other comprehensive loss income not to be reclassified to profit or loss in subsequent periods Revaluation of property and equipment 4564 20804 NET OTHER COMPREHENSIVE LOSS INCOME NOT TO BE RECLASSIFIED TO PROFIT OR LOSS IN SUBSEQUENT PERIODS 4564 20804 OTHER COMPREHENSIVE LOSS INCOME FOR THE YEAR FROM DISCONTINUED OPERATIONS NOT TO BE RECLASSIFIED TO PROFIT OR LOSS IN SUBSEQUENT PERIODS 4564 20804 TOTAL COMPREHENSIVE INCOME FOR THE YEAR FROM DISCONTINUED OPERATIONS 41286 80904 14680 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 167 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
Financial
Statements
DISCONTINUED OPERATIONS AND ASSETS AND LIABILITIES OF DISPOSAL GROUP HELD FOR SALE CONTINUED ASSETS AND LIABILITIES OF DISPOSAL GROUP HELD FOR SALE AND DISCONTINUED OPERATIONS CONTINUED Assets and liabilities of disposal group held for sale as at 31 December 2017 are presented below Cash and cash equivalents 48840 Amounts due from credit institutions 14768 Investment securities 1263 Accounts receivable and other loans 125393 Insurance premiums receivable 21257 Prepayments 30354 Inventories 118811 Property and equipment 643076 Goodwill 114798 Intangible assets 28466 Income tax assets 2026 Other assets 17308 TOTAL ASSETS 1166360 Amounts due to credit institutions 267010 Debt securities issued 93493 Accruals and deferred income 21944 Insurance contracts liabilities 20953 Income tax liabilities 72 Other liabilities 215929 TOTAL LIABILITIES 619401 The differences between total assets and total liabilities and assets and liabilities of disposal group held for sale presented in the consolidated statement of financial position are intergroup eliminations in amount of GEL 29943 assets and GEL 102738 liabilities as at 31 December 2017.
SEGMENT INFORMATION The Group disaggregated revenue from contracts with customers by products and services for each of our segments as the Group believes it best depicts how the nature amount timing and uncertainty of revenue and cash flows are affected by economic factors.
In 2017 the Group changed the composition of its reportable segments and applied the change retrospectively for comparable periods.
For details refer to Note 3.
For management purposes the Group is organised into the following operating segments based on products and services as follows BANKING BUSINESS The Groups Banking Business segments dedicated to delivery and enhancement of banking and related financial services
Retail Banking excluding Retail Banking of BNB  principally provides consumer loans mortgage loans overdrafts credit cards and other credit facilities funds transfers and settlement services and handling customer deposits for both individuals as well as legal entities targeting the emerging retail mass retail and mass affluent segments together with small and medium enterprises and micro businesses.
CIB
Corporate Investment Banking  comprises Corporate Banking and Investment Management operations in Georgia.
Corporate Banking principally provides loans and other credit facilities funds transfers and settlement services trade finance services documentary operations support and handles saving and term deposits for corporate and institutional customers.
The Investment Management business principally provides private banking services to high net worth clients.
BNB
Comprising JSC Belarusky Narodny Bank principally provides retail and corporate banking services to clients in Belarus.
Other Banking Business  Comprising of several small corporate and social responsibility companies and corporate centre allocations.
INVESTMENT BUSINESS  The Groups investment arm segments with disciplined development paths and exit strategies GHG Discontinued Georgia Healthcare Group  principally providing widescale healthcare health insurance and pharmaceutical services to clients and insured individuals.
Comprising the Groups real estate subsidiaries principally developing and selling affordable residential apartments and also renting out commercial properties.
GGU
Comprising the Groups utility and energy subsidiaries  principally supplies water electricity and provides a wastewater service.
Aldagi
Property and Casualty Insurance business  principally providing widescale property and casualty insurance services to corporate clients and insured individuals.
Other Investment Business  Comprising of Teliani Valley operations and corporate centre allocations.
Management monitors the operating results of its segments separately for the purpose of making decisions about resource allocation and performance assessment.
Segment performance as explained in the table overhead is measured in the same manner as profit or loss in the consolidated financial statements.
Transactions between operating segments are on an arms length basis in a similar manner to transactions with third parties.
The Groups operations are primarily concentrated in Georgia except for BNB which operates in Belarus.
No revenue from transactions with a single external customer or counterparty amounted to 10% or more of the Groups total revenues in 2017 2016 or 2015.
168 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC SEGMENT INFORMATION CONTINUED The following tables present income statement and certain asset and liability information regarding the Groups operating segments as at and for the year ended 31 December 2017 Banking Business Investment Business
Business eliminations
Retail banking
Other
Banking
Business
Banking
Business eliminations
Business
GHG
Discontinued m GGU Aldagi
Investment
Business
Investment
Business eliminations
Business
Net banking interest income 480955 156171 29397 5542 35 672100        435 672535 Net fee and commission income 99790 22717 9336 369  131474        1424 130050 Net banking foreign currency gain loss 28937 46276 10852 5  86060        6954 79106 Net other banking income 5029 14256 1773  1357 19701        1056 18645 Gross insurance profit          28572  1523 27049 216 27265 Gross real estate profit        35451  124  208 35367 977 34390 Gross utility and energy profit         89460  1 1091 88370 360 88010 Gross other investment profit        93 6415 1020 24009 954 30583 47 30630 REVENUE 614711 239420 51358 5168 1322 909335  35544 95875 29716 24010 3776 181369 10073 1080631 Operating expenses 235152 76658 29664 2784 1322 342936  8521 22506 12088 33019 1342 74792 4683 413045 OPERATING INCOME EXPENSE BEFORE COST OF CREDIT RISKEBITDA 379559 162762 21694 2384  566399  27023 73369 17628 9009 2434 106577 5390 667586 Profit from associates 1311     1311         1311 Investment Business related income statement items        471 33533 2318 20405 933 50216 7201 57417 OPERATING INCOME EXPENSE BEFORE COST OF CREDIT RISK 380870 162762 21694 2384  567710  27494 39836 19946 29414 1501 56361 12591 611480 Cost of credit risk 110800 47403 9093   167296   1673 671 1071  3415  170711 NET OPERATING INCOME LOSS BEFORE NONRECURRING ITEMS 270070 115359 12601 2384  400414  27494 38163 19275 30485 1501 52946 12591 440769 Net nonrecurring expenseloss incomegain 2358 1882 60   4300  128 1122  627  623  4923 PROFIT LOSS BEFORE INCOME TAX 267712 113477 12541 2384  396114  27366 37041 19275 29858 1501 52323 12591 435846 Income tax expense benefit 18046 7584 2256 1294  26592  1554 933 2975 286  5748  32340 Profit loss for the year from continuing operations 249666 105893 10285 3678  369522  25812 36108 16300 30144 1501 46575 12591 403506 Profit from discontinued operations       45850    1 1501 47352 12591 59943 PROFIT LOSS FOR THE YEAR 249666 105893 10285 3678  369522 45850 25812 36108 16300 30143  93927  463449 Assets and liabilities Total assets 7788168 4585439 624835 2218 92982 12907678 1166360 346927 665750 137407 778590 331121 2763913 502922 15168669 Total liabilities 6927986 3974452 545315 205 92982 11354976 619401 188343 371471 86473 649678 331121 1584245 502922 12436299 Other segment information Property and equipment 45089 6473 1464 100 2 53124 82820 16437 175813 2440 39316  316826  369950 Intangible assets 20217 2819 999 12  24047 15327 10 1580 273 357  17547  41594 CAPITAL EXPENDITURE 65306 9292 2463 112 2 77171 98147 16447 177393 2713 39673  334373  411544 Depreciation and amortisation 34742 5134 1098   40974  508 20332 855 6540  28235  69209 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 169 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
Financial
Statements
SEGMENT INFORMATION CONTINUED The following tables present income statement and certain asset and liability information regarding the Groups operating segments as at and for the year ended 31 December 2017 Banking Business Investment Business
Business eliminations
Retail banking
Other
Banking
Business
Banking
Business eliminations
Business
GHG
Discontinued m GGU Aldagi
Investment
Business
Investment
Business eliminations
Business
Net banking interest income 480955 156171 29397 5542 35 672100        435 672535 Net fee and commission income 99790 22717 9336 369  131474        1424 130050 Net banking foreign currency gain loss 28937 46276 10852 5  86060        6954 79106 Net other banking income 5029 14256 1773  1357 19701        1056 18645 Gross insurance profit          28572  1523 27049 216 27265 Gross real estate profit        35451  124  208 35367 977 34390 Gross utility and energy profit         89460  1 1091 88370 360 88010 Gross other investment profit        93 6415 1020 24009 954 30583 47 30630 REVENUE 614711 239420 51358 5168 1322 909335  35544 95875 29716 24010 3776 181369 10073 1080631 Operating expenses 235152 76658 29664 2784 1322 342936  8521 22506 12088 33019 1342 74792 4683 413045 OPERATING INCOME EXPENSE BEFORE COST OF CREDIT RISKEBITDA 379559 162762 21694 2384  566399  27023 73369 17628 9009 2434 106577 5390 667586 Profit from associates 1311     1311         1311 Investment Business related income statement items        471 33533 2318 20405 933 50216 7201 57417 OPERATING INCOME EXPENSE BEFORE COST OF CREDIT RISK 380870 162762 21694 2384  567710  27494 39836 19946 29414 1501 56361 12591 611480 Cost of credit risk 110800 47403 9093   167296   1673 671 1071  3415  170711 NET OPERATING INCOME LOSS BEFORE NONRECURRING ITEMS 270070 115359 12601 2384  400414  27494 38163 19275 30485 1501 52946 12591 440769 Net nonrecurring expenseloss incomegain 2358 1882 60   4300  128 1122  627  623  4923 PROFIT LOSS BEFORE INCOME TAX 267712 113477 12541 2384  396114  27366 37041 19275 29858 1501 52323 12591 435846 Income tax expense benefit 18046 7584 2256 1294  26592  1554 933 2975 286  5748  32340 Profit loss for the year from continuing operations 249666 105893 10285 3678  369522  25812 36108 16300 30144 1501 46575 12591 403506 Profit from discontinued operations       45850    1 1501 47352 12591 59943 PROFIT LOSS FOR THE YEAR 249666 105893 10285 3678  369522 45850 25812 36108 16300 30143  93927  463449 Assets and liabilities Total assets 7788168 4585439 624835 2218 92982 12907678 1166360 346927 665750 137407 778590 331121 2763913 502922 15168669 Total liabilities 6927986 3974452 545315 205 92982 11354976 619401 188343 371471 86473 649678 331121 1584245 502922 12436299 Other segment information Property and equipment 45089 6473 1464 100 2 53124 82820 16437 175813 2440 39316  316826  369950 Intangible assets 20217 2819 999 12  24047 15327 10 1580 273 357  17547  41594 CAPITAL EXPENDITURE 65306 9292 2463 112 2 77171 98147 16447 177393 2713 39673  334373  411544 Depreciation and amortisation 34742 5134 1098   40974  508 20332 855 6540  28235  69209 170 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC SEGMENT INFORMATION CONTINUED The following tables present income statement and certain asset and liability information regarding the Groups operating segments as at and for the year ended 31 December 2016 Banking Business Investment Business
Business eliminations
Retail banking
Other
Banking
Business
Banking
Business eliminations
Business
GHG
Discontinued m GGU Aldagi
Investment
Business
Investment
Business eliminations
Business
Net banking interest income 374022 147108 30773 1708  553611        5490 548121 Net fee and commission income 90193 27963 7462 551 157 124910        2433 122477 Net banking foreign currency gain 26086 48643 8452 22  83203        6277 89480 Net other banking income 3833 10170 738  1082 12183        1516 10667 Gross insurance profit          25788  532 25256 687 24569 Gross real estate profit        19146  34  114 19066 581 18485 Gross utility and energy profit         39075   395 38680 139 38541 Gross other investment profit        1798 6365 1506 11354 311 21334 46 21288 REVENUE 494134 233884 45949 1179 1239 773907  20944 45440 27328 11354 730 104336 4615 873628 Operating expenses 197627 69100 20905 5155 1239 291548  5824 9317 11509 9973 730 35893 4635 322806 OPERATING INCOME EXPENSE BEFORE COST OF CREDIT RISKEBITDA 296507 164784 25044 3976  482359  15120 36123 15819 1381  68443 20 550822 Investment Business related income statement items        386 13974 2049 6077  18388 1791 16597 OPERATING INCOME EXPENSE BEFORE COST OF CREDIT RISK 296507 164784 25044 3976  482359  14734 22149 17868 4696  50055 1811 534225 Cost of credit risk 75690 76266 15796   167752   6 808 202  1004  168756 NET OPERATING INCOME LOSS BEFORE NONRECURRING ITEMS 220817 88518 9248 3976  314607  14734 22155 17060 4898  49051 1811 365469 Net nonrecurring expenseloss incomegain 32002 11934 1419   45355  533 31770 3 1433  32673  12682 PROFIT BEFORE INCOME TAX EXPENSE FROM CONTINUING OPERATIONS 188815 76584 7829 3976  269252  14201 53925 17063 3465  81724 1811 352787 Income tax expense benefit 20475 11698 5141 588  26444  1717 2790 3318 1119  8944  17500 PROFIT LOSS FOR THE YEAR FROM CONTINUING OPERATIONS 209290 88282 2688 4564  295696  12484 51135 13745 4584  72780 1811 370287 Profit from discontinued operations       60100      60100 1811 58289 PROFIT LOSS FOR THE YEAR 209290 88282 2688 4564  295696 60100 12484 51135 13745 4584  132880  428576 ASSETS AND LIABILITIES Total assets 6062559 4583811 544727 2834 70573 11123358 909851 371332 426721 118067 705396 224298 2307069 476251 12954176 Total liabilities 5369588 3995930 475256 655 70573 9770856 370222 234382 139254 75541 676257 224298 1271358 476251 10565963 OTHER SEGMENT INFORMATION Property and equipment 31705 4855 1407 64  38031 110550 4181 35624 1241 60264  211860  249891 Intangible assets 11434 1483 300 3  13220 10707 8tel 12497  25717 CAPITAL EXPENDITURE 43139 6338 1707 67  51251 121257 4268 36300 1839 60693  224357  275608 Depreciation and amortisation 30943 5124 1140   37207  243 7353 774 1692  10062  47269 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 171 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
Financial
Statements
SEGMENT INFORMATION CONTINUED The following tables present income statement and certain asset and liability information regarding the Groups operating segments as at and for the year ended 31 December 2016 Banking Business Investment Business
Business eliminations
Retail banking
Other
Banking
Business
Banking
Business eliminations
Business
GHG
Discontinued m GGU Aldagi
Investment
Business
Investment
Business eliminations
Business
Net banking interest income 374022 147108 30773 1708  553611        5490 548121 Net fee and commission income 90193 27963 7462 551 157 124910        2433 122477 Net banking foreign currency gain 26086 48643 8452 22  83203        6277 89480 Net other banking income 3833 10170 738  1082 12183        1516 10667 Gross insurance profit          25788  532 25256 687 24569 Gross real estate profit        19146  34  114 19066 581 18485 Gross utility and energy profit         39075   395 38680 139 38541 Gross other investment profit        1798 6365 1506 11354 311 21334 46 21288 REVENUE 494134 233884 45949 1179 1239 773907  20944 45440 27328 11354 730 104336 4615 873628 Operating expenses 197627 69100 20905 5155 1239 291548  5824 9317 11509 9973 730 35893 4635 322806 OPERATING INCOME EXPENSE BEFORE COST OF CREDIT RISKEBITDA 296507 164784 25044 3976  482359  15120 36123 15819 1381  68443 20 550822 Investment Business related income statement items        386 13974 2049 6077  18388 1791 16597 OPERATING INCOME EXPENSE BEFORE COST OF CREDIT RISK 296507 164784 25044 3976  482359  14734 22149 17868 4696  50055 1811 534225 Cost of credit risk 75690 76266 15796   167752   6 808 202  1004  168756 NET OPERATING INCOME LOSS BEFORE NONRECURRING ITEMS 220817 88518 9248 3976  314607  14734 22155 17060 4898  49051 1811 365469 Net nonrecurring expenseloss incomegain 32002 11934 1419   45355  533 31770 3 1433  32673  12682 PROFIT BEFORE INCOME TAX EXPENSE FROM CONTINUING OPERATIONS 188815 76584 7829 3976  269252  14201 53925 17063 3465  81724 1811 352787 Income tax expense benefit 20475 11698 5141 588  26444  1717 2790 3318 1119  8944  17500 PROFIT LOSS FOR THE YEAR FROM CONTINUING OPERATIONS 209290 88282 2688 4564  295696  12484 51135 13745 4584  72780 1811 370287 Profit from discontinued operations       60100      60100 1811 58289 PROFIT LOSS FOR THE YEAR 209290 88282 2688 4564  295696 60100 12484 51135 13745 4584  132880  428576 ASSETS AND LIABILITIES Total assets 6062559 4583811 544727 2834 70573 11123358 909851 371332 426721 118067 705396 224298 2307069 476251 12954176 Total liabilities 5369588 3995930 475256 655 70573 9770856 370222 234382 139254 75541 676257 224298 1271358 476251 10565963 OTHER SEGMENT INFORMATION Property and equipment 31705 4855 1407 64  38031 110550 4181 35624 1241 60264  211860  249891 Intangible assets 11434 1483 300 3  13220 10707 8tel 12497  25717 CAPITAL EXPENDITURE 43139 6338 1707 67  51251 121257 4268 36300 1839 60693  224357  275608 Depreciation and amortisation 30943 5124 1140   37207  243 7353 774 1692  10062  47269 172 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC SEGMENT INFORMATION CONTINUED The following tables present income statement and certain asset and liability information regarding the Groups operating segments as at and for the year ended 31 December 2015 Banking Business Investment Business
Business eliminations
Retail banking
Other
Banking
Business
Banking
Business eliminations
Business
GHG
Discontinued m GGU Aldagi
Investment
Business
Investment
Business eliminations
Business
Net banking interest income 322879 156068 29307 2343  510597        10174 500423 Net fee and commission income 78218 34335 9198 440 92 121219        3123 118096 Net banking foreign currency gain loss 17108 41763 17036 26  75933         75933 Net other banking income 9160 10113 2198 4 2076 19399        1864 17535 Gross insurance profit          21180  438 20742 1133 19609 Gross real estate profit        14131  30   14161  14161 Gross other investment profit        7503 23 9883 1361 47 18677 296 18381 REVENUE 427365 242279 57739 1933 2168 727148  21634 23 31093 1361 485 53580 16590 764138 Operating expenses 172297 63357 19731 5070 2168 258287  5860 505 10365 6897 485 23142 3695 277734 OPERATING INCOME EXPENSE BEFORE COST OF CREDIT RISKEBITDA 255068 178922 38008 3137  468861  15774 528 20728 5536  30438 12895 486404 Investment Business related income statement items        2906 4142 6121 6486 8611 10212 804 11016 OPERATING INCOME EXPENSE BEFORE COST OF CREDIT RISK 255068 178922 38008 3137  468861  12868 3614 14607 950 8611 40650 12091 497420 Cost of credit risk 75406 56159 19270 27  150808    710 411  1121  151929 NET OPERATING INCOME LOSS BEFORE NONRECURRING ITEMS 179662 122763 18738 3110  318053  12868 3614 13897 539 8611 39529 12091 345491 Net nonrecurring expenseloss incomegain 8945 4877 1478   12344  137 8 701 274  556  12900 PROFIT BEFORE INCOME TAX EXPENSE FROM CONTINUING OPERATIONS 170717 117886 20216 3110  305709  12731 3622 13196 813 8611 38973 12091 332591 Income tax expense benefit 23995 17256 2753 87  43917  1974 65 731 1860  4500  48417 PROFIT LOSS FOR THE YEAR FROM CONTINUING OPERATIONS 146722 100630 17463 3023  261792  10757 3687 12465 1047 8611 34473 12091 284174 Profit from discontinued operations       23291     8611 14680 12091 26771 PROFIT LOSS FOR THE YEAR 146722 100630 17463 3023  261792 23291 10757 3687 12465 1047  49153  310945 ASSETS AND LIABILITIES Total assets 4595652 4032752 469319 2011 48337 9051397 758507 275676 56215 102504 156881 8641 1341142 313448 10079091 Total liabilities 3115238 4338340 397283 146 48337 7802670 286941 167889 81 66567 34940 8641 547777 313448 8036999 OTHER SEGMENT INFORMATION Property and equipment 43990 6870 1193 186  52239 89653 701  442 1532  92328  144567 Intangible assets 6568 1163 598 71  8400 3532 21  958 12  4523  12923 CAPITAL EXPENDITURE 50558 8033 1791 257  60639 93185 722  1400 1544  96851  157490 Depreciation and amortisation 27714 4612 1038 1  33365  191 44 834 1324  2393  35758 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 173 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
Financial
Statements
SEGMENT INFORMATION CONTINUED The following tables present income statement and certain asset and liability information regarding the Groups operating segments as at and for the year ended 31 December 2015 Banking Business Investment Business
Business eliminations
Retail banking
Other
Banking
Business
Banking
Business eliminations
Business
GHG
Discontinued m GGU Aldagi
Investment
Business
Investment
Business eliminations
Business
Net banking interest income 322879 156068 29307 2343  510597        10174 500423 Net fee and commission income 78218 34335 9198 440 92 121219        3123 118096 Net banking foreign currency gain loss 17108 41763 17036 26  75933         75933 Net other banking income 9160 10113 2198 4 2076 19399        1864 17535 Gross insurance profit          21180  438 20742 1133 19609 Gross real estate profit        14131  30   14161  14161 Gross other investment profit        7503 23 9883 1361 47 18677 296 18381 REVENUE 427365 242279 57739 1933 2168 727148  21634 23 31093 1361 485 53580 16590 764138 Operating expenses 172297 63357 19731 5070 2168 258287  5860 505 10365 6897 485 23142 3695 277734 OPERATING INCOME EXPENSE BEFORE COST OF CREDIT RISKEBITDA 255068 178922 38008 3137  468861  15774 528 20728 5536  30438 12895 486404 Investment Business related income statement items        2906 4142 6121 6486 8611 10212 804 11016 OPERATING INCOME EXPENSE BEFORE COST OF CREDIT RISK 255068 178922 38008 3137  468861  12868 3614 14607 950 8611 40650 12091 497420 Cost of credit risk 75406 56159 19270 27  150808    710 411  1121  151929 NET OPERATING INCOME LOSS BEFORE NONRECURRING ITEMS 179662 122763 18738 3110  318053  12868 3614 13897 539 8611 39529 12091 345491 Net nonrecurring expenseloss incomegain 8945 4877 1478   12344  137 8 701 274  556  12900 PROFIT BEFORE INCOME TAX EXPENSE FROM CONTINUING OPERATIONS 170717 117886 20216 3110  305709  12731 3622 13196 813 8611 38973 12091 332591 Income tax expense benefit 23995 17256 2753 87  43917  1974 65 731 1860  4500  48417 PROFIT LOSS FOR THE YEAR FROM CONTINUING OPERATIONS 146722 100630 17463 3023  261792  10757 3687 12465 1047 8611 34473 12091 284174 Profit from discontinued operations       23291     8611 14680 12091 26771 PROFIT LOSS FOR THE YEAR 146722 100630 17463 3023  261792 23291 10757 3687 12465 1047  49153  310945 ASSETS AND LIABILITIES Total assets 4595652 4032752 469319 2011 48337 9051397 758507 275676 56215 102504 156881 8641 1341142 313448 10079091 Total liabilities 3115238 4338340 397283 146 48337 7802670 286941 167889 81 66567 34940 8641 547777 313448 8036999 OTHER SEGMENT INFORMATION Property and equipment 43990 6870 1193 186  52239 89653 701  442 1532  92328  144567 Intangible assets 6568 1163 598 71  8400 3532 21  958 12  4523  12923 CAPITAL EXPENDITURE 50558 8033 1791 257  60639 93185 722  1400 1544  96851  157490 Depreciation and amortisation 27714 4612 1038 1  33365  191 44 834 1324  2393  35758 174 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTStel Cash on hand 447807 450264 442293 Current accounts with central banks excluding obligatory reserves 91692 150152 152455 Current accounts with credit institutions 278978 540801 475779 Time deposits with credit institutions with maturities of up to 90 days 763958 432393 362407 CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTS 1582435 1573610 1432934 Cash and cash equivalents held by BGEO of GEL 2688 2016 GEL 105248 2015 GEL 32435 is represented by placements on current accounts with Georgian banks and the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development OECD bank.
As at 31 December 2017 GEL 932030 2016 GEL 837721 2015 GEL 662296 was placed on current and time deposit accounts with internationally recognised OECD banks and central banks that are the counterparties of the Group in performing international settlements.
The Group earned up to 2.00% interest per annum on these deposits 2016 up to 0.90% 2015 up to 0.59%.
Management does not expect any losses from nonperformance by the counterparties holding cash and cash equivalents and there are no material differences between their book and fair values.
AMOUNTS DUE FROM CREDIT INSTITUTIONStel Obligatory reserves with central banks 1000566 934997 620287 Time deposits with maturities of more than 90 days 218831 113035 12717 Deposits pledged as security for open commitments  3287 96405 Interbank loan receivables 6550 3664 1956 AMOUNTS DUE FROM CREDIT INSTITUTIONS 1225947 1054983 731365 Obligatory reserves with central banks represent amounts deposited with the NBG and National Bank of the Republic of Belarus the NBRB.
Credit institutions are required to maintain cash deposits obligatory reserve with the NBG and with the NBRB the amount of which depends on the level of funds attracted by the credit institution.
The Groups ability to withdraw these deposits is restricted by regulation.
The Group earned up to 1.00% interest on obligatory reserves with NBG and NBRB for the year ended 31 December 2017 2016 0.25% 2015 nil.
As at 31 December 2017 interbank loan receivables include GEL 6550 2016 GEL 2164 2015 GEL 1956 placed with nonOECD banks.
INVESTMENT SECURITIEStel Georgian ministry of Finance treasury bonds 847839 811532 575591 Georgian ministry of Finance treasury bills 77460 88411 165545 Certificates of deposit of central banks 73415 24015 76807 Other debt instruments 564801 360597 84476 Corporate shares 1354 1448 1448 INVESTMENT SECURITIES 1564869 1286003 903867 GEL 448558 was pledged for shortterm loans from the NBG 2016 GEL 712169 2015 GEL 229800.
GEL Nil was pledged for shortterm loans from the NBG 2016 GEL 55842 2015 GEL 3805.
GEL Nil was pledged for shortterm loans from the NBG 2016 9402 2015 GEL 2966.
GEL 475735 was pledged for shortterm loans from the NBG 2016 GEL 286832 2015 79187.
Other debt instruments as at 31 December 2017 mainly comprise GELdenominated bonds issued by the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development of GEL 268057 2016 GEL 133055 201550666 GELdenominated bonds issued by the International Finance Corporation of GEL 110862 2016 GEL 28402 2015 GEL 28460 GELdenominated bonds issued by the Asian Development Bank of GEL 65245 2016 GEL 64921 2015 Nil GEL denominated bonds issued by the Black Sea Trade and Development Bank of GEL 60625 2016 GEL 60454 2015 Nil and Dollar denominated bonds issued by an Internationally recognised investment bank of GEL 26666 2016 Nil 2015 Nil.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 175 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
Financial
Statements
LOANS TO CUSTOMERS AND FINANCE LEASE RECEIVABLEStel Commercial loans 2594424 2699506 2397781 Consumer loans 1751106 1367228 1165107 Micro and SME loans 1776044 1493937 1041929 Residential mortgage loans 1712515 1234176 814344 Gold  pawn loans 67940 60685 61140 LOANS TO CUSTOMERS GROSS 7902029 6855532 5480301 Less  Allowance for loan impairment 276885 252769 198894 LOANS TO CUSTOMERS NET 7625144 6602763 5281407 FINANCE LEASE RECEIVABLES GROSS 67686 48267 42912 Less  Allowance for finance lease receivables impairment 2380 2548 2202 FINANCE LEASE RECEIVABLES NET 65306 45719 40710 LOANS TO CUSTOMERS AND FINANCE LEASE RECEIVABLES NET 7690450 6648482 5322117 ALLOWANCE FOR LOAN IMPAIRMENT Movements of the allowance for impairment of loans to customers by class are as follows
Consumer loans
Micro and SME loans
AT 1 JANUARY 159759 58785 3891 30334 252769 Charge 40311 80607 2700 31592 155210 Recoveries 9979 23485 8151 11177 52792 Writeoffs 35053 74027 9912 32267 151259 Accrued interest on writtenoff loans 10746 16649 768 4141 32304 Currency translation differences 19 143  199 323 AT 31 DECEMBER 164269 72058 4062 36496 276885 Individual impairment 153522 1019 2427 23621 180589 Collective impairment 10747 71039 1635 12875 96296 164269 72058 4062 36496 276885 GROSS AMOUNT OF LOANS INDIVIDUALLY DETERMINED TO BE IMPAIRED BEFORE DEDUCTING ANY INDIVIDUALLY ASSESSED IMPAIRMENT ALLOWANCE 310308 2178 14671 53117 380274
Consumer loans
Micro and SME loans
AT 1 JANUARY 125312 51017 6061 16504 198894 Charge 75288 64099 3899 15606 158892 Recoveries 3525 21632 4003 7084 36244 Writeoffs 41442 65597 8597 10317 125953 Accrued interest on writtenoff loans 3900 12463 1475 642 18480 Currency translation differences 976 97  2099 3172 AT 31 DECEMBER 159759 58785 3891 30334 252769 Individual impairment 143493 1977 2272 23704 171446 Collective impairment 16266 56808 1619 6630 81323 159759 58785 3891 30334 252769 GROSS AMOUNT OF LOANS INDIVIDUALLY DETERMINED TO BE IMPAIRED BEFORE DEDUCTING ANY INDIVIDUALLY ASSESSED IMPAIRMENT ALLOWANCE 462607 2778 11869 51118 528372 176 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC LOANS TO CUSTOMERS AND FINANCE LEASE RECEIVABLES CONTINUED ALLOWANCE FOR LOAN IMPAIRMENT CONTINUED
Consumer loans
Micro and SME loans
AT 1 JANUARY 72885 23648 2993 4254 103780 Charge 59090 62638 3410 17681 142819 Recoveries 4331 21079 3066 5209 33685 Writeoffs 10324 47075 2847 10694 70940 Accrued interest on writtenoff loans 1086 9035 561 992 11674 Currency translation differences 416 238  1046 1224 AT 31 DECEMBER 125312 51017 6061 16504 198894 Individual impairment 118960 1850 4380 13745 138935 Collective impairment 6352 49167 1681 2759 59959 125312 51017 6061 16504 198894 GROSS AMOUNT OF LOANS INDIVIDUALLY DETERMINED TO BE IMPAIRED BEFORE DEDUCTING ANY INDIVIDUALLY ASSESSED IMPAIRMENT ALLOWANCE 330084 3136 15902 27421 376543 Interest income accrued on loans for which individual impairment allowances have been recognised at 31 December 2017 comprised GEL 20510 2016 GEL 31433 2015 GEL 22234.
COLLATERAL AND OTHER CREDIT ENHANCEMENTS The amount and type of collateral required depend on an assessment of the credit risk of the counterparty.
Guidelines are implemented regarding the acceptability of types of collateral and valuation parameters.
The main types of collateral obtained are as follows For commercial lending charges over real estate properties equipment and machinery corporate shares inventory trade receivables and third party corporate guarantees.
For retail lending mortgages over residential properties cars gold and jewellery and third party corporate guarantees.
Management requests additional collateral in accordance with the underlying agreement and monitors the market value of collateral obtained during its review of the adequacy of the allowance for loan impairment.
It is the Groups policy to dispose of repossessed properties in an orderly fashion or to hold them for capital appreciation or earning rentals as appropriate in each case.
The proceeds are used to reduce or repay the outstanding claim.
In general the Group does not occupy repossessed properties for business use.
Without taking into account the discounted value of collateral the allowance for loan impairment would be GEL 253818 higher as at 31 December 2017 2016 GEL 322880 higher 2015 GEL 176759 higher.
CONCENTRATION OF LOANS TO CUSTOMERS As at 31 December 2017 the concentration of loans granted by the Group to the ten largest third party borrowers comprised GEL 857582 accounting for 11% of the gross loan portfolio of the Group 2016 GEL 815363 and 12% respectively 2015 GEL 708839 and 13% respectively.
An allowance of GEL 43478 2016 GEL 20123 2015 GEL 2484 was established against these loans.
As at 31 December 2017 the concentration of loans granted by the Group to the ten largest third party group of borrowers comprised GEL 1072450 accounting for 14% of the gross loan portfolio of the Group 2016 GEL 1242944 and 18% respectively 2015 GEL 1094979 and 20% respectively.
An allowance of GEL 75628 2016 GEL 51831 2015 GEL 41413 was established against these loans.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 177 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
Financial
Statements
LOANS TO CUSTOMERS AND FINANCE LEASE RECEIVABLES CONTINUED CONCENTRATION OF LOANS TO CUSTOMERS CONTINUED As at 31 December 2017 31 December 2016 and 31 December 2015 loans were principally issued within Georgia and their distribution by industry sector was as followstel Individuals 4297215 3336589 2482389 Manufacturing 935827 925333 711677 Trade 815216 812141 727214 Real estate 432352 423124 354331 Construction 368509 304890 178642 Hospitality 283527 233891 168011 Service 182038 136792 223088 Transport and communication 114926 166288 165330 Mining and quarrying 104799 114115 127706 Electricity gas and water supply 84727 34835 77633 Financial intermediation 49729 130435 77662 Other 233164 237099 186618 LOANS TO CUSTOMERS GROSS 7902029 6855532 5480301 Less  Allowance for loan impairment 276885 252769 198894 LOANS TO CUSTOMERS NET 7625144 6602763 5281407 Loans have been extended to the following types of customerstel Private companies 3604814 3497322 2958145 Individuals 4297215 3336589 2482389 Stateowned entities  21621 39767 LOANS TO CUSTOMERS GROSS 7902029 6855532 5480301 Less  allowance for loan impairment 276885 252769 198894 LOANS TO CUSTOMERS NET 7625144 6602763 5281407 The following is a reconciliation of the individual and collective allowances for impairment losses on loans to customers for the years ended 31 December 2017 31 December 2016 and 31 December 2015tel
Collective impairment
Individual
Collective impairment
Individual
Collective impairment
AT 1 JANUARY 171446 81323 252769 138935 59959 198894 71381 32399 103780 Charge for the year 58821 96389 155210 74051 84841 158892 94883 47936 142819 Recoveries 10948 41844 52792 7880 28364 36244 9994 23691 33685 Writeoffs 49554 101705 151259 46812 79141 125953 34722 36218 70940 Interest accrued on impaired loans to customers 10768 21536 32304 5394 13086 18480 3617 8057 11674 Currency translation differences 304 19 323 2786 386 3172 1016 208 1224 AT 31 DECEMBER 180589 96296 276885 171446 81323 252769 138935 59959 198894 178 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC LOANS TO CUSTOMERS AND FINANCE LEASE RECEIVABLES CONTINUED FINANCE LEASE RECEIVABLEStel Minimum lease payments receivable 83008 60715 51649 Less  Unearned finance lease income 15322 12448 8737 67686 48267 42912 Less  Allowance for impairment 2380 2548 2202 FINANCE LEASE RECEIVABLES NET 65306 45719 40710 The difference between the minimum lease payments to be received in the future and the finance lease receivables represents unearned finance income.
As at 31 December 2017 the concentration of investment in the five largest lease receivables comprised GEL 4403 or 7% of total finance lease receivables 2016 GEL 8420 or 17% 2015 GEL 15234 or 36% and finance income received from them for the year ended 31 December 2017 comprised GEL 755 or 5% of total finance income from lease 2016 GEL 395 or 4% 2015 GEL 1931 or 20%.
Future minimum lease payments to be received after 31 December 2017 31 December 2016 and 31 December 2015 are as followstel Within 1 year 43782 29265 28807 From 1 to 5 years 34224 31450 22842 More than 5 years 5002 MINIMUM LEASE PAYMENT RECEIVABLES 83008 60715 51649 Movements of the allowance for impairment of finance lease receivables are as follows Finance lease receivables Finance lease receivables Finance lease receivables AT 1 JANUARY 2548 2202 729 Charge 496 777 1958 Amounts writtenoff 611 511 305 Currency translation differences 53 80 180 AT 31 DECEMBER 2380 2548 2202 Individual impairment 1152 1702 1507 Collective impairment 1228 846 695 2380 2548 2202 GROSS AMOUNT OF FINANCE LEASE RECEIVABLES INDIVIDUALLY DETERMINED TO BE IMPAIRED BEFORE DEDUCTING ANY INDIVIDUALLY ASSESSED IMPAIRMENT ALLOWANCE 2593 2475 3725 INVESTMENT PROPERTIEStel AT 1 JANUARY 288227 246398 190860 Additions 86530 36123 56823 Disposals 11469 8599 19815 Net gains from revaluation of investment property 32020 1811 20737 Acquisition through business combination Note 5  19417 705 Transfers to from property and equipment and other assets 39864 21291 2381 Currency translation differences 1879 14368 5293 AT 31 DECEMBER 353565 288227 246398 GEL 17187 GEL 9799 and GEL 18947 were paid in 2017 2016 and 2015 respectively for acquisition of properties by the Groups Real Estate business for development.
The remaining additions of 2017 2016 and 2015 comprise foreclosed properties no cash transactions were involved.
Comprised of GEL 27216 transfer to property and equipment 2016 transfers to property and equipment GEL 351 and 2015 transfers to property and equipment GEL 669 respectively GEL 1158 transfer to other assets  inventories 2016 transfer from to assets  inventories GEL 19402 and 2015 transfer from other assets  inventories GEL 2357 and GEL 11490 transfer to finance lease receivables 2016 transfer to finance lease receivable GEL 1538 and 2015 transfer from finance lease receivable GEL 693.
Investment properties are stated at fair value.
The fair value represents the price that would be received to sell an asset in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date.
As at 31 December 2017 the fair values of the properties are based on valuations performed by accredited independent valuers.
Refer to Note 32 for details on fair value measurements of investment properties.
The Group pledges its investment property as collateral for its borrowings.
The carrying amount of investment property pledged as at 31 December 2017 was GEL 113598 2016 GEL 77148 2015 Nil.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 179 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
Financial
Statements
PROPERTY AND EQUIPMENT The movements in property and equipment during the year ended 31 December 2017 were as follows
Hospitals and clinics
Computers and equipment
Leasehold improvements Assets under construction
Factory and equipment Other Total COST OR REVALUED
31 DECEMBER 2016 331429 401793 194803 249439 19689 26237 89536 199304  2136 1514366 Additions 1887 28716 25772 67387 7417 2930 191234 12619 31986 2 369950 Business combination Note 5 359 7909 1142 3714 3745 537 20364    37770 Disposals 1773 440 424 997 789 3802 4038 1976 18  14257 Transfers 15603 456 3390 1394 12759 7463 162140 65720 59055 Transfers from investment properties 10386      16777    27163 Transfers to from other assets 40  735 1365  232 144    1684 Revaluation 3197 6958     286    3475 Writeoff    1321       1321 Transfer to assets of disposal group held for sale 14939 430564 18763 198315 5850 12685 325    681441 Currency translation differences 74  50 17 155 41 2152    2307 31 DECEMBER 2017 346263  205135 117165 37126 20871 153990 275667 91023 2138 1249378
IMPAIRMENT
31 DECEMBER 2016 2926  40 60 7  9    3042 Currency translation differences 64  2 19       47 31 DECEMBER 2017 2862  38 79 7  9    2995
DEPRECIATION
31 DECEMBER 2016 23725 740 105964 73876 5177 7440  5738  70 222730 Depreciation charge 3482 3800 18166 29138 4049 4918  16507 4171 70 84301 Currency translation differences 8  25 1088 284  301 Transfers to investment properties 53          53 Transfers to from other assets 171  1239 1242  1     2651 Revaluation  2394         2394 Transfer to assets of disposal group held for sale 327 1951 2958 29771 1532 1826     38365 Disposals 358 195 242 534 381 3450  160   5320 31 DECEMBER 2017 26306  119716 70379 7338 7095 2 23084 3887 140 257947 NET BOOK VALUE 31 DECEMBER 2016 304778 401053 88799 175503 14505 18797 89527 193566  2066 1288594 31 DECEMBER 2017 317095  85381 46707 29781 13776 153979 252583 87136 1998 988436 Certain amounts do not correspond to the 2016 consolidated financial statement as they reflect the adjustments made for change in accounting policy as described in Note 3.
180 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC PROPERTY AND EQUIPMENT CONTINUED The movements in property and equipment during the year ended 31 December 2016 were as follows
Hospitals and clinics Furniture and fixtures
Motor vehicles
Assets under construction
COST OR REVALUED
31 DECEMBER 2015 211491 332775 174334 197274 9586 22147 9033   956640 Additions 5298 47950 21714 69897 3394 2299 98211 1098 30 249891 Business combination Note 5 109863 13296 3528 2605 6689 1063 21659 169939  328642 Disposals 330 5412 1530 1700 2958 2970 917 670 64 16551 Transfers 3196 194 154 372 3580 3716 39097 28937 Transfers from investment properties 351         351 Transfers to from other assets   760 857 1  504  2170 1058 Revaluation  12990        12990 Write off   2440 17720 667 176    21003 Currency translation differences 1560     2348 31 DECEMBER 2016 331429 401793 194803 249439 19689 26237 89536 199304 2136 1514366
IMPAIRMENT
31 DECEMBER 2015 1221  38 82 7  9   1357 Impairment 1403         1403 Currency translation differences 302  2 22      282 31 DECEMBER 2016 2926  40 60 7  9   3042
DEPRECIATION
31 DECEMBER 2015 18560 6844 91421 68591 5345 6495    197256 Depreciation charge 3421 1965 17976 24285 2572 3726  5738 74 59757 Currency translation differences 1019     1314 Transfers 764  204 319 241 Transfers to from other assets   414 694      1108 Revaluation  7814        7814 Writeoff   2440 17720 667 176    21003 Disposals 39 255 429 434 1898 2613   4 5672 31 DECEMBER 2016 23725 740 105964 73876 5177 7440  5738 70 222730 NET BOOK VALUE 31 DECEMBER 2015 191710 325931 82875 128601 4234 15652 9024   758027 31 DECEMBER 2016 304778 401053 88799 175503 14505 18797 89527 193566 2066 1288594 Certain amounts do not correspond to the 2016 consolidated financial statement as they reflect the adjustments made for change in accounting policy as described in Note 3.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 181 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
Financial
Statements
PROPERTY AND EQUIPMENT CONTINUED The movements in property and equipment during the year ended 31 December 2015 were as follows Office buildings and service centres Hospitals and clinics Furniture and fixtures Computers and equipment Motor vehicles
Assets under construction Total COST OR REVALUED AMOUNT 31 DECEMBER 2014 197108 207038 140130 130810 7566 12751 9599 705002 Additions 5348 24528 23764 67631 2834 5555 14907 144567 Business combination 10388 94096 8317 22806 870 1790 7347 145614 Disposals 2555 1425 389 21096 581 1872 140 28058 Transfers 3090 8538 3124 1616 1024 4000 16112 Transfers to investment properties 425       425 Transfers to from other assets   343 736 4  6231 7306 Currency translation differences 1463  269 525 83 77 337 2754 31 DECEMBER 2015 211491 332775 174334 197274 9586 22147 9033 956640 ACCUMULATED IMPAIRMENT 31 DECEMBER 2014 3621   3823 Reversal of impairment 1097       1097 Transfers to investment properties 1040       1040 Currency translation differences 263  13 38 6 9  329 31 DECEMBER 2015 1221  38 82 7  9 1357 ACCUMULATED DEPRECIATION 31 DECEMBER 2014 16593 2646 75530 55402 4023 5125  159319 Depreciation charge 3059 4264 15787 15920 1770 2676  43476 Currency translation differences 708  91 235 31 36  1101 Transfers to investment properties 54       54 Transfers to from other assets   233 606 3   836
Disposals 131 124 161 1575 360 1197  3548 31 DECEMBER 2015 18560 6844 91421 68591 5345 6495  197256 NET BOOK VALUE 31 DECEMBER 2014 176894 204392 64549 75288 3530 7617 9590 541860 31 DECEMBER 2015 191710 325931 82875 128601 4234 15652 9024 758027 Certain amounts do not correspond to the 2016 consolidated financial statement as they reflect the adjustments made for change in accounting policy as described in Note 3.
The Group pledges its property as collateral for its borrowings.
The carrying amount of the pledged property excluding that of the disposal group held for sale as at 31 December 2017 was GEL 90200 2016 GEL 482001 including that of the disposal group held for sale 2015 GEL 330224 including that of the disposal group held for sale.
182 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC
Movements in goodwill during the years ended 31 December 2017 31 December 2016 and 31 December 2015 were as followstel
1 January 135436 101434 78083 Business combinations 60138 34002 23351 Transfer to assets of disposal group held for sale 111848 AT 31 DECEMBER 83726 135436 101434 Accumulated impairment 1 January 28450 28450 28450 AT 31 DECEMBER 28450 28450 28450 Net book value 1 January 106986 72984 49633 At 31 December 55276 106986 72984 IMPAIRMENT TEST FOR GOODWILL Goodwill acquired through business combinations with indefinite lives has been allocated to four individual cashgenerating units for impairment testing Corporate banking Retail banking Property and Casualty Insurance and Teliani.
The carrying amount of goodwill allocated to each of the cashgenerating units CGU is as followstel Retail banking 23386 23488 23488 PandC Insurance 15454 16139 16139 Corporate banking 9965 9965 9965 Teliani 6471 3439 3439 Pharmacy  29025 Healthcare  21468 16491 Health Insurance  3462 3462 TOTAL 55276 106986 72984 KEY ASSUMPTIONS USED IN VALUEINUSE CALCULATIONS The recoverable amounts of the CGUs have been determined based on a valueinuse calculation using cash flow projections based on financial budgets approved by senior management covering a one to threeyear period.
Discount rates were not adjusted for either a constant or a declining growth rate beyond the threeyear periods covered in financial budgets.
For the purposes of the impairment test a 3% permanent growth rate has been assumed when assessing the future operating cash flows of the CGU.
The following discount rates were used by the Group for Corporate banking and Retail banking Corporate banking Retail bankingteltel Discount rate 4.5% 5.3% 5.8% 6.1% 6.9% 6.7% The following rates were used by the Group for PandC Insurance and Teliani PandC Insurance Telianiteltel Discount rate 9.0% 14.5% 10.4% 12.8% 14.9% 9.4% DISCOUNT RATES Discount rates reflect managements estimate of return required in each business.
This is the benchmark used by management to assess operating performance and to evaluate future investment proposals.
Discount rates are calculated by using pretax weighted average cost of capital WACC.
For the Healthcare CGU the following additional assumptions were made over the first threeyear period of the business plan Further synergies from healthcare businesses will increase cost efficiency and further improve operating leverage.
Growth of other healthcare business lines through an increased market demand and economic growth.
For the Retail and Corporate banking CGUs the following additional assumptions were made Stable business as usual growth of loans and deposits.
No material changes in costincome structure or ratio.
Stable business as usual growth of trade finance and other documentary businesses.
Further expansion of the Express banking businesses bringing more stable margins to Retail banking.
SENSITIVITY TO CHANGES IN ASSUMPTIONS Management believes that reasonable possible changes to key assumptions used to determine the recoverable amount for each CGU will not result in an impairment of goodwill.
The excess of value in use over carrying value is determined by reference to the net book value as at 31 December 2017.
Possible change was taken as 1% in discount rate and growth rate.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 183 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
Financial
Statements
TAXATION
The corporate income tax credit expense comprisestel Current income expense 42396 25034 38959 Deferred income tax credit expense 9669 63690 9449 INCOME TAX EXPENSE CREDIT 32727 38656 48408 Income tax expense attributable to continuing operations 32340 17500 48417 Income tax expense attributable to a discontinued operation Note 6 387 21156 9 Deferred income tax credit expense in other comprehensive income loss 1328 2274 283 Deferred tax related to items charged or credited to other comprehensive income during the years ended 31 December 2017 2016 and 2015 was as followstel Currency translation differences 576 2253 283 Net losses on investment securities availableforsale 27 21 Revaluation of buildings 779 INCOME TAX EXPENSE CREDIT IN OTHER COMPREHENSIVE INCOME 1328 2274 283 The income tax rate applicable to most of the Groups income is the income tax rate applicable to subsidiaries income which ranges from 15% to 27% 2016 from 15% to 27% 2015 from 15% to 25%.
In May 2016 the Parliament of Georgia approved a change in the current corporate taxation model with changes applicable from 1 January 2017 for all entities apart from certain financial institutions including banks and insurance businesses changes are applicable to financial institutions including banks and insurance businesses from 1 January 2019.
The changed model implies a zero corporate tax rate on retained earnings and a 15% corporate tax rate on distributed earnings compared to the previous model of 15% tax rate charged to the companys profit before tax regardless of the retention or distribution status.
The effective income tax rate differs from the statutory income tax rates.
As at 31 December 2017 31 December 2016 and 31 December 2015 a reconciliation of the income tax expense based on statutory rates with the actual expense is as followstel Profit before income tax expense from continuing operations 435846 352787 332591 Net gain before income tax benefit from discontinued operations Note 6 60330 37133 26762 PROFIT BEFORE INCOME TAX EXPENSE 496176 389920 359353 Average tax rate 15% 15% 15% THEORETICAL INCOME TAX EXPENSE AT AVERAGE TAX RATE 74426 58488 53903 Nontaxable income 38223 19711 3744 Correction of prior year declarations 5940 2494 1472 Nondeductible expenses 1220 1645 487 Tax at the domestic rates applicable to profits in each country 1244 143 262 Effects from changes in tax legislation  76964 Other  237 1028 INCOME TAX EXPENSE BENEFIT 32727 38656 48408 Applicable taxes in Georgia and Belarus include corporate income tax profit tax individuals withholding taxes property tax and value added tax among others.
However regulations are often unclear or nonexistent and few precedents have been established.
This creates tax risks in Georgia and Belarus substantially more significant than typically found in countries with more developed tax systems.
Management believes that the Group is in substantial compliance with the tax laws affecting its operations.
However the risk remains that relevant authorities could take differing positions with regard to interpretative issues.
As at 31 December 2017 31 December 2016 and 31 December 2015 income tax assets and liabilities consist of the followingtel Current income tax assets 1155 22329 3654 Deferred income tax assets 1138 1714 17896 INCOME TAX ASSETS 2293 24043 21550 Current income tax liabilities 9617 5548 20083 Deferred income tax liabilities 11342 22170 99210 INCOME TAX LIABILITIES 20959 27718 119293 184 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC TAXATION CONTINUED Deferred tax assets and liabilities as at 31 December 2017 31 December 2016 and 31 December 2015 and their movements for the respective years are as follows Origination and reversal of temporary differences Origination and reversal of temporary differences Origination and reversal of temporary differences In the income statement
In other comprehensive income 2015 In the income statement
In other comprehensive income 2016 In the income statement IFRS 15 adoption In other comprehensive income 2017 TAX EFFECT OF DEDUCTIBLE TEMPORARY DIFFERENCES Amounts due to credit institutions 1005 523   482 482 Investment securities availableforsale 1195 1194  1 Investment properties 980    980 431  921 490 284  18 188 Insurance premiums receivables 1510 650   2160 952   1208 721   487 Allowances for impairment and provisions for other losses 198 5035  367 4866 1090  535 6491 1490  205 7776 Tax losses carried forward 12296 6606 1992 250 17160 13095  4065 Property and equipment 936 50  49 937 44  73 820 87  179 728 Other assets and liabilities 3869 406 982 2 4447 3053 1497 168 3059 1277  16 4320 DEFERRED TAX ASSETS 21989 10218 1010 165 31032 16105 1497 4356 12068 1849  418 13499 TAX EFFECT OF TAXABLE TEMPORARY DIFFERENCES Amounts due to credit institutions 44 26  2 68 1162   1230 469   761 Amounts due to customers 1325 1325 Loans to customers 30236 763  517 28956 11210  720 18466 4423  262 13781 Other insurance liabilities and pension fund obligations 1382 1160   222 222 Property and equipment 35227 18653 9666 170 63716 57990 1915 1062 6579 2829  1201 4951 Investment properties 64 6500  53 6511 4966  1545 Intangible assets 6532 1122  7 5403 5053  102 452 435  1 16 Other assets and liabilities 8664 1142 13 39 7470 1516 140 297 5797 336 1911 28 4194 DEFERRED TAX LIABILITIES 83474 19667 9653 448 112346 79795 2055 2082 32524 7820 1911 910 23703 NET DEFERRED TAX LIABILITIES 61485 9449 10663 283 81314 63690 558 2274 20456 9669 1911 1328 10204 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 185 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
Financial
Statements
TAXATION CONTINUED Deferred tax assets and liabilities as at 31 December 2017 31 December 2016 and 31 December 2015 and their movements for the respective years are as follows Origination and reversal of temporary differences Origination and reversal of temporary differences Origination and reversal of temporary differences In the income statement
In other comprehensive income 2015 In the income statement
In other comprehensive income 2016 In the income statement IFRS 15 adoption In other comprehensive income 2017 TAX EFFECT OF DEDUCTIBLE TEMPORARY DIFFERENCES Amounts due to credit institutions 1005 523   482 482 Investment securities availableforsale 1195 1194  1 Investment properties 980    980 431  921 490 284  18 188 Insurance premiums receivables 1510 650   2160 952   1208 721   487 Allowances for impairment and provisions for other losses 198 5035  367 4866 1090  535 6491 1490  205 7776 Tax losses carried forward 12296 6606 1992 250 17160 13095  4065 Property and equipment 936 50  49 937 44  73 820 87  179 728 Other assets and liabilities 3869 406 982 2 4447 3053 1497 168 3059 1277  16 4320 DEFERRED TAX ASSETS 21989 10218 1010 165 31032 16105 1497 4356 12068 1849  418 13499 TAX EFFECT OF TAXABLE TEMPORARY DIFFERENCES Amounts due to credit institutions 44 26  2 68 1162   1230 469   761 Amounts due to customers 1325 1325 Loans to customers 30236 763  517 28956 11210  720 18466 4423  262 13781 Other insurance liabilities and pension fund obligations 1382 1160   222 222 Property and equipment 35227 18653 9666 170 63716 57990 1915 1062 6579 2829  1201 4951 Investment properties 64 6500  53 6511 4966  1545 Intangible assets 6532 1122  7 5403 5053  102 452 435  1 16 Other assets and liabilities 8664 1142 13 39 7470 1516 140 297 5797 336 1911 28 4194 DEFERRED TAX LIABILITIES 83474 19667 9653 448 112346 79795 2055 2082 32524 7820 1911 910 23703 NET DEFERRED TAX LIABILITIES 61485 9449 10663 283 81314 63690 558 2274 20456 9669 1911 1328 10204 186 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED OTHER ASSETS AND OTHER LIABILITIES OTHER ASSETS COMPRISEtel Foreclosed assets 52095 50821 49602 Operating tax assets 35403 50227 18225 Defined contribution pension assets 18536 16441 13706 Assets purchased for finance lease purposes 10037 11378 10689 Reinsurance assets 20671 13161 10381 Other receivables 23647 12903 19380 Investments in associates 11850 12814 53458 Derivative financial assets 12392 1466 42212 Trading securities owned 3191 1396 1977 Settlements on operations 928 1100 5060 Other 20899 27176 22090 209649 198883 246780 Less  Allowance for impairment of other assets 20917 14092 10000 OTHER ASSETS 188732 184791 236780 OTHER LIABILITIES COMPRISEtel Accounts payable 48011 111766 44865 Creditors 19129 6606 7729 Defined contribution pension obligations 18536 16441 13706 Other taxes payable 18676 34662 5072 Other insurance liabilities 11008 8235 9572 Provisions 5915 4086 2240 Derivative financial liabilities 3948 9411 3243 Dividends payable to noncontrolling shareholders 1100 1313 815 Amounts payable for share acquisitions 413 8491 38005 Other 15397 30612 9509 OTHER LIABILITIES 142133 231623 134756 2017 amounts payable for share acquisition fully comprise payables for acquisition of New Coffee Georgia.
2016 amounts payable for share acquisitions fully comprise payables for healthcare business acquisitions.
2015 amounts payable for share acquisitions comprise GEL 28757 payable for the healthcare subsidiaries acquired in 2015 and GEL 9248 payable for the acquisition of JSC PrivatBank.
The table below shows the fair values of derivative financial instruments recorded as assets or liabilities together with their notional amounts.
The notional amount recorded gross is the amount of a derivatives underlying asset or liability reference rate or index and is the basis upon which changes in the value of derivatives are measured.
The notional amounts indicate the volume of transactions outstanding at the year end and are not indicative of the credit risk.
Notional amount Fair value Asset Liability FOREIGN EXCHANGE CONTRACTS Forwards and Swaps  domestic 352738 1817 1958 Forwards and Swaps  foreign 227585 1706 534 INTEREST RATE CONTRACTS Forwards and Swaps  foreign 777660 7368 Options  foreign IR 10183 1501 1456 TOTAL DERIVATIVE ASSETSLIABILITIES 1368166 12392 3tel
Fair value
Fair value Asset Liability Asset Liability FOREIGN EXCHANGE CONTRACTS Forwards and Swaps  domestic 234969 954 1734 12510 183 10 Forwards and Swaps  foreign 302679 512 7043 145055 41994 510 Options  foreign    56768 35 2723 INTEREST RATE CONTRACTS Forwards and Swaps  foreign 794040  634 TOTAL DERIVATIVE ASSETSLIABILITIES 1331688 1466 9411 214333 42212 3243 187 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
Financial
Statements
CLIENT DEPOSITS AND NOTES The amounts due to customers include the followingtel Time deposits 3321953 2787419 2597244 Current accounts 3316064 2521051 2153275 Promissory notes issued 74465 74228 868 CLIENT DEPOSITS AND NOTES 6712482 5382698 4751387 HELD AS SECURITY AGAINST LETTERS OF CREDIT AND GUARANTEES NOTE 20 98399 96692 64534 As at 31 December 2017 31 December 2016 and 31 December 2015 promissory notes issued by the Group comprise the notes privately held by financial institutions being effectively equivalents of certificates of deposits with fixed maturity and fixed interest rate.
The average effective maturity of the notes was 23 months 2016 16 months 2015 9 months.
At 31 December 2017 amounts due to customers of GEL 880957 13% were due to the ten largest customers 2016 GEL 635303 12% 2015 GEL 782146 16%.
Amounts due to customers include accounts with the following types of customerstel Individuals 3883940 3134251 2615774 Private enterprises 2364255 2110975 1945233 State and stateowned entities 464287 137472 190380 CLIENT DEPOSITS AND NOTES 6712482 5382698 4751387 The breakdown of customer accounts by industry sector is as followstel Individuals 3883940 3134251 2615774 Trade 576524 420402 374291 Government services 438492 102530 141007 Financial intermediation 314081 365515 292771 Service 297393 264609 289485 Transport and communication 257818 213301 317161 Construction 257799 272351 224477 Manufacturing 224230 208145 236238 Real estate 103800 66207 64990 Electricity gas and water supply 93097 95651 74125 Hospitality 44241 22248 18818 Other 221067 217488 102250 CLIENT DEPOSITS AND NOTES 6712482 5382698 4751387 AMOUNTS OWED TO CREDIT INSTITUTIONS Amounts due to credit institutions comprisetel Borrowings from international credit institutions 1423840 1221070 640517 Shortterm loans from the National Bank of Georgia 793528 1085000 307200 Time deposits and interbank loans 305287 397506 353638 Correspondent accounts 204512 329609 92617 2727167 3033185 1393972 Nonconvertible subordinated debt 428672 436906 395090 AMOUNTS DUE TO CREDIT INSTITUTIONS 3155839 3470091 1789062 During the year ended 31 December 2017 the Group paid up to 6.27% on Dollar borrowings from international credit institutions 2016 up to 5.79% 2015 up to 5.29%.
During the year ended 31 December 2017 the Group paid up to 8.92% on Dollar subordinated debt 2016 up to 8.44% 2015 up to 7.95%.
Some longterm borrowings from international credit institutions are received upon certain conditions the Lender Covenants that the Group maintains different limits for capital adequacy liquidity currency positions credit exposures leverage and others.
At 31 December 2017 31 December 2016 and 31 December 2015 the Group complied with all the Lender Covenants of the significant borrowings from international credit institutions.
188 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED AMOUNTS OWED TO CREDIT INSTITUTIONS CONTINUED CHANGES IN LIABILITIES ARISING FROM FINANCING ACTIVITIES Amounts due to credit institutions CARRYING AMOUNT AT 31 DECEMBER 2016 21692 Foreign currency translation 9 Cash repayments 21701 CARRYING AMOUNT AT 31 DECEMBER 2017 DEBT SECURITIES ISSUED Debt securities issued comprisetel Eurobonds and notes issued 1344334 937406 908183 Local bonds 96266 140965 98859 Certificates of deposit 268552 177272 32762 DEBT SECURITIES ISSUED 1709152 1255643 1039804 On 24 May 2017 the Group completed the issuance of GEL 500 million GELdenominated 11.00% notes due in 2020.
The Regulation SRule 144A senior unsecured notes were issued and sold at an issue price of 100% of their principal amount.
The notes are rated BB Fitch and Ba2 Moodys.
The notes are listed on the Irish Stock Exchange.
COMMITMENTS AND CONTINGENCIES
In the ordinary course of business the Group and BGEO are subject to legal actions and complaints.
Management believes that the ultimate liability if any arising from such actions or complaints will not have a material adverse effect on the financial condition or the results of future operations of the Group or BGEO.
FINANCIAL COMMITMENTS AND CONTINGENCIES As at 31 December 2017 31 December 2016 and 31 December 2015 the Groups financial commitments and contingencies comprised the followingtel CREDITRELATED COMMITMENTS Guarantees issued 621267 508685 473839 Undrawn loan facilities 261397 231704 273851 Letters of credit 40350 58561 43126 923014 798950 790816 Less  Cash held as security against letters of credit and guarantees Note 17 98399 96692 64534 Less  Provisions 5915 4086 2240 OPERATING LEASE COMMITMENTS Not later than 1 year 22731 35823 17056 Later than 1 year but not later than 5 years 54620 110466 31216 Later than 5 years 25671 18994 5553 103022 165283 53825 CAPITAL EXPENDITURE COMMITMENTS 2538 13174 27624 FINANCIAL COMMITMENTS AND CONTINGENCIES NET 924260 876629 805491 189 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
Financial
Statements
EQUITY
SHARE CAPITAL As at 31 December 2017 issued share capital comprised 39384712 common shares 2016 39500320 2015 39500320 all of which were fully paid.
Each share has a nominal value of one 1 British penny.
Shares issued and outstanding as at 31 December 2017 are described below
Amount of ordinary shares 31 DECEMBER 2014 39500320 1143 Effect of translation of equity components to presentation currency  11 31 DECEMBER 2015 39500320 1154 31 DECEMBER 2016 39500320 1154 Share buyback and cancellation 115608 3 31 DECEMBER 2017 39384712 1151 In 2016 the Management Board approved a US 50 million share buyback and cancellation programme over a twoyear period.
During the year ended 31 December 2017 the Group repurchased and cancelled 115608 shares in exchange for GEL 12186.
TREASURY SHARES Treasury shares are held by the Group solely for the employees future sharebased compensation purposes.
The number of treasury shares held by the Group as at 31 December 2017 comprised 2268313 31 December 2016 1843091 31 December 2015 1521752 with nominal amount of GEL 66 31 December 2016 GEL 54 31 December 2015 GEL 44.
DIVIDENDS
Shareholders are entitled to dividends in British Pounds Sterling.
On 1 June 2017 the shareholders of BGEO declared a final dividend for 2016 of GEL 2.6 per share.
The currency conversion date was set at 26 June 2017 with the official GELGBP exchange rate of 3.0690 resulting in a GBPdenominated final dividend of 0.8472 per share.
Payment of the total GEL 101501 final dividends was received by shareholders on 7 July 2017.
On 26 May 2016 the shareholders of BGEO declared a final dividend for 2015 of GEL 2.4 per share.
The currency conversion date was set at 11 July 2016 with the official GELGBP exchange rate of 3.0376 resulting in a GBPdenominated final dividend of 0.7901 per share.
Payment of the total GEL 97604 final dividends was received by shareholders on 22 July 2016.
On 21 May 2015 the shareholders of BGEO declared a final dividend for 2014 of GEL 2.1 per share.
The currency conversion date was set at 8 June 2015 with the official GELGBP exchange rate of 3.5110 resulting in a GBPdenominated final dividend of 0.5981 per share.
Payment of the total GEL 80411 final dividends was received by shareholders on 16 June 2015.
NATURE AND PURPOSE OF OTHER RESERVES REVALUATION RESERVE FOR PROPERTY AND EQUIPMENT The revaluation reserve for property and equipment is used to record increases in the fair value of hospitals and infrastructure assets and decreases to the extent that such decrease relates to an increase on the same asset previously recognised in equity.
UNREALISED GAINS LOSSES ON INVESTMENT SECURITIES This reserve records fair value changes on investment securities.
UNREALISED GAINS LOSSES FROM DILUTION OR SALEACQUISITION OF SHARES IN EXISTING SUBSIDIARIES This reserve records unrealised gains losses from dilution or saleacquisition of shares in existing subsidiaries.
FOREIGN CURRENCY TRANSLATION RESERVE The foreign currency translation reserve is used to record exchange differences arising from the translation of the financial statements of subsidiaries with functional currency other than GEL.
Movements in other reserves during the years ended 31 December 2017 31 December 2016 and 31 December 2015 are presented in the statements of other comprehensive income.
190 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED EQUITY CONTINUED NONCONTROLLING INTEREST Georgia Healthcare Group PLC is the only significant subsidiary of the Group that has a material noncontrolling interest of 43% as at 31 December 2017 31 December 2016 35% 31 December 2015 32%.
The following table summarises key information before intraGroup eliminations relevant to Georgia Healthcare Group PLC.
Total assets 1166360 909851 758507 Total liabilities 619401 370222 286941 Profit for the year 45850 60100 23291 Net decrease increase in cash and cash equivalents 25602 121914 112369 Profit attributable to noncontrolling interest 27955 27376 5208 EARNINGS PER SHAREtel BASIC EARNINGS PER SHARE Profit for the year attributable to ordinary shareholders of the Group 437615 398538 303694 Profit for the year from continuing operations attributable to ordinary shareholders of the Group 405626 367625 282131 Profit for the year from discontinued operations attributable to ordinary shareholders of the Group 31989 30913 21563 Weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding during the year 37697497 38266383 38314369 Basic earnings per share 11.6086 10.4148 7.9264 Earnings per share from continuing operations 10.7600 9.6070 7.3636 Earnings per share from discontinued operations 0.8486 0.8078 0.
DILUTED EARNINGS PER SHARE Effect of dilution on weighted average number of ordinary shares Dilutive unvested share options 1825434 1233937 Weighted average number of ordinary shares adjusted for the effect of dilution 39522931 39500320 38314369 Diluted earnings per share 11.0724 10.0895 7.9264 Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations 10.2631 9.3069 7.3636 Diluted earnings per share from discontinued operations 0.8093 0.7826 0.5628 NET INTEREST INCOME 2017 2016
Business
Investment
Business Elimination Total
Business
Investment
Business Elimination Total From loans to customers 995731 52 6125 989658 822557 59 5537 817079 From investment securities availableforsale 113290 2415 4680 111025 91099 14 498 90615 From finance lease receivable 14144   14144 10420   10420 From amounts due from credit institutions 17127 10503 5128 22502 7987 4071 398 11660 INTEREST INCOME 1140292 12970 15933 1137329 932063 4144 6433 929774 On client deposits and notes 215683  6309 209374 194047  5465 188582 On amounts owed to credit institutions 170124 15438 72 185490 119439 7312 8139 134890 On debt securities issued 82385 14576 2786 94175 64966 6098 5408 65656 INTEREST EXPENSE 468192 30014 9167 489039 378452 13410 2734 389128 NET INTEREST INCOME 672100 17044 6766 648290 553611 9266 3699 540646
Business
Investment
Business Elimination Total From loans to customers 781842 320 11988 770174 From investment securities availableforsale 69514 42 120 69436 From finance lease receivable 9728   9728 From amounts due from credit institutions 9628 2151 878 10901 INTEREST INCOME 870712 2513 12986 860239 On client deposits and notes 190777  3520 187257 On amounts owed to credit institutions 88669 1183 12978 102830 On debt securities issued 80669 932 13074 68527 INTEREST EXPENSE 360115 2115 3616 358614 NET INTEREST INCOME 510597 398 9370 501625 191 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
Financial
Statements
NET FEE AND COMMISSION INCOMEtel Settlements operations 153529 129792 112540 Guarantees and letters of credit 17378 18893 25930 Cash operations 13238 12965 13822 Currency conversion operations 446 585 1550 Brokerage service fees 1766 1040 553 Advisory  1379 465 Other 4035 4927 2904 FEE AND COMMISSION INCOME 190392 169581 157764 Settlements operations 48103 34304 29371 Cash operations 5156 5807 4670 Guarantees and letters of credit 2192 2880 3836 Insurance brokerage service fees 3148 2431 625 Currency conversion operations 27 20 62 Other 1716 1662 1104 FEE AND COMMISSION EXPENSE 60342 47104 39668 NET FEE AND COMMISSION INCOME 130050 122477 118096 GROSS INSURANCE PROFIT Net insurance premiums earned net insurance claims incurred and respective gross insurance profit for the years ended 31 December 2017 31 December 2016 and 31 December 2015 comprisedtel Life insurance contracts premium written 8772 7488 6850 General insurance contracts premium written 69081 59809 57492 TOTAL PREMIUMS WRITTEN 77853 67297 64342 Gross change in life provision 24 5 289 Gross change in general insurance contracts unearned premium provision 2528 4344 3740 TOTAL GROSS PREMIUMS EARNED ON INSURANCE CONTRACTS 75301 62958 60891 Reinsurers share of life insurance contracts premium written 622 560 530 Reinsurers share of general insurance contracts premium written 23375 19847 20402 Reinsurers share of change in life provision 76 5 1 Reinsurers share of change in general insurance contracts unearned premium provision 983 149 237 TOTAL REINSURERS SHARE OF GROSS EARNED PREMIUMS ON INSURANCE CONTRACTS 22938 20551 21168 NET INSURANCE PREMIUMS EARNED 52363 42407 39723 Life insurance claims paid 3167 2388 1576 General insurance claims paid 31308 23430 20639 TOTAL INSURANCE CLAIMS PAID 34475 25818 22215 Reinsurers share of life insurance claims paid 77 181 54 Reinsurers share of general insurance claims paid 9025 7530 4186 Gross change in total reserves for claims 6178 2653 1466 Reinsurers share of change in total reserves for claims 6453 2922 673 NET INSURANCE CLAIMS INCURRED 25098 17838 20114 GROSS INSURANCE PROFIT 27265 24569 19609 GROSS REAL ESTATE PROFITtel Revenue from sale of apartments 92643 96373 44917 Revaluation of investment property developed by the Group 24033 959 7083 Operating lease income 3479 2251 1882 REAL ESTATE REVENUE 120155 99583 53882 Cost of real estate 85765 81098 39721 GROSS REAL ESTATE PROFIT 34390 18485 14161 192 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC GROSS UTILITY PROFITtel Revenue from water supply 117454 51230 Revenue from electric power sales 9754 5117 UTILITY AND ENERGY REVENUE 127208 56347 Cost of water supply 36886 17341 Cost of electric power sales 2312 465 COST OF UTILITY AND ENERGY 39198 17806 GROSS UTILITY AND ENERGY PROFIT 88010 38541 GROSS OTHER INVESTMENT PROFITtel Gross profit from beverage production and distribution 23128 11150 10079 Net gains from revaluation of other investment properties 652 2074 7267 Net gain from sale of PPE and IP 41 341 46 Other investment profit 6809 7723 989 GROSS OTHER INVESTMENT PROFIT 30630 21288 18381 SALARIES AND OTHER EMPLOYEE BENEFITS AND GENERAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES SALARIES AND OTHER EMPLOYEE BENEFITStel Salaries and bonuses 225690 179000 155728 Social security costs 3870 3049 2987 Pension costs 982 804 713 SALARIES AND OTHER EMPLOYEE BENEFITS 230542 182853 159428 The average number of staff employed by the Group for the years ended 31 December 2017 31 December 2016 and 31 December 2015 wastel The Bank 5248 4729 4591 Insurance 303 272 279 GGU 2454 2326 0 Other 1378 1034 1062 AVERAGE TOTAL NUMBER OF STAFF EMPLOYED 10038 8936 6436 Salaries and bonuses include GEL 56649 GEL 45992 and GEL 31219 of the Equity Compensation Plan costs for the years ended 31 December 2017 31 December 2016 and 31 December 2015 respectively associated with the existing sharebased compensation scheme approved in the Group Notes 30 and 34.
GENERAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSEStel Occupancy and rent 26253 20172 17202 Marketing and advertising 25492 16709 10375 Legal and other professional services 17560 13248 11822 Repairs and maintenance 14847 10989 10088 Operating taxes 12842 8895 5695 Office supplies 7902 5659 5244 Corporate hospitality and entertainment 6315 5706 4077 Communication 6306 5362 5667 Personnel training and recruitment 3623 2653 1681 Insurance 3504 1642 1160 Security 2605 1812 1971 Travel expenses 2396 1510 1812 Other 6532 2672 4570 GENERAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES 136177 97029 81364 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 193 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
Financial
Statements
SALARIES AND OTHER EMPLOYEE BENEFITS AND GENERAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES CONTINUED AUDITORS REMUNERATION Auditors remuneration is included within legal and other professional services expenses above and comprisestel Fees payable for the audit of the Companys current year Annual Report 529 423 405 Fees payable for other services Audit of the Companys subsidiaries 2807 2990 2057 TOTAL AUDIT FEES 3336 3413 2462 Auditrelated assurance services Review of the Companys and Subsidiaries interim accounts 711 637 351 Other assurance services 513 590 1237 TOTAL AUDITRELATED FEES 1224 1227 1588 Nonaudit services Tax compliance services  49 Tax advisory services   194 Corporate finance services 54  1724 Other nonaudit services 36 41 TOTAL OTHER SERVICES FEES 90 90 1918 TOTAL FEES 4650 4730 5968 The figures shown in the above table relate to fees paid to Ernst and Young LLP and its associates.
Fees paid to other auditors not associated with EY in respect of the audit of the parent and Groups subsidiaries were GEL 105 2016 GEL 111 2015 GEL 40 and in respect of other services of the Group were GEL 400 2016 GEL 328 2015 GEL 200.
NET NONRECURRING ITEMStel Gain on bargain purchase Note 5 260 36915 Termination benefits 1394 9820 1598 Gain from the sale of Class C and Class B shares of Visa Inc.
Gain on reclassification of AFS investment to investment in associate  9626 Loss from full redemption of debt securities issued  43919 Consulting costs  5258 Loss from remeasurement of investment in associate  5145 Writeoff of miscellaneous healthcarerelated assets Impairment of prepayments  2205 2503 Impairment of property and equipment and intangible assets  1403 426 Reversal of impairment on property and equipment   1524 Loss from early repayments of borrowings from international credit institutions and debt securities issued   4519 JSC PrivatBank integration costs   3731 Impairment of finance lease receivables   1969 Other 3789 7899 322 TOTAL NONRECURRING EXPENSELOSS 4923 12682 12900 NET NONRECURRING EXPENSELOSS 4923 12682 12900 194 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC SHAREBASED PAYMENTS EXECUTIVES EQUITY COMPENSATION PLAN In 2015 the Group set up Executive Equity Compensation Trustee  Sanne Fiduciary Services Limited the Trustee which acts as the trustee of the Groups Executives Equity Compensation Plan EECP.
In 2017 the Trustee has repurchased 784084 shares 2016 768953 shares and 2015 282657 shares.
In February 2017 BGEOs Remuneration Committee resolved to award 323950 ordinary shares of BGEO to the members of the Management Board and 73550 ordinary shares of BGEO to the Groups 20 executives.
Shares awarded to the Management Board and the other 20 executives are subject to threeyear vesting for Management Board and threeyear vesting for executives with continuous employment being the only vesting condition for both awards.
The Group considers 28 February 2017 as the grant date.
The Group estimates that the fair value of the shares awarded on 28 February 2017 was GEL 90.01 per share.
In February 2016 BGEOs Remuneration Committee resolved to award 320500 ordinary shares of BGEO to the members of the Management Board and 52600 ordinary shares of BGEO to the Groups 19 executives.
Shares awarded to the Management Board and the other 19 executives are subject to twoyear vesting for Management Board and threeyear vesting for executives with continuous employment being the only vesting condition for both awards.
The Group considers 12 February 2016 as the grant date.
The Group estimates that the fair value of the shares awarded on 12 February 2016 was GEL 57.83 per share.
In March 2015 BGEOs Remuneration Committee resolved to award 153500 ordinary shares of BGEO to the members of the Management Board and 107215 ordinary shares of BGEO to the Groups 24 executives.
Shares awarded to the Management Board and the other 24 executives are subject to twoyear vesting with continuous employment being the only vesting condition for both awards.
The Group considers 19 March 2015 as the grant date.
The Group estimates that the fair value of the shares awarded on 19 March 2015 was Georgian Lari 57.41 per share.
In August 2015 the Management Board members signed new threeyear fixed contingent sharebased compensation agreements with a total of 934000 ordinary shares of BGEO.
The total amount of shares fixed to each executive will be awarded in three equal installments during the three consecutive years starting January 2017 of which each award will be subject to a fouryear vesting period.
The Group considers 24 August 2015 as the grant date for the awards.
The Group estimates that the fair value of the shares on 24 August 2015 was GEL 59.17.
At the end of 2016 and during 2017 the new Management Board members signed new threeyear fixed contingent sharebased compensation agreements with a total of 141000 ordinary shares of BGEO.
The total amount of shares fixed to each executive will be awarded in three equal installments during the three consecutive years starting January 2018 of which each award will be subject to a fouryear vesting period.
The Group considers 11 October 2016 18 October 2016 and 1 March 2017 as the grant dates for the awards.
The Group estimates that the fair value of the shares on 11 October 2016 18 October 2016 and 1 March 2017 were GEL 86.4 87.6 and 92.2 respectively.
At the end of 2015 and during 2016 the new Management Board members signed new threeyear fixed contingent sharebased compensation agreements with the total of 225000 ordinary shares of BGEO.
The total amount of shares fixed to each executive will be awarded in three equal installments during the 3 consecutive years starting January 2017 of which each award will be subject to a fouryear vesting period.
The Group considers 30 December 2015 and 6 September 2016 as the grant date for the awards.
The Group estimates that the fair value of the shares on 30 December 2015 and 6 September 2016 were Georgian Lari 68.30 and 90.22 respectively.
The Bank grants share compensation to its nonexecutive employees.
In February 2017 February 2016 and March 2015 the Supervisory Board of the Bank resolved to award 131710 91851 and 111298 ordinary shares to its nonexecutive employees respectively.
All these awards are subject to threeyear vesting with continuous employment being the only vesting condition for all awards.
The Group considers 28 February 2017 12 February 2016 and 19 March 2015 as the grant dates of these awards respectively.
The Group estimates that the fair values of the shares awarded on 28 February 2017 12 February 2016 and 19 March 2015 were GEL 90.01 57.83 and 57.41 per share respectively.
SUMMARY
Fair value of the shares granted at the measurement date is determined based on available market quotations.
The weighted average fair value of sharebased awards at the grant date comprised GEL 89.81 per share in year ended 31 December 2017 31 December 2016 GEL 66.19 per share 31 December 2015 GEL 58.74.
The Groups total sharebased payment expenses for the year ended 31 December 2017 comprised GEL 56649 31 December 2016 GEL 45992 31 December 2015 GEL 31219 and are included in salaries and other employee benefits as salaries and bonuses.
Below is the summary of the sharebased paymentsrelated datatel Total number of equity instruments awarded 670210 689951 1536013 Among them to top management 464950 545500 1106000 Weighted average value at grant date per share GEL in full amount 89.81 66.19 58.74 VALUE AT GRANT DATE TOTAL GEL 60194 45671 90228 TOTAL EXPENSE RECOGNISED DURING THE YEAR GEL 56649 45992 31219 2015 award includes fixed contingent sharebased compensation of 1164000 ordinary shares per new employment agreements signed on 24 August 2015 for subsequent consecutive threeyear period including 934000 for the Management Board members.
During 2017 BGEO Directors exercised 126000 shares 2016 115000 2015 147500 with fair value of GEL 12049 2016 GEL 10760 2015 GEL 8251.
Weighted average share price comprised GEL 95.63 per share 2016 GEL 93.57 2015 GEL 55.94.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 195 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
Financial
Statements
RISK MANAGEMENT
INTRODUCTION
Risk is inherent to the Groups activities but it is managed through a process of ongoing identification measurement and monitoring subject to risk limits and other controls.
This process of risk management is critical to the Groups continuing profitability and each individual within the Group is accountable for the risk exposures relating to his or her responsibilities.
The Group is exposed to credit risk liquidity risk and market risk the latter being subdivided into trading and nontrading risks.
It is also subject to operational risks.
The independent risk control process does not include business risks such as changes in the environment technology and industry.
They are monitored through the Groups strategic planning process.
RISK MANAGEMENT STRUCTURE
AUDIT COMMITTEE The Audit Committee assists the Board in relation to the oversight of the Groups financial and reporting processes.
It monitors the integrity of the financial statements and is responsible for governance around both the internal audit function and external auditor reporting back to the Board.
It reviews the effectiveness of the policies procedures and systems in place related to among other operational risks compliance IT and IS including cybersecurity and works closely with the Risk Committee in connection with assessing the effectiveness of the risk management and internal control framework.
RISK COMMITTEE The Risk Committee assists the Board in relation to the oversight of risk.
It reviews the Groups risk appetite in line with strategy identifies and monitors risk exposure and the risk management infrastructure oversees the implementation of strategy to address risk and in conjunction with the Audit Committee assesses the strength and effectiveness of the risk management and internal control framework.
MANAGEMENT BOARD The Management Board has overall responsibility for the Banks asset liability and risk management activities policies and procedures.
In order to effectively implement the risk management system the Management Board delegates individual risk management functions to each of the various decisionmaking and execution bodies within the Bank.
BANK ASSET AND LIABILITY MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE The Banks Asset and Liability Management Committee ALCO is the core risk management body that establishes policies and guidelines with respect to capital adequacy market risks and respective limits funding liquidity risk and respective limits interest rate and prepayment risks and respective limits money market general terms and credit exposure limits that designs and implements respective risk management and stress testing models in practice and that regularly monitors compliance with the preset risk limits.
INTERNAL AUDIT The Internal Audit Department is responsible for the annual audit of the Groups risk management internal control and corporate governance processes with the aim of reducing the levels of operational and other risks auditing the Groups internal control systems and detecting any infringements or errors on the part of the Groups departments and divisions.
It examines both the adequacy of and the Groups compliance with those procedures.
The Groups Internal Audit Department discusses the results of all assessments with management and reports its findings and recommendations to the Audit Committee.
RISK MEASUREMENT AND REPORTING SYSTEMS The Groups risks are measured using a method which reflects both the expected loss likely to arise in normal circumstances and unexpected losses which are an estimate of the ultimate actual loss based on different forecasting models.
The models make use of probabilities derived from historical experience adjusted to reflect the economic environment.
The Group runs three different basic scenarios of which one is Base Case forecast under normal business conditions and the other two are Troubled and Distressed Scenarios which are worse and the worst case scenarios respectively that would arise in the event that extreme events which are unlikely to occur do in fact occur.
Monitoring and controlling risks is primarily performed based on limits established by the Group.
These limits reflect the business strategy and market environment of the Group as well as the level of risk that the Group is willing to accept with additional emphasis on selected industries.
In addition the Group monitors and measures the overall risk bearing capacity in relation to the aggregate risk exposure across all risks types and activities.
Information compiled from all the businesses is examined and processed in order to analyse control and identify risks early.
This information is presented and explained to the Management Board and the Head of each business division.
The reports include aggregate credit exposures and their limits exceptions to those limits liquidity ratios and liquidity limits market risk ratios and their limits and changes to the risk profile.
Senior management assesses the appropriateness of the allowance for credit losses on a monthly basis.
The Management Board receives a comprehensive Credit Risk report and ALCO report once a month.
These reports are designed to provide all the necessary information to assess and conclude on the risks of the Group.
For all levels throughout the Group specifically tailored risk reports are prepared and distributed in order to ensure that all business divisions have access to extensive relevant and uptodate information.
A daily briefing is given to the Management Board and all other relevant employees of the Group on the utilisation of market limits proprietary investments and liquidity plus any other risk developments.
RISK MITIGATION As part of its overall risk management the Group uses derivatives and other instruments to manage exposures resulting from changes in interest rates foreign currencies equity risks credit risks and exposures arising from forecast transactions.
While these are intended for hedging they do not qualify for hedge accounting.
The Group actively uses collateral to reduce its credit risks see overhead for more detail.
196 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC
RISK MANAGEMENT CONTINUED
INTRODUCTION CONTINUED EXCESSIVE RISK CONCENTRATION Concentrations arise when a number of counterparties are engaged in similar business activities or activities in the same geographic region or these counterparties represent related parties to each other or have similar economic features that would cause their ability to meet contractual obligations to be similarly affected by changes in economic political or other conditions.
Concentrations also involve combined aggregate exposures of large and significant credits compared to the total outstanding balance of the respective financial instrument.
Concentrations indicate the relative sensitivity of the Groups performance to developments affecting a particular industry or geographical location.
In order to avoid excessive concentrations of risks the Groups policies and procedures include specific guidelines to focus on maintaining a diversified portfolio of both financial assets as well as financial liabilities.
Identified concentrations of credit risks or liquidityrepayment risks are controlled and managed accordingly.
CREDIT RISK Credit risk is the risk that the Group will incur a loss because its customers clients or counterparties fail to discharge their contractual obligations.
The Group manages and controls credit risk by setting limits on the amount of risk it is willing to accept for individual counterparties and for geographical industry product and currency concentrations and by monitoring exposures in relation to such limits.
The Group has established a credit quality review process to provide early identification of possible changes in the creditworthiness of counterparties including regular collateral revisions.
Counterparty limits are established by the use of a credit risk classification system which assigns each counterparty a risk rating.
Risk ratings are subject to regular revision.
The credit quality review process allows the Group to assess the potential loss as a result of the risks to which it is exposed and take corrective action.
The maximum credit exposure is limited to carrying value of respective instruments and notional amounts of guarantees and commitments provided.
DERIVATIVE FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS Credit risk arising from derivative financial instruments is at any time limited to those with positive fair values as recorded in the statement of the financial position.
CREDITRELATED COMMITMENTS RISKS The Group makes available to its customers guarantees which may require that the Group make payments on their behalf.
Such payments are collected from customers based on the terms of the letter of credit.
They expose the Group to similar risks to loans and these are mitigated by the same control processes and policies.
CREDIT QUALITY PER CLASS OF FINANCIAL ASSETS The credit quality of financial assets is managed by the Group through internal credit ratings.
The table below shows the credit quality by class of asset for loanrelated lines in the statement of financial position based on the Groups credit rating system.
Neither past due nor impaired 31 December 2017 Notes
Standard grade
Past due or individually impaired Total Amounts due from credit institutions 9 1225829 118   1225947 Debt investment securities availableforsale 10 1563515    1563515 Loans to customers 11 Commercial loans 1766329 511296 6193 310606 2594424 Consumer loans 1580503 37612 31915 101076 1751106 Micro and SME loans 1547233 105302 30019 93490 1776044 Residential mortgage loans 1619638 28961 19783 44133 1712515 Gold  pawn loans 65865   2075 67940 6579568 683171 87910 551380 7902029 Finance lease receivables 11 48069 12161 2063 5393 67686 TOTAL 9416981 695450 89973 556773 10759177 Neither past due nor impaired 31 December 2016 Notes
Standard grade
Past due or individually impaired Total Amounts due from credit institutions 9 1049889 5094   1054983 Debt investment securities availableforsale 10 1284555    1284555 Loans to customers 11 Commercial loans 1617466 588526 17814 475700 2699506 Consumer loans 1243553 21520 23740 78415 1367228 Micro and SME loans 1225610 113565 37761 117001 1493937 Residential mortgage loans 1134266 49285 15052 35573 1234176 Gold  pawn loans 56977   3708 60685 5277872 772896 94367 710397 6855532 Finance lease receivables 11 28756 9925 3089 6497 48267 TOTAL 7641072 787915 97456 716894 9243337 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 197 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
Financial
Statements
RISK MANAGEMENT CONTINUED
CREDIT RISK CONTINUED Past due loans to customers analysed by age below include those that are past due by at least one day and are not impaired.
Neither past due nor impaired 31 December 2015 Notes
Standard grade
Past due or individually impaired Total Amounts due from credit institutions 9 731365    731365 Debt investment securities availableforsale 10 902419    902419 Loans to customers 11 Commercial loans 1789428 196607 57085 354661 2397781 Consumer loans 1047775 22810 22642 71880 1165107 Micro and SME loans 892014 80064 27828 42023 1041929 Residential mortgage loans 750455 22033 11223 30633 814344 Gold  pawn loans 61140    61140 4540812 321514 118778 499197 5480301 Finance lease receivables 11 16442 12270 3531 10669 42912 TOTAL 6191038 333784 122309 509866 7156997 It is the Groups policy to maintain accurate and consistent risk ratings across the credit portfolio.
This facilitates focused management of the applicable risks and the comparison of credit exposures across all lines of business geographic regions and products.
The rating system is supported by a variety of financial analytics to provide the main inputs for the measurement of counterparty risk.
All internal risk ratings are tailored to the various categories and are derived in accordance with the Groups rating policy.
Attributable risk ratings are assessed and updated regularly.
The credit risk assessment policy for nonpast due and individually nonimpaired financial assets has been determined by the Group as follows A financial asset that is neither past due nor impaired at the reporting date but historically used to be past due no more than 30 days is assessed as a financial asset with High grade A financial asset that is neither past due nor impaired at the reporting date but historically used to be past due more than 30 but less than 60 days is assessed as a financial asset with Standard grade A financial asset that is neither past due nor impaired at the reporting date but historically used to be past due more than 60 days or the borrower of this loan has at least an additional borrowing in past due more than 60 days as at reporting date is assessed as a financial asset with SubStandard grade.
AGEING ANALYSIS OF PAST DUE BUT NOT INDIVIDUALLY IMPAIRED LOANS PER CLASS OF FINANCIAL ASSETS 31 December 2017 Less than 30 days 31 to 60 days 61 to 90 days More than 90 days Total Loans to customers Consumer loans 42625 15044 12321 28907 98897 Micro and SME loans 7486 8822 4777 19288 40373 Residential mortgage loans 14446 4969 2144 7903 29462 Commercial loans 148tel2374 Finance lease receivables 2499 227  74 2800 TOTAL 68543 29514 19450 56399 173906 31 December 2016 Less than 30 days 31 to 60 days 61 to 90 days More than 90 days Total Loans to customers Consumer loans 34353 10940 9349 20995 75637 Micro and SME loans 20035 9494 6479 29874 65882 Residential mortgage loans 10074 4472 1840 7319 23705 Commercial loans 10235 4558 387 1621 16801 Finance lease receivables 256tel4022 TOTAL 77262 29832 18404 60549 186047 31 December 2015 Less than 30 days 31 to 60 days 61 to 90 days More than 90 days Total Loans to customers Consumer loans 29592 8498 6930 23724 68744 Micro and SME loans 5196 4148 1000 4259 14603 Residential mortgage loans 7594 1207 908 5023 14732 Commercial loans 21727 1227 25 1596 24575 Finance lease receivables 1520 342 535 4547 6944 TOTAL 65629 15422 9398 39149 129598 198 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC
RISK MANAGEMENT CONTINUED
CREDIT RISK CONTINUED See Note 11 for more detailed information with respect to the allowance for impairment of loans to customers and finance lease receivables.
The Group specifically monitors performance of the loans with overdue payments in arrears for more than 90 days.
The gross carrying value i. as at 31 December 2017 31 December 2016 and 31 December 2015 respectively.
CARRYING AMOUNT PER CLASS OF FINANCIAL ASSETS WHOSE TERMS HAVE BEEN RENEGOTIATED The table below shows the carrying amount for renegotiated financial assets by class as at 31 Decembertel Loans to customers Commercial loans 103365 235026 141294 Micro and SME loans 47539 37003 20890 Residential mortgage loans 44058 38757 28594 Consumer loans 39318 29828 18243 Finance lease receivables 5508 5829 2684 TOTAL 239788 346443 211705 IMPAIRMENT ASSESSMENT The main considerations for the loan impairment assessment include whether any payments of principal or interest are overdue by any number of days or there are any known difficulties in the cash flows of counterparties credit rating downgrades or infringement of the original terms of the contract.
The Group addresses impairment assessment in two areas individually assessed allowances and collectively assessed allowances.
Loans are considered to be individually impaired if they are past due by certain number of days as prescribed per the Group methodology or history of the debt service is deteriorated by a certain percentage as defined per the Group methodology or any other defined event of a default is identified.
Impairment for all such loans is assessed individually rather than through a collective impairment assessment model of the Group.
INDIVIDUALLY ASSESSED ALLOWANCES For loan loss allowance determination purposes the Group considers all individually significant loans and classifies them between being individually impaired and not impaired.
The allowance for those individually significant loans that are determined to be individually impaired is determined through individual assessment of the associated credit risk.
The allowances for nonsignificant loans that are determined to be individually impaired are also individually assessed.
The allowance for losses for individually significant loans that are determined not to be individually impaired is assessed through the collective assessment approach described below.
Items considered when determining allowance amounts include the sustainability of the counterpartys business plan its ability to improve performance once a financial difficulty has arisen projected receipts and the expected dividend payout should bankruptcy ensue the availability of other financial support and the realisable value of collateral the timing of the expected cash flows and past history of the debt service of the borrower.
Impairment losses are evaluated at each reporting date unless unforeseen circumstances require more careful attention.
COLLECTIVELY ASSESSED ALLOWANCES Allowances are assessed collectively for all loans including but not limited to credit cards residential mortgages and unsecured consumer lending commercial lending etc. both significant as well as nonsignificant where there is not yet objective evidence of individual impairment.
Allowances are evaluated on each reporting date with each portfolio receiving a separate review.
The collective assessment takes into account the impairment that is likely to be present in the portfolio even though there is not yet objective evidence of the impairment in an individual assessment.
Impairment losses are estimated by taking into consideration the following information historical losses on the portfolio current economic conditions the appropriate delay between the time a loss is likely to have been incurred and the time it will be identified as requiring an individually assessed impairment allowance and expected receipts and recoveries once impaired.
Local management is responsible for deciding the length of this period which can extend for as long as one year depending on the product.
The impairment allowance is then reviewed by credit management to ensure alignment with the Groups overall policy.
Financial guarantees and letters of credit are assessed and provision is made in a similar manner to loans.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 199 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
Financial
Statements
RISK MANAGEMENT CONTINUED
CREDIT RISK CONTINUED The geographical concentration of the Groups assets and liabilities is set out below Georgia OECD CIS and other foreign countries Total
Cash and cash equivalents 552723 932030 97682 1582435 Amounts due from credit institutions 1032749 182699 10499 1225947 Investment securities 931986 559468 73415 1564869 Loans to customers and finance lease receivables 7290710  399740 7690450 All other assets 2980244 40722 84002 3104968 12788412 1714919 665338 15168669
Client deposits and notes 4954215 655034 1103233 6712482 Amounts owed to credit institutions 1235669 1844350 75820 3155839 Debt securities issued 346941 1333699 28512 1709152 All other liabilities 823725 28801 6300 858826 7360550 3861884 1213865 12436299 NET BALANCE SHEET POSITION 5427862 2146965 548527 2732tel Georgia OECD CIS and other foreign countries Total Georgia OECD CIS and other foreign countries Total
Cash and cash equivalents 661207 837721 74682 1573610 623904 662296 146734 1432934 Amounts due from credit institutions 1048136 3287 3560 1054983 630217 97242 3906 731365 Investment securities 914446 286832 84725 1286003 824820 79047  903867 Loans to customers and finance lease receivables 6286382  362100 6648482 5002004  320113 5322117 All other assets 2343008 16455 31635 2391098 1594962 63265 30581 1688808 11253179 1144295 556702 12954176 8675907 901850 501334 10079091
Client deposits and notes 3872607 560582 949509 5382698 3522316 422649 806422 4751387 Amounts owed to credit institutions 1676312 1682934 110845 3470091 508287 1063404 217371 1789062 Debt securities issued 200055 1031462 24126 1255643 98859 940945  1039804 All other liabilities 436645 13403 7483 457531 441116 8296 7334 456746 6185619 3288381 1091963 10565963 4570578 2435294 1031127 8036999 NET BALANCE SHEET POSITION 5067560 2144086 535261 2388213 4105329 1533444 529793 2042092 LIQUIDITY RISK AND FUNDING MANAGEMENT Liquidity risk is the risk that the Group will be unable to meet its payment obligations when they fall due under normal and stress circumstances.
To limit this risk management has arranged diversified funding sources in addition to its core deposit base manages assets with liquidity in mind and monitors future cash flows and liquidity on a regular basis.
This incorporates an assessment of expected cash flows and the availability of high grade collateral which could be used to secure additional funding if required.
The Group maintains a portfolio of highly marketable and diverse assets that can be easily liquidated in the event of an unforeseen interruption of cash flow.
The Group also has committed lines of credit that it can access to meet liquidity needs.
In addition the Group maintains a cash deposit obligatory reserve with the NBG the amount of which depends on the level of customer funds attracted.
The liquidity position is assessed and managed by the Group primarily on a standalone Bank basis based on certain liquidity ratios established by the NBG.
Minimum NBG requirement for liquidity ratio is 30% calculated as average liquid assets during the month as defined by the NBG divided by liabilities for the same month with certain exceptions established by the NBG.
For the years ended 31 December 2017 31 December 2016 and 31 December 2015 these ratios were as followstel Average liquidity ratio 39.8% 43.6% 38.1% Maximum liquidity ratio 47.0% 62.5% 48.0% Minimum liquidity ratio 31.3% 34.1% 28.9% 200 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC
RISK MANAGEMENT CONTINUED
LIQUIDITY RISK AND FUNDING MANAGEMENT CONTINUED The average liquidity ratio is calculated on a standalone basis for JSC Bank of Georgia as the annual average arithmetic mean of daily liquidity ratios computed as the ratio of liquid assets to liabilities determined by the National Bank of Georgia as follows Liquid assets comprise cash cash equivalents and other assets that are immediately convertible into cash.
Those assets include investment securities issued by the Georgian Government plus Certificates of Deposit issued by NBG and do not include amounts due from credit institutions other than interbank deposits andor debt securities of Governments and Central Banks of nonOECD countries amounts in nostro accounts which are under lien impaired interbank deposits and amounts on obligatory reserve with NBG that are pledged due to borrowings from NBG.
Liabilities comprise the total balance sheet liabilities less amounts due to credit institutions that are to be exercised or settled later than six months from the reporting date plus offbalance sheet commitments with residual maturity subsequent to the reporting date of less than six months.
Offbalance sheet commitments include all commitments except financial guarantees and letters of credit that are fully collateralised by customer deposits placed in the Bank and commitments due to dealing operations with foreign currencies.
The maximum and minimum liquidity ratios are taken from historical data of the appropriate reporting years.
In addition on 15 May 2017 NBG issued an Order on Liquidity Coverage Ratio for Commercial Banks which became effective from 1 September 2017.
Pursuant to that order banks are required to maintain a liquidity coverage ratio which is defined as the ratio of high quality liquid assets to net cash outflow over the next 30 days.
The order requires that absent a stressperiod the value of the ratio be no lower than 100%.
The liquidity coverage ratio as at 31 December 2017 was 112.4%.
The Group also matches the maturity of financial assets and financial liabilities and imposes a maximum limit on negative gaps compared to the Banks standalone total regulatory capital calculated per NBG regulation.
The ratios are assessed and monitored monthly and compared against set limits.
In the case of deviations amendment strategiesactions are discussed and approved by ALCO.
The table below summarises the maturity profile of the Groups financial liabilities based on contractual undiscounted repayment obligations.
Repayments which are subject to notice are treated as if notice were to be given immediately.
However the Group expects that many customers will not request repayment on the earliest date the Bank could be required to pay and the table does not reflect the expected cash flows indicated by the Banks deposit retention history.
Financial liabilities As at 31 December 2017 Less than 3 months 3 to 12 months 1 to 5 years
5 years Total Client deposits and notes 2566259 3571233 624661 65597 6827750 Amounts owed to credit institutions 1319622 566406 1084701 756014 3726743 Debt securities issued 42908 173476 1058146 951146 2225676 Derivative financial liabilities 3139 809   3948 Other liabilities 47263 35177 41528 16 123984 TOTAL UNDISCOUNTED FINANCIAL LIABILITIES 3979191 4347101 2809036 1772773 12908101 Excluding discontinued operations.
Financial liabilities As at 31 December 2016 Less than 3 months 3 to 12 months 1 to 5 years
5 years Total Client deposits and notes 1892485 3066596 503357 49205 5511643 Amounts owed to credit institutions 1745625 578801 1173071 451051 3948548 Debt securities issued 91251 127073 493251 947050 1658625 Derivative financial liabilities 2188 6589 634  9411 Other liabilities 68780 108734 23519 22 201055 TOTAL UNDISCOUNTED FINANCIAL LIABILITIES 3800329 3887793 2193832 1447328 11329282 Financial liabilities As at 31 December 2015 Less than 3 months 3 to 12 months 1 to 5 years
5 years Total Client deposits and notes 2968883 1258421 613914 60094 4901312 Amounts owed to credit institutions 318902 376323 628932 524874 1849031 Debt securities issued 51564 24695 1070369  1146628 Other liabilities 53099 36939 19266 4 109308 TOTAL UNDISCOUNTED FINANCIAL LIABILITIES 3392448 1696378 2332481 584972 8006279 The table below shows the contractual expiry by maturity of the Groups financial commitments and contingencies.
Contractual expiry by maturity of the Groups financial commitments and contingencies Less than 3 months 3 to 12 months 1 to 5 years
5 years Total 31 December 2017 396907 194430 326812 110425 1028574 31 December 2016 401159 230831 303451 41966 977407 31 December 2015 411175 300894 142915 17281 872265 The Group expects that not all of the contingent liabilities or commitments will be drawn before expiry of the commitments.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 201 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
Financial
Statements
RISK MANAGEMENT CONTINUED
LIQUIDITY RISK AND FUNDING MANAGEMENT CONTINUED The maturity analysis does not reflect the historical stability of current accounts.
Their liquidation has historically taken place over a longer period than indicated in the tables above.
These balances are included in amounts due in less than three months in the tables above.
Included in client deposits and notes are term deposits of individuals.
In accordance with the Georgian legislation the Bank is obliged to repay such deposits upon demand of a depositor Note 17.
MARKET RISK Market risk is the risk that the fair value or future cash flows of financial instruments will fluctuate due to changes in market variables such as interest rates foreign exchanges and equity prices.
The Group classifies exposures to market risk into either trading or nontrading portfolios.
Trading and nontrading positions are managed and monitored using sensitivity analysis.
INTEREST RATE RISK Interest rate risk arises from the possibility that changes in interest rates will affect future cash flows or the fair values of financial instruments.
The following table demonstrates the sensitivity to a reasonably possible change in interest rates with all other variables held constant on the Groups consolidated income statement.
The sensitivity of the consolidated income statement is the effect of the assumed changes in interest rates on the net interest income for the year based on the floating rate for nontrading financial assets and financial liabilities held at 31 December 2017.
Changes in basis points are calculated as standard deviations of daily changes in floating rates over the last month multiplied by respective floating rates.
During the years ended 31 December 2017 2016 and 2015 sensitivity analysis did not reveal any significant potential effect on the Groups equity.
Currency
Increase in basis points Sensitivity of net interest income Sensitivity of other comprehensive income GEL 13 443 1159 EUR 1 22 USD 3 73
Decrease in basis points Sensitivity of net interest income Sensitivity of other comprehensive income GEL 13 443 1159 EUR 1 22 USD 3 73
Increase in basis points Sensitivity of net interest income Sensitivity of other comprehensive income GEL 206 261 1758 EUR 1 1 USD 3 69
Decrease in basis points Sensitivity of net interest income Sensitivity of other comprehensive income GEL 206 261 1758 EUR 1 1 USD 3 69
Increase in basis points Sensitivity of net interest income Sensitivity of other comprehensive income GEL 63 1887 5080 EUR 20 81 USD 5 187
Decrease in basis points Sensitivity of net interest income Sensitivity of other comprehensive income GEL 63 1887 5080 EUR 20 81 USD 5 187  202 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC
RISK MANAGEMENT CONTINUED
MARKET RISK CONTINUED CURRENCY RISK Currency risk is the risk that the value of a financial instrument will fluctuate due to changes in foreign exchange rates.
The Management Board has set limits on positions by currency based on the NBG regulations.
Positions are monitored daily.
The tables below indicate the currencies to which the Group had significant exposure at 31 December 2017 on its monetary assets and liabilities.
The analysis calculates the effect of a reasonably possible movement of the currency rate against the Georgian Lari with all other variables held constant on the income statement due to the fair value of currency sensitive nontrading monetary assets and liabilities.
The reasonably possible movement of the currency rate against the Georgian Lari is calculated as a standard deviation of daily changes in exchange rates over the 12 months.
A negative amount in the table reflects a potential net reduction in income statement or equity while a positive amount reflects a net potential increase.
During the year ended 31 December 2017 year ended 31 December 2016 and year ended 31 December 2015 sensitivity analysis did not reveal any significant potential effect on the Groups equity.
Currency
Change in currency rate in % Effect on profit before tax Change in currency rate in % Effect on profit before tax Change in currency rate in % Effect on profit before tax EUR 12.0% 2487 11.6% 3336 2.9% 1 USD 8.9% 5758 9.3% 3507 1.1% 1329 PREPAYMENT RISK Prepayment risk is the risk that the Group will incur a financial loss because its customers and counterparties repay or request repayment earlier than expected such as fixed rate mortgages when interest rates fall or other credit facilities for similar or whatever reasons.
The Group calculates the effect of early repayments by calculating the weighted average rates of early repayments across each loan product individually applying these historical rates to the outstanding carrying amount of respective products as at the reporting date and multiplying by the weighted average effective annual interest rates for each product.
The model does not make a distinction between different reasons for repayment e. relocation refinancing and renegotiation and takes into account the effect of any prepayment penalties on the Groups income.
The estimated effect of prepayment risk on net interest income of the Group for the years ended 31 December 2017 31 December 2016 and 31 December 2015 is as follows Effect on net interest income 2017 46527 2016 27487 2015 19341 OPERATIONAL RISK Operational risk is the risk of loss arising from systems failure human error fraud or external events.
When controls fail to perform operational risks can cause damage to reputation have legal or regulatory implications or lead to financial loss.
The Group cannot expect to eliminate all operational risks but through a control framework and by monitoring and responding to potential risks the Group is able to manage the risks.
Controls include effective segregation of duties access authorisation and reconciliation procedures staff education and assessment processes including the use of internal audit.
OPERATING ENVIRONMENT Most of the Groups business is concentrated in Georgia.
As an emerging market Georgia does not possess a welldeveloped business and regulatory infrastructure that would generally exist in a more mature market economy.
Operations in Georgia may involve risks that are not typically associated with those in developed markets including the risk that the Georgian Lari is not freely convertible outside the country and undeveloped debt and equity markets.
However over the last few years the Georgian Government has made a number of developments that positively affect the overall investment climate of the country specifically implementing the reforms necessary to create banking judicial taxation and regulatory systems.
This includes the adoption of a new body of legislation including new Tax Code and procedural laws.
In the view of the Board these steps contribute to mitigating the risks of doing business in Georgia.
The existing tendency aimed at the overall improvement of the business environment is expected to persist.
The future stability of the Georgian economy is largely dependent upon these reforms and developments and the effectiveness of economic financial and monetary measures undertaken by the
However the Georgian economy is vulnerable to market downturns and economic slowdowns elsewhere in the world.
INSURANCE RISK The risk under an insurance contract is the risk that an insured event will occur including the uncertainty of the amount and timing of any resulting claim.
The principal risk the Group faces under such contracts is that actual claims and benefit payments exceed the carrying amount of insurance liabilities.
This is influenced by the frequency of claims severity of claims actual benefits paid that are greater than originally estimated and subsequent development of longterm claims.
The variability of risks is improved by diversification of risk of loss to a large portfolio of insurance contracts as a more diversified portfolio is less likely to be affected across the board by change in any subset of the portfolio as well as unexpected outcomes.
The variability of risks is also improved by careful selection and implementation of underwriting strategy and guidelines as well as the use of reinsurance arrangements.
The Group establishes underwriting guidelines and limits which stipulate who may accept what risks and the applicable limits.
These limits are continuously monitored.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 203 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
Financial
Statements
FAIR VALUE MEASUREMENTS FAIR VALUE HIERARCHY For the purpose of fair value disclosures the Group has determined classes of assets and liabilities on the basis of the nature characteristics and risks of the asset or liability.
The following tables show analysis of assets and liabilities measured at fair value or for which fair values are disclosed by level of the fair value hierarchy 31 December 2017 Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total Assets measured at fair value Total investment properties   353565 353565 Land   122394 122394 Residential properties   66206 66206 Nonresidential properties   164965 164965 Investment securities  1563531 1338 1564869 Other assets  derivative financial assets  12392  12392 Other assets  trading securities owned 3191   3191 Total revalued property   252583 252583 Infrastructure assets   252583 252583 Assets for which fair values are disclosed Cash and cash equivalents  1582435  1582435 Amounts due from credit institutions  1225947  1225947 Loans to customers and finance lease receivables   7822351 7822351 Liabilities measured at fair value Other liabilities  derivative financial liabilities  3948  3948 Liabilities for which fair values are disclosed Client deposits and notes  6716763  6716763 Amounts owed to credit institutions  2625385 530454 3155839 Debt securities issued  1355930 364818 1720748 31 December 2016 Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total Assets measured at fair value Total investment properties   288227 288227 Land   118765 118765 Residential properties   82003 82003 Nonresidential properties   87459 87459 Investment securities  1283606 2397 1286003 Other assets  derivative financial assets  1466  1466 Other assets  trading securities owned 1396   1396 Total revalued property   594619 594619 Hospitals and clinics   401053 401053 Infrastructure assets   193566 193566 Assets for which fair values are disclosed Cash and cash equivalents  1573610  1573610 Amounts due from credit institutions  1054983  1054983 Loans to customers and finance lease receivables   6725662 6725662 Liabilities measured at fair value Other liabilities  derivative financial liabilities  9411  9411 Liabilities for which fair values are disclosed Client deposits and notes  5388768  5388768 Amounts owed to credit institutions  3272454 197637 3470091 Debt securities issued  996164 318236 1314400 204 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC FAIR VALUE MEASUREMENTS CONTINUED FAIR VALUE HIERARCHY CONTINUED 31 December 2015 Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total Assets measured at fair value Total investment properties   246398 246398 Land   94476 94476 Residential properties   40873 40873 Nonresidential properties   111049 111049 Investment securities  902419 1448 903867 Other assets  derivative financial assets  42212  42212 Other assets  trading securities owned 1977   1977 Assets for which fair values are disclosed Cash and cash equivalents  1432934  1432934 Amounts due from credit institutions  731365  731365 Loans to customers and finance lease receivables   5284299 5284299 Liabilities measured at fair value Other liabilities  derivative financial liabilities  3243  3243 Liabilities for which fair values are disclosed Client deposits and notes   4777093 4777093 Amounts owed to credit institutions   1789062 1789062 Debt securities issued  938894 131621 1070515 The following is a description of the determination of fair value for financial instruments which are recorded at fair value using valuation techniques.
These incorporate the Groups estimate of assumptions that a market participant would make when valuing the instruments.
DERIVATIVE FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS Derivative financial instruments valued using a valuation technique with market observable inputs are mainly interest rate swaps currency swaps forward foreign exchange contracts and option contracts.
The most frequently applied valuation techniques include forward pricing and swap models using present value calculations as well as standard option pricing models.
The models incorporate various inputs including the credit quality of counterparties foreign exchange spot and forward rates interest rate curves and implied volatilities.
TRADING SECURITIES AND INVESTMENT SECURITIES Trading securities and a certain part of investment securities are quoted equity and debt securities.
Investment securities valued using a valuation technique or pricing models consist of unquoted equity and debt securities.
These securities are valued using models which sometimes only incorporate data observable in the market and at other times use both observable and nonobservable data.
The nonobservable inputs to the models include assumptions regarding the future financial performance of the investee its risk profile and economic assumptions regarding the industry and geographical jurisdiction in which the investee operates.
MOVEMENTS IN LEVEL 3 FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS MEASURED AT FAIR VALUE The following tables show a reconciliation of the opening and closing amounts of Level 3 financial assets which are recorded at fair value At 31
Purchase of
At 31
Other
Reclassification to associates Purchase of
At 31
Purchase sale of AFS securities At 31
Level 3 financial assets Equity investment securities availableforsale 1412 36 1448 9626 9626 949 2397 1059 1338 MOVEMENTS IN LEVEL 3 NONFINANCIAL ASSETS MEASURED AT FAIR VALUE All investment properties and revalued properties of property and equipment are Level 3.
Reconciliations of their opening and closing amounts are provided in Notes 12 and 13 respectively.
IMPACT ON FAIR VALUE OF LEVEL 3 FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS MEASURED AT FAIR VALUE OF CHANGES TO KEY ASSUMPTIONS The following table shows the impact on the fair value of Level 3 instruments of using reasonably possible alternative assumptionstel
Effect of reasonably possible alternative assumptions
Effect of reasonably possible alternative assumptions
Effect of reasonably possible alternative assumptions Level 3 financial assets Equity investment securities availableforsale 1338  200 2397  359 1448  217 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 205 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
Financial
Statements
FAIR VALUE MEASUREMENTS CONTINUED FAIR VALUE HIERARCHY CONTINUED In order to determine reasonably possible alternative assumptions the Group adjusted key unobservable model inputs as follows For equities the Group adjusted the priceoverbookvalue multiple by increasing and decreasing the ratio by 10% which is considered by the Group to be within a range of reasonably possible alternatives based on the priceoverbookvalue multiples used across peers within the same geographic area of the same industry.
DESCRIPTION OF SIGNIFICANT UNOBSERVABLE INPUTS TO VALUATIONS OF NONFINANCIAL ASSETS The following tables show descriptions of significant unobservable inputs to Level 3 valuations of investment properties and revalued properties and equipment
Significant unobservable inputs
Other key information
INVESTMENT
PROPERTY
Land 122394 108723 Market approach Price per square metre 0.111008 Square metres land Increase decrease in the price per square metre would result in increase decrease in fair value 13671 Cost approach Price per square metre Square metres land Increase decrease in the price per square metre would result in increase decrease in fair value
66206 Market approach Price per square metre Square metres building Increase decrease in the price per square metre would result in increase decrease in fair value
82745 Market approach
98mln 0.6 mln Square metres land Increase decrease in the price would result in increase decrease in fair value Square metres building Rent per square metre Square metres building Increase decrease in the rent price would result in increase decrease in fair value 67406 Income approach
10%75% 21% Increase decrease in the occupancy rate would result in increase decrease in fair value
Increase decrease in the average daily rate would result in increase decrease in fair value Land price per square metre Square metres land Increase decrease in the land price per square metre would result in increase decrease in fair value 14814 Cost approach
Square metres building Increase decrease in the depreciated replacement cost per square metre would result in increase decrease in fair value PROPERTY AND
Infrastructure
Discounted cash flows
WACC
Terminal period growth rate 16.5% Pipes and wells equipment NA Increase decrease in WACC would result in decrease increase in fair value increase decrease in terminal growth rate would result in increase decrease in fair value
Market approach Unit costs comparable prices technical parameters 9.1 Increase decrease in the price of comparables would result in increase decrease in fair value Price rate and cost of unobservable inputs in this table are presented in Georgian Lari GEL unless otherwise indicated.
206 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC FAIR VALUE MEASUREMENTS CONTINUED FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS OVERVIEW Set out below is an overview of all financial instruments other than cash and shortterm deposits held by the Group as at 31 December 2017 31 December 2016 and 31 December 2015 31 December 2017 Loans and receivables Availableforsale Fair value through profit or loss FINANCIAL ASSETS Amounts due from credit institutions 1225947 Loans to customers and finance lease receivables 7690450 Accounts receivable and other loans 38944 Equity instruments  1354 384 Debt instruments  1563515 2807 Interest rate contracts   8869 Foreign currency derivative financial instruments   3523 TOTAL 8955341 1564869 15583 FINANCIAL LIABILITIES Client deposits and notes 6712482 Amounts owed to credit institutions 3155839 Debt securities issued 1709152 Trade and other payables in other liabilities 615003 Interest rate contracts   1456 Foreign currency derivative financial instruments   2492 TOTAL 12192476  3948 31 December 2016 31 December 2015 Loans and receivables Availableforsale Fair value through profit or loss Loans and receivables Availableforsale Fair value through profit or loss FINANCIAL ASSETS Amounts due from credit institutions 1054983   731365 Loans to customers and finance lease receivables 6648482   5322117 Accounts receivable and other loans 128506   87972 Equity instruments  1448 261  1448 1505 Debt instruments  1284555 1135  902419 472 Foreign currency derivative financial instruments   1466   42212 TOTAL 7831971 1286003 2862 6141454 903867 44189 FINANCIAL LIABILITIES Client deposits and notes 5382698   4751387 Amounts owed to credit institutions 3470091   1789062 Debt securities issued 1255643   1039804 Trade and other payables in other liabilities 171519   106128 Foreign currency derivative financial instruments   9411   3243 TOTAL 10279951  9411 7686381  3243 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 207 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
Financial
Statements
FAIR VALUE MEASUREMENTS CONTINUED FAIR VALUE OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS THAT ARE CARRIED IN THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOT AT FAIR VALUE Set out below is a comparison by class of the carrying amounts and fair values of the Groups financial instruments that are carried in the financial statements.
The table does not include the fair values of nonfinancial assets and nonfinancial liabilities or fair values of other smaller financial assets and financial liabilities fair values of which are materially close to their carrying values.
Carrying value 2017 Fair value
FINANCIAL ASSETS Cash and cash equivalents 1582435 1582435 Amounts due from credit institutions 1225947 1225947 Loans to customers and finance lease receivables 7690450 7822351 131901 FINANCIAL LIABILITIES Client deposits and notes 6712482 6716763 4281 Amounts owed to credit institutions 3155839 3155839 Debt securities issued 1709152 1720748 11596 TOTAL UNRECOGNISED CHANGE IN UNREALISED FAIR VALUE 116024
Fair value 2016
Carrying value 2015
Unrecognised loss 2015 FINANCIAL ASSETS Cash and cash equivalents 1573610 1573610  1432934 1432934 Amounts due from credit institutions 1054983 1054983  731365 731365 Loans to customers and finance lease receivables 6648482 6725662 77180 5322117 5284299 37818 FINANCIAL LIABILITIES Client deposits and notes 5382698 5388768 6070 4751387 4777093 25706 Amounts owed to credit institutions 3470091 3470091  1789062 1789062 Debt securities issued 1255643 1314400 58757 1039804 1070515 30711 TOTAL UNRECOGNISED CHANGE IN UNREALISED FAIR VALUE 12353 94235 The following describes the methodologies and assumptions used to determine fair values for those financial instruments which are not already recorded at fair value in the consolidated financial statements.
ASSETS FOR WHICH FAIR VALUE APPROXIMATES CARRYING VALUE For financial assets and financial liabilities that are liquid or have a shortterm maturity less than three months it is assumed that the carrying amounts approximate to their fair value.
This assumption is also applied to demand deposits savings accounts without a specific maturity and variable rate financial instruments.
FIXED RATE FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS The fair value of fixed rate financial assets and liabilities carried at amortised cost are estimated by comparing market interest rates when they were first recognised with current market rates offered for similar financial instruments.
The estimated fair value of fixed interest bearing deposits is based on discounted cash flows using prevailing moneymarket interest rates for debts with similar credit risk and maturity.
MATURITY ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL ASSETS AND LIABILITIES The table below shows an analysis of financial assets and liabilities according to their contractual maturities except for current accounts as described below.
See Note 31 Risk management for the Groups contractual undiscounted repayment obligations.
On demand Up to 3 months Up to 6 months Up to 1 year Up to 3 years Up to 5 years
5 years Total Financial assets Cash and cash equivalents 824629 757806      1582435 Amounts due from credit institutions 1003214 185572 3410 21493  1759 10499 1225947 Investment securities 788692 641380 3061 49962 21012 58916 1846 1564869 Loans to customers and finance lease  1233630 609491 1397004 2012016 1156137 1282172 7690450 TOTAL 2616535 2818388 615962 1468459 2033028 1216812 1294517 12063701 Financial liabilities Client deposits and notes 1297682 1253845 608234 2942822 538399 39351 32149 6712482 Amounts owed to credit institutions 205019 1105365 146260 343653 545558 326458 483526 3155839 Debt securities issued  42030 122895 130982 719725 693520  1709152 TOTAL 1502701 2401240 877389 3417457 1803682 1059329 515675 11577473 NET 1113834 417148 261427 1948998 229346 157483 778842 486228 ACCUMULATED GAP 1113834 1530982 1269555 679443 450097 292614 486228 208 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC MATURITY ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL ASSETS AND LIABILITIES CONTINUED
Up to 3 months Up to 6 months Up to 1 year Up to 3 years Up to 5 years
5 years Total Financial assets Cash and cash equivalents 1115012 458598      1573610 Amounts due from credit institutions 944403 14334 19913 69842 5094  1397 1054983 Investment securities 109868 1080617 38414 11488 6269 38971 376 1286003 Loans to customers and finance lease  1124962 501429 1520939 1765099 810045 926008 6648482 TOTAL 2169283 2678511 559756 1602269 1776462 849016 927781 10563078 Financial liabilities Client deposits and notes 1004823 876865 550296 2462509 408091 54055 26059 5382698 Amounts owed to credit institutions 330899 1373489 176065 358190 582783 299309 349356 3470091 Debt securities issued  82247 34338 70208 271276 87892 709682 1255643 TOTAL 1335722 2332601 760699 2890907 1262150 441256 1085097 10108432 NET 833561 345910 200943 1288638 514312 407760 157316 454646 ACCUMULATED GAP 833561 1179471 978528 310110 204202 611962 454646
Up to 3 months Up to 6 months Up to 1 year Up to 3 years Up to 5 years
5 years Total Financial assets Cash and cash equivalents 1072361 360573      1432934 Amounts due from credit institutions 617673 702 28338 82393 309  1950 731365 Investment securities 560120 241481 31247 6531 60244 3057 1187 903867 Loans to customers and finance lease  796765 537690 1024619 1586728 705152 671163 5322117 TOTAL 2250154 1399521 597275 1113543 1647281 708209 674300 8390283 Financial liabilities Client deposits and notes 847003 810072 541142 2008160 444591 80012 20407 4751387 Amounts owed to credit institutions 92617 528644 108023 247414 403528 139573 269263 1789062 Debt securities issued  51457  53703 934644   1039804 TOTAL 939620 1390173 649165 2309277 1782763 219585 289670 7580253 NET 1310534 9348 51890 1195734 135482 488624 384630 810030 ACCUMULATED GAP 1310534 1319882 1267992 72258 63224 425400 810030 The Groups capability to discharge its liabilities relies on its ability to realise equivalent assets within the same period of time.
In the Georgian marketplace where most of the Groups business is concentrated many shortterm credits are granted with the expectation of renewing the loans at maturity.
As such the ultimate maturity of assets may be different from the analysis presented above.
To reflect the historical stability of current accounts the Group calculates the minimal daily balance of current accounts over the past two years and includes the amount in the up to 1 year category in the table above.
The remaining current accounts are included in the On demand category.
The Groups principal sources of liquidity are as follows deposits borrowings from international credit institutions interbank deposit agreements debt issues proceeds from sale of securities principal repayments on loans interest income and fees and commissions income.
As at 31 December 2017 client deposits and notes amounted to GEL 6712482 2016 GEL 5382698 2015 GEL 4751387 and represented 54% 2016 51% 2015 59% of the Groups total liabilities.
These funds continue to provide a majority of the Groups funding and represent a diversified and stable source of funds.
As at 31 December 2017 amounts owed to credit institutions amounted to GEL 3155839 2016 GEL 3470091 2015 GEL 1789062 and represented 25% 2016 33% 2015 22% of total liabilities.
As at 31 December 2017 debt securities issued amounted to GEL 1709152 2016 GEL 1255643 2015 GEL 1039804 and represented 14% 2016 12% 2015 13% of total liabilities.
In the Boards opinion liquidity is sufficient to meet the Groups present requirements.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 209 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
Financial
Statements
MATURITY ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL ASSETS AND LIABILITIES CONTINUED The table below shows an analysis of assets and liabilities analysed according to when they are expected to be recovered or settled 31 December 2017 Less than 1 year More than 1 year Total Cash and cash equivalents 1582435  1582435 Amounts due from credit institutions 1213689 12258 1225947 Investment securities 1483095 81774 1564869 Loans to customers and finance lease 3240125 4450325 7690450 Accounts receivable and other loans 38810 134 38944 Insurance premiums receivable 30538 35 30573 Prepayments 112122 37436 149558 Inventories 92158 8036 100194 Investment properties  353565 353565 Property and equipment  988436 988436 Goodwill  55276 55276 Intangible assets  60980 60980 Income tax assets 1155 1138 2293 Other assets 111972 76760 188732 Assets of disposal group held for sale 1136417  1136417 TOTAL ASSETS 9042516 6126153 15168669 Client deposits and notes 6102583 609899 6712482 Amounts owed to credit institutions 1800297 1355542 3155839 Debt securities issued 295907 1413245 1709152 Accruals and deferred income 104290 28379 132669 Insurance contracts liabilities 39349 7053 46402 Income tax liabilities 9617 11342 20959 Other liabilities 112328 29805 142133 Liabilities of disposal group held for sale 516663  516663 TOTAL LIABILITIES 8981034 3455265 12436299 NET 61482 2670888 2732370 31 December 2016 31 December 2015 Less than 1 year More than 1 year Total Less than 1 year More than 1 year Total Cash and cash equivalents 1573610  1573610 1432934  1432934 Amounts due from credit institutions 1048492 6491 1054983 729106 2259 731365 Investment securities 1240387 45616 1286003 839379 64488 903867 Loans to customers and finance lease receivables 3147330 3501152 6648482 2359074 2963043 5322117 Accounts receivable and other loans 128222 284 128506 87955 17 87972 Insurance premiums receivable 46379 44 46423 39177 49 39226 Prepayments 57465 18812 76277 25371 32957 58328 Inventories 88375 99969 188344 98387 28640 127027 Investment properties  288227 288227  246398 246398 Property and equipment  1288594 1288594  758027 758027 Goodwill  106986 106986  72984 72984 Intangible assets  58907 58907  40516 40516 Income tax assets 22329 1714 24043 3654 17896 21550 Other assets 137364 47427 184791 106235 130545 236780 TOTAL ASSETS 7489953 5464223 12954176 5721272 4357819 10079091 Client deposits and notes 4894493 488205 5382698 4206377 545010 4751387 Amounts owed to credit institutions 2238643 1231448 3470091 976698 812364 1789062 Debt securities issued 186793 1068850 1255643 105160 934644 1039804 Accruals and deferred income 58726 71593 130319 113134 33718 146852 Insurance contracts liabilities 62247 5624 67871 51273 4572 55845 Income tax liabilities 5548 22170 27718 20083 99210 119293 Other liabilities 213064 18559 231623 120082 14674 134756 TOTAL LIABILITIES 7659514 2906449 10565963 5592807 2444192 8036999 NET 169561 2557774 2388213 128465 1913627 2042092 210 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC RELATED PARTY DISCLOSURES In accordance with IAS 24 Related Party Disclosures parties are considered to be related if one party has the ability to control the other party or exercise significant influence over the other party in making financial or operational decisions.
In considering each possible related party relationship attention is directed to the substance of the relationship not merely the legal form.
Related parties may enter into transactions which unrelated parties might not and transactions between related parties may not be effected on the same terms conditions and amounts as transactions between unrelated parties.
All transactions with related parties disclosed below have been conducted on an arms length basis.
The volumes of related party transactions outstanding balances at the yearend and related expenses and income for the year are as followstel
Key management personnel Associates
Key management personnel LOANS OUTSTANDING AT 1 JANUARY GROSS 15247 2006 13541 1258 78592 2048 Loans issued during the year 15831 5536 337 2035 4000 4511 Loan repayments during the year 15655 5983 640 1236 84033 6188 Other movements 1630 1354 2009 51 14982 887 LOANS OUTSTANDING AT 31 DECEMBER GROSS 17053 2913 15247 2006 13541 1258 Less  Allowance for impairment at 31 December     116 LOANS OUTSTANDING AT 31 DECEMBER NET 17053 2913 15247 2006 13425 1258 Interest income on loans 1329 161 1243 148 3986 173 Loan impairment charge DEPOSITS AT 1 JANUARY 1241 28419 1419 20129 4975 17500 Deposits received during the year 50 32082 1163 14447 195316 40774 Deposits repaid during the year 535 11826  446 199048 41548 Other movements 1249 9833 1341 5711 176 3403 DEPOSITS AT 31 DECEMBER 2005 38842 1241 28419 1419 20129 Interest expense on deposits 2 446  614 33 477 Other income  98  115 15 77 Deferred income  1740 Real estate revenue  1924 Key management personnel include members of BGEOs Board of Directors and key executives of the Group.
Details of Directors emoluments are included in the Remuneration Report on pages 98 to 113.
Compensation of key management personnel comprised the followingtel Salaries and other benefits 10595 7735 6464 Sharebased payments compensation 43334 40679 19435 Longterm benefits 2243 Social security costs 82 51 55 TOTAL KEY MANAGEMENT COMPENSATION 56254 48465 25954 In 2016 Sharebased payments compensation includes termination benefits in the amount of GEL 9820 for key management personnel reflected in the nonrecurring items Note 29.
Key management personnel do not receive cash settled compensation except for fixed salaries.
The major part of the total compensation is sharebased Note 30.
The number of key management personnel at 31 December 2017 was 21 31 December 2016 18 31 December 2015 16.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 211 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
Financial
Statements
CAPITAL ADEQUACY The Group maintains an actively managed capital base to cover risks inherent in the business.
The adequacy of the Groups capital is monitored using among other measures the ratios established by the NBG in supervising the Bank.
Approved and published on 28 October 2013 by NBG a new capital adequacy regulation became effective in 2014 based on Basel IIIII requirements adjusted for NBGs discretionary items.
Pillar 1 requirements became effective on 30 June 2014 with Pillar II ICAAP requirements becoming effective 30 June 2015.
A transition period continued through to 31 December 2017 during which the Bank was required to comply with both the new and the current capital regulations of the NBG.
During the year ended 31 December 2017 the Bank and the Group complied in full with all its externally imposed capital requirements.
The primary objectives of the Groups capital management are to ensure that the Bank complies with externally imposed capital requirements and that the Group maintains strong credit ratings and healthy capital ratios in order to support its business and to maximise value for shareholders.
The Group manages its capital structure and makes adjustments to it in the light of changes in economic conditions and the risk characteristics of its activities.
In order to maintain or adjust the capital structure the Group may adjust the amount of dividend payment to shareholders return capital to shareholders or issue capital securities.
No changes were made in the objectives policies and processes from the previous years.
NBG CAPITAL ADEQUACY RATIO The NBG requires banks to maintain a minimum capital adequacy ratio of 9.6% of riskweighted assets computed based on the Banks standalone special purpose financial statements prepared in accordance with NBG regulations and pronouncements.
As at 31 December 2017 31 December 2016 and 31 December 2015 the Banks capital adequacy ratio on this basis was as followstel Core capital 787225 676692 728139 Supplementary capital 787225 669940 649607 Less  Deductions from capital 116716 79059 60311 TOTAL REGULATORY CAPITAL 1457734 1267573 1317435 RISKWEIGHTED ASSETS 11004699 9360857 7811398 TOTAL CAPITAL ADEQUACY RATIO 13.2% 13.5% 16.9% Core capital comprises share capital additional paidin capital and retained earnings without current period profits less intangible assets and goodwill.
Supplementary capital includes subordinated longterm debt current period profits and general loss provisions.
Deductions from the capital include investments in subsidiaries.
Certain adjustments are made to IFRSbased results and reserves as prescribed by the NBG.
NBG BASEL II CAPITAL ADEQUACY RATIO Effective 30 June 2014 the NBG requires banks to maintain a minimum total capital adequacy ratio of 10.5% of riskweighted assets computed based on the banks standalone special purpose financial statements prepared in accordance with NBG regulations and pronouncements based on Basel II requirements.
As at 31 December 2017 the Banks capital adequacy ratio on this basis was as followstel Tier 1 capital 1141845 892613 914784 Tier 2 capital 501689 519726 479176 TOTAL CAPITAL 1643534 1412339 1393960 RISKWEIGHTED ASSETS 11115315 9790282 8363369 TOTAL CAPITAL RATIO 14.8% 14.4% 16.7% Tier 1 capital comprises share capital additional paidin capital and retained earnings less investments in subsidiaries intangible assets and goodwill.
Tier 2 capital includes subordinated longterm debt and general loss provisions.
Certain adjustments are made to IFRSbased results and reserves as prescribed by the NBG.
212 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC CAPITAL ADEQUACY CONTINUED NBG BASEL III CAPITAL ADEQUACY RATIO In December 2017 the NBG adopted amendments to the regulations relating to capital adequacy requirements including amendments to the regulation on capital adequacy requirements for commercial banks and introduced new requirements on the determination of the countercyclical buffer rate on the identification of systematically important banks on determining systemic buffer requirements and on additional capital buffer requirements for commercial banks within Pillar 2.
The NBG requires banks to maintain a minimum total capital adequacy ratio of 12.4% of riskweighted assets computed based on the banks standalone special purpose financial statements prepared in accordance with NBG regulations and pronouncements based on Basel III requirements.
As at 31 December 2017 the Banks capital adequacy ratio on this basis was as follows Tier 1 capital 1141845 Tier 2 capital 501689 TOTAL CAPITAL 1643534 RISKWEIGHTED ASSETS 9192078 TOTAL CAPITAL RATIO 17.9% EVENTS AFTER THE REPORTING PERIOD ACQUISITION OF BLACK LION LLC In February 2018 JSC Georgia Capital former JSC BGEO Investments acquired 100% of Black Lion LLC a craft beer producer company operating in
The total consideration for the acquisition was USD 3.2 million.
The Group has not yet completed respective business combination accounting in respect of this acquisition.
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE DEMERGER On 12 February 2018 the Board approved the implementation of the demerger.
The demerger is subject to shareholder approval at the 2018 Annual General Meeting and the process is currently expected to complete by 30 June 2018.
ISSUE OF USD 300 MILLION NOTES DUE IN 2024 BY JOINT STOCK COMPANY GEORGIA CAPITAL On 5 March 2018 JSC Georgia Capital successfully priced a US 300 million offering of 6.125% notes due March 2024 denominated in US Dollars which are expected to settle on 9 March 2018.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 213 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
Strategic report
Strategic report
Strategic report
Governance Financial statements
Information
ABBREVIATIONS
ADB Asian Development Bank AFS Availableforsale AGM Annual General Meeting ALCO Asset and Liability Committee AML Antimoney laundering ATMs Automated teller machines BNB Belarusky Narodny Bank BSTDB Black Sea Trade and Development Bank CAGR Compounded annual growth rate CAR Capital Adequacy ratio DCFTA Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Agreement DEG Deutsche Investitions und Entwicklungsgesellschaft German Investment and Development Corporation DFI Development Finance Institutions EBRD European Bank for Reconstruction and Development EECP Executives Equity Compensation Plan EFSE European Fund for Southeast Europe EIB European Investment Bank EPS Earnings per share ESMS Environmental and Social Risk Management Procedures EUR Euro EY Ernst and Young FDI Foreign direct investment FMO FinancieringsMaatschappij voor Ontwikkelingslanden The Netherlands Development Bank FRC Financial Reporting Council GBP Great British Pound national currency of the UK GDP Gross domestic product GDRs Global Depositary Receipts GEL Georgian Lari or Lari national currency of Georgia GHG Georgia Healthcare Group GLC Georgian Leasing Company IAS International Accounting Standards IASB International Accounting Standards Board IFC International Finance Corporation IFRS International Financial Reporting Standards IMF International Monetary Fund IRR Internal Rate of Return JSC Joint stock company KfW Kreditanstalt fr Wiederaufbau KPIs Key performance indicators LSE London Stock Exchange MSME Micro small and medium enterprise NBG National Bank of Georgia NBRB National Bank of the Republic of Belarus NGO Nongovernmental organisation NIM Net Interest Margin NMF Not meaningful to present NPLs Nonperforming loans OECD Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development OFAC Office of Foreign Assets Control PandC Property and Casualty PLC Public limited company POS Point of sale ROAA Return on Average Assets ROAE Return on Average Equity SMEs Small and medium size enterprises TSR Total Shareholder Return UK United Kingdom US Dollar national currency of the United States of America VAR Value at Risk WACC Weighted Average Cost of Capital WM Wealth Management 214 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC
Alternative performance measures APMs In this Annual Report the Management uses various APMs which they believe provide additional useful information for understanding the financial performance of the Group.
These APMs are not defined by International Financial Reporting Standards and also may not be directly comparable with other companies who use similar measures.
Management believes that these APMs provide the best representation of our financial performance as these measures are used by management to evaluate our operating performance and make daytoday operating decisions Basic Earnings Per Share EPS Profit for the period from operations attributable to shareholders of the Group divided by the weighted average number of outstanding ordinary shares over the same period Book Value Per Share Total equity attributable to shareholders of the Group divided by ordinary shares outstanding at period end net ordinary shares outstanding equals total number of ordinary shares outstanding at period end less number of treasury shares at period end Combined Ratio Sum of the loss ratio and the expense ratio Constant Currency Basis Changes assuming constant exchange rate Cost of Funds Banking interest expense of the period divided by monthly average interest bearing liabilities Cost of Risk Impairment charge for loans to customers and finance lease receivables for the period divided by monthly average gross loans to customers and finance lease receivables over the same period Cost to Income Ratio Operating expenses divided by revenue Expense Ratio Sum of acquisition costs and operating expenses divided by net earned premiums Interest Bearing Liabilities Amounts due to credit institutions client deposits and notes and debt securities issued Interest Earning Assets excluding cash Amounts due from credit institutions investment securities but excluding corporate shares and net loans to customers and finance lease receivables Leverage times Total liabilities divided by total equity Liquid Assets Cash and cash equivalents amounts due from credit institutions and investment securities Liquidity Coverage Ratio LCR High quality liquid assets as defined by NBG divided by net cash outflow over the next 30 days as defined by NBG Loan Yield Banking interest income from loans to customers and finance lease receivables divided by monthly average gross loans to customers and finance lease receivables Loss Ratio Net insurance claims expense divided by net earned premiums NBG Liquidity Ratio Daily average liquid assets as defined by NBG during the month divided by daily average liabilities as defined by NBG during the month NBG Basel II Tier I Capital Adequacy Ratio CAR Tier I capital divided by total risk weighted assets both calculated in accordance with the requirements the National Bank of Georgia instructions NBG Basel II Total Capital Adequacy Ratio CAR Total capital divided by total risk weighted assets both calculated in accordance with the requirements of the National Bank of Georgia instructions 215 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Strategic Report
Governance Financial
Additional
Information
Strategic report
Strategic report
Strategic report
Governance Financial statements
Information
NBG Basel III Tier I Capital Adequacy Ratio CAR Tier I capital divided by total risk weighted assets both calculated in accordance with the requirements the National Bank of Georgia instructions NBG Basel III Total Capital Adequacy Ratio CAR Total capital divided by total risk weighted assets both calculated in accordance with the requirements of the National Bank of Georgia instructions Net Interest Margin NIM Net banking interest income of the period divided by monthly average interest earning assets excluding cash for the same period Net loans In all sections of the Annual Report except for the consolidated audited financial statements net loans are defined as gross loans to customers and finance lease receivables less allowance for impairment NonPerforming Loans NPLs The principal and interest on loans overdue for more than 90 days and any additional potential losses estimated by management NPL Coverage Ratio Allowance for impairment of loans and finance lease receivables divided by NPLs NPL Coverage Ratio adjusted for discounted value of collateral Allowance for impairment of loans and finance lease receivables divided by NPLs discounted value of collateral is added back to allowance for impairment Operating Leverage Percentage change in revenue less percentage change in operating expenses Return on Average Total Assets ROAA Banking Business profit for the period divided by monthly average total assets for the same period Return on Average Total Equity ROAE Banking Business profit for the period attributable to shareholders of BGEO divided by monthly average equity attributable to shareholders of BGEO for the same period.
Weighted Average Number of Ordinary Shares Average of daily outstanding number of shares less daily outstanding number of treasury shares Weighted Average Diluted Number of Ordinary Shares Weighted average number of ordinary shares plus weighted average dilutive number of shares known to management during the same period 216 Annual Report 2017 BGEO Group PLC SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION OUR WEBSITE All shareholders and potential shareholders can gain access to the Annual Report presentations to investors key financial information regulatory news share and dividend data AGM documentation and other significant information about BGEO at httpsite OUR REGISTERED ADDRESS BGEO Group PLC 84 Brook Street London W1K 5EH United Kingdom ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING The Annual General Meeting of BGEO the AGM will be held at Baker and McKenzie LLP  100 New Bridge Street London EC4V 6JA.
Details of the date time and business to be conducted at the AGM will be contained in the Notice of AGM which will be mailed to shareholders along with the shareholder circular describing the demerger.
SHAREHOLDER ENQUIRIES BGEOs share register is maintained by Computershare Investor Services PLC.
Any queries about the administration of holdings of ordinary shares such as change of address or change of ownership should be directed to the address or telephone number immediately below.
Holders of ordinary shares may also check details of their shareholding subject to passing an identity check by visiting the Registrars website site or by calling the Shareholder Helpline on 44 0tel.
Computershare Investor Services PLC The Pavilions Bridgwater Road Bristol BS99 6ZY United Kingdom 44 0tel
On 16 February 2018 the Directors of BGEO declared their intention to recommend an annual dividend for 2017 totalling c.
EL 120 million.
If the expected demerger is successfully implemented as planned it is intended that Bank of Georgia PLC the then new parent company of the Banking Business will instead shortly after the demerger is completed declare and pay a dividend in a similar or the same aggregate amount to shareholders then on the record.
In the event that the demerger is for any reason not completed it is intended subject to shareholder approval that the Board would implement the payment of this dividend which would represent a payment of GEL 3.1 per share payable in British Pounds Sterling at the prevailing rate a 19.2% increase over the 2016 dividend.
As a holding company whose principal assets are the shares of its subsidiaries BGEO relies primarily on dividends and other statutorily and contractually permissible payments from its subsidiaries principally the Bank to generate reserves necessary to pay dividends to its shareholders.
FORWARDLOOKING STATEMENTS Certain statements in this Annual Report and Accounts contain forwardlooking statements including but not limited to statements concerning expectations projections objectives targets goals strategies future events future revenues or performance capital expenditures financing needs plans or intentions relating to acquisitions competitive strengths and weaknesses plans or goals relating to financial position and future operations and development.
Although
BGEO Group PLC believes that the expectations and opinions reflected in such forwardlooking statements are reasonable no assurance can be given that such expectations and opinions will prove to have been correct.
By their nature these forwardlooking statements are subject to a number of known and unknown risks uncertainties and contingencies and actual results and events could differ materially from those currently being anticipated as reflected in such statements.
Important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those expressed or implied in forwardlooking statements certain of which are beyond our control and certain of which include among other things those described in Principal risks and uncertainties included in this Annual Report and Accounts see pages 34 to 37.
No part of these results or report constitutes or shall be taken to constitute an invitation or inducement to invest in BGEO Group PLC or any other entity and must not be relied upon in any way in connection with any investment decision.
BGEO Group PLC undertakes no obligation to update any forwardlooking statements whether as a result of new information future events or otherwise except to the extent legally required.
Nothing in this document should be construed as a profit forecast.
