ANNUAL REPORT 2017 This Annual Report contains forwardlooking statements based on current expectations and assumptions.
Various known and unknown risks uncertainties and other factors may cause actual results to differ from any future results or developments expressed or implied by the forwardlooking statement.
Each forward looking statement speaks only as of the date of this Report.
The Company accepts no obligations to revise or update publicly these forwardlooking statements or adjust them to future events or developments whether as a result of new information future events or otherwise except to the extent legally required.
Cautionary forward looking statement Our aim is to make Essentra the best company it can be.
To achieve this we all need to bring our six principles to life in our work and to follow the three steps to longterm success.
Strategic Report Basis of Preparation 2 Essentra at a Glance 4 What We Do 6
Chairmans Statement 8
Chief Executives Review 10
Strategy and Progress 18
Financial Review 22
Operational Review Management of Principal Risks 40 Corporate Responsibility 50 Financial Statements Consolidated Income Statement 116 Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income 117 Consolidated Balance Sheet 118 Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity 119 Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows 120 Accounting Policies 121 Critical Accounting Judgements and Estimates 129 Notes 130 Essentra plc Company Balance Sheet 170 Essentra plc Company Statement of Changes in Equity 171 Essentra plc Company Accounting Policies 172 Essentra plc Company Notes 174
Independent Auditors Report to
Advisers and Investor Information 191
Keep uptodate at site Directors Report Group Management Committee 60 Board of Directors 62 Chairmans Corporate Governance Statement 64 Corporate Governance Framework 65 Corporate Governance Report 67 Nomination Committe Report 73 Audit Committee Chairmans Letter 74 Report of the Audit Committee Remuneration Committee Chairmans Letter 81
Remuneration Policy Report 86
Annual Report on Remuneration 97 Other Statutory Information 108 Statement of Directors Responsibilities 112 ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM BASIS OF PREPARATION FY 2017 results at a glance FY 2017 FY 2016 % change Actual FX % change Constant FX Revenue 1027 999 3 2 Adjusted operating profit 85 109 22 27 Adjusted pretax profit 74 96 23 28 Adjusted net income 59 77 23 29 Adjusted earnings per share 22.1p 29.2p 24 30 Dividend per share 20.7p 20.7p  na Reported operating profit  loss 6 50 na na Reported pretax profit  loss 5 63 na na Reported net income  loss  total 116 40 na na Reported earnings  loss per share  total 43.7p 15.4p na na Basis of preparation Continuing operations Unless otherwise stated the FY 2017 results and narrative contained in this Annual Report reflect the revenue and adjusted operating profit of the Essentra Group on a continuing basis ie excluding the Porous Technologies business which was divested on 6 March 2017.
NonGAAP measures Throughout this FY 2017 Annual Report the following terms are used to describe Essentras financial performance.
Constant exchange rates Movements in exchange rates relative to sterling affect actual results as reported.
The constant exchange rate basis adjusts the comparative to exclude such movements to show the underlying performance of the Company.
For the principal exchange rates for Essentra for the year ended 31 December 2017 FY 2017 see the table below.
Retranslating at FY 2017 average rates increases the prior year revenue and adjusted operating profit by 53.0m and 6.9m respectively.
Principal exchange rates US
FY 2017 1.30 1.14 FY 2016 1.36 1.23
FY 2017 1.35 1.13 FY 2016 1.24 1.17 Likeforlike basis The term likeforlike describes the performance of the business on a comparable basis excluding the impact of acquisitions disposals and foreign exchange.
The FY 2017 results are adjusted for the divestment of the Bristol consumer packaging site on 5 June 2017 .
Adjusted basis The term adjusted excludes the impact of amortisation of acquired intangible assets and exceptional operating items less any associated tax impact.
In FY 2017 amortisation of acquired intangible assets was 22.9m FY 2016 30.2m and there was an exceptional pretax charge of 56.2m FY 2016 128.5m mainly relating to costs associated with the closure of the folding cartons facility at Newport UK the strategic review of the Company and the simplification of the organisational structure  including the departure of certain senior management  during the year.
Constant exchange likeforlike and adjusted measures are provided to reflect the underlying performance of Essentra.
For further details on the performance metrics used by Essentra please refer to page 21.
Reconciliation of GAAP to nonGAAP measures The following tables are presented by way of reconciling the metrics which management uses to evaluate the Essentra Group to GAAP measures.
Cash flow Adjusted operating cash flow is presented to exclude the impact of tax exceptional items interest and other items not impacting operating profit.
Net capital expenditure is included in this measure as management regards investment in operational assets as integral to the underlying cash generation capability of the Company.
The financial information in this FY 2017 Annual Report is prepared in accordance with IFRS as adopted by the European Union and IFRS as issued by the International Accounting Standards Board and with the accounting policies set out on pages 121 to 128.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT  BASIS OF PREPARATION Summary growth in revenue by division % growth Likeforlike
Foreign exchange
Component Solutions 8  5 13 Component Solutions exPPT 3  5 8 Health and Personal Care Packaging 8 1 4 5 Filter Products 3  6 3 Total 2  5 3 Pipe Protection Technologies.
Net income m FY 2017 FY 2016 Adjusted net income 59.2 76.9 Amortisation of acquired intangible assets 22.9 30.2 Exceptional operating items 56.2 128.5 Exceptional tax items 11.4 Tax on adjustments 14.0 30.8 Profit  loss after tax 5.5 51.0 Cash flow m FY 2017 FY 2016 Operating profit  adjusted 84.6 108.7 Depreciation and amotisation of nonacquired intangible assets 36.3 31.1 Share option expense  other movements 2.0 3.5 Change in working capital 6.4 2.8 Net capital expenditure 45.3 37.3 Operating cash flow  adjusted 80.0 101.8 Cash spent on exceptional items 17.1 8.3 Pension obligations 0.1 1.1 Other 0.6 15.2 Add back net capital expenditure 45.3 37.3 Net cash inflow from operating activities  continuing operations 96.5 130.0 Net cash outflow  inflow from operating activities  discontinued operations 19.1 23.0 Net cash inflow from operating activities  total Group 77.4 153.0 Operating cash flow  adjusted 80.0 101.8 Net interest paid 12.5 11.3 Pension obligations 0.1 1.1 Free cash flow  adjusted  continuing operations 56.4 74.5 Free cash flow  adjusted  discontinued operations 7.6 24.3 Free cash flow  adjusted  total Group 48.8 98.8 Divisional performance The revenue and adjusted operating profit for each division is stated before the elimination of intersegment revenue and the cost of central services as reconciled to the reported results set out in note 1 on pages 130 to 132.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT  BASIS OF PREPARATION ESSENTRA AT A GLANCE Component Solutions Health and Personal Care Packaging The Health and Personal Care Packaging division is one of only two multicontinental suppliers of a full secondary packaging range to the health and personal care sectors with 25 facilities across four geographic regions.
The divisions innovative products include cartons leaflets selfadhesive labels and printed foils used in blister packs which help customers to meet the rapidlychanging requirements of these endmarkets and can also be combined with Essentras authentication solutions to help the fight against counterfeiting.
Essentra is globally recognised as the leading manufacturer and supplier of pressuresensitive tear tapes  as well as a provider of other solutions such as bags sacks and commercial print  which are largely used in the tobacco food and drink and specialist packaging sectors.
The business is also a leading manufacturer and distributor of adhesivecoated tape products for a wide range of industries and applications in particular the point of purchase and white goods sectors.
Supported by an inhouse design studio RandD and multimillion pound print facilities Essentra is positioned to deliver the very best in quality service and reliability through its worldwide manufacturing and sales structure.
Page 26 For our operating review on Component Solutions Page 32 For our operating review on Health and Personal Care Packaging The Components business is a global market leading manufacturer and distributor of plastic injection moulded vinyl dip moulded and metal items.
Operating units in 27 countries serve a very broad industrial base of customers with a rapid supply of products for a variety of applications in industries such as equipment manufacturing automotive fabrication electronics and construction.
The Pipe Protection Technologies business specialises in the manufacture of high performance innovative products from commodity resins to engineeringgrade thermoplastics and polymer alloys for use in the oil and gas industry.
Locations in four countries combined with a wide distributor network serve customers around the world.
The Extrusion business is a leading custom profile extruder located in the Netherlands which offers a complete design and production service.
One of the first companies to extrude plastics in 1956 Essentra is now one of Europes most advanced suppliers of coextrusion and triextrusion to all branches of industry.
The Card Solutions business has access to a wide portfolio of products and services including printers software and consumables from leading manufacturers.
2017 summary Broadbased Components revenue growth across all geographic regions Increase in general protection caps and plugs and access solutions hardware Consolidation of south east Asia seals product range in Thailand and general expansion in Turkey Recovery in Pipe Protection Technologies benefiting from positive developments in the oil and gas sector Moderate revenue decline in Extrusion following two years of excellent growth Completion of the acquisition of Micro Plastics in Components
2016 302.6m 13.4% Operating profit 2016 54.4m 7 .9% Excluding amortisation of acquired intangible assets and exceptional operating items.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT  ESSENTRA AT A GLANCE Health and Personal Care Packaging Filter Products The Filter Products division is the only global independent cigarette filter supplier.
The eight worldwide locations including a dedicated Technology Centre supported by three regional development facilities provide a flexible infrastructure strategically positioned to serve the tobacco sector.
The business supplies a wide range of valueadding high quality innovative filters packaging solutions to the rollyourown segment and analytical laboratory services for ingredient measurement to the industry.
Essentras offering also includes ecigarette and Heat Not Burn solutions to the rapidly evolving market for Next Generation Products.
2017 summary Revenue impacted by lower pricing owing to passthrough of raw material cost savings Further commercialisation of new special filters notably capsule smaller diameter and visually differentiated formats Successful transfer of a significant customerspecific product line from the US to Asia Good growth in China supported by recent innovative product launches Expansion of capsule capability to meet demand in the growth markets of the Middle East and Asia Continued efficiency benefits from investment in highspeed flexible combining equipment Attractive contract wins  renewals for Scientific Services laboratory
2016 269.2m 3.1% Operating profit 2016 37.5m 7.2% Excluding amortisation of acquired intangible assets and exceptional operating items.
2017 summary Revenue decline owing to ongoing operational challenges at certain health and personal care sites and temporary disruption in Puerto Rico posthurricane Maria Progressive improvement in key service and quality metrics  and enhanced customer dialogue  further to senior management focus and remedial action Continued product pipeline development to meet industry trends and evolving legislative requirements Mixed performance in Tapes with gains in the appliance and food segments being offset by weakness in the point of purchase and tobacco sectors Creation of a global health and personal care packaging organisation to better serve customers with a consistent global value proposition Closure of lossmaking Newport UK IP5 folding cartons facility at year end owing to significant ongoing structural issues
2016 430.2m 4.8% Operating profit 2016 34.5m 79.1% Excluding amortisation of acquired intangible assets and exceptional operating items.
Page 36 For our operating review on Filter Products ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT  ESSENTRA AT A GLANCE WHAT WE DO The Essentra Group comprises nine businesses serving multiple end markets with a very broad and differentiated range of products and services.
Reflecting our strategic review with effect from 1 January 2018 Essentra changed its structure and is now organised as three global divisions of Components Packaging and Filters with a fourth division Specialist Components  comprising our six smaller businesses.
In order to create sustainable longterm value our business model seeks to effectively and efficiently manage this portfolio of global leading diverse activities while adding further to this through a clearly articulated role for the Group underpinned by robust financial and capital allocation policies.
Although our businesses produce a diverse range of products and serve a wide range of endmarkets nonetheless we share a number of capabilities and characteristics.
Focus on sizeable endmarkets with growth opportunities Essentra has a clear datadriven strategy for each of its Components Packaging and Filters global divisions each of which operates in sizeable endmarkets which present opportunities for future growth and in which the Company is fundamentally wellpositioned to drive longterm growth and margin expansion.
Develop longstanding blue chip customer relationships Essentra develops and maintains a close relationship with a wide portfolio of blue chip customers who are successful leaders in their respective markets.
The high standards of service and supply demanded by such customers help to drive continuous improvement across the Company.
Essentras manufacturing and distribution expertise adds value in response to customer demands and its innovative capabilities drive the joint development of new products and services with key strategic partners.
Invest in innovation capability The continued successful launch and commercialisation of new products and services is a key driver of Essentras growth.
Investment in research and development functions supported by the identification of additional product sourcing opportunities to deliver product innovation and range development provides the platform to further enhance the Companys competitive positions.
Robust quality systems maintained to internationally accredited standards assist the fulfilment of customers demands.
Global partner with local presence Essentra has a comprehensive international production and distribution footprint which can be flexed to respond to customers needs whether they be product service cost or supply chain driven.
The Company is focused on being a lowcost producer to secure revenue growth at attractive margins and continuous improvement programmes with tight cost control and productivity gains  serving to reduce conversion costs.
Efficient footprint and strong value proposition Essentra has a wellinvested and flexible international sourcing supply chain and production infrastructure.
This provides businesses across the Company with the opportunity to use the existing infrastructure and management to exploit new opportunities efficiently and costeffectively.
The Companys extensive international distribution network ensures the delivery of costcompetitive and highquality products in response to customers requirements.
High levels of service and broad geographic reach are an important competitive differentiator.
A portfolio of activities ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT  WHAT WE DO There is clear scope for the Group to add value through a defined role.
Portfolio management and strategic development While each division is responsible for contributing to the successful delivery of Essentras strategic and financial objectives it is important that this is managed within an established and agreed framework which not only facilitates and challenges the next stage of corporate development but also identifies and exploits any commercial synergies between the Essentra businesses.
Risk management
Effective management of risk and opportunity is essential to the protection of Essentras reputation and the delivery of sustainable shareholder value.
The Board of Directors is responsible for determining the risk attitude of the Company and for communicating to the organisation what constitutes acceptable risktaking.
The
Board supported by the Audit Committee also oversees the management process for the identification assessment and mitigation of risk across Essentra.
Legal requirements and compliance Essentra is committed to doing business the right way to continually earn the trust of its customers other stakeholders and the wider marketplace and to ensuring that all of its activities are conducted in accordance with all applicable legal and regulatory requirements and the highest standards of ethical business conduct.
Essentras Ethics Code helps to ensure that everyone working for or on behalf of the Company understands its expectations and conducts Essentra business in a way that is consistent with the Companys six principles and with its procedures.
Together with common sense logic and good faith behaviour Essentras Ethics Code provides a framework and structure to guide employees in determining the correct course of action and the Companys policies continue to promote fair and ethical dealings with customers and competitors as a matter of law and conscience.
Talent management Essentras greatest asset is its employees and at all levels we have a highly experienced and wellregarded team.
Their skills and experience are essential to driving the innovation which enables the Company to provide added value to its customers enhance supply chain logistics and reduce the environmental impact of its operations.
In creating a winning and engaged team it is important that we have a worldclass global talent management process and high performance ethos.
We must also strive for excellence in health and safety and proactively manage learning and development and our objective is to become exemplary with regard to diversity and inclusion.
Process alignment and sharing of best practice Sharing certain facilities and functions from Human Resources Operations and Corporate Governance to Finance IT and Commercial  allows us to develop and implement aligned processes and procedures identify and fill skill gaps share best practice across the Company and exploit our collective size infrastructure investment and capabilities.
A unified whole Our respective businesses have secured leadership positions in the majority of the industries which they serve.
Through harnessing this strength in diversity with a clearly defined and unifying role for the Group  all of which underpinned by clear financial and capital allocation policies appropriately aligned to management incentives  we are wellplaced to create sustainable longterm growth for our shareholders.
A portfolio of activities   With shared business priorities   Sustainable longterm value ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT  WHAT WE DO CHAIRMANS STATEMENT In my first full year as Chairman I am very pleased to report that 2017 saw stability being restored to Essentra after a year of challenge and change in 2016 with our new corporate strategy being unveiled by Chief Executive Paul Forman at the time of our HY 2017 results.
The Board was extensively engaged in the strategy review process and fully supports the future direction set out by Paul which provides the roadmap for future sustainable growth across the Group based on the highest standards of business ethics and best practice governance.
Board composition As previously reported Paul Forman joined the Board as Chief Executive with effect from 1 January 2017 .
Pauls proven track record of international experience at senior level  in particular in strategy and acquisitions  has already shown itself to be extremely relevant and beneficial in restoring widespread stability to Essentra.
Paul has provided a clear and datadriven strategy which he and his team have developed and communicated which will deliver sustainable longterm shareholder value excellent customer service and a motivated and engaged workforce.
In July as the result of a robust selection process led by the Nomination Committee my colleagues and I were delighted to welcome Mary Reilly and Ralf
Wunderlich to the Board as independent NonExecutive Directors both of whom have extensive international experience across a wide range of industries.
Mary was a Partner at Deloitte LLP for more than 20 years and has served on a number of Boards in a nonexecutive capacity since 2000 while Ralf  who is currently based in Singapore  has an extensive knowledge of the packaging industry and has lived and worked across three continents.
Separately in December Terry Twigger advised the Board that he will be retiring as a Director and from his current roles as Senior Independent Director SID and Chairman of the Audit Committee following the Companys 2018 Annual General Meting AGM.
Terry joined Essentra as a NonExecutive Director and Chairman of the Audit Committee in 2009 and was subsequently appointed as SID in 2014.
On behalf of the Board I would like to thank Terry for his dedication and significant commitment to Essentra during his nineyear tenure.
He has been unfailing in his support and guidance throughout and I and my fellow Board members will miss both his financial insight and wise counsel.
We wish him all the very best for a long and healthy retirement.
My Board colleagues and I are very pleased that Tommy Breen who joined the Board as a NonExecutive Director in 2015 will assume the role of SID following the 2018 AGM and will bring significant experience to the position.
Replacing Terry as our new Audit Committee Chair will be Mary Reilly.
With her extensive accounting finance and international management background we have no doubt that Mary will prove an excellent successor to Terry and build further on the important work of the Committee which he led with considerable skill and expertise.
I would like to wish both Tommy and Mary every success in their new roles.
As previously advised Peter Hill and Colin Day retired from the Board following the Companys 2017 AGM.
Strategic review While there was significant focus on stabilising the Company during 2017  not least those handful of manufacturing sites where we have previously experienced operational issues  at the same time we simultaneously developed a clear and objective assessment of the various businesses within the Essentra organisation together with their future potential.
We have only just started upon this path but the review has confirmed that Essentra is a fundamentally strong organisation with many positive features to build upon.
Such a detailed evaluation of any business potentially results in tough decisions.
This was indeed the case with our folding cartons site in Newport where having given a number of strategic options careful consideration the Board regrettably concluded that the proposal to close the facility was the most appropriate route given that it was not anticipated to make a realistic improvement to profitability in the near or even long term.
The decision was in no way a reflection on the quality or dedication of our employees there and my fellow Board colleagues and I would like to acknowledge the supportive and professional way in which they engaged in the consultation process.
Paul Lester CBE
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT  CHAIRMANS STATEMENT In conjunction with the strategic review the Board evaluated the appropriate deployment of capital in the business including the amount which is returned to shareholders by way of dividends.
While our financial Key Performance Indicators will focus on all value drivers further to the strategy review there is a clear and increased emphasis on cash generation and returns.
These financial and capital allocation priorities have been aligned to new metrics for both short and longterm management incentives upon which we have already consulted with shareholders and are subject to approval at the 2018 AGM.
People and culture Change for the better is still change which can be disconcerting for those involved.
Accordingly on behalf of the Board I would like to thank all our employees for their continued commitment to building a better Essentra together.
We are proud of our international presence in 33 countries and we recognise the vital contribution which our people make.
Indeed during the course of the year I had the pleasure of visiting a number of our facilities  from our head offices in Milton Keynes UK and Chicago US and our Health and Personal Care Packaging sites in Portsmouth UK and Charlotte US to our Components European manufacturing hub in Kidlington UK and our Filter Products joint venture in Dubai  and can testify to the skill passion and hard work of our employees.
In particular my fellow Board members and I would like to pay tribute and give our sincere thanks to our 345 colleagues in Puerto Rico who in the face of significant personal challenge following hurricane Maria have shown incredible fortitude and dedication in attending work and supporting our customers many of whom were facing similar hurricanerelated issues.
Separately I attended the leadership conference in June during which the output of the strategic review was discussed at length with approximately 100 of our senior management team.
The lively debate and contribution over the threeday offsite was hugely encouraging as was the positive energy for change.
Consistent with Paul and the senior management team the Board is committed to making Essentra a great place to work where talent can thrive.
We therefore wholeheartedly support his focus on building employee engagement and in particular on his priority of creating a safe respectful and diverse environment for our people.
While we are coming from a low base in certain aspects of morale and motivation following a challenging 2016 my Board colleagues and I are nevertheless encouraged by the improvement in engagement which has been reported in our 2017 surveys and the focus which is being given to following up and implementing postsurvey action plans in a timely manner .
The Board is committed to achieving and maintaining the highest standards of occupational health and safety and environmental protection as well as making Essentra an exemplary workplace with regard to diversity and inclusion.
Each
Board member is required to visit one of the Essentra sites each year and to undertake a health and safety walk around the site to focus on these important matters.
The
Board thus fully endorses the priority which these critical workplace practices are now being given under Pauls stewardship which is expanded upon in the Chief Executives Review on pages 10 to 17 .
A stronger company Last year saw substantial change at Essentra and restoring the Company to sustainable profitable growth will take time.
However while there is much still to do we made significant progress and widespread improvement during 2017 so we are already well underway.
PAUL LESTER CBE
2 March 2018 ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT  CHAIRMANS STATEMENT CHIEF EXECUTIVES REVIEW Paul Forman Chief Executive Having been appointed as Chief Executive of Essentra on 1 January 2017 I am pleased to present my first Annual Review.
In summary following a period of turbulence we did much in 2017 to stabilise Essentra this was not only with regard to our operational performance metrics but also in terms of starting to win back lost credibility with our customers improving engagement with our employees and creating a stable balance sheet supported by markedly improved cash flow control.
At the same time we have developed and articulated a sustainable datadriven corporate strategy which will see the various activities which comprise the Essentra Group restored to profitable growth over the medium term behind a talented and engaged workforce.
At the heart of this change programme is our people where the establishment of an agreed set of principles and the absolute priority of health and safety have been critical developments in the culture of excellence which we are seeking to create and embed across Essentra.
There is clearly much for us all still to do and this will take time however now a year into my tenure I am encouraged by the progress we have made to date and by the positive energy for change across the organisation.
Financial performance FY 2017 revenue decreased 2.3% at constant exchange with a likeforlike decline of 2.0%.
The underlying result reflected an improved revenue trend in the second half of the year with a continued strong result in Component Solutions and a material improvement in Filter Products offset by a decrease in Health and Personal Care Packaging.
With a significantly positive foreign exchange benefit together with a modest decline from change in scope owing to the divestment of the Bristol consumer packaging site in June 2017  total revenue increased 2.9% to 1027 .3m.
On an adjusted basis operating profit was down 26.8% at constant exchange at 84.6m.
The 280bps reduction in the margin at constant exchange to 8.2% was largely driven by Health and Personal Care Packaging  notably the profit dropthrough from lower revenue together with a material operating loss at our folding cartons site at Newport UK and the impact of hurricane Maria on our facilities in Puerto Rico  as well as a less profitable revenue and segment mix in Tapes.
There was a 2.1m decrease in our financing costs resulting from a lower average net debt position during the year and our tax rate was maintained at 20.0% contributing to basic adjusted earnings per share at constant exchange reducing by 30.1% to 22.1p.
During the year there was further investment in our footprint and equipment with FY 2017 net capital expenditure of 45.3m we also made good progress with regard to net working capital management which supported a cash conversion ratio of 94.6%.
As such and boosted by net proceeds from the divestment of Porous Technologies of 210.8m our financial ratios remain robust with net debt to EBITDA of 1.7x and interest cover of 9.0x as at 31 December 2017 .
As a result the Board is recommending a final dividend of 14.4p per share  implying a FY 2017 dividend of 20.7p per share unchanged versus FY 2016.
My initial impressions When I joined Essentra it was clear that the Company had experienced a number of challenges.
Most evident of these was the poorly executed integration of the Clondalkin Specialist Packaging Division SPD which resulted in certain material commercial and operational issues which were significantly weighing on the financial performance.
Beyond this however were a number of other root causes Essentra did not have a clearly defined corporate strategy the matrix organisational structure was a source of confusion and a consequent lack of accountability there was a conspicuous lack of rigorous and consistent process and the IT infrastructure was fragmented and had been underinvested.
Taking these issues together it was unsurprising therefore that employee morale was very low and there had been an exodus of talent.
Notwithstanding these challenges my initial view was that the Essentra Group is comprised of strategically attractive businesses virtually all of which hold leadership or number two positions in their respective markets and many of which have sustainable organic and possibly acquisition growth potential thanks to their strong competitive advantage and their loyal blue chip customer base.
Critically I met many excellent and passionate colleagues who believed in the fundamental strengths of Essentra and were enthused by the prospect for positive change.
Accordingly the issues to be overcome were predominantly selfinflicted  rather than endmarket related  and there were solid foundations upon which to build.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT  CHIEF EXECUTIVES REVIEW During 2017  we successfully restored stability across the organisation  from our people and customers to our processes and finances.
A year into my tenure my belief in a bright future for our Company is  if anything even stronger than my initial view.
2017  a year of stabilisation While it was important to initiate the strategy development programme at the earliest opportunity at the same time we needed to restore stability to the Company from our people and customers to our processes and finances.
My priority as Chief Executive is to provide employees with a safe respectful and diverse environment where people want to come to work in the morning.
In the first instance therefore it was imperative to start to rebuild our corporate culture and to develop and communicate an agreed set of values  as well as where we aim to take the business and why  to ensure we are all clear as to how we should behave while in the workplace as well as how we will together build Essentra into the best company it can be.
Accordingly we established our six principles and three steps to longterm success  being Stability Strategy and Growth  which were rolled out across the business supported by an extensive programme of video communication in all languages and townhall presentations.
In addition we needed an unambiguous organisational structure which resulted in the disbanding of the previous Strategic Business Unit and regional matrix in favour of three global divisions each with profit and loss accountability and clear lines of reporting and responsibility.
Following a period of significant footprint change too often to the detriment of our commercial relationships we undertook to stabilise our business and to regain revenue momentum behind a new set of customer retention initiatives.
In the case of certain underperforming sites this also entailed the injection of turnaround resource  both in terms of judicious financial investment and dedicated experienced personnel.
This significant focus and remedial action was particularly evident in Health and Personal Care Packaging as we sought to arrest the significant rate of revenue and profit decline during the second half of 2016 especially at those sites impacted by the acquisition integration we also moved rapidly to start to address systems challenges and simplify our infrastructure in IT and changed the reporting line of the Chief Information Officer CIO directly to me to reflect the critical importance of the task ahead.
While 2017 marks the outset of our threestep corporate change programme nonetheless we made meaningful progress in driving widespread stability during the year compared to a low point in H2 2016 our revenue trends have steadied our key performance indicators notably service and quality metrics have increased demonstrably in all three divisions which has helped to enhance the dialogue we are having with customers we have delivered a number of successful commercial and operational initiatives and our employee engagement surveys have shown excellent levels of participation with improvement in all key areas albeit from a low base in some cases versus 2016.
Underpinning all of this is a robust balance sheet and a very good level of cash conversion in the business and towards the end of the year we successfully refinanced our entire debt facilities to extend maturities at attractive rates  including the issue of US75m of US Private Placement notes  to ensure stability in our finances over the medium to long term.
Entailing eight different workstreams the aim of our strategy review was to provide a welldefined and objective assessment of the current status and positioning of the various business activities within the Essentra organisation together with their future potential.
Presented to the financial markets at the time of our interim results on 28 July 2017  the output of this sixmonth review has been a clear corporate strategy with options which is aligned to a threeyear plan and provides a datadriven view of the areas which may require measured additional investment in capability  process and of how we intend to drive future growth.
Ahead of our external presentation however I was pleased to have the opportunity to discuss the findings from the strategy review with ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT  CHIEF EXECUTIVES REVIEW our leadership teams from across Essentra at our global Management Conference in June.
Involving a much wider group than has previously been so directly involved of almost 100 people I greatly valued their contribution to our future and they have collectively done a fantastic job of communicating our strategy to their respective organisations to ensure that our employees fully understand the direction in which we are heading and the reasons why  and to solicit their comments and questions.
Overall the strategy review confirmed my initial assessment namely that the nine businesses comprising the Essentra Group have strong and defensible strategic positions with operating margins which can be sustained or  in the case of Health and Personal Care Packaging  improved to industry norms over the medium term.
As part of the review we also determined that with effect from 1 January 2018 and to provide greater focus across the portfolio we should be grouped into three global divisions of Components Packaging and Filters with the creation of a fourth Specialist Components division to separately manage our six smaller businesses.
In addition we clearly defined the role of the overall Group in driving value.
In order to support our stability and future growth agenda we identified the need for an incremental 30m of investment over three years in key areas of this c.
10m is ITrelated and approximately 20m is to drive an equipment upgrade programme in Packaging.
Components
Combining the expertise and credibility of a manufacturer with the service orientation of a distributor there are a number of factors which make the c.
8bn Bill of Materials small components market attractive to Essentra.
Competitors of which there are hundreds  are either distributors or niche manufacturers it is difficult for new entrants to establish themselves in a meaningful way due to the high cost to produce moulds to manufacture standard parts across a very broad range of Stock Keeping Units SKUs  Asia remains a large growing and relatively underdeveloped region and good margins are generally available  among other factors.
Indeed no major changes in market dynamics or customer needs are foreseen in the immediate future.
While there are opportunities for improvement  including crossselling across product categories and the rate of new customer acquisition  the strategy for Components is essentially one of evolution from a strong and relatively unique proposition.
However over and above the scope to grow the division organically through expanding into fastergrowing geographies and adjacent product ranges there is also potential to achieve this through bolton transactions.
Indeed the acquisition of Micro Plastics a leading provider of fasteners  at the end of the year was a great example of the consolidation opportunities available to us not only does Micro Plastics significantly enhance our offering in the US for one of our core product ranges and add custom injection moulding capability  as well as providing compelling crossselling potential it also extends our manufacturing footprint and gives us access to a number of highgrowth endmarkets in Mexico.
Our strategic review has confirmed that the fundamental strengths exist across our businesses which we can build upon and that previous challenges were caused by internal not external factors.
Packaging
As one of only two multicontinental suppliers of a full range of specialist secondary health and personal care packaging Essentra is fundamentally wellpositioned in an attractive sector underlying markets are stable and growing we have a predominantly blue chip customer base which represents a high barrier to entry and exhibits a clear pattern of one stop shop purchasing and industry trends support continuing growth and scope for valueadded opportunities.
However as mentioned above through the poor integration of the acquisition of Clondalkin SPD we lost much of our market share through a reduced share of wallet and customer trust over the course of 2016 further to which much of our recent focus has been on stabilising the business.
As part of the strategy review and to create greater organisational clarity we took the decision to carve out the tapes activities from the division and to run them as part of the newlycreated Specialist Components division.
In addition low complexity packaging for consumer goods applications will be deemphasised notably this ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT  CHIEF EXECUTIVES REVIEW unfortunately resulted in the closure of the financially and operationallychallenged Newport folding cartons site at the end of 2017  and thus the removal of c. losses in FY 2018.
As we continue to stabilise our underlying health and personal care packaging activities we are now starting to leverage our core capabilities to drive revenue growth through initiatives such as additional commercial programmes to materially increase customer share of wallet developing a broader and deeper service proposition and expanding geographically with existing customers.
At the same time the delivery of shortterm profit levers including procurement and process improvement initiatives as well as the benefit from incremental investment in upgraded more efficient equipment are expected to help the division to start to improve towards an industryaverage operating margin.
Filters
While Essentras addressed segments are fundamentally stable in an overall declining tobacco market  given our significant weighting towards special filters and Asia  there is scope to refine and distinguish the current proposition further with the objective of both expanding the share of wallet with multinationals while simultaneously driving share among independent customers.
In the case of the former rebuilding global key account management and providing solutions in new geographic markets now demanding special filters should help us to strengthen and deepen customer relationships regarding the latter a more tailored offering and a better configuration of facilities can help to balance their demand for innovation with lowcost manufacturing.
Combined with further internal upgrading of our innovation capability to become a more commercially rather than operationally led business and hence a more strategic partner these initiatives which are being led by our new divisional Managing Director Kamal Taneja who joined us in October  are aimed at improving customer and market visibility and thereby dampening the historical volatility in the project pipeline.
Over and above optimising the existing business we have identified three potential game changers and we are in the process of evaluating these further China  the worlds largest cigarette market 44% global volume and currently served as an export market from our sites in Thailand and Indonesia.
We are exploring a structural move into China supported by our proven special filter capability to capture the clear market trends toward premium and more internationalstyle products Greater outsourcing  a 1% shift in the outsourced filter share represents a c.
50m revenue increase to third party producers such as Essentra.
With multinational players continuing to pursue opportunities to rationalise their manufacturing footprint and to focus on core skills  improve asset utilisation we are exploring the potential to help them simplify their supply chains through outsourcing a greater proportion of filter production Next Generation Products NGP currently a very small percentage of the overall tobacco market however rapidly expanding as multinationals increasingly focus their innovation spend on both vaping ecigarette and Heat Not Burn platforms.
With a strong position in combustibles and an expanding presence in both NGP segments there is the possibility for us to grow in such emerging technologies Given the early stage of evaluating each of these potential medium to longterm valuecreating levers these are not opportunities which we are assuming to be certain and we will update the financial markets accordingly as our analysis progresses.
Specialist Components The newlycreated Specialist Components division comprises Essentras six smaller business activities which have very limited synergy with their previous larger host divisions and with each other.
However in their respective niches most have strong or at least reasonable positions and all have scope for organic growth.
Accounting for FY 2017 revenue of c.
Extrusion Pipe Protection Technologies Tear Tapes Speciality Tapes Industrial Supply the Maintenance Repair and Overhaul MRO industrial components business and Card Solutions Security.
We expect that this new organisational structure will facilitate faster more nimble management and that greater focus will enable more detailed strategic development it will also give greater visibility on the performance of the three larger divisions.
With effect from 1 January 2018 Tim Wilson joined Essentra as divisional President and  over and above maximising shortterm tactical opportunities  his task over the next six months will be to work with each of the respective business heads to formulate a full range of longerterm strategies.
The role of Finance As we have stabilised the Company the Finance function has made a significant contribution in providing due control discipline and balance sheet management and will continue to do so as we seek to restore sustainable revenue growth and profitability to Essentra.
In particular the team has a critical role to play in terms of business partnering as well as capturing the financial consequences of our corporate strategy and hence in informing the decision making process  both in terms of mediumterm planning and inyear budgeting.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT  CHIEF EXECUTIVES REVIEW While there is limited synergy between our businesses we have clearly defined a role for the Group to add value across a number of enabling functions from Corporate
Finance and HR to Operations IT HSE and Commercial.
Across our diverse businesses our manufacturing capability is a common theme and  having first started producing filters in the UK in the late 1940s  we have extensive expertise from plastic injection moulding and extrusion to specialist printing  conversion and filtration technologies.
In harnessing this significant capability the Group has an important role to play in leveraging investment sharing best practice to move our facilities to world class levels taking advantage of common purchasing opportunities and standardising key processes where relevant.
Alongside Operations there are also opportunities to deliver critical process improvements skill upgrades and cultural change in our Strategy and Commercial function particularly with regard to driving corporate strategy facilitating and challenging the next stage of divisional strategies and overseeing MandA activity and consistent postmerger integration protocols.
As both areas will greatly benefit from central leadership and support we have accordingly created two important Group Management Committee GMC roles in Group Operations Director and Strategy and Commercial Director.
Further to our review we have revised our key financial performance indicators to focus on all value drivers from both a profit and loss and balance sheet perspective.
In the case of the former operating profit growth and margin are now prioritised while in the case of the latter there is an emphasis on working capital measured as average working capital per month as a percentage of revenue Property Plant and Equipment and gearing this translates into an increased focus on returns both return on capital employed ie how we are using our balance sheet and return on total invested capital including accumulated goodwill etc from acquisition spend.
From a financial perspective the output of our review is a clear  and significantly enhanced  focus on cash flow generation indeed notwithstanding the afore mentioned incremental 30m capital expenditure our objective is to improve our conversion ratio over the medium term in particular through driving sustainable improvement in net working capital.
This focus on cash generation is evidenced in welldefined financial and capital allocation policies these include a leverage target of between 1  2x net debt to EBITDA and a stretching internal return threshold for capital expenditure programmes as well as a disciplined financial approach to acquisitions and a recognition of the importance of the dividend to shareholders while driving stability and growth.
In addition we have revised our management incentives to ensure due alignment such that cashrelated performance measures now account for 30% of the annual cash bonus and 20  40% of the LongTerm Incentive Programme.
While there is limited synergy between our nine businesses in terms of endmarkets and customers served nonetheless there are a number of key aspects where the Group can add value.
Indeed over and above the role of Finance outlined above together with Human Resources and Health and Safety of which more below there are a number of other areas where a unifying central resource can significantly enhance the sum of our constituent parts and we are already making progress.
Not least among these is Corporate Governance and consistent with the Boards ongoing commitment to promoting a strong culture of the highest standards of business ethics based on clear principles we now have an externally benchmarked and supported route to upper quartile FTSE 250 performance by 2020.
Together with the cultural change initiated during the year  which has seen a more committed tone from the top and the revision of a number of protocols we have initiated a number of process improvements including resetting our risk management approach to develop consistent and relevant performance indicators filling certain gaps in business continuity management and contract processes and revising our internal audit approach to add value and help drive positive change.
IT is also an area where we can benefit from an integrated approach global infrastructure and coordinated activities.
Indeed the previous absence of corporate strategy consistent standards and postacquisition systems integration has resulted in a proliferation of platforms and installations relative to our site footprint while historic underinvestment means certain software is coming to the end of vendor support and we lack the necessary skills and number of resource for the relatively complex environment we have.
The IT team led by our new CIO Richard Cammish and supported by selective external expertise has much to do to upgrade our capabilities  as well as to direct the continued investment being made to address the growing risks which all companies face in the cyber security domain  but is energised for change and the task in hand.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT  CHIEF EXECUTIVES REVIEW People At all levels our employees are a vital resource in the Companys pursuit of operational excellence and the provision of quality products and services to our customers.
And as Chief Executive my priority is to provide a working environment which enables talent to flourish and where people believe they have the opportunity for career development.
Having introduced assessmentbased Leadership Development Centres LDC in 2014 a total of 171 colleagues across all geographical regions have now attended the two key development programmes globally.
Essentras LDC is not a traditional training programme rather it is designed to assess skills against defined Company leadership competencies which will be critical to our organisational success going forward.
Together with their manager the employee takes responsibility for using the output from the LDC to create a personal development plan with support from our Human Resources team.
By being nominated to the LDC employees have already delivered success consistently in their current role and demonstrated the potential for future advancement.
As a result the programme is designed to help employees fulfil their respective potential.
The Essentra Graduate Programme enjoyed further success in 2017 .
The twoyear programme has provided a talent pipeline for a number of years and in 2017  25 people joined the scheme which continues to expand its international reach.
The 2017 intake will join the 19 graduates recruited in 2016 and will have the opportunity to develop their management skills through bespoke training which takes place around Essentras sites giving graduates exposure to the business while carrying out an operational job from day one.
Separately in October the 2015 graduate intake who for the first time had the opportunity to undertake some of their training in Asia in Bangalore India  completed their programme with a number of successful presentations hosted in Milton Keynes.
Representatives from senior management were invited to watch the graduate teams drawn from across functions and geographies present on topics focusing on Millennial Employee Engagement at Essentra Should Essentra Improve its Employer Brand and Knowledge Sharing a Proposal for Implementation in Essentra Components .
Additionally in April we announced our first National Apprenticeship Progamme in the UK.
The programme launched across our sites at Bradford Kidlington Kilmarnock Newmarket Newport Nottingham and Portsmouth providing 20 young apprentices the opportunity to learn skills in the printing setting and finishing industries.
Comprised of a selection of vocationallyrecognised qualifications as well as technical functional and soft skills modules the programme will take 36 months to complete and provide participants with a Level 3 apprenticeship.
With the average age of employees at our manufacturing sites increasing we believe that such an initiative is an excellent way of attracting new talent to our business particularly in skilled operational roles  and to offer them a rewarding and varied career .
Since joining I have had the pleasure of visiting all our manufacturing sites and speaking to thousands of my colleagues and what has consistently struck me is the incredible team we have and the extent of their knowledge skill passion and dedication to Essentra.
Nowhere is this more evident than at our sites in Puerto Rico where hurricane Maria caused devastation beyond anything most of us can imagine.
While our experienced local team was well prepared for the hurricane strike nonetheless the response of our 345 employees at Manati and Guaynabo in reporting for work at a time when many of them were facing significant personal challenges was truly humbling and the Board GMC and I would like to pay tribute to their outstanding commitment to our business.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT  CHIEF EXECUTIVES REVIEW Health safety and environment
Nobody involved with our operations should suffer injury or harm and Essentras commitment to achieving and maintaining the highest standards of occupational health and safety extends to our employees temporary workers contractors customers suppliers visitors and members of the public alike.
Our
Although we are still some way from the levels of excellence to which the Board and GMC are committed  and which are espoused in our updated Group HSE policy we made progress in improving the HSE culture across the Group in 2017 .
Indeed
Incidents only modestly decreased versus 2016 we saw a close to 20% reduction in days lost as a result of these incidents indicating that the severity of the cases reported has notably lessened.
In addition we significantly invested in our global HSE capability during the year to add resource and capability and to help identify and drive further improvements in performance and culture.
This included the recruitment of a new Group HSE Director who  with his Global Safety Team and with my and the GMCs unstinting support  will be responsible for ensuring that this critical area remains at the forefront of the Companys agenda will take steps to reduce the number of accidents and incidents with a goal of zero will share learnings of safety investigations to prevent recurrence and will encourage and facilitate employee participation and feedback to contribute to the high standards we have set ourselves.
We will also expect employees to participate fully in the improvement of standards not least site managers and supervisors to ensure that healthy and safe working conditions are maintained within their sphere of influence at all times.
Further to the disbanding of the matrix structure in February 2017  in October we made further organisational changes in light of our strategic review.
In particular having restored stability to our activities we created a global Health and Personal Care Packaging organisation  Essentra Packaging  with leadership under a single functional team.
This has brought together our previous Europe and Asia and Americas regional organisations  which had been separately managed since February 2017  and will allow us to serve our global customers better and with greater alignment and to leverage our scale in innovation best practice transfer and talent development.
As a result it will allow us to pursue a clear strategic direction with common purpose and to provide customers with a consistent global value proposition.
Leading Essentra Packaging with effect from October is Iain Percival who joined Essentra as Managing Director of the Europe and Asia business in March 2017 supporting Iain will be a number of senior global roles which we have already made good progress in recruiting.
Following a year of challenge and change in 2016 we have much still to do to improve motivation and morale in certain parts of the organisation.
This includes the Company being exemplary in all aspects of diversity and inclusion and we have recently established a Steering Group to implement the agenda in these critical areas which form part of the cornerstone of our six principles.
Accordingly there is a significant role for our Group Human Resources team from monitoring and reviewing the action plans from engagement surveys and further enhancing and managing our Learning and Development programmes to continuing to lead the recruitment process for talent to fill skill gaps and benefiting from the addition of dedicated resource to expand our employee communications.
Together with my GMC colleagues I am committed to ensuring that Essentra is a great place to work and to driving the engagement of our people from the lower quartile level which I inherited to our objective of upper quartile.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT  CHIEF EXECUTIVES REVIEW As part of the cornerstone of our six principles it is imperative that we give health and safety in the workplace our full focus and commitment and I expect every one of us to participate fully in delivering our strategic and policy objectives in this area.
Essentra is additionally committed to the highest standards of corporate governance and responsibility to ensure that the way in which we manage our activities reflects the expectations of all the Companys stakeholders.
As a member of both the FTSE4Good Index and the Carbon Trust we recognise that careful stewardship of the environment is a duty we owe to our neighbours and to future generations as well as a critical component of the international reputation and quality of Essentras businesses.
All our principal manufacturing facilities hold the ISO 14001 environmental accreditation and with the exception of recently acquired sites they have also achieved the Occupational Health and Safety Management Systems OHSAS 18001.
Many of our operations are additionally required to adhere to more stringent standards notably those serving the automotive and health and personal care sectors.
During the year our Barcelona Spain Components site was accredited to IATF 16949 an updated and improved certification which ensures the facility meets the rigorous processes required to sell components to the automotive industry.
Separately we received PS9000 certification across all our Health and Personal Care Packaging sites in the US and Puerto Rico making Essentra the first manufacturer of secondary packaging in the region to secure this accreditation and underscoring our commitment to Good Manufacturing Practice and best in class quality assurance to our pharmaceutical customers.
As part of our aforementioned updated HSE policy we also committed to continuously improving our environmental performance.
This includes preventing pollution and minimising emissions discharges and disposals reducing waste specific energy consumption and where possible conserving and recycling resources such as water  particularly in areas of scarcity.
In addition we have committed to actively engage with stakeholders to explore the opportunities offered by new technologies to improve our production processes and operations.
Summary
Our roadmap from Stability through to Strategy and Growth will take two to three years and given the scale of the task we will need to prioritise our objectives and may need to evolve our thinking over time.
However the vast majority of what we need to do is in our own hands and we are already well on our way to rebuilding the foundations from which we can restore sustainable growth in our fantastic
We underwent a great deal of change in 2017  which I know can be both exciting and unsettling  and I would like to thank all our employees for their collective hard work and commitment in this respect as together we seek to build a better Essentra.
PAUL FORMAN Chief Executive 2 March 2018 Restoring Essentra to sustainable profitable growth is not a rapid journey and we clearly have a lot of work still to do.
However together we have made great progress and tangible improvement in 2017 so we are already well on our way.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT  CHIEF EXECUTIVES REVIEW STRATEGY AND PROGRESS Our aim is to make Essentra the best company it can be.
To achieve this everyone in the business needs to bring our six principles to life in their work and to follow the three steps to longterm success of Stability Strategy and Growth.
How we will achieve it The map Our strategy provides a detailed roadmap of what each of our businesses will look like in three to five years how we will get there how we can be the best supplier we can to our customers and how we will protect our position.
In delivering our strategic objectives there is a welldefined role for the overall Group in driving value not least with regard to corporate governance.
Underpinning our strategy are clear and robust financial and capital allocation policies with an overall focus on cash generation and quality of earnings being aligned to management incentives.
The journey As we progress it is imperative that we remain stable while delivering growth particularly to the extent that growth entails acquiring other businesses.
We also need to ensure that we have the necessary skills in place to deliver our strategy as well as the appropriate financial profile to support the future development of the Group.
The preparation In order to restore  and maintain sustainable growth to Essentra over the medium to long term it is imperative that we have stable foundations upon which to build in our people our processes our customers and our finances.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT  STRATEGY AND PROGRESS Strategic objectives Progress in 2017 Priorities for 2018 Disbanded matrix organisation structure Established and communicated our six principles Undertook two employee engagement surveys to identify key areas for improvement Reestablished HSE as a priority across the Group Developed an externally benchmarked and supported route to best in class governance by 2020 Reset risk management approach and revised internal audit structure to drive process improvements and add greater value Stabilised revenue trends in each division Implemented new customer retention initiatives and significantly enhanced dialogue Made progressive improvement in key service and quality metrics Started to address IT systems challenges and simplify infrastructure Completed disposal of Porous Technologies business Successfully refinanced Group banking facilities Ensure action plans from 2017 engagement surveys are executed Undertake annual Groupwide employee engagement survey Improve internal communication through dedicated resource Drive ongoing improvements in diversity and inclusion based on Steering Group findings Define and drive an excellence programme in HSE Drive further governance improvements consistent with agreed priorities and timeline Fill gaps in business continuity management protocols and contracting processes Implement findings from Voice of Customer surveys Drive further operational stability initiatives Implement priority IT technical and functional solutions to drive progressive improvement Continue to focus on cash generation Developed and articulated a clear corporate strategy aligned to a threeyear plan for each of the larger three global divisions Undertook detailed benchmarking exercise and established clear financial and capital allocation policies Invested in adding  upgrading equipment and skills Identified certain key Operational and Commercial capability gaps and appointed two GMC roles to lead and drive improvement Made operational improvements at underperforming sites to progress towards market acceptable service standards Establish and communicate strategy for each of the businesses in Specialist
Drive deeper customer relationships and confirm and communicate new value propositions Identify and develop valueadding innovation opportunities Develop more structured sales management processes and enhance Key Account Management capability Sharpen innovation focus and better manage new product pipeline ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT  STRATEGY AND PROGRESS Strategic objectives Progress in 2017 Priorities for 2018 Aligned management incentives with strategic Key Performance Indicators Completed divestment of Bristol and closure of Newport cartons consumer packaging sites Complete basic Sales and Operations Planning rollout and further upgrade processes Continue to drive service improvements at underperforming sites Implement lean manufacturing continuous improvement tools across the Group Continue to invest in upgrading equipment especially in Packaging and IT Completed acquisition of Micro Plastics in
Successfully filled a number of key roles needed for the successful delivery of our strategy Successfully integrate Micro Plastics Evaluate and drive the three medium term opportunities in Filters Continue to grow and develop talent across Essentra Identify further skill gaps and attract appropriate talent to meet future strategic requirements Focus on key business capabilities and continue to progress towards bestin class levels Continue to develop pipeline of potential bolton acquisition opportunities in Components Facilitate and challenge the next stage of divisional strategies Continue to provide Finance team support to deliver the strategy Key Performance Indicators The delivery of Essentras strategic priorities is underpinned by a focus on Key Performance Indicators KPIs which measure the Companys progress in the delivery of value.
Further to the strategic review which took place during the year these metrics have been duly amended from the prior year period to reflect an additional emphasis on profitability cash flow generation and return on capital.
In addition the definition of Net Working Capital Ratio has been revised to be the average monthly net working capital measured over 12 months  as opposed to the balance as at year end  as a percentage of revenue.
With the exception of adjusted earnings per share and dividend per share these indicators have been used as principal elements in assessing the longterm performance of the operating businesses.
Alignment of KPIs to management remuneration Performance measures for the Executive Annual Bonus Plan Performance measures for the Executive LongTerm Incentive Plan ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT  STRATEGY AND PROGRESS What we measure Why we measure it How did we do Likeforlike revenue growth 1 Measures the ability of the Company to grow sales by operating in selected geographies and categories and offering differentiated costcompetitive products and services Likeforlike revenue growth % 2016 9% Adjusted operating profit Measures the profitability of the Company
2016 109m Adjusted earnings per share Measures the benefits generated for shareholders from the Companys overall performance Adjusted earnings per share p 2016 29.2p Net working capital ratio Average net working capital per month as a % of revenue Measures the ability of the Company to finance its expansion and release cash from working capital Net working capital ratio % 2016 16.6% Adjusted operating cash flow Measures the cash generation capability of the Company Adjusted operating cash flow m 2016 102m Cash conversion Adjusted operating cash flow as a % of adjusted operating profit Measures how the Company converts its profit into cash  quality of the Companys earnings Adjusted cash conversion % 2016 94% Dividend per share Measures the amount of cash per share which the Company returns to shareholders Dividend per share p 2016 20.7p Return on Capital Employed Adjusted operating profit divided by tangible fixed assets and net working capital Measures how effectively the Company uses its operational assets Return on Capital Employed % 2016 25.8% Return on Invested Capital Adjusted operating profit after tax Capital Employed plus intangible assets Measures the Companys ability to effectively deploy capital Return on Invested Capital % 2016 8.8% Total shareholder return Total annual increase in value based on the increase in share price and the dividend paid to shareholders Measures the Companys ability to generate longterm value Total shareholder return % 2016 42.6% At constant exchange rates excluding acquisitions and disposals.
At constant exchange rates excluding the impact of amortisation of acquired intangible assets and exceptional operating items.
As defined in the Financial Review on page 22.
As defined in the Basis of Preparation on page 3.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT  STRATEGY AND PROGRESS FINANCIAL REVIEW Stefan Schellinger Group Finance Director Trading performance FY 2017 revenue increased 2.9% decreased 2.3% at constant exchange to 1027 .3m with a likeforlike decline of 2.0%.
While
Component Solutions showed significant growth  driven by our Components and Pipe Protection Technologies businesses this was more than offset by a decline in Health and Personal Care Packaging and a likeforlike decrease in Filter Products mainly as a result of the passthrough of reduced raw material costs in the form of lower pricing.
On an adjusted basis operating profit was down 22.2% 26.8% at constant exchange at 84.6m.
The 270bps reduction in the margin 280bps at constant exchange to 8.2% largely arose in Health and Personal Care Packaging owing to the profit dropthrough from lower revenue a material loss at our Newport folding cartons facility and the costs associated with disruption to the sites in Puerto Rico further to hurricane Maria  as well as a less profitable revenue and segment mix in Tapes.
Including amortisation of acquired intangible assets of 22.9m and an exceptional pretax charge of 56.2m mainly relating to costs associated with the closure of our folding cartons site in Newport the strategic review of the Company and the simplification of the organisational structure including the departure of certain senior management during the year  operating profit as reported was 5.5m FY 2016 operating loss of 50m.
Net finance expense Net finance expense was lower at 10.4m 2016 12.5m.
The net interest charge on net debt decreased to 8.4m 2016 11.6m the amortisation of bank facility fees was slightly higher at 1.0m 2016 0.7m and there was an IAS 19 pension net finance charge of 1.0m 2016 0.2m.
Tax
The effective tax rate on underlying profit before exceptional items and tax was 20.0% 2016 20.0%.
Net income On an adjusted basis net income of 59 .2m was down 23.0% 28.8% at constant exchange and basic earnings per share declined by 24.4% 30.1% at constant exchange to 22.1p.
Reflecting the posttax profit and exceptional gain on sale relating to the Porous Technologies business which completed on 6 March 2017  on a total reported basis net income of 115.8m and earnings per share of 43.7p compared to a net loss of 39 .6m and a loss per share of 15.4p in FY 2016.
Dividends
The Board of Directors recommends a final dividend of 14.4p per share 2016 14.4p taking the FY 2017 dividend to 20.7p per share unchanged versus FY 2016.
Net working capital Net working capital is defined as inventories plus trade and other receivables less trade and other payables adjusted to exclude deferred consideration receivable payable and interest accruals  capital payables.
Net working capital of 124.4m was 11.6m lower than the 31 December 2016 level of 136.0m largely due to a reduction in accounts receivable.
The average net working capital  revenue ratio decreased to 15.1% 2016 16.3% at constant exchange .
Cash flow Adjusted operating cash flow was lower at 80.0m 2016 101.8m.
This included an inflow of net working capital for the year of 6.4m 2016 inflow of 2.8m and gross capital expenditure of 47 .1m 2016 46.7m with net capital expenditure at 45.3m 2016 37 .3m.
Net capital expenditure equated to 125% 2016 120% of the depreciation charge including amortisation of non acquired intangible assets for the year of 36.3m 2016 31.1m.
Net interest paid was 12.5m 2016 11.3m and tax payments decreased by 5.9m to 11.2m 2016 17 .1m.
The inflow in respect of pension obligations was 0.1m 2016 1.1m.
Adjusted free cash flow of 56.4m compared to 74.5m in FY 2016.
Free cash flow reconciliation m Adjusted operating profit 84.6 Noncash  other items 34.3 Net working capital 6.4 Net capital expenditure 45.3 Adjusted operating cash flow 80.0 Tax paid 11.2 Net interest paid 12.5 Pension contributions 0.1 Adjusted free cash flow 56.4 Net debt Net debt at the end of the period was 210.6m 31 December 2016 379.3m reflecting the proceeds from the sale of the Porous Technologies business and strong underlying cash flow generation.
The Companys financial ratios remain robust.
The ratio of net debt to EBITDA as at 31 December 2017 was 1.7x 31 December 2016 2.3x and interest cover was 9.0x 31 December 2016 9.0x.
In November the Group refinanced its existing bank revolving credit facility into a new 375m fiveyear multicurrency facility provided by a strong international banking group.
In addition we also successfully placed US75m of loan notes spread over seven 10 and 12year maturities in the United States Private Placement market USPP notes.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT  FINANCIAL REVIEW In 2017  we strengthened the balance sheet generated a very good level of cash conversion and refinanced our entire debt facilities helping to secure not only our current financial stability but also underpinning our medium to longterm position.
This refinancing optimises Essentras financial position going forward in terms of interest cost sources of funding and maturities  as well as providing further headroom  thus underpinning the medium and longterm financial stability of the Company as we pursue our strategic objectives.
Balance sheet As at the end of 2017  the Company had shareholders funds attributable to Essentra equity holders of 612.3m 2016 595.4m an increase of 2.8%.
Net debt was 210.6m 2016 379.3m and total capital employed in the business was 831.0m 2016 982.0m.
This finances noncurrent assets of 868.1m 2016 885.3m of which 283.1m 2016 285.9m is tangible fixed assets the remainder being intangible assets deferred tax assets retirement benefit assets and longterm receivables.
The Company has net working capital of 124.4m 2016 136.0m current provisions of 4.8m 2016 1.2m and longterm liabilities other than borrowings of 105.4m 2016 105.4m.
Pensions
As at 31 December 2017  the Companys IAS 19 net pension liability was 13.4m 2016 23.4m.
The role of Finance in the strategic process Over and above the aforementioned refinancing of our facilities the Finance workstream was a critical aspect of the strategic review which we undertook.
The key objective of this was to define the financial architecture and potential of the Group based on the status quo a detailed benchmarking exercise of Essentras divisional performance versus its peers and an evaluation of the sustainable revenue growth and operating margin as a result of executing our key strategic initiatives.
Further to this extensive exercise we have a datadriven view of the financial consequences of our strategy and our financial potential and are thus better positioned with regard to Group decision making  including capital allocation and portfolio management.
Accordingly we have not only been able to articulate an outlook for revenue growth and profitability for each of our larger three global divisions we have also been able to formulate clear key performance indicators and financial and capital allocation policies to which management incentives will appropriately be aligned.
Treasury policies and controls Essentra has a centralised treasury function to control external borrowing and manage exchange risk.
Treasury policies are approved by the Board and cover the nature of the exposure to be hedged the types of financial investments that may be employed and the criteria for investing and borrowing cash.
The Company uses derivatives only to manage foreign currency and interest rate risk arising from underlying business activities.
No transactions of a speculative nature are undertaken.
Treasury activities are subject to independent reviews by the Group Assurance department.
Underlying policy assumptions and activities are reviewed by the Treasury Committee.
Controls over exposure changes and transaction authenticity are in place and dealings are restricted to those banks with the relevant combination of geographical presence and suitable credit rating.
Essentra monitors the credit ratings of its counterparties and credit exposure to each counterparty.
Foreign exchange risk The majority of Essentras net assets are in currencies other than sterling.
The Companys normal policy is to limit the translation exposure and the resulting impact on shareholders funds by borrowing in those currencies in which the Company has significant net assets.
As at 31 December 2017  Essentras US dollardenominated assets were approximately 36% hedged by its US dollardenominated borrowings and its eurodenominated assets were approximately 65% hedged by its eurodenominated borrowings.
The majority of Essentras transactions are carried out in the functional currencies of its operations and so transaction exposure is limited.
However where they do occur the Companys policy is to hedge the exposures as soon as they are committed using forward foreign exchange contracts.
Impact of US tax legislation Essentra notes the enactment of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act in the United States on 22 December 2017  which has reduced the statutory rate of US Federal corporate income tax to 21% with effect from 1 January 2018.
While the full implications of this new US tax legislation on the Company are still being reviewed Essentra estimates that the Groups effective tax rate for the year ending 31 December 2018 will only be marginally impacted by the enactment of this new Act.
STEFAN SCHELLINGER Group Finance Director 2 March 2018 ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT  FINANCIAL REVIEW OPERATIONAL REVIEW 24 This Operational Review covers Component Solutions page 26 Health and Personal Care Packaging page 32 Filter Products page 36
Management of Principal Risks
Corporate Responsibility page 50 25 Component
A leading global manufacturer and distributor of a comprehensive range of components used in diverse industrial applications and endmarkets.
Revenue
2016 302.6m 13.4% Operating profit 2016 54.4m 7 .9% 17.1% Operating margin 2016 18.0% 90bps Excluding amortisation of acquired intangible assets and exceptional operating items.
Scott Fawcett
Director
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM STRATEGIC REPORT  OPERATIONAL REVIEW  COMPONENT SOLUTIONS 26 Who we are and what we do The Components business is a global marketleading manufacturer and distributor of plastic injection moulded vinyl dip moulded and metal items.
Operating in 27 countries worldwide 11 manufacturing facilities and 24 logistics centres serve more than 90000 customers with a rapid supply of low cost but essential products for a variety of applications in industries such as equipment manufacturing automotive fabrication electronics and construction.
The Pipe Protection Technologies PPT business specialises in the manufacture of highperformance innovative products from commodity resins to engineering grade thermoplastics and polymer alloys for use in the oil and gas industry.
Locations in four countries combined with a wide distributor network serve customers around the world.
The Extrusion business is a leading custom profile extruder located in the Netherlands which offers a complete design and production service.
One of the first companies to extrude plastics in 1956 Essentra is now one of Europes most advanced suppliers of coextrusion and triextrusion to all branches of industry.
The Card Solutions business is a provider of ID card printers systems and accessories to direct and trade customers providing a broad product offering and competitive value.
How we do it The objective of our Components business is to leverage its extensive customer base product range and distribution capability using our efficient sourcing and manufacturing operations and integrated IT platform to respond to the demands of our diverse customer base.
Our tool library product development skills and manufacturing experience combined with our inventory and logistics infrastructure are unique assets.
We have sophisticated businesstobusiness multichannel marketing expertise and support this with our knowledgeable sales resource and comprehensive product catalogues which are available in many languages and online.
We target organic growth through increasing the range of products and effective marketing cross selling to existing customers expanding our customer base and entering new geographic markets.
We also see opportunities to grow through acquisition where it can move our business into complementary product categories or endmarkets or further our geographic distribution capability.
As a global leading supplier to the oil and gas sectors our PPT business provides the broadest range of custom thread and pipe protection products for a complete range of Oil Country Tubular Goods OCTG tubulars line pipe and drilling pipe applications.
Our objective is to leverage our stateoftheart manufacturing footprint headquarters in Houston US to meet global demand while ensuring adherence to the latest industry regulations.
Offering a full range of valueadding design and production services Essentra Extrusion is well placed to provide purposedeveloped products based on unique specifications.
Our objective is to leverage our extensive inhouse capabilities including a laboratory RandD department and tooling expertise  to partner with customers from the earliest stages of new product development and provide them with a compelling value proposition no matter how complex the finished product.
The Card Solutions business has access to a wide portfolio of products and services including printers software and consumables from leading manufacturers.
Our systems produce durable highquality credit cardstyle photo ID cards which are compatible with the majority of security systems and which can be specified to incorporate magstripes barcodes contactless chips or smart cards.
How we performed in 2017 Financial performance Revenue increased 13.4% 8.0% at constant exchange to 343.1m driven by growth in Components and recovery in Pipe Protection Technologies.
Excluding
PPT revenue increased 8.5% 3.4% at constant exchange.
The result in Components was broad based across geographic regions with a continued strong performance in Continental Europe and Asia underpinned by a return to growth in the Americas and the UK further to operational and commercial improvement initatives implemented in both markets.
The increase in Europe was supported by further service improvements at our regional manufacturing hub in Kidlington with better management of inventory levels helping to reduce overall net working capital.
Trading in the Americas benefited from a more defined segmentation of the customer base and product offering particularly in the Maintenance Repair and Overhaul MRO segment further to the rollout of 4000 new mechanical components towards the end of the prior year  while growth in Asia was driven by electronics and general industrial midsized customers.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT  OPERATIONAL REVIEW  COMPONENT SOLUTIONS Our general protection range of caps and plugs increased with our access hardware offering also continuing to perform well in addition components aimed at the consumer electronics segment delivered a strong result in Asia.
Further to the successful development of tooling there was an encouraging revenue contribution in custom injection moulding particularly in the automotives sector in both Europe and the US.
Towards the end of the year we also relaunched our catalogue in Europe featuring c.
1000 new products including electromechanical switches and cable management and access hardware solutions.
In December we announced the acquisition of Micro Plastics a leading manufacturer and distributor of nylon fasteners and other plastic components for a wide range of industrial endmarkets including general industrial automotive and white goods.
Based in Arkansas US the transaction not only expands one of our core product ranges and adds to our manufacturing capacity in the US but also  with a facility in Monterrey provides an entry platform for our Components business in the attractive Mexican market.
Likeforlike revenue in PPT increased 115.7% to 28.4m notwithstanding temporary disruption to our Houston US facility from Hurricane Harvey this recovery from a low base was as a result of an uplift in the North American rig count and the consequent impact on drilling activity and demand from the pipe mills oil and gas service companies and pipe processors.
Both our mid and heavyduty product ranges including Tector Plus and Titan performed particularly well as onshore drilling improved although this was partially offset by the impact of lower investment in offshore explorations and production fields.
Revenue in Extrusion was moderately lower than the prior year.
Continuing to benefit from its expertise in complex technical profiles the business saw further good growth for its plastic components used in the purification of drinking and processed water in both industrial and municipal installations as well as in the construction industry for swimming pool covers however this was offset by a softer performance in extruded finishing parts used in the furniture sector.
Adjusted operating profit increased 7 .9% 3.9% at constant exchange to 58.7m equating to a 90bps decline in the margin to 17 .1% 70bps at constant exchange excluding PPT adjusted operating profit declined 1.4% 5.2% at constant exchange to 56.1m with a 180bps 160bps at constant exchange decrease in the margin to 17 .8%.
Further operating efficiency savings together with a return to profitability in PPT were offset by measured investment in Components to rebuild capability together with a significant increase in raw material costs in early 2017 and a lower margin product mix in Extrusion.
Operational developments During the year we undertook a number of operational initiatives across the division.
In Components we further rationalised our footprint with the transfer of our seals activities from Ipoh Malaysia to our facility at Rayong Thailand which is accredited to the stringent level of quality demanded by the automotive industry.
As a result of this consolidation of our operational capabilities and resources we will build scale in south east Asia as well as helping our customers to simplify their own supply chains as all our seals products are now available to ship from a single location.
In Turkey we extended into a second facility to accommodate the expansion of both our metal hardware and mainline plastics components offering while new injection moulding equipment with reduced setup time was installed at both Kidlington and our Americas regional manufacturing hub in Erie US.
Revenue by destination % 1 Europe and Africa 53.3 2 Americas 36.9 3 Asia including Middle East 9.8 Revenue by endmarket % 1 Electronics 30.1 2 Fabrication machinery 23.2 3 Automotive 10.6 4 Oil and gas 9.7 5 Paper board and point of purchase 6.6 6 Construction 5.0 7 Hydraulics  pneumatics 2.6 8 Other 12.2 ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT  OPERATIONAL REVIEW  COMPONENT SOLUTIONS Following the previous addition of robotics and automated parts handling systems to our presses at Houston we further invested in our PPT manufacturing platform at this flagship site in additional automation and laboratory capabilities.
There was also significant investment in three large tonnage injection moulding machines in Veracruz Mexico which has improved both our capacity and our abilities.
2018 key initiatives Introduce further new products in Components to reinforce strengths in core offering and expand one stop shop ranges Successfully integrate Micro Plastics and leverage crossselling opportunities Reorient marketing digital and sales efforts to drive new customer acquisition Expand our China footprint through the creation of a south China facility Continue to focus on improvements to the customer experience in order to improve Net Promoter Score Ongoing focus on high performance material formulations that improve PPT product performance and decrease part weights Development of a complete line of high performance tooling to support strategic growth in premium high thread protection products for the oil and gas industry Continued expansion of manufacturing automation in Houston and capacity at Veracruz Investment in an additional extrusion line to support growth opportunities for swimming pool covers
Market trends Given their very wide application the global market for industrial components is large fragmented and illdefined for both suppliers and customers.
However management estimates the value of the Bill of Materials small components market at c.
8bn with growth in line with Industrial Production.
Manufacturing GDP growth rate With lowcost direct material components being used in a very broad spectrum of industrial endmarkets those countries with a higher manufacturing GDP growth rate are particularly attractive.
Increased use of standard components There is an increasing move to small specialised manufacturing businesses which assemble their parts and equipment from a range of standard components.
This approach provides them with flexibility and the ability to move quickly to provide their own customers with the service they require.
Justintime delivery As customers are required to deliver their own products justintime so their demand for critical components from their suppliers is increasingly on the same basis.
Increasing labour costs Standardised manufacturing processes and components typically require less labour thereby helping customers reduce their cost base.
There is also a trend among larger customers to design in higher technology markets such as the US UK Germany Japan and Singapore and then to manufacture in lower labour cost regions eg eastern Europe China and India which benefits components suppliers with global reach.
Industry specification As endmarkets become more sophisticated and demanding so the requirement for higherquality components increases.
Over and above this more general trend certain customers are increasingly facing regulatory guidelines in terms of the specification of the components they use.
Weight reduction Increasing focus on fuel efficiency in the automotives industry is resulting in weight reduction targets and a trend of replacing metal components with plastic.
Growing functionality Increased product sophistication particularly in the automotives and white goods sectors is resulting in growing demand for cable management solutions.
Key new product opportunities Continue range expansion to provide customers with the broadest selection of components Develop new sectors for existing customer base such as hardware Globalise successful local products through established supply chain Enter new and adjacent product markets such as medical devices and aerospace Launch products which are compliant with new industry standards ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT  OPERATIONAL REVIEW  COMPONENT SOLUTIONS What we measure NUMBER OF ACTIVE CUSTOMERS Why we measure it Reflects marketing effectiveness and measures the potential population for further growth opportunities How we have done Reduction from 99K to 94K as we focus on midsized customers NET PROMOTER SCORE Why we measure it Reflects our customers overall satisfaction with our products and service as well as loyalty to our brand How we have done Increased from 25 to 31 on a global basis ON TIME IN FULL Why we measure it Demonstrates the ability to meet delivery demands How we have done 90.4% compares to 89.8% in 2016 LOST TIME INCIDENTS Why we measure it Measures the opportunity cost of incidents in the workplace How we have done Decreased to 8 from 10 in 2016 Pipe protection Technologies Market trends The global oil and gas market is prone to volatility in supply with the consequent fluctuations in energy prices having an impact on the level of drilling activity and rig count.
Evolving oil and gas production techniques Over the cycle the significant increase in shale gas and oil will result in the development of more efficient drilling rigs and the adoption of new technologies which benefit suppliers with the ability to invest in supporting industry growth.
Industry specification As endmarkets become more sophisticated and demanding so the requirement for higher quality components increases.
Over and above this more general trend customers are increasingly facing regulatory guidelines in terms of the specification of the components they use.
Cost
Continued customer focus on their cost base benefits suppliers with a broad product offering across price points and the ability to invest in more efficient equipment and manufacturing processes.
Key new product opportunities Continue to invest in stateoftheart manufacturing capability and further capacity to meet industry demands Launch products which are compliant with new industry standards Leverage new product development expertise to provide customers with the most comprehensive and cost competitive range What we measure SALES PER MACHINE HOUR Why we measure it Indicative of business mix and productivity How we have done A 30% increase in sales per machine hour reflecting the recovery in the oil and gas industry during 2017 NEW CUSTOMERS ADDED Why we measure it Reflects our ability to successfully target new growth opportunities How we have done 62 compares to 137 in 2016 ON TIME IN FULL Why we measure it Demonstrates the ability to meet delivery demands How we have done 86.2% compares to 88.9% in 2016 LOST TIME INCIDENTS Why we measure it Measures the opportunity cost of incidents in the workplace How we have done 0 lost time incidents compares to 2 in 2016 ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT  OPERATIONAL REVIEW  COMPONENT SOLUTIONS Extrusion Market trends Management estimates the global addressable market for extruded plastic products at around 400m increasing broadly in line with GDP .
The underlying growth rates and key trends vary depending on the endmarket served and the respective solution being provided.
Increased demand for fullyengineered and rapid solutions Customers are increasingly seeking more sophisticated and bespoke solutions to their needs which typically require more valueadded equipment and a more technicallyeducated workforce.
In addition with solutions required ever more rapidly the ability to provide prototype tooling for example through the use of 3D printing as well as to integrate the design and manufacturing process is becoming more important.
Practicality and reliability In many endmarkets particularly in construction and furniture the use of plastic is increasingly displacing more traditional materials such as wood and metal in a wide variety of applications from finishing to protection and for interiors and exteriors alike.
Regulatory requirements and sustainability As regulation evolves and sustainability concerns increase so there is a growing demand for products which use more environmentallyfriendly nonPVC raw materials.
Consumer behaviour The continued increase in online shopping is reducing traditional retail shelf space while a growing cruise ship market is driving demand for waste water solutions.
Cost
Continued customer focus on profitability and competition from low cost economies benefits suppliers with a broad product offering across price points and the ability to invest in more efficient equipment and manufacturing processes.
Key new product opportunities Continue to invest in high valueadded tooling and design capabilities to meet demand for technical and efficient highend profile solutions and reduce lead times Actively outsource tools where appropriate to provide greater capacity flexibility Investigate alternative suppliers and or raw materials to meet regulatory sustainability requirements and customer need What we measure NEW CUSTOMERS WON FROM MADE QUOTES Why we measure it Demonstrates the ability to translate quotes into revenuegenerating opportunities How we have done 12% compares to 17% in 2016
Why we measure it Drives productivity and the efficient use of materials How we have done 15.7% compares to 15.6% in 2016 ON TIME IN FULL Why we measure it Demonstrates the ability to meet delivery demands How we have done 91.0% showing an improving trend in this first year of measurement LOST TIME INCIDENTS Why we measure it Measures the opportunity cost of incidents in the workplace How we have done 1 lost time incident compares to 3 in 2016 ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT  OPERATIONAL REVIEW  COMPONENT SOLUTIONS Health and Personal Care Packaging A leading global provider of specialist packaging and authentication solutions to a diversified blue chip customer base.
Revenue
2016 430.2m 4.8% Operating profit 2016 34.5m 79.1% 1.8% Operating margin 2016 8.0% 620bps Excluding amortisation of acquired intangible assets and exceptional operating items.
Who we are and what we do Essentra is one of only two multi continental suppliers of a full secondary packaging range to the health and personal care sectors.
The divisions innovative products include cartons leaflets selfadhesive labels and printed foils used in blister packs which help customers to meet the rapidlychanging requirements of these endmarkets and can also be combined with Essentras authentication solutions o help the fight against counterfeiting.
Our products and technologies  which also include pressuresensitive tear tapes can combine to provide a valueadding multifunctional product choice for our customers.
Accordingly our range of solutions helps to ensure that the consumer does not get frustrated by opening packs and receives products that have been protected in transit have not been tampered with and can be confirmed as genuine.
The business is also a leading manufacturer and distributor of adhesivecoated tape products for a wide range of industries and applications in particular the point of purchase and white goods sectors.
Supported by an inhouse design studio The Design Hub  RandD and multimillion pound print facilities Essentra is positioned to deliver the very best in quality service and reliability through its worldwide manufacturing and sales structure.
How we do it Our objective is to understand our customers needs and business challenges and then to collaborate closely with them using our product process and services knowhow capabilities and resources to deliver successful and valuecreating solutions.
We seek to leverage our international footprint to provide marketleading quality and service on a global basis and to add value to both customers and consumers.
Operating from 25 manufacturing sites across four geographic regions Essentra is a leading global supplier of a broad suite of innovative specialist secondary packaging and authentication solutions to meet the rapidly changing requirements of the health and personal care markets.
Working in effective partnership with customers and strategic suppliers Essentra is committed to quality flexibility Iain Percival Managing Director ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT  OPERATIONAL REVIEW  HEALTH and PERSONAL CARE PACKAGING and creativity and is well placed to meet the exacting needs of an international customer base.
Essentra is also globally recognised as the leading manufacturer and supplier of pressuresensitive tear tapes  as well as a provider of other solutions such as bags sacks and commercial print  which are largely used in the tobacco food and drink and specialist packaging sectors.
Serving a broad range of endmarkets Essentra has expertise in coating multiple adhesive systems in numerous technologies.
With close to 3000 adhesive products available for sameday shipping Essentras products can meet all high performance needs from foam magnetic fingerlift and acrylic high bond tapes to hook and loop and nonskid foam.
How we performed in 2017 Financial performance Revenue decreased 4.8% 9.0% at constant exchange to 409 .5m.
Excluding the divestment of the Bristol consumer packaging facility on 5 June 2017 likeforlike revenue reduced 8.5%.
As expected the performance in health and personal care continued to deteriorate largely owing to legacy operational issues at certain integration sites in the UK and US which had a disproportionate impact on the result.
Specifically the structural and operational challenges at our folding cartons facility IP5 in Newport were such that a proposal to cease production was confirmed and the facility was closed at the end of the year.
Indeed
Revenue by destination % 1 Europe and Africa 56.0 2 Americas 40.1 3 Asia including Middle East 3.9 Revenue by endmarket % 1 Health and personal care 70.0 2 Food and beverage 10.1 3 Tobacco 7.5 4 Paper board and point of purchase 7.0 5 Other 5.4 In the autumn hurricane activity impacted our sites in Largo US and  more severely at Guaynabo and Manati in Puerto Rico.
While all our employees were fortunately safely accounted for and the facilities were left fundamentally intact our Puerto Rico operations were significantly affected by the infrastructure and supply chain issues which ensued and a reduced level of demand from customers who themselves faced similar posthurricane Maria challenges.
Although normal output levels were fully restored by the end of the year  management estimates the FY 2017 revenue and adjusted operating profit impact of hurricane activity ie including Largo at 2.5  3.0m and 1.5  2.0m respectively net of any recovery from insurance.
However beyond the aforementioned issues the focus and remedial action of the senior management team on the integration challenges of the prior year led to a reduction in the rate of revenue decline in FY 2017 when compared to H2 2016 and key service and quality metrics improved progressively during the year in both the US and Europe.
These demonstrable and consistent improvements have been noted by customers and have facilitated a significantly enhanced dialogue about how we can collaborate to help them meet a range of needs and business objectives.
This enhanced customer sentiment was reinforced by encouraging new business wins during 2017  as well as certain multiyear multiproduct global framework agreements with international blue chip healthcare companies which were renewed towards the end of the year.
In addition our range of freshness labels  which can be tailored to meet specific requirements and help to keep a product as fresh as possible for as long as possible  continued to perform well with growth underpinned by further demand from an existing customer.
The result in Tapes reflected gains in the appliance sector for speciality tapes and in the food segment for tear tapes being offset respectively by softness in point of purchase and continued weakness in tobacco.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT  OPERATIONAL REVIEW  HEALTH and PERSONAL CARE PACKAGING While the focus in 2017 was on stabilising the division and restoring a platform from which to grow nonetheless we continued to develop our product pipeline to ensure that customers are wellpositioned to meet such industry trends as patient adherence and evolving legislative requirements regarding the tracking tracing and authenticating of products through the supply chain.
Accordingly we further commercialised our serialised carton and label offering as well as our large format literature and range of fibretear voidrelease and frangible labels which allow consumers to easily identify if packaging has been interfered with.
Following its establishment in 2016 we leveraged the capabilities of our Design Hub service in providing customers with valueadded solutions  from offering a fast turnaround of digital samples and mockups to delivering standout packaging which helps them to differentiate their products onshelf.
In particular through combining structural and creative packaging design with the technical expertise of our product development teams we were pleased to work with an international pharmaceutical customer in the successful redesign of their range of folding cartons.
Customers also responded positively to our intention to focus on specialist secondary packaging for the health and personal care sectors as stated in our strategic review.
Reinforcing our commitment to these endmarkets in October we created a global divisional organisation with leadership under a single functional team which will allow us to serve our multinational customers better and with greater alignment and to leverage our scale in innovation best practice transfer and talent development.
As a result we will be even better positioned to pursue a clear strategic direction with common purpose and to provide our customers with a consistent global value proposition.
Indicative of our strategic focus on the health and personal care sectors during the year we divested our consumer packaging site in Bristol which manufactured printed paper bags and associated packaging solutions for the bakery and food service sectors.
In addition the closure of our IP5 site  given its significant weighting towards folding cartons for the consumer goods industry  will not only remove significant financial and operational challenges but will also further focus our manufacturing footprint on those endmarkets where we can add greatest value with our specialist secondary packaging solutions.
Adjusted operating profit decreased 79.1% 80.2% at constant exchange to 7 .2m equating to a margin of 1.8%.
The 620bps decline in the margin 630bps at constant exchange was due to the volume gearing effect of revenue decline the afore mentioned ongoing losses at the IP5 site and disruption in Puerto Rico together with a less profitable revenue and segment mix in Tapes.
Operational developments In 2017  there was substantial investment to rebuild operational capability across the division both to help unblock production bottlenecks and to support growth opportunities.
New gluing lines were installed at our cartons sites in Charlotte US and Barcelona Spain with an upgraded press at Moorestown US allowing more rapid changeover times and superior colour management and vision control.
Large format folding equipment for literature production was also added in Greensboro and Indianapolis US Manati Puerto Rico and Wolfen Germany while enhanced digital capability at Glasnevin Ireland helped the facility to secure new cartons business with a clinical trials customer for 2018.
In addition the introduction of standardised colour management technology at site level helped to underpin the improvements in quality metrics made during the year and represent a substantial upgrade to our capability in this respect.
Indeed the significant focus on operational efficiency in general during the year resulted in the establishment of a wide range of process competencies  from quality and Sales and Operations Planning to procurement and waste reduction  has helped to stabilise the division and to provide solid foundations from which to build in the future.
Notwithstanding this investment our strategy review identified the need for incremental capital expenditure of 20m over three years to improve the divisions capabilities and to support our future growth agenda.
This upgrade programme to more modern equipment should not only continue to improve our productivity service and quality but also help us to drive profitability back towards an industry average level over the medium term  consistent with our strategic objective.
2018 key initiatives Continue to improve  and maintain customer service and quality to best in class levels Grow market share through regaining share of wallet and continue to build global Key Account Management to increase customer relevance Implement Voice of Customer survey findings reflecting the demands for greater innovation closer supply chain efficiency collaboration and supporting the trend to multiproduct suppliers Deliver creativity in marketled product development eg patient adherence and further leverage inhouse design expertise Implement supporting initiatives in procurement plant optimisation and process stability to deliver cost benefits Identify growth opportunities in tear tape to help mitigate continued softness in the tobacco segment Continue to grow industrial applications for speciality tapes Market trends Management estimates the value of the global addressable market for secondary health and personal care packaging at c.
15bn growing at a low to mid singledigit level depending on the geographic region served.
In Tapes management estimates that speciality tapes are modestly increasing at c.
2% while a declining market for tear tapes to the tobacco industry in developed ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT  OPERATIONAL REVIEW  HEALTH and PERSONAL CARE PACKAGING economies is being partially mitigated by rapid growth in the paper and board segment for online shopping use.
Legislation
Increasing regulatory requirements such as the European Falsified Medicines Directive are driving demand for tamperevident packaging while the more standardised pack requirements of the EU Tobacco Products Directive potentially limit the scope for innovative solutions.
Brand and identity protection and verification Brand owners have a continued need to protect their assets from counterfeiters and to reassure consumers that the product they are purchasing is genuine and has not been interfered with.
Increasing consumer communication Packaging is increasingly used to communicate brand messages and to engage with consumers via promotions or competitions.
Provision of total solutions Customers are increasingly seeking a partner which can deliver a complete offering  from design to endsupply as well as individual products capable of providing multiple pack features.
There is also a clear pattern of one stop shopping by health and personal care customers benefiting suppliers with a breadth of product offering.
Customer risk management As customers globalise their own activities they are seeking strategic multicontinental partners who can grow with them and hence reduce their supply chain risk.
Key account management As global customers seek to simplify their respective supply chains they are increasingly seeking suppliers who can meet their requirements across multiple jurisdictions.
Emerging segments and technologies As the pharmaceutical and health and personal care sectors continue to evolve so new segments emerge  eg biopharma cosmaceuticals  with specific packaging requirements.
Functionality and convenience There is a growing demand for packaging which not only offers optimum product protection but is also easy for consumers to access without frustration.
Sustainability and waste reduction There is an increasing need for packaging to be resealable so as to maintain freshness and reduce waste as well as to have a lower environmental impact.
Industry specification As the industrial and retail sectors continue to evolve there is a growing interest in replacing traditional fastening solutions with high quality efficient lighterweight alternatives.
Key new product opportunities Investment in technology to develop novel valueadded packaging and brand protection solutions in particular to meet legislative and regulatory changes Investment in equipment and digital capability to meet the growing demand for smaller batch manufacturing Creative and secure design solutions to provide enhanced communication and authentication opportunities Functional packaging benefits such as opening closing and tamperevidence Ecofriendly packaging solutions such as closing and resealing Replacement of traditional fastening solutions eg nails screws with adhesive tapes in industrial and retail applications What we measure ON TIME IN FULL Why we measure it Drives performance of quality systems and service delivery How we have done 96.0% compares to 91.4% in 2016 CUSTOMER COMPLAINTS Why we measure it Drives performance of quality systems and performance delivery How we have done A 28.7% decrease in customer complaints versus 2016 LOST TIME INCIDENTS Why we measure it Measures the opportunity cost of incidents in the workplace How we have done 53 lost time incidents compares to 45 in 2016 ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT  OPERATIONAL REVIEW  HEALTH and PERSONAL CARE PACKAGING Filter Products The only global independent provider and related solutions to the tobacco industry.
Revenue
2016 269.2m 3.1% Operating profit 2016 37.5m 7.2% 12.5% Operating margin 2016 13.9% 140bps Excluding amortisation of acquired intangible assets and exceptional operating items.
Who we are and what we do Our Filter Products business is the only global independent supplier of filters.
Not only do we manufacture standard filters but as the leading supplier of special filters we also provide innovative solutions that meet the consumerdriven demands of the tobacco industry against a backdrop of ongoing legislative changes.
In addition our offering extends into nicotine delivery devices where we have a number of fullyfunctional and packaged ecigarette products as well as solutions for the Heat Not Burn segment which draw upon the broad range of technologies which the Essentra Group can deliver.
We also increasingly provide adjacent services to the tobacco industry.
Our
Scientific Services facility located in the UK was one of the first independent externally accredited laboratories for the testing of cigarettes cigarette filters smokeless devices including ecigarettes and low ignition propensity LIP for cigarette papers and has over 20 years experience of providing analytical services to state monopolies and both independent and multinational customers.
Additionally we offer a full bespoke range for the design packing and packaging of filters of rollyourown brands providing an efficient and costeffective solution to delivering retailready products to the market.
We supply over 500 product specifications to c.
250 customers including all the multinational tobacco companies.
We have seven manufacturing facilities in seven countries supported by a dedicated research facility and three regional development centres.
Kamal Taneja Managing Director ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM STRATEGIC REPORT  OPERATIONAL REVIEW  FILTER PRODUCTS How we do it Innovation is at the heart of our Filter Products business and our objective is to develop valuecreating partnerships with our customers.
We seek to leverage our longstanding experience expertise and insight to provide brand differentiation and identity solutions as well as excellence in both manufacturing and service.
Our recognised ability to provide new valueadded products and services is key to the future growth of our business as market dynamics in the tobacco industry continue to evolve.
Research in filters is carried out at a dedicated Technology Centre supported by three regional development facilities.
Together they work closely with customers to understand their specific needs and strive to deliver innovative solutions which will give their brands differentiation and relevance at a pace appropriate to local market conditions and legislative requirements.
Our offering is further enhanced by our ability to complement our customers own strengths and assets in a variety of tolling or outsourced management relationship arrangements as well as our growing adjacent services activities.
We continuously upgrade our technology and footprint to ensure we exceed our customers expectations and remain at the forefront of market trends.
Our flexible manufacturing capability allows us to respond rapidly to market changes and customer demand for surge volumes while a consistent focus on high standards of quality cost control and production efficiency act as further sources of competitive advantage.
How we performed in 2017 Financial performance Revenue increased 3.1% 3.4% at constant exchange to 277 .5m.
Underlying volumes were modestly below FY 2016 and pricing declined owing to the passthrough of lower raw material costs however this was offset by the positive mix effect of a strong result in capsules and growth in flavoured filters particularly in the second half of the year.
While the nature of outsourcing in the tobacco industry implies a certain degree of volatility in our pipeline nonetheless the acknowledged capabilities of our business in terms of delivering valueadded filters which meet the evolving requirements of our customers  continued to be successfully commercialised during the year.
Joint development initiatives with multi national customers for higher value capsule products were particularly successful as well as innovative variants of our Combined Performance Superior filter which combine a high level of visual differentiation with enhanced efficiency.
Following a weaker performance in FY 2016 owing to softer underlying market conditions our business in China rebounded strongly supported by recent Superslim and shaped filter launches to meet the growing consumer trend for smaller diameter and increasingly complex formats.
Overall therefore we maintained our track record of supporting customers in the development of bespoke solutions tailored to their specific needs as they seek to respond to global market trends.
In FY 2017  our Scientific Services laboratory continued to leverage its extensive experience and expanded portfolio of accredited testing methods for both traditional tobacco and nontobacco products to ensure the delivery of highquality analysis which remains at the forefront of industry trends and evolving regulatory requirements.
Revenue by destination % 1 Asia including Middle East 56.8 2 Europe and Africa 28.9 3 Americas 14.3 Revenue by segment % 1 Other special including capsules 55.7 2 Monoacetate 26.7 3 Carbon 12.8 4 Flavour 4.8 ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT  OPERATIONAL REVIEW  FILTER PRODUCTS Beyond traditional tobacco products we continued to develop our NGP capabilities during the year.
While these remained a very modest contributor to divisional revenue in FY 2017  nonetheless we have product offerings in both ecigarettes which are located at our Greensboro US site as well as Heat Not Burn where we are already a provider of filters to one of the multinationals and we believe that we are wellpositioned to support our customers as these nascent segments continue to rapidly evolve.
Adjusted operating profit decreased 7 .2% 12.6% at constant exchange to 34.8m and the margin declined by 140bps 140bps at constant exchange to 12.5%.
Further efficiency improvements and productivity gains were offset by the impact of modestly lower volume and a timing effect relating to the pass through of acetate tow material costs in the first half of the year.
Operational developments In order to ensure that we maintain a flexible and competitive global manufacturing base we benefited from a number of operational initiatives in FY 2017 .
The previouslycommunicated transfer of a certain line of business to Asia from the US was successfully completed further to which our Greensboro site was rightsized not only to maintain its capability in traditional tobacco filters but also to become the production hub for our ecigarette offering.
In addition following the transfer of our European activity from Jarrow UK in 2016 quality and service metrics significantly improved in Hungary with a new development centre also being established to serve customers in the region.
Continuing to respond to customer requirements additional capacity for capsule filters was added in Indonesia Thailand and Dubai to ensure that we remain at the forefront of these innovative segments in the growth markets of Asia and the Middle East with additional technical and development capability also being extended in the region.
2018 key initiatives Evaluate the three potential game changers highlighted in the strategy review namely China further outsourcing and NGPs Continue to align geographic footprint with market shift in production volume Continue to invest in advanced filter capability to support further growth Improve value proposition in more competitive mature tobacco markets Maintain focus on delivering further productivity and quality improvements Drive further benefits from investment in highspeed more flexible filter manufacturing equipment ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT  OPERATIONAL REVIEW  FILTER PRODUCTS Market trends The global tobacco market is valued at c.
US750bn with a c.
2% cigarette retail volume decline.
Regulation
The tobacco industry is heavily regulated around the world on health grounds with significant restrictions on the way in which products can be marketed to consumers.
Legislation continues to evolve both in respect of traditional cigarettes and innovations such as ecigarettes and Heat Not Burn devices as well as surrounding the testing and packaging requirements for these products.
Illicit trade Counterfeiting of tobacco products is a significant and increasing challenge for the industry undermining brand value presenting a risk to consumers from lowquality goods and reducing tax revenues.
The illicit trade accounts for approximately 10% of dutypaid cigarette volumes and is estimated to be growing.
Beyond tobacco products The market for products beyond traditional cigarettes continues to evolve rapidly.
There is increased interest in other nicotine delivery mechanisms  such as Heat Not Burn and ecigarettes both of which are reportedly delivering rapid growth albeit from a low base and which are forecast to continue doing so.
East versus west Accounting for approximately 70% of total world cigarette volume the growth markets of Asia dominate the global tobacco industry and are forecast to be flat while western regions continue to decline.
Consumer engagement As per capita income rises  particularly in eastern markets  so lifestyles change and new segments are created with different consumer expectations and aspirations from the products which they purchase.
As such there is an increasing demand for new products to reflect these changes.
Consumer need Consumers are increasingly concerned with environmental matters such as sustainability and pollution and the impact of products which they purchase.
Such needs are often unspoken but create challenges for the industry to supply products which address such considerations.
Cost and price As the price of cigarettes has continued to increase growth opportunities have been created for other industry segments including rollyourown and Other Tobacco Products such as chewing tobacco.
Key new product opportunities Lifestyle solutions eg Slims  Superslims low  ultralow tar eco ranges Brandspecific requirements such as recessed filters Enhanced user experience such as capsules flavoured thread and activated carbon Full bespoke service for rollyourown brands Provision of scientific services Adjacent sectors such as Heat Not Burn products and ecigarettes What we measure ON TIME IN FULL Why we measure it Demonstrates the ability to meet delivery demands How we have done 95.2% compares to 92.7% in 2016 QUALITY COMPLAINTS PER BILLION RODS Why we measure it Drives productivity and the efficient use of material How we have done A 41% reduction in complaints per billion rods versus 2016
Why we measure it Drives productivity and the efficient use of material How we have done 6.0% a decrease from 6.4% in 2016 LOST TIME INCIDENTS Why we measure it Measures the opportunity cost of incidents in the workplace How we have done Decreased to 7 from 9 in 2016 ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT  OPERATIONAL REVIEW  FILTER PRODUCTS Risk management approach 2017 was a year of strategic review for Essentra but it was also a year when restoring stability to the business was fundamental to securing the opportunities to exploit future growth prospects.
The Principal Risk section of the 2016 Annual Report included commentary on the failure of the Company to manage risks relating to the Packaging division during 2016 which led to a decline in overall financial performance.
The 2016 Annual Report also highlighted that the Company had recognised the need to undertake a review of its existing risk management structure and processes in order to deliver improvements in the identification assessment and mitigation of risk.
In addition to the strategic objectives for the respective businesses the Chief Executive has set the objective for the Company to continue to improve its overall governance to ensure alignment with FTSE 250 top quartile best practice by 2020 and to underpin the successful delivery of strategic growth and business performance.
During 2017  the Company has developed a welldefined governance improvement plan facilitated in part in conjunction with specialist external professional review and expertise.
The Governance Improvement Programme includes a number of specific initiatives designed to deliver more effective governance driven by the adoption of risk management enterprise risk and business continuity internal audit and compliance programmes in line with best practice.
Recommendations from an external review of risk management processes are being addressed to deliver improvements in the identification assessment and mitigation of risk and a refreshed risk appetite statement is being implemented.
The Chief Executive is sponsoring these improvements which are being led by the Company Secretary and General Counsel.
The changes are being implemented with the full endorsement of the Board and the Company is increasing its internal resources as part of a new Legal Risk and Governance team to support the delivery of the Governance Improvement
The Board and the Audit Committee receive regular reports on the progress of the Governance Improvement Programme and are fully engaged with and committed to its successful delivery.
The Group Management Committee GMC has following the completion of the strategic review undertaken a number of formal risk identification prioritisation and mitigation workshops in 2017 .
In addition the Board has also conducted a fundamental review and discussion of the outputs from the work undertaken by the GMC.
The senior leadership teams of the Packaging Components and Filters divisions and certain enabling functions have also undertaken detailed risk management discussions in the context of the implementation of the outputs from the strategy review.
Risk mitigation activities are being incorporated into strategy implementation plans and regular risk discussions will be part of leadership meetings of all the divisions and enabling functions to embed risk management into business as usual activities.
In order to further strengthen the leadership oversight and governance of risk management the annual cycle of Board agenda activities has been updated to facilitate additional risk reviews while the Audit Committee focuses on ensuring that the new risk management processes are being effectively embedded across the businesses.
In addition a new Group Risk Committee GRC chaired by the Chief Executive has been constituted.
The first meetings of the new GRC took place in January and February 2018 and further meetings will take place on at least a quarterly basis.
The Board will receive regular reporting from the Chief Executive in his capacity as GRC Chairman to enable the Board to challenge and review the GRCs views on the Principal Risks and emerging risks as an important part of fulfilling its responsibilities to determine the nature and extent of the risks the Company is willing to take in meeting its new strategic objectives.
The Chairman of the Board and the Audit Committee Chairman receive copies of the minutes of each meeting.
The Audit Committee will engage directly with individual enabling functions and divisional businesses including deep dive reviews as part of fulfilling its oversight responsibilities on the risk management processes.
The Principal Risks set out below reflect the key risks and uncertainties facing the business following the updates to the strategy and the structure of the Essentra
As a result the Principal Risks are a combination of new and previously disclosed risks.
The updated risk management practices have facilitated a better articulation of the nature and characteristics of the major risks and an enhanced focus on effective mitigation.
The development of key risk indicators during 2018 will further enable the consistent diligent and effective monitoring and management of the risks impacting the Company.
The diagram over represents the Companys risk management framework under the refreshed structure along with the phases of implementation.
The Company has considered the risks it is facing under the following four risk category headings and has identified 13 Principal Risks.
Strategic  Internal risks that may impede achievement of strategic goals.
External  Risks relating to the macroeconomic climate political events competitive pressures or regulatory issues.
Operational  Risks that could impact daytoday operations and prevent business as usual activities.
Disruptive  Risks that could impact the business model or viability of the
Although key disruptive risks have been identified and mitigated by the Company none of them are considered to be Principal Risks currently.
MANAGEMENT OF PRINCIPAL RISKS
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM STRATEGIC REPORT  MANAGEMENT OF PRINCIPAL RISKS 40 Board Group Risk Committee GRC Divisional Boards Business Units Enabling Functions Audit and Risk
Group Risk Function Divisional Risk
Enabling Function Risk Champions
Refreshed 2017 Refreshed early 2018 Refreshed during 2018 Direct and monitor
Overall responsibility for assessing the Groups Principal Risks setting risk appetite and monitoring risk management.
Chaired by the Chief Executive and compiled of Group Management Committee members the GRC is responsible for monitoring principal and key group risks and ensuring the eectiveness of divisional and functional risk management.
Each Divisional Board is responsible for ensuring their divisional risks are captured and are being eectively mitigated within business as usual processes.
Risk management is a standing agenda item for Divisional Board meetings.
Specic business units or sites within each division will implement their own risk registers risk and action owners.
Management will be responsible for managing local level risk and reporting to the respective Divisional Board.
Enabling Functions will be responsible for identifying and mitigating risks within their own functions  applicable to Finance IT Human Resources and Legal and Compliance.
Responsible for reviewing the eectiveness of the Groups
risk management
The Principal Risks detailed over are graded for likelihood and impact on a gross basis ie without accounting for existing mitigation and are not presented in any priority.
The Board believes that the Principal Risks are specific to Essentra and reflect the risk profile of the Company at the current time.
The continued evolution and embedding of improved risk management activities cascading down from the Board through the respective divisions and enabling functions will further align risk management with the delivery of strategic objectives in line with the defined risk appetite.
The Board has reassessed the risk appetite in the context of the newly defined strategy for the Company and will keep this under ongoing review.
In addition to the Principal Risk other key or emerging risks have been identified and are being monitored by the Company.
The materiality of those other key or emerging risks as a whole is not sufficient for them to be considered as a Principal Risk but the development of mitigation actions in response to such risks will form an important part of the divisional and functional risk reporting to the GRC and Board.
Structure
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM STRATEGIC REPORT  MANAGEMENT OF PRINCIPAL RISKS Strategic Risks Description Mitigation Failure to Achieve Acceptable Returns from the Packaging Division Likelihood Low Impact High Change in risk level New
Packaging division MD
Company Specific The Packing division failed to perform as expected in 2016.
A number of strategic initiatives have been undertaken to address this in 2017 however there remains a risk that such initiatives fail to address performance issues and allow the division to provide an acceptable return.
This includes winning profitable new business realising expected cost savings or initiatives taking longer or costing more than anticipated.
Although a Principal Risk relating to the decline of the Packaging division was reported in 2016 this risk is considered to be a new risk where the division has stabilised and therefore risk focus is now on ensuring the steps that have been taken are effective and allow the division to provide an acceptable return.
The Packaging division has been a key area of focus for the Company in 2017 and a number of changes have been made to address performance including Creation of a new globally managed Packaging division replacing the previous Americas and Europe and Asia regional structure and other organisational complexity New leadership including divisional Managing Director and other senior appointments.
The Chief Executive has also focused significantly on the Packaging division in 2017 and will continue to do so in 2018 A new Packaging division strategy has been developed communicated and rolled out.
This includes initiatives such as the closure of the Newport cartons production facility the carveout of the Tapes business into the new Specialist Components division equipment upgrades improving operational stability and customer delivery and growing existing customer relationships and developing new opportunities ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT  MANAGEMENT OF PRINCIPAL RISKS Strategic Risks Description Mitigation Tobacco Industry Dynamics Likelihood High Impact High Change in risk level No change
Filters division MD
Company Specific The business of the Filters division relates to the supply of filter products and packaging solutions to manufacturers in the tobacco industry.
Changes in the traditional tobacco market have strategic ramifications for Essentra presenting both potential risks and future opportunities.
While the Company has a strong market position in its key existing addressable segments the future growth opportunities for the Company and its financial performance may be affected by market dynamics within the industry and the structural shift away from traditional tobacco products into Next Generation Products and overall declining market growth.
Essentras competitive position cannot be sustained unless it manages and adapts its operational capacity and innovation capabilities in line with key market trends including global consumption shift from western to eastern markets customers selfmanufacture and demand volatility increasing commercial pressures special filters and New Generation Product developments and evolving legislation.
Tobaccorelated litigation could also adversely affect Essentra although there is no history of the Company being involved in such a claim.
Essentra is seeking to mitigate the risk associated with changes in the tobacco market dynamics and the overall decline in market growth for traditional tobacco products by focusing on activities with longerterm viability and exploiting potential growth opportunities emerging from the latest market trends.
Increased segmentation and prioritisation based on customer categorisation and filter differentiation Further upgrading of innovation capabilities and development of project partnering with key customers Enhanced focus on Key Account Management leading to better market visibility and building further enhanced relationships Developing a more commerciallyled focus while maintaining operational excellence and responsiveness to customer demands Exploring possible medium to long term value creation levers Investing to establish a permanent presence in the highly attractive Chinese market Delivering new solutions and business models to respond to evolving outsourcing equirements of multinational customers Developing Next Generation Products possibly in partnership with third parties ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT  MANAGEMENT OF PRINCIPAL RISKS Strategic Risks Description Mitigation Customer Service Quality and On Time in Full OTIF delivery Likelihood Low Impact High Change in risk level New
Group Operations Director
Company Specific The Groups success is dependent on its ability to provide its customers with quality customer service and on time and in full product delivery.
The customer base is diverse ranging from an individual who may order low cost parts from our Components business to multinational blue chip companies that rely on products from our Packaging and Filters divisions.
If the Group is unable to deliver excellence consistently and meet all expectations then it is likely to lose business and profit to competitors.
This is a newly identified Principal Risk.
While it has high importance across the Company it is fundamental that this risk is managed within the Packaging division which will be reliant on rebuilding customer goodwill lost in 2016 and 2017 .
Improvements in operational performance have been a key focus of the business in 2017 .
As well as safety metrics quality and delivery performance metrics are tracked and discussed on a daily basis at site level as well as on a weekly and monthly basis within divisions and on a monthly basis at the GMC in order to identify a issues that require intervention and b ongoing opportunities for improvement.
The Board also receives a quarterly report on operational metrics.
In 2017  all divisions recorded improvements in OTIF delivery performance and reductions in both the number of quality complaints received and the incident rate for quality complaints ie number of complaints per number of orders  production volume.
The improved performance has enhanced the satisfaction of key customers.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT  MANAGEMENT OF PRINCIPAL RISKS External Risks Description Mitigation Regulatory  Governance Likelihood Low Impact High Change in risk level Same
Company Secretary and General Counsel
Industry General The Group operates internationally and with a diverse supplier and customer base.
As a consequence it is required to comply with multiple areas of regulation and good practice for areas such as AntiTrust AntiBribery Sanctions and General Data Protection Regulation GDPR from May 2018.
Such compliance and good practice is resource intensive and processes and controls must reach 8000 plus employees in 30 countries some of which are higher risk territories.
Failure to comply with regulation could result in significant fines costs and reputational damage to the Group.
The level of the risk has remained the same as there have been no material changes in levels of regulation from a Company perspective albeit that the GDPR deadline is imminent.
The Group uses a range of controls to manage regulatory risk including A tone from the top from the Board and GMC on the importance of ethics and compliance New internal resource and investment to drive better governance practices Group compliance policies and guidance materials Communication and training platforms and programmes A Right to Speak process in which the Chief Executive Company Secretary and General Counsel and Group Human Resources Director are key stakeholders A third party risk management process and platform Working closely with external partners to monitor the regulatory environment Identification and management of regulatory risks via the enterprise risk management process Roll out of GDPR compliance programmes Regulatory  Products Likelihood Low Impact High Change in risk level Same
Company Secretary and General Counsel
Company Specific The Group manufactures multiple products such as filters pharmaceutical packaging plastic components and oil and gas pipe protection products that are subject to product regulation.
The Group must therefore constantly monitor and comply with such product regulations as a breach could have a significant financial and reputational impact.
The level of the risk has remained the same as there have been no material changes in levels of regulation or business operations to affect this from the Companys perspective although the use of certain materials such as plastics may lead to some additional reputational risk.
The Group uses a range of controls to manage regulatory risk relating to the products that it manufactures and distributes including A tone from the top from the Board and GMC on the importance of ethics compliance and strong governance New internal resource and investment to drive better governance practices Group compliance policies processes and guidance materials Communication and training platforms and programmes Specialist external support ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT  MANAGEMENT OF PRINCIPAL RISKS External Risks Description Mitigation Cyber Attack Likelihood Medium Impact High Change in risk level
Ownership
Chief Information Officer
Industry General The Company is dependent on its IT systems for daytoday operations.
Should the Group become affected by a general global cyber incident or be specifically targeted by a criminal network this could potentially lead to suspension of some operations regulatory breaches and fines reputational damage loss of customer and employee information and loss of customer confidence.
Although there are no indicators to suggest that the risk of a cyber attack on the Company is higher the risk has generally increased given the higher volume of global cyber incidents in 2017 .
The Company employs multiple layers of cyber security threat defences from endpoint protection encryption of data identitybased access control network firewalls web and email content protection to ongoing vulnerability and penetration testing across critical corporate and online services.
As part of the technology transformation programme the cyber security project is enhancing capability across people process and technology to ensure Essentra is instep with the increased risk associated with cyber attack.
Brexit
Likelihood High Impact High Change in risk level New
Group Operations Director Group Finance Director Group Human Resources
Categorisation
Industry General Brexit could impact the Company in a number of ways for example A material element of the operations of the Components division involves manufacturing products in the UK and distributing them into the EU.
Should trade tariffs and  or a customs border be imposed this could lead to increased costs and complexity within the divisions existing business model.
The Company has multiple manufacturing sites in the UK.
Should trade tariffs or a customs border be imposed this could restrict the supply chain opportunities available to these sites.
Depending on the outcome of negotiations Brexit could increase the cost of or restrict funding for the Groups current and future investment plans.
Brexit has previously been identified as a key but not Principal Risk to the
As UK  EU negotiations continue the Company has determined that it should now be managed mitigated and monitored as a Principal Risk.
During 2017 and the early part of 2018 the Company conducted a thorough review of Brexit risks including understanding Essentras exposure.
This included consultation with external experts and used third party support.
Coming out of this review a range of potential mitigation options were identified which the Company is now in the process of reviewing.
These include Potential changes to the European asset and manufacturing footprint to optimise material flows Optimisation of product manufacturing locations versus customer locations Seeking alternative raw material supply sources to minimise crossborder flows Seeking Approved Economic Operator status to minimise inspection delays ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT  MANAGEMENT OF PRINCIPAL RISKS Operational Risks Description Mitigation Operational Resilience Natural Catastrophes and Fire Likelihood Low Impact High Change in risk level Same
Group Operations Director
Industry General The Group has some single manufacturing site dependencies for the production of specific products and meeting particular customer requirements.
All of these sites are subject to fire risk and some of them are in locations that are more prone to natural catastrophes such as hurricanes floods storms or earthquakes.
The Group experienced both employee impact and operational disruption as a result of such events in 2017 at sites in Puerto Rico and Houston US.
Should further events occur this could impact production capability and fixed assets supply chain management customer relationships reputation revenue and profit.
Such events will continue to be a threat to the normal operation of the Company and consequently the level of the risk remains the same.
The Group has reviewed and refreshed its business continuity planning processes in 2017  working closely with external parties.
Enhanced processes are being adopted across the business and are targeted at higher risk sites and processes and ensuring that robust continuity plans and site improvements are in place.
Aligned to this there is increased focus on IT infrastructure.
Such plans are to be kept under constant review and tested periodically.
Other
Operating within a flexible global infrastructure Developing multisite capabilities and manufacturing flexibility Installing fire and other risk prevention systems Assessing and managing operational risks via the enterprise risk management process Maintaining a comprehensive insurance programme Product Quality Liability and
Likelihood Medium Impact High Change in risk level New
Group Operations Director
Industry General The Company manufactures a range of products for a wide range of customers some of which provide significant proportion of Group and  or divisional revenues.
Should the Company fail to provide adequate quality consistently in its products there is a risk of loss of customers and  or failure to win profitable new business.
Similarly there is a risk that some manufactured products that reach consumers such as filters labels or component parts could become contaminated or cause an accident for which the Company is liable.
Should this occur this could lead to significant fines and  or reputational damage.
Product Quality Liability and Contamination has been elevated to a Principal Risk to the Company and incorporates any potential tobaccorelated or Next Generation Products litigation.
In addition to the ongoing tracking of quality metrics mentioned above the Group is also undertaking a review of its quality management processes to ensure they are fitforpurpose to minimise the risk of contamination or product quality issues.
This review includes support from external experts in some cases along with alignment of quality processes and standards across geographies and within divisions to ensure a single consistent global process for customers in multiple jurisdictions.
Divisional capital expenditure plans also include where appropriate additional spend on inspection equipment eg sensors cameras to improve inline inspection and further reduce the likelihood of product quality issues.
The Company continues to assess potential exposures to litigation arising from tobaccorelated or Next Generation Products and seeks to manage the supply packaging and labelling of such products accordingly.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT  MANAGEMENT OF PRINCIPAL RISKS Operational Risks Description Mitigation Internal Business
Likelihood Medium Impact Medium Change in risk level New
Divisions and Enabling Functions
Company Specific A number of the issues that have previously impacted the Company were due to weaknesses in internal business processes and controls.
Examples of this include inadequate acquisition integration failure to document or to update operational processes or define business process ownership poor planning and project execution and lack of effective training and development.
The Company has acknowledged and begun to review these weaknesses in 2017  and they will remain a risk while they are being addressed.
Internal Business Processes have been identified as a new Principal Risk to the Company.
The scope key questions to be addressed and outcomes of the strategy review were set out in detail in the 2017 strategic review.
The outputs from strategy work streams are being implemented across all four divisions with the support of the Enabling Functions.
The activities will result in the implementation of clear business strategies supported by better internal business processes and improved risk mitigation through consistent adherence to business processes and cultural change.
Development of the Companys IT capabilities will support the improvement in Internal Business Processes.
The benefits of these changes and the investments being made including the addition of new internal resources are expected to support stabilisation and growth of the Company in 2018.
Safety including Regulatory Likelihood Low Impact High Change in risk level New
Chief Executive
Industry General Safety is of the highest priority for the
Essentra has 49 manufacturing facilities across the world along with many nonmanufacturing sites and internationally mobile employees.
Manufacturing can be inherently risky given the use of industrial machinery and high speed manufacturing processes.
In addition the Company must comply with the requirements of multiple jurisdictions concerning safety regulation.
Should an injury or fatality affect any of our employees or visitors or should there be any breach of safety regulation resulting in prosecution we could anticipate considerable reputational damage as well as potentially significant financial costs.
Following the risk reviews during 2017  the Company has reaffirmed its commitment to treat Safety as an absolute priority and this is reflected through its elevation to one of the Principal Risks to the Company.
Throughout 2017  the tone from the top on safety has been reinforced throughout Essentra.
Management teams have been instructed to give a higher priority to establishing and reinforcing the management systems employed throughout the Company and key Health Safety and Environment senior appointments have been made including a new Group HSE Director reporting to the Chief Executive.
During 2017  a programme was developed which will ensure that every Company site has a comprehensive and robust approach to the identification prioritisation and remediation of risks and hazards.
Delivery of this programme will continue through 2018 and is supported by central resources who provide training support and expertise.
The scope of this programme has now been broadened to encompass all Essentra sites during 2018.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT  MANAGEMENT OF PRINCIPAL RISKS Operational Risks Description Mitigation Supply Chain Single Point of Failure Likelihood Medium Impact Medium Change in risk level New
Group Operations Director
Company Specific The Companys supply chain is reliant on raw materials and goods being delivered in full and on time to its manufacturing sites from various international sources and suppliers.
In some cases the Company is reliant on a limited number of suppliers or a single supplier for a key raw material.
In the case of supplier failure significant input cost increases or transportation  infrastructure disruption could have a material impact on the profitability of the Company.
Similarly the Company is reliant on certain sites and their equipment in some cases to manufacture specific products.
Should such machinery not be able to operate for an extended period of time this could also have a material profit impact.
Supply Chain Single Point of Failure has been identified as a new Principal Risk to the Company and the risk incorporates Raw Material Supply which was previously identified as a Principal Risk.
The Company increased focus in this area in 2017 including working on business continuity planning with external parties as noted above.
This focus will continue in 2018.
A comprehensive supply chain assessment will be completed in 2018 which will focus on Identification of investment requirements including additional IT capabilities Identification of alternative sources of supply for key raw materials where necessary and feasible Ensuring comprehensive maintenance plans are in place for key manufacturing equipment and or alternative manufacturing routes are identified Identifying alternative logistics routings where necessary and feasible The implementation of the Companys new business continuity planning process will continue in 2018 ensuring any specific areas of concern are properly mitigated.
IT Systems Stability and Reliability Likelihood High Impact Medium Change in risk level Same
Chief Information Officer
Company Specific The Company is dependent on a wide range of IT systems for its daytoday operations.
In some cases mainly due to a lack of historic investment IT systems are relatively old have not been updated and may lack both external and internal support.
This can lead to IT systems being unreliable or having poor functionality to support everyday operations which creates risk of material impact to customers and employees ultimately impacting profitability and reputation.
The level of risk is considered to be the same as reported in 2016 albeit a number of initiatives will be completed in 2018 which are anticipated to reduce the risk over time.
The Company began an investment programme in Q4 2017 to upgrade and reconfigure the internal infrastructure across all divisions and key sites.
The focus has been to reduce and ultimately eliminate the number of unplanned outages caused by systems failure and avoid any disruption to business operations.
Core networks and data communications are being upgraded and scaled to accommodate the forecasted increase in data flows.
This includes internal data flows in our core supply chain and finance systems and external flows to the internet to streamline our digital interactions with customers and cloudbased services.
A threeyear IT strategy is being developed to address the current challenges and the proposed investment to support the necessary improvements and will be subject to detailed review during H1 2018.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT  MANAGEMENT OF PRINCIPAL RISKS Priorities  goals How do we manage it How did we do How will we do it Achieve the highest standards of health and safety Regular review of the Groups Health and Safety strategy Identify and understand the health and safety risks of our activities Establish Group minimum expectations for the management of health and safety Understand current health and safety performance and establish Group expectations for improvements and results Encourage employee participation in developing and driving health and safety improvement initiatives Gain OHSAS 18001 accreditation at all manufacturing sites Completed an annual review of the Group Health Safety and Environmental strategy with the revised version formally approved by Board Maintained programme of OHSAS 18001 certification Continue to focus on health safety and environmental strategy Maintain robust management systems standards and processes Pursue accredited OHSAS 18001 certification for selected manufacturing facilities Develop and embed Groupwide minimum standards for the identification and control of health and safety risks Continue to drive culture and employee engagement through employee consultation forums communication programmes and training Increase emphasis on sharing good practice and disseminating lessons identified from incidents Ensure that Essentra fulfils its commitment to being a great place to work Undertake employee engagement surveys on at least an annual basis Ensure robust followup procedures to engagement survey findings Carry out regular sitelevel visits by the Chief Executive and senior divisional management Regularly communicate with employees in an appropriate local language forum Provide appropriate learning and development opportunities at all levels Encourage constructive open and honest dialogue across the organisation Carried out a pulse and full annual employee engagement survey Established site level forum groups and clear action plans to follow through engagement survey findings Improved internal communication through greater Chief Executive and senior management involvement Established Diversity and Inclusion Steering Group Increased participation in Graduate Development Programme and Leadership Development Centres Launched first National Apprenticeship Programme in the UK Undertake annual employee engagement surveys and act upon feedback Enhance internal communication following appointment of dedicated Group Communications Director and launch of intranet Continue to focus on regular employee dialogue with the Chief Executive and divisional management Evaluate findings from Diversity and Inclusion Steering Group and act upon as appropriate Continue to expand geographic reach of Leadership Development Centres and Graduate Development Programme Further develop apprenticeship initiatives Ensure the highest standards of business integrity and conduct Embed and embody Essentras six principles Establish clear policies and guidance Secure employee awareness and engagement Continue to promote the Right to Speak policy Regular review of adherence with policies and guidance by Group Assurance Developed and communicated Essentras six principles which describe the way we work Established a new Legal Risk and Governance function led by the Company Secretary and General Counsel Updated policies to reflect Essentras six principles and three longterm steps to success Updated Essentras Ethics Code and Right to Speak materials and undertook employee training Continued communication of core policies through eLearning and reviews in Essentra Group System Continued to promote compliance systems Respond to new risks and requirements Provide further training Drive employee responsibility and cultural change Investigate complaints No significant adverse impact to the local environment and commitment to achieving the highest standards of environmental performance Regular review of the Groups Environmental strategy Identify and understand the environmental aspects and impacts associated with our activities Establish Group minimum expectations for environmental management Understand current environmental performance and establish Group expectations for improvements and results Implement initiatives to reduce waste and increase recycling Completed an annual review of the Group Health Safety and Environmental strategy with the revised version formally approved by Board Maintained programme of ISO 14001 certification Broadened programme of ISO 50001 certification Continue to focus on health safety and environmental strategy Maintain robust management systems standards and processes Pursue accredited ISO 14001 and ISO 50001 certification for selected manufacturing facilities Develop and embed Groupwide minimum standards for the identification and control of risks and environmental impacts CORPORATE RESPONSIBILITY At Essentra we are committed to doing business the right way to continually earn the trust of our customers our other stakeholders and the wider marketplace.
As we follow the three steps to longterm success of Stability Strategy and Growth our six principles should direct each of us in how we behave at all times in the workplace.
Responsible business practice must be at the heart of what we do and we recognise the significance and importance of being a responsible corporate citizen wherever we carry out business.
In pursuing our corporate strategy our objective is to adopt business practices that are economically socially and environmentally sustainable and to promote these to our stakeholders in order to strengthen relationships share knowledge and encourage best practice.
Accordingly we aim to identify and prioritise those corporate responsibility issues which are material to our business and to our stakeholders  whether specific to a particular country or location or applicable globally and to respond to them in an appropriate and robust manner.
In so doing our risk management processes consider the potential impact of corporate responsibility issues on Essentras performance our investment decisions include due evaluation of the potential consequences for our stakeholders and the environment and our policies promote fair and ethical dealings as a matter of law and conscience.
Essentras Ethics Code helps to ensure that everyone working for or on behalf of the Company understands our expectations and conducts Essentra business in a way that is consistent with our six principles and our procedures.
Each of us is expected to understand and embrace the principles of our Ethics Code and act responsibly honestly and with integrity show respect and treat others fairly and with dignity conduct our activities based on the highest ethical standards and ensure our business practices comply with all legal or regulatory requirements.
Reinforcing this commitment to best practice governance  and to ensure alignment with our six principles  we revised our Ethics Code and Right to Speak protocols during the year with extensive employee training undertaken across the organisation.
Essentras six principles which describe the way we work can be found on the Companys website site ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT  CORPORATE RESPONSIBILITY Priorities  goals How do we manage it How did we do How will we do it Achieve the highest standards of health and safety Regular review of the Groups Health and Safety strategy Identify and understand the health and safety risks of our activities Establish Group minimum expectations for the management of health and safety Understand current health and safety performance and establish Group expectations for improvements and results Encourage employee participation in developing and driving health and safety improvement initiatives Gain OHSAS 18001 accreditation at all manufacturing sites Completed an annual review of the Group Health Safety and Environmental strategy with the revised version formally approved by Board Maintained programme of OHSAS 18001 certification Continue to focus on health safety and environmental strategy Maintain robust management systems standards and processes Pursue accredited OHSAS 18001 certification for selected manufacturing facilities Develop and embed Groupwide minimum standards for the identification and control of health and safety risks Continue to drive culture and employee engagement through employee consultation forums communication programmes and training Increase emphasis on sharing good practice and disseminating lessons identified from incidents Ensure that Essentra fulfils its commitment to being a great place to work Undertake employee engagement surveys on at least an annual basis Ensure robust followup procedures to engagement survey findings Carry out regular sitelevel visits by the Chief Executive and senior divisional management Regularly communicate with employees in an appropriate local language forum Provide appropriate learning and development opportunities at all levels Encourage constructive open and honest dialogue across the organisation Carried out a pulse and full annual employee engagement survey Established site level forum groups and clear action plans to follow through engagement survey findings Improved internal communication through greater Chief Executive and senior management involvement Established Diversity and Inclusion Steering Group Increased participation in Graduate Development Programme and Leadership Development Centres Launched first National Apprenticeship Programme in the UK Undertake annual employee engagement surveys and act upon feedback Enhance internal communication following appointment of dedicated Group Communications Director and launch of intranet Continue to focus on regular employee dialogue with the Chief Executive and divisional management Evaluate findings from Diversity and Inclusion Steering Group and act upon as appropriate Continue to expand geographic reach of Leadership Development Centres and Graduate Development Programme Further develop apprenticeship initiatives Ensure the highest standards of business integrity and conduct Embed and embody Essentras six principles Establish clear policies and guidance Secure employee awareness and engagement Continue to promote the Right to Speak policy Regular review of adherence with policies and guidance by Group Assurance Developed and communicated Essentras six principles which describe the way we work Established a new Legal Risk and Governance function led by the Company Secretary and General Counsel Updated policies to reflect Essentras six principles and three longterm steps to success Updated Essentras Ethics Code and Right to Speak materials and undertook employee training Continued communication of core policies through eLearning and reviews in Essentra Group System Continued to promote compliance systems Respond to new risks and requirements Provide further training Drive employee responsibility and cultural change Investigate complaints No significant adverse impact to the local environment and commitment to achieving the highest standards of environmental performance Regular review of the Groups Environmental strategy Identify and understand the environmental aspects and impacts associated with our activities Establish Group minimum expectations for environmental management Understand current environmental performance and establish Group expectations for improvements and results Implement initiatives to reduce waste and increase recycling Completed an annual review of the Group Health Safety and Environmental strategy with the revised version formally approved by Board Maintained programme of ISO 14001 certification Broadened programme of ISO 50001 certification Continue to focus on health safety and environmental strategy Maintain robust management systems standards and processes Pursue accredited ISO 14001 and ISO 50001 certification for selected manufacturing facilities Develop and embed Groupwide minimum standards for the identification and control of risks and environmental impacts ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT  CORPORATE RESPONSIBILITY Group Feb17 Mar17 Apr17 May17 Jun17 Jul17 Aug17 Sep17 Oct17 Nov17 Dec17 We are proud to be listed in the FTSE4Good index which measures the performance of companies against globally recognised corporate responsibility standards and improves transparency for investors where corporate responsibility issues are an influencing factor in their decisionmaking process.
Health and safety HSE Our overriding commitment in the workplace continues to be the health safety and welfare of our employees and all those who visit Essentras operations as well as those who carry out work on our behalf.
The Board provides health and safety leadership and the Chief Executive has primary responsibility for setting the principal health and safety objectives within which the detailed policies operate and for reviewing progress against those objectives.
As per our Health and Safety policy we aim to continually reduce the number of accidents and incidents with a goal of zero.
In light of our commitment to achieving and maintaining the highest standards of occupational health and safety and to ensure that HSE remains at the forefront of our thinking  as led by our Chief Executive Paul Forman  during the year we launched an Essentrawide Assurance Programme EAP to ensure that the foundations are in place to sustainably improve safety.
This initiative will ensure that every task has a risk assessment and standard work document safe operating procedure all employees have access to our incident and nearmiss reporting programme and appropriate training and competency standards will progressively be implemented across all sites.
We continue to use an inhouse self assessment programme to monitor the maturity of local sitebased HSE management arrangements.
Underpinning this increased focus was a significant investment in Essentras HSE capability during 2017  which has resulted in additional resources in each of our businesses  including newlyappointed Group and divisional Health Safety and Environment Directors  to help identify and further drive improvements in performance and culture.
Although the number of Lost Time Incidents was only slightly reduced versus 2016 the number of days lost as a result of these incidents showed a marked decline from 1834 to 1490  suggesting that severity of injury declined during the year  and with a Lost Time Incident Frequency Rate per 200000 hours worked of 1.004 this places Essentra as average for manufacturing companies.
LostTime Incident Incidence Rate per 200000 hours 12 month rolling average ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT  CORPORATE RESPONSIBILITY In 2017  we also standardised our incident reporting and investigation guidance to ensure a clear process flow across the organisation  from injured  reporting person and first aider through immediate supervisor to site  production Manager and facility HSE lead.
In addition we undertook a number of specific HSE improvement projects  from machine guarding to hand safe programmes with a focus on the most frequently observed types of incident.
We manage occupational health by identifying key risk activities undertaking health assessments and where appropriate implementing health surveillance programmes.
We continue to drive the Occupational Health and Safety Management Systems OHSAS 18001 standard into our manufacturing sites and at the end of 2017  48% of our principal manufacturing facilities had achieved accreditation.
Details of Essentras health and safety policy and accident performance data can be viewed on the Companys website site
We are committed to ensuring that Essentra is a great place to work and to growing our business through positive teamwork.
We recognise that an engaged and motivated workforce is key to the delivery of excellence in everything we do and in return for the dedication and expertise of our employees providing them with a safe respectful and diverse working environment in which talent can flourish is the foundation of the six principles which were developed and rolled out during the year  and is Paul Formans stated priority as Chief Executive.
Accordingly our objective is to drive employee engagement to upper quartile levels and  as a critical enabler of that improvement  to enhance communication and feedback across the organisation.
Following a challenging year in 2016  which had seen a clear deterioration in motivation and morale  in 2017 we undertook two engagement surveys with an excellent 89% response rate to the more comprehensive annual survey.
While we have seen an improvement in many areas nonetheless the overall engagement score is still below the norm for a company of our size and stature and we are committed to responding to the findings and to taking action to tackle the issues raised through local focus groups and established action plans.
We are equally focused on providing a respectful and diverse working environment as we believe that this ensures we attract and retain the best talent from the widest pool creating a diverse and inclusive culture also has a proven positive impact on employee engagement and business performance.
We do not tolerate harassment in any form and are committed to equal opportunities at work employees should not engage in or support discrimination based on race colour language caste national or ethnic origin indigenous status sexual orientation religion disability gender marital status union membership political affiliation or age.
However one of the key findings from our latest engagement survey is that not enough employees believe that diverse perspectives are valued at Essentra and we have recently established a Diversity and Inclusion Steering Group to address these concerns to ensure that we make meaningful and consistent improvement towards our objective of being exemplary in this regard.
The gender of Essentras employees as at 31 December 2017 was Male Female NonExecutive Directors 4 2 Executive Directors 2 0 Senior Managers 77 13 All employees 5451 2832 Our guiding principle is to provide all employees with the opportunity to develop and advance  subject to personal performance and business objectives  and to remunerate fairly with respect to skills performance competitors and local market conditions.
This includes giving full and fair consideration to employment applications by disabled people.
In the event of employees becoming disabled we make every effort to ensure that the training career development and promotion opportunities available are as far as possible identical to those of nondisabled employees.
Our employees are vital in ensuring that we provide quality products and services to our customers and operate our business activities effectively and efficiently Indeed their talent and commitment drive the innovation which allows Essentra to provide added value to our customers enhance supply chain logistics with our suppliers and reduce the environmental impact of operations.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT  CORPORATE RESPONSIBILITY Nowhere was this more evident during the year than at our two Health and Personal Care Packaging sites at Guaynabo and Manati in Puerto Rico following the devastating impact of hurricane Maria who continued to report for work and provide excellent support to our customers despite facing significant personal challenges.
Our
Over and above our immediate relief effort however it was clear that there was a longerterm impact to address  that of damage to homes cars and belongings.
For this reason we set up a fund  The Essentra 2017 Hurricane Relief Fund to provide our employees with financial assistance in rebuilding their lives so that those people who were impacted are able to apply for an amount of money to support them.
The fund is being managed by a team who will review each application on a case by case basis to ensure that the money reaches those of our colleagues who need it.
In order to deliver our strategic objectives both now and in the future  we need to be able to attract retain and motivate employees with the necessary skills and talent across the Company.
Over and above driving excellence in health and safety our Group Human Resources HR team is responsible for overseeing and coordinating the key strategic aspects of recruitment training and development to ensure that we have a consistent approach across the
In order to continually improve our talent pool at all levels of the organisation we run a number of very successful training initiatives  from our Leadership Development Centres to our Graduate Development Programme  which continue to expand their international reach we also offer a number of different apprenticeship opportunities across our Components and Packaging sites in the UK.
Our Group team is supported by a regional and local network of HR colleagues who have an understanding of the local culture and accepted practices in the countries in which we operate and help to ensure that we have the necessary structures in place to enable best practice people management at all our locations.
We operate in 33 countries and we comply fully with all appropriate legislation in these jurisdictions.
Throughout our international operations we support human rights  as set down by the United National Declaration and its applicable International Labour Organisation conventions  through our employment policies our supply chain and the responsible provision of our products and services.
This commitment includes a mandatory requirement on all our sites to avoid the employment of children as well as a commitment to the prevention of slavery and human trafficking this is set out in our Modern Slavery Statement which can be viewed on the Companys website site Our operations based in India Indonesia and Thailand are additionally accredited to SA 8000 which details fundamental principles of human rights.
Community
We are proud of our international footprint and of being part of the communities in which we operate and it is important to us that we play a key role in local society  not least because that is where our employees come from.
Our commitment to being a responsible corporate citizen extends to support for appropriate nonpolitical and nonsectarian projects across a range of organisations and charities.
Regardless of regional or national boundaries we aim to support the creation of prosperous educated sustainable and healthy communities in the countries and localities in which we operate.
In attempting to bring benefits back to those communities whose support provides a basis for our success we have focused on education and enterprise health and welfare and the environment with support driven at a local rather than a corporate level.
Our approach is to support and enhance employee efforts in their respective communities through applying Essentras resources and there are many local programmes across the Company which involve significant employee engagement through direct involvement or secondment.
We are looking to further enhance such relationships with local people business partners and community groups not only to meet our wider corporate responsibility objectives but also to improve local relationships and build employee pride in the communities where they live and work.
Marketplace
Our business reputation together with the trust and confidence of the people we do business with is one of our most valuable assets.
The Essentra Ethics Code applies to all our businesses around the world and to everyone who represents or acts on behalf of the Company and helps them to understand their role in upholding our principles procedures and policies.
Whether on our own behalf or through our relationships with third parties we are committed to free and fair competition plus the prohibition of bribery and political donations as well as to honest and fair dealings with suppliers customers and local and national authorities.
In particular we seek to confirm that our suppliers protect the welfare of their own workers and employment conditions to ensure that overall working environments within the Essentra supply chain meet or exceed internationally recognised standards.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT  CORPORATE RESPONSIBILITY Ethics and compliance Everyone in the Essentra team shares the responsibility for developing and maintaining a working environment that we can be proud of.
The cornerstones of this are founded on everyone acting with openness honesty and integrity treating others with respect and being accountable for doing what they say they will and speaking up if they feel this is not happening.
Essentras Ethics Code is our framework to assist in making ethical decisions and is supported by further policies and guidance notes.
These governance materials are approved by the Board and distributed globally in all relevant languages and are intended to promote the positive diverse culture and safe and respectful working environment which is espoused by our six principles.
None of these documents can address every issue that an Essentra employee may face in the performance of their duties however together with common sense logic and good faith behaviour our Ethics Code provides a structure to guide each of us in determining the correct course of action.
While
Essentras Company Secretarial department is accountable for promoting monitoring and enforcing our Ethics Code responsibility for following the Ethics Code and for upholding Essentras overall integrity and reputation  both globally and locally rests with each employee individually.
Consistent with our commitment to operating with integrity and to dealing fairly with all our stakeholders at all times Essentra adopts a zero tolerance approach to bribery and corruption through our AntiBribery and AntiCorruption ABC policies.
This extends to all business dealings and transactions in which the Company is involved and includes prohibiting political donations offering or receiving inappropriate gifts and making facilitation payments we also expect the same standards to apply to any third parties providing services on our behalf.
All employees are required to read our policies relating to Conflicts of Interest and Gifts and Entertainments which are reviewed on an annual basis and where their compliance is recorded either digitally or manually.
Given the number of jurisdictions in which we do business Essentra has adopted a Third Party Due Diligence policy.
The objective of this policy is to ensure that appropriate riskbased reviews are undertaken and the Company is protected from unmitigated risk with a clear and legitimate business reason for every thirdparty relationship.
The expectations and guidance detailed in this policy are supplementary to our existing know your customer procurement or other third party engagement processes which we have in place including financial controls and quality management requirements.
We are all required to review and confirm our acceptance of critical Group policies with the majority of employees being required to review and accept all of the Groups policies.
These additional Group policies and guidance are intended to cover the operational and commercial risks identified within the divisions on a range of material issues  including environmental sustainability modern slavery human rights and antibribery and anticorruption and we require those relevant colleagues to read and certify their compliance with these policies either digitally or manually.
Our Essentra Compliance and Ethics programme delivers the appropriate training required by legislation and regulation with a focus on communicating major compliance events.
For example this includes requiring employees to inform their line managers of any change in circumstances  such as any conflict of interest or outside business interest a significant deterioration in the health and safety of their working environment or their ability to protect Essentras assets.
Employees understanding of these policies is supported by an eLearning training programme and where applicable we hold classroomstyle training sessions with all divisions being required to identify what are the most prevalent risks to their respective activities  taking into consideration the markets into which they do business.
In all cases acceptance of our policies is reviewed by the Group Assurance team as part of their normal internal audit processes with the activity metrics of the Compliance and Ethics programme also being conveyed  as required  to the Audit Committee.
Accordingly the Audit Committee is able to address any specific risk areas within the organisation further to which Group Assurance then conducts appropriate followup audits after any confirmed compliance incidents.
Our Right to Speak policy and process is in place to enable any employee to report any circumstances where they genuinely and reasonably believe that the standards of the Ethics Code or the Companys wider policies and guidance notes are not being upheld.
We are committed to ensuring that employees feel able to raise any such concerns openly in good faith without fear of victimisation or retaliation and with the support of the Company.
Employees can access the Ethics Reporting Line via essentra. at each business location.
As part of our Governance Improvement Program implemented during 2017 a new Compliance Strategy has been developed and 2018 will see further initiatives with improvements in compliance and ethics risk assessment processes to better identify and mitigate.
The testing of the effectiveness of our existing controls will continue along with the continued evolution of KPIs to support these initiatives and to include metrics on training culture effectiveness and investigations.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT  CORPORATE RESPONSIBILITY Environment Consistent with our increased focus on all aspects of HSE  and our objective of continual improvement  our approach to managing environmental impacts during the year focused on Implementing and maintaining environmental and energy management systems certified by accredited bodies to ISO 14001 and ISO 50001 standard in all inscope facilities Measuring and monitoring energy and water consumption and any associated emissions to air and water and setting targets to improve performance Conducting environmental impact assessments and developing site management plans Providing training to employees on ways to reduce their environmental impact Engaging with customers and suppliers to identify opportunities to reduce environmental footprint across the supply chain Providing facilities to segregate and reuse or recycle production waste In the UK our sites comply with the Carbon Reduction Commitment CRC legislation and we continue to apply the principles of the CRC to our operations worldwide.
To date all our principal manufacturing facilities apply an Environmental Management Systems EMS based on the ISO 14001 standard.
During 2017  we implemented an Energy Management System to the ISO 50001 standard across a selection of manufacturing facilities at the end of 2017  15% of these sites had achieved external thirdparty accreditation.
As identified last year following a review of the benefits of external certification schemes it was decided to develop and standardise central management of our Energy Management and our intention remains to pursue a Group certification programme during 2018.
The following core measures of our environmental impacts are measured and monitored across the whole Group Greenhouse gas emissions from energy use including electricity natural gas heating fuel transport and travel Use of resources including water Generation and disposal of waste We continuously seek ways to improve our utilisation of natural resources.
In particular a process of continuous improvement is applied by our Filter Products research and development facilities in the UK Asia and the US to innovate in the use of renewable resources and recyclable biodegradable products.
Tonnes of CO e gross
31 Dec
31 Dec % change from Scope 1 10111 10479 3.51% Scope 2 87051 95748 9.08% Total gross emissions 97162 106227 8.53% Total carbon emissions per m revenue 94.57 96.23 1.73% The following assumptions methodology definitions and data validation processes have been used to report the Groups key environmental performance indicators in 2017 .
The reported data complies with the Companies Act for the Mandatory Reporting of Greenhouse Gases.
Boundary scope  Data from all locations over which the Company has operational control is collected and measured Primary data sources  These include billing invoices and other systems provided by the supplier of the energy to communicate energy consumption Secondary data sources  These include the Companys internal systems used to record and report the above consumption data Internal data validation  The process used to review and compare primary data with secondary data.
All invoices and data loggers for locations consuming more than 1 million Kwh per year are crosschecked with the data held within the Companys own internal data capture systems Conversion factors  The CO Emissions from Fuel Combustion 2016 edition published by the International Energy Agency has been used for converting gross emissions Intensity metric  Total carbon emissions per m of revenue are used to calculate the Companys intensity metric ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT  CORPORATE RESPONSIBILITY The absolute reduction in Scope 1 and 2 emissions has been influenced by certain site closures and divestments during the year which while not sufficiently material to warrant restating previous years environmental data have nonetheless contributed towards the net reduction in emissions for the Group as a whole.
This effect is also reflected in the reduction in revenues being the measure we have historically used to calculate an intensity ratio.
As a result our emissions per m have decreased by 1.73%.
Water
Year ended 31 Dec
31 Dec % change from Total water consumption m 256142 315822 18.90% per million revenue 249.3 286.1 12.86% The effect of the change in business mix outlined above has been even more pronounced in the water consumption data.
However the amount of water being consumed is comparatively low and it is no longer considered a material component of Essentras environmental footprint.
There is very little process water used in any of our operations and the figures reported mainly comprise the water used for cleaning sanitation and hygiene  none of which are considered appropriate areas for targeted reductions.
Following a review during 2017 it has therefore been decided that this measure will no longer form part of our environmental targets.
Waste
Year ended 31 Dec
31 Dec % change from General waste sent to landfill tonnes 5928 6530 9.22% Factory waste sent to recycling tonnes 19753 23020 14.19%
Hazardous special waste sent to special disposal tonnes 462 726 36.36% The above figures for waste do not include a oneoff exceptional figure of 2801 tonnes of general waste from our Newport facility.
This was mainly hardcore and rubble from various construction projects associated with the closure of the site and as such has been excluded from the data table.
Given the diversity and scale of Essentras international operations the use of energy and raw materials has both environmental and commercial importance.
Local management drives environmental performance in accordance with Group policy copies of which can be found at site and local legislation.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
STRATEGIC REPORT  CORPORATE RESPONSIBILITY DIRECTORS REPORT 58 This Directors Report contains Biographical details for the Group Management Committee page 60 and the Board of Directors page 62
Chairmans Corporate Governance Statement
Corporate Governance Framework page 65 and Corporate Governance Report page 67 Nomination Committee Report page 73 Audit Committee Chairmans Letter page 7 4 and Report of the Audit Committee page 7 6 Remuneration Committee Chairmans Letter page 81  Remuneration Policy Report page 86 and Annual Report on Remuneration page 97 Other Statutory Information page 108 Statement of Directors Responsibilities page 112 59 GROUP MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE Paul Forman Chief Executive Stefan Schellinger Group Finance Director Scott Fawcett Managing Director Essentra Components Kamal Taneja Managing Director Essentra Filters Iain Percival Managing Director Essentra Packaging Tim Wilson
Essentra Specialist Components Richard Cammish Chief Information
Jon Green Company Secretary and General Counsel Nick Pennell Group Operations Director Kathrina FitzGerald Strategy and Commercial
Gavin Leathem Group Human Resources Director Executive Board Directors Divisional Managing Directors Enabling Function Directors ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
DIRECTORS REPORT  GROUP MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE Paul Forman Chief Executive Pauls biographical details can be found on page 63.
Stefan Schellinger Group Finance Director Stefans biographical details can be found on page 63.
Richard Cammish Chief Information Officer Richard Cammish joined Essentra as Chief Information Officer in 2017  prior to which he was Group Chief Information Officer for Coats plc.
During a 25year career Richard has gained extensive IT and digital experience at a range of large multinational companies in increasingly senior roles at global regional and local country level as well as through running startup businesses and as a management consultant.
Scott Fawcett Managing Director Essentra Components Scott Fawcett joined Essentra in 2010 as Managing Director of the European Components business and was appointed Divisional Managing Director in January 2014.
Prior to joining Essentra Scott was Head of eCommerce at Electrocomponents plc where he held a variety of increasingly senior sales marketing and eCommerce positions during his 17year career there.
Kathrina FitzGerald Strategy and Commercial Director Kathrina FitzGerald was appointed as Strategy and Commercial Director in January 2018.
Prior to joining Essentra Kathrina worked with DMGT plc a portfolio of information and media businesses where she held a number of increasingly senior roles during her tenyear tenure including Business Development Director Managing Director of DMGT International and Director of Strategy and Development.
Kathrina started her career at JP Morgan where she spent seven years in investment banking.
Jon Green Company Secretary and General Counsel Jon Green joined Essentra in 2005 and was appointed Company Secretary and General Counsel in July 2005.
Prior to joining Essentra Jon worked as an inhouse lawyer for a number of large international businesses including Hays plc and Unilever plc.
Jon is a qualified solicitor.
Gavin Leathem Group Human Resources Director Gavin Leathem joined Essentra as Group Human Resources Director in 2014.
Prior to joining Essentra Gavin was Vice President of HR for Europe Middle East and Africa at Emerson Network Power Systems before which he was Group HR Director at Chloride Group plc during his 13year career there.
Gavin is a Chartered Fellow of the Institute of Personnel and Development.
Nick Pennell Group Operations Director Nick Pennell joined Essentra as Group Operations Director in 2017  prior to which he was Chairman of Lavery  Pennell and a Partner at Booz Allen Hamilton  Booz and Co. in the UK and China.
Nick has extensive experience of performance improvement operational and strategy development projects gained across the industrial and energy sectors and in many geographies.
He has also held operational and corporate strategy roles at Bass Brewers and at Shell.
Iain Percival Managing Director Essentra Packaging Iain Percival joined Essentra as Managing Director Essentra Packaging in 2017  before which he was Divisional CEO Beverage Cans Europe for Rexam plc.
Prior to this Iain held a number of increasingly senior roles at Rexam plc Toyota Motor  Europe Manufacturing and Dowty Group and has extensive experience in category management manufacturing and supply chain optimisation.
Kamal Taneja Managing Director Essentra Filters Kamal Taneja joined Essentra as Managing Director Essentra Filters in 2017 from Amcor Tobacco Packaging where he worked as Vice President and General Manager based in Singapore.
Prior to this Kamal held increasingly senior roles at Ingersoll Rand and Trane and has extensive marketing commercial operational and supply chain optimisation experience throughout the Asia Pacific region.
Tim Wilson
Essentra Specialist Components Tim Wilson was appointed as President Essentra Specialist Components in January 2018 prior to which he was President and Chief Executive Officer of Arnold Magnetic Technologies a leading global manufacturer of engineered magnetic solutions.
After an early career in Operations roles Tim held increasingly senior positions with ENI a division of Emerson Electrics and Videojet a division of Danaher Corporation and has extensive international manufacturing and commercial experience.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
DIRECTORS REPORT  GROUP MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE BOARD OF DIRECTORS Paul Lester CBE NonExecutive Chairman Terry Twigger Senior Independent
Tommy Breen NonExecutive Director Mary Reilly NonExecutive Director Paul Forman Chief Executive Stefan Schellinger Group Finance Director Lorraine Trainer NonExecutive Director Ralf K.
Wunderlich
NonExecutive Director ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
DIRECTORS REPORT  BOARD OF DIRECTORS Paul Lester CBE N NonExecutive Chairman Appointed to the Board December 2015 Skills and experience Paul is currently NonExecutive Chairman of Forterra plc  the leading UK producer of manufactured masonry products  McCarthy and Stone plc  the UKs leading retirement housebuilder and Knight Square Holdings  the property services business.
Paul brings a wealth of experience to Essentra gained in increasingly senior operational and strategic executive roles and has also served on a number of Boards in a nonexecutive capacity for more than 20 years.
Other appointments NonExecutive Chairman of Forterra plc McCarthy and Stone plc and Knight Square Holdings.
Past appointments Chairman of John Laing Infrastructure Fund Greenergy and Parabis Group Chief Executive of VT Group plc and Graseby plc Group Managing Director of Balfour Betty plc President of the Society of Maritime industries the BSA and the Engineering Employers Federation.
Paul Forman N Chief Executive Appointed to the Board January 2017 Skills and experience Prior to joining Essentra Paul was Group Chief Executive of Coats Group plc the worlds leading industrial thread manufacturer for seven years where he oversaw company rationalisation as well as growth through acquisition instigated and delivered a clear vision and corporate strategy drove material improvements in financial performance and built the momentum to position the business as an innovative and global industry leader.
Before assuming the role of Group Chief Executive Paul held a number of increasingly senior operational and strategic positions at a variety of companies and has a proven track record of international manufacturing experience at the highest level.
Other appointments NonExecutive Director of Tate and Lyle plc.
Past appointments Group Chief Executive of Coats Group plc and Low and Bonar PLC NonExecutive Director of Brammer plc.
Terry Twigger A Senior Independent Director Appointed to the Board June 2009 Skills and experience Terry has considerable mergers and acquisitions experience and has also held a number of senior finance roles including having previously been Finance Director at Meggitt PLC.
Prior to his retirement in 2013 Terry was Chief Executive of Meggitt PLC.
Other appointments Senior Independent NonExecutive Director and Chairman of the Audit Committee of X Power Limited.
Past appointments Chief Executive of Meggitt PLC Director of Lucas Aerospace.
Stefan Schellinger Group Finance Director Appointed to the Board October 2015 Skills and experience Stefan joined Essentra in 2013 and prior to being appointed to his current position in 2015 he was Corporate Development Director where he played a key role in the development of the Companys strategy and in building its mergers and acquisitions activity.
Before joining Essentra Stefan was Finance Director  Emerging Markets at Gilbarco Veeder Root a division of the Danaher Corporation from 2011 having initially joined the Danaher Corporation as Director Corporate Development  Europe in 2005.
Stefan gained extensive investment banking experience as a Vice President at JP Morgan having started his career in accountancy at Arthur Andersen.
Tommy Breen A NonExecutive Director Appointed to the Board April 2015 Skills and experience Prior to his recent retirement Tommy was Chief Executive of DCC plc an international sales marketing distribution and business support services group headquartered in Dublin and with operations in 13 countries.
Tommy brings significant experience to Essentra in particular of growing diverse businesses both organically and via acquisition during his 30year career with DCC.
Past appointments Chief Executive of DCC plc.
Lorraine Trainer R NonExecutive Director Appointed to the Board July 2013 Skills and experience Lorraine began her executive career at Citibank and has some 20 years experience in Human Resources at such blue chip companies as the London Stock Exchange and Coutts NatWest Group.
Lorraine currently combines her Board work with consultancy at and around Board level in Director development.
Other appointments NonExecutive Director Senior Independent Director and Chairman of the Remuneration Committee of Jupiter Fund Management plc NonExecutive Director of Sonae  SGPS S.
Past appointments NonExecutive Director of Aegis Group plc and Colt Group S.
Mary Reilly A NonExecutive Director Appointed to the Board July 2017 Skills and experience Mary is currently a NonExecutive Director of global media internet company Travelzoo  a USlisted publisher of travel entertainment and local offers  Ferrexpo plc an iron ore mining company  Mitie Group plc a facilities management company  Saranac Partners  a wealth management partnership and the Department of Transport in the UK.
Mary brings a wealth of accounting finance and international management experience to Essentra having previously been a Partner of Deloitte LLP for more than twenty years as well as serving on a number of Boards in a nonexecutive capacity since 2000.
Other appointments NonExecutive Director and Chair of the Audit Committee of Travelzoo and of Ferrexpo plc.
NonExecutive Director of Mitie Group plc and NonExecutive Director and Chair of the Oversight Committee of Saranac Partners.
NonExecutive Director and Chair of the Audit and Risk Committee of the Department of Transport.
Past appointments NonExecutive Director of Cape plc London 2012 the London Development Agency Woodford Investment Managers Crown Agents Ltd and Crown Agents Bank Ltd.
Ralf K.
Wunderlich A NonExecutive Director Appointed to the Board July 2017 Skills and experience Based in Singapore Ralf is currently a senior adviser to private equity firms and an independent consultant.
He was previously President and Managing Director of Amcor Flexibles  Asia Pacific and a member of the Global Group Executive Team of Amcor the world leader in packaging with operations in approximately 40 countries and revenue of approximately US10bn.
Ralf brings extensive international experience in the packaging industry to Essentra gained over many years and through living and working across three continents.
Other appointments NonExecutive Director of AptarGroup Inc.
Past appointments NonExecutive Director of AMVIG.
Committee membership key A Audit Committee N Nomination Committee R Remuneration Committee Committee Chairman ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
DIRECTORS REPORT  BOARD OF DIRECTORS
CHAIRMANS CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STATEMENT
Board evaluation As the Company continues to develop one of the greatest challenges facing the Board is to ensure that we have in place the right people culture and process to exploit fully the opportunities available to Essentra and to manage effectively the risks to which the organisation is exposed.
Accordingly it is essential that the Company has a fully engaged and committed Board with an appropriate mix of skills experience and knowledge that is capable of engaging in positive and constructive debate to meet these challenges.
Having committed to look afresh at the composition of the Board in 2017  I believe that the changes which have taken place during the year have fulfilled our objectives of increasing both diversity and international experience relevant to the Company and introducing valuable new perspective.
At the beginning of the year the Company reengaged Lintstock an independent third party to oversee and coordinate a Board evaluation.
The evaluation focused particularly on the ways in which the Board can maximise its impact in support of Paul and the senior management team behind the new strategy and a reinvigorated and engaging culture.
Following the evaluation an appropriate action plan has been formulated and agreed to deliver further improvements in the leadership and effectiveness of the Board and progress against this plan is being reviewed on a regular basis.
Particular actions which the Board took during 2017 to address some of the challenges which had been experienced in 2016 included Board dynamics  improving the interaction engagement and communication between the Board and management teams Board oversight  ensuring a clear cycle of agenda items to facilitate appropriate steering and supervising focus on key issues Board support  improving the quality content and timeliness of materials submitted to the Board
As the Company seeks to move towards an integrated coordinated and effective governance model appropriate for Essentras purposes it is anticipated that the focus will evolve in nature and extent as current activities identify additional risks or process gaps which require attention.
Under the direction of the Chief Executive and in support of the Companys strategy  we are collectively committed to driving significant improvements in our governance practices to secure stability provide a solid foundation for future sustainable growth restore stakeholder confidence and make Essentra the best company it can be.
The Board will continue to focus on delivering further governance improvements at all levels of the organisation to ensure that the fundamental behaviours and processes necessary to deliver good governance across Essentra are appropriately in place and to rigorously pursue and achieve its objective of establishing FTSE 250 upper quartile best practice governance by 2020.
During 2017 the Company has identified the processes and procedures to be put in place to improve its corporate governance structure.
The next 12 months will see the implementation of these processes and practices with increased emphasis and focus on the management of risk and the embedding of appropriate riskbased assurance throughout Essentra.
With the Board having effectively energised the corporate governance structure the challenge during 2018 will be to drive these changes and culture throughout the organisation.
However with effective and appropriate investment in people time and resources my Board colleagues and I are convinced that the benefits of the change programme are already evident across the Company.
PAUL LESTER CBE
2 March 2018 I strongly believe that good governance is a cornerstone of a successful company and is founded on the principles and behaviours established and demonstrated by the
Accordingly in line with the core elements of the UK Corporate Governance Code the Code the Company has committed to a fully fledged Governance Improvement Programme which will establish or restore clear leadership effectiveness and accountability at the respective Board Committee and Executive Management levels to drive better governance practices.
As a Board we have established a clear commitment to ensuring the Company operates more effectively and efficiently as a result of better planning improved process more focused reviews and higher quality reporting to deliver material performance improvements and the cultural change necessary for sustainable future growth.
Ensuring that the principles of the other Code elements of Executive Remuneration and Stakeholder Management are adhered to are other important considerations in ensuring shareholder trust in the Company and these are discussed in more detail in the Remuneration Committee Chairmans Letter on pages 81 to 85.
Paul Lester CBE
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
DIRECTORS REPORT  CHAIRMANS CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STATEMENT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FRAMEWORK Our Governance Improvement Programme is designed to ensure that there is an effective corporate governance framework supported by robust processes procedures and controls which by 2020 is aligned with FTSE 250 upper quartile best practice.
Board effectiveness A high performing Board is a fundamental component of any effective corporate governance framework with continuous improvement in the contribution of the Board being driven by a programme of actions arising from a thorough independent Board evaluation process each year.
In 2017  the Company engaged Lintstock Ltd to facilitate an interviewdriven review of the performance of the Board and each of its Committees.
The first stage of the review involved Lintstock engaging with the Chairman and the Company Secretary to set the context for the evaluation and to tailor survey content to the Companys specific circumstances.
Board members were then requested to complete an online questionnaire addressing the performance of the Board its Committees and the Chairman as well as their own individual contribution to the Board.
Lintstock subsequently conducted interviews with the Board members enabling them to expand on their responses to the questionnaire.
The anonymity of all respondents was ensured throughout the process in order to promote the open and frank exchange of views.
Lintstock presented their report during a meeting of the Board addressing the following areas The current composition of the Board and any particular considerations relevant to any potential new Director appointments The management of Board and Committee meetings including the quality of the Board and Committee meeting packs The Boards relationships with and exposure to management both inside and outside the boardroom The Boards understanding of the component parts of the business as well as the Boards oversight of strategy major projects and the main risks facing the business The delegation of authority from the Board to senior management alongside the Boards oversight of the performance of management The identification of the priorities for the new Chief Executive as well as the priorities for improving the Boards performance over the coming year The performance of each of the Board Committees in fulfilling their mandates Further to the completion of the questionnaires an action plan was drawn up which was and continues to be regularly reviewed for progress at scheduled Board meetings.
The priority items to address were identified as Board dynamics  increasing the Boards engagement support and ability to challenge the senior management team Board oversight  ensuring clear agendas and annual cycle of reviews to facilitate appropriate steering and supervising focus on key issues Board support  improving quality content and timeliness of materials submitted to Board Essentra has engaged Lintstock to conduct a followup review in early 2018 in order to review the progress made since this initial exercise.
The findings of the detailed review will be presented to the Board by Lintstock.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
DIRECTORS REPORT  CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FRAMEWORK The Board The Boards role is to provide leadership to the Company and to be responsible to the shareholders for the longterm success of the Company.
In fulfilling its role the Board Sets continually reviews and tests the Companys strategic aims Determines the nature and extent of acceptable risks in achieving the Companys strategic objectives Oversees the establishment of formal and transparent arrangements for the application of corporate reporting risk management and internal control requirements and principles Ensures that the necessary financial and human resources are in place for the Company to meet its objectives Sets the Companys values and standards Reviews the performance of the Companys executive management Presents a fair balanced and understandable assessment of the Companys position and prospects to its shareholders Some matters are reserved exclusively for decision by the Board while others are delegated to the Board Committees as follows The Audit Committee supports the Board and is responsible for monitoring the integrity of the Companys Financial Statements reviewing challenging and approving its accounting policies and scrutinising the effectiveness of the internal and external auditors and the Companys internal control and risk management systems.
The Remuneration Committee is established by the Board and is responsible for setting a remuneration policy for Directors and senior executives which should be designed to promote the longterm success of the Company taking into consideration shareholders and other stakeholders.
The Remuneration Committee should determine an appropriate balance between fixed and performancerelated and immediate and deferred remuneration.
The Remuneration Committee is also responsible for setting the fees of the Chairman.
The Nomination Committee is responsible for regularly reviewing the structure size and composition of the Board for any changes that it considers to be appropriate.
The Nomination Committee will lead the process for board appointments and make recommendations to the Board.
In selecting and recommending candidates for appointment the Nomination Committee should evaluate the balance of skills experience independence knowledge and diversity on the Board and the future challenges and opportunities facing the Company.
The terms of reference for each of the Audit Remuneration and Nomination Committee can be found on the Companys website site or on request from the Company Secretary and General Counsel.
The Group Management Committee GMC provides general executive management of Essentra within agreed delegated authority limits determined by the Board of Directors.
Specifically the GMC will support the Chief Executive in reinforcing Essentras six principles.
The Group Risk Committee GRC is responsible for monitoring principal and key group risks and ensuring the effectiveness of divisional and functional risk management.
Further details of the Companys risk management framework can be found on page 40.
Divisional Boards operate within a mandated agenda which includes health and safety governance strategy and performance.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
DIRECTORS REPORT  CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FRAMEWORK CORPORATE GOVERNANCE REPORT Board membership and meeting attendance As at the date of this report the Board has eight members comprising a NonExecutive Chairman two Executive Directors and five NonExecutive Directors.
The names of the Directors serving during the year and at the date of this report are set out below.
Meetings during the year Paul Lester NonExecutive Chairman Paul Forman Chief Executive appointed 1 January 2017 Terry Twigger Senior Independent Director Stefan Schellinger Group Finance Director Tommy Breen NonExecutive Director Mary Reilly NonExecutive Director appointed 1 July 2017 Lorraine Trainer NonExecutive Director Ralf K.
Wunderlich
NonExecutive Director appointed 1 July 2017 Colin Day Executive Director retired 20 April 2017 Peter Hill NonExecutive Director retired 20 April 2017 Figures in brackets denote the maximum number of meetings that could have been attended.
Tommy Breen was unable to attend one of the meetings due to a longstanding prior commitment.
Colin Day remained as a Director of the Company until after the AGM in April 2017 although he retired as Chief Executive on 1 January 2017 .
Colin was available to support the Board during this period but he did not attend the Board meetings given the appointment of Paul Forman as the new Chief Executive.
The Essentra Board is accountable to all the Companys stakeholders for the standards of governance which are maintained across Essentras diverse range of global businesses.
During the year Essentra was and continues to be subject to the UK Corporate Governance Code the Code 2016 published by the Financial Reporting Council FRC a copy of which can be found on its website www. rc.
The Board has reviewed its operations and governance framework and confirms that as at the date of this report the Company has complied with the provisions set out in the Code.
The Company applies the Codes principles of openness integrity and accountability through its own behaviour corporate governance best practice and by adopting as appropriate and proportionate for a company of the size and nature of Essentra recommendations of relevant professional bodies.
The Board is collectively responsible for the longterm success of the Company and its role is to provide entrepreneurial leadership within a framework of prudent and effective controls which enables risk to be assessed and managed in the pursuit of the Companys strategic objectives.
The Board believes that it and its Committees have the appropriate composition to discharge their respective duties effectively with the appropriate level of challenge and level of independence and that the members of the Board in conjunction with the senior executive teams are well equipped to drive and are capable of delivering the Companys strategic objectives.
The Board is of the view that it has a highly competent Chairman who together with each of the other NonExecutive Directors has considerable international experience at a senior level in the management of activities broadly similar to those carried out by Essentra and the material issues likely to arise for the Group.
The roles of the Chairman and the Chief Executive are separately held and are so defined as to ensure a clear separation of responsibilities.
The Chairman leads the Board and ensures its effectiveness and the Chief Executive is responsible for the executive management and performance of Essentras operations.
Together with the primary responsibilities of the Senior Independent Director SID the other NonExecutive Directors and the clear definition of reserved matters and delegated authorities there is a system which exists of checks and balances in which no individual has unfettered decisionmaking power.
Chairman
Leads the Board Ensures effective communication with shareholders Ensures effective communication flows between Directors and executive management Facilitates the effective communication of all Directors Responsible for effective corporate governance Chief Executive Implements the strategy which has been set by the Board Develops manageable goals and priorities Leads and motivates the management teams Develops proposals to present to the Board on all areas reserved for its judgement ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
DIRECTORS REPORT  CORPORATE GOVERNANCE REPORT Senior Independent Director SID Provides a sounding board for the Chairman Serves as an intermediary for the other Directors when necessary Acts as an alternative point of contact for shareholders where contact through the normal channels of Chairman or other Executive Directors has failed to resolve any concerns or for which such contact is inappropriate Leads the annual assessment of the effectiveness of the Chairman NonExecutive Directors Provide constructive challenge to executive management Bring experience and objectivity to the Boards discussions and decisionmaking Monitor the delivery of the Groups strategy against the governance risk and control framework established by the Board Are responsible for evaluating the performance of the Chairman led by the SID Company Secretary Maintains a record of attendance at Board meetings and Committee meeting Is responsible for ensuring good information flows to the Board and its Committees and between senior management and the NonExecutive Directors Advises the Board on all regulatory and corporate governance matters Assists the Chairman in ensuring that the Directors have suitably tailored and detailed induction and ongoing training and professional development programmes The Board maintains that for the year ended 31 December 2017  the NonExecutive Directors were each considered to be independent.
In making this assessment of independence the Board considers that the Chairman and NonExecutive Directors are independent of management and free from business and other relationships which could interfere with the exercise of independent judgement now and in the future.
The Board believes that any shareholdings of the Chairman and NonExecutive Directors serve to align their interests with those of shareholders.
The Board considers that the NonExecutive Directors provide an independent view in Board discussions and in the development of the Companys strategy.
NonExecutive
Directors also ensure a sound basis for good corporate governance for the Company challenging managements performance and in conjunction with the Executive Directors ensuring that rigorous financial controls and systems of risk management are maintained as appropriate to the needs of the businesses within Essentra.
The Board is aware of current external commitments for all of the NonExecutive Directors who are also required to discuss any additional external appointments with the Chairman prior to their acceptance in addition the time commitments of the Chairman are the subject of review by the SID in conjunction with the other NonExecutive Directors.
While there were no material changes to the time commitment of the Chairman during the year the Board took note of Paul Lesters appointment as Chairman of McCarthy and Stone plc at its AGM on 24 January 2018.
The Board has considered Paul Lesters commitment of time to the Company in light of this and other external positions and concluded that he would continue to be able to fully satisfy his obligations to Essentra.
In considering the Chairmans continued time commitments to the Company the NonExecutive Directors also viewed positively his exemplary attendance record at Essentra ensuring that he was able to attend 100% of Board and Committee meetings throughout the year.
The Board expects this attendance record to continue going forward and Paul Lester has given assurances to this end of his continued commitments to the Company in line with expectations outlined in his Letter of Appointment.
Regarding the time commitments of Tommy Breen it is noted that he retired as the Chief Executive of DCC plc and therefore will have sufficient time for the Senior Independent Director role which he will be undertaking with effect from the 2018 AGM.
The Board is content that the Non Executive Directors devote sufficient time to the business of Essentra.
Executive Directors may accept outside appointments provided that such appointments do not in any way prejudice the ability to perform their duties on behalf of Essentra.
Paul Forman Chief Executive currently holds one external nonexecutive position and the Board is of the view that this is not detrimental to the performance of his duties given the time requirements involved.
Colin Day was an Executive Director until April 2017  during which time he held three external nonexecutive positions.
The letters of appointment for Non Executive Directors are available for review at the Companys registered office and prior to the AGM.
The Companys Articles of Association require that all new Directors seek election to the Board at the AGM following their appointment.
In compliance with the Code all eligible Directors will put themselves forward for reelection on an annual basis.
The Board is satisfied that each of the Directors being put forward for reelection continues to be effective and that their ongoing commitment to the role is undiminished.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
DIRECTORS REPORT  CORPORATE GOVERNANCE REPORT The conduct of Board matters In managing the affairs of the Company the Boards agenda is set by the Chairman in conjunction with the Company Secretary and General Counsel and deals with an adopted schedule of reserved matters which are to be reviewed annually including Strategy and resources Annual planning Treasury policies Major capital and operating expenditure proposals Major acquisitions and disposals Debt facilities Key Group policies Appointments to the Board Systems of internal control Dividend payments Categories of public announcements Risk appetite Health and safety The detailed implementation of all these and general operational matters are the responsibility of executive senior management and regular formal reports are provided to the Board.
During the year there were eight scheduled Board meetings.
In addition to these scheduled formal meetings the Board met on a number of other occasions as required and in particular the Directors met to review and agree the strategy on two separate occasions.
In conjunction with the continuous review of the strategy and monitoring the progress in stabilising the Company the Board evaluated the appropriate deployment of capital in the business including the development of the dividend policy along with a clear and increased emphasis on cash generation and returns necessary to ensure the longterm growth and success of the Company.
At each meeting the Board considers reports from the Chief Executive and the Group Finance Director covering operational financial performance and other significant business matters together with regular updates on any material issues which may impact the Group.
Board meetings are structured to allow open discussion.
Other noteworthy matters considered by the Board in 2017 include Review of the Governance Improvement Programme Agreement to the disposal of the Porous Technologies businesses Agreement to the disposal of the packaging business based in Bristol Revised strategy and resourcing for Health and Safety Agreement to the closure of the Newport cartons facility Review of the new Group organisation structure Revision of Human Resources strategy including engagement succession and diversity Consideration of Brexit implications Approval of the Companys trading statements full year and half year results and quarterly trading statements Refinancing of the Companys debt facilities Approval of a revised Code of Ethics and Right to Speak policy With the recent changes to the Board and particularly the appointment of the Chairman there has been improved communication between the Chairman and the NonExecutive Directors including meetings between the Chairman and the NonExecutive Directors without the Executive Directors present.
Led by the Senior Independent Director the Non Executive Directors also met without the Chairman present to appraise his performance.
Regular contact is also maintained with the Chief Executive.
Further to the formal Board meetings there is an enhanced programme of meetings both formal and informal in line with recommendations of the Board evaluation action plan with members of the senior executive management.
During the year as part of the Companys Governance Improvement Programme and in conjunction with the externally facilitated Board evaluation conducted by Lintstock the Board undertook a review of its meeting processes.
This included the provision of meeting papers annual schedule of agenda items and the future calendar of meetings and should enable the Board to improve its ability to operate more effectively.
In 2017 the Board held one of its meetings at a UK facility and it is intended that further locations will host meetings during 2018 so that the Board has the opportunity to engage with local management and derive a better understanding of the Companys operations and business model.
Operational matters and the responsibility for the daytoday management of the businesses are delegated to the Chief Executive supported by members of senior executive management as appropriate within delegated authority limits and in accordance with clearly defined systems of internal control.
In support of the operational reports provided during the year the Board received detailed presentations from senior management across a range of businesses within the Company and considered reports from enabling functional management about matters of material importance to the Company which arose from time to time.
The Board was supported during the year by the GMC which ensures a strong link between Essentras overall corporate strategy and its implementation within an effective internal control environment.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
DIRECTORS REPORT  CORPORATE GOVERNANCE REPORT The GMC provides general executive management of the Company within agreed delegated authority limits determined by the Board.
The GMC consists of the Chief Executive Group Finance Director Divisional Managing Directors or Presidents and the respective heads of the enabling Group functions.
Full details of the membership of the GMC can be found on pages 60 to 61.
As part of the Governance Improvement Programme Essentra has established that in order to continue to implement effective corporate governance within the Group the GMC needs to drive new working practices and behaviours through the establishment of clearly defined annual agendas for reporting reviewing and decision making.
The Board Committees are a valuable part of the Companys corporate governance structure and the Board looks to the Audit Committee in particular to undertake the majority of the work involved in monitoring and seeking assurance as to compliance with the controls within this structure.
However the Board as a whole maintains oversight of such important matters and after each Committee meeting the Chairman of the Audit Committee reports on the matters which have been reviewed.
Other specific responsibilities are delegated to the Nomination and Remuneration
These Committees report as appropriate to the Board.
Applying Essentras Corporate Responsibility principles The Chief Executive is the Director with primary responsibility for the implementation and integration of Essentras Corporate Responsibility principles across the Company.
During
2017  the Group Human Resources Director supported by the Company Secretary and General Counsel was responsible for coordinating the operation of detailed policies on health and safety ethics and the environment which support Essentras commitment to its Corporate Responsibility principles.
Further details of these policies can be viewed in the Corporate Responsibility statement on pages 50 to 57 and on the Companys website site
Essentra is focused on providing a safe respectful and diverse working environment.
The Companys new six principles which were communicated during 2017 details of which can be found at site include specific reference to the importance of diversity in supporting the Companys stability strategy and growth objectives.
Essentra has begun a Diversity and Inclusion programme with some externally facilitated support to ensure behaviours fully reflect the principles of diversity and inclusion across the Company and it is intended to develop a specific policy as part of that programme.
Indeed one of the key findings from the 2017 employee engagement survey was the importance of ensuring that diverse perspectives are valued within the Company and Essentra is committed to establishing an inclusive culture where diversity is embraced by everyone and makes Essentra a rewarding and successful place to work.
Conflict of interests Directors have a statutory duty to avoid actual or potential conflicts of interest.
The Companys Articles of Association permit the Board to consider and if it sees fit to authorise situations where a Director has an interest that conflicts or may possibly conflict with the interests of the
During the year the Conflict of Interests policy which governs the responsibilities of Directors in such situations was reviewed.
The decision to authorise a conflict of interest can only be made by nonconflicted Directors ie those who have no interest in the matter being considered and in making such a decision the Directors must act honestly and in good faith when giving authorisation where they think this is appropriate and will be most likely to promote the Companys success.
The
Company Secretary and General Counsel maintains a register of Directors interests so that any potential concerns are addressed before any material issues may arise.
The Conflict of Interests register and the schedule of Directors Interests is reviewed at each Board meeting.
During the course of the year there were no material conflicts of interest impacting on the conduct of the Boards activities.
Information and professional development The Chairman supported by the Company Secretary and General Counsel takes responsibility for ensuring that the Directors receive accurate timely and clear information.
On appointment an induction programme tailored to their individual needs is available to Directors and is designed to assist them in their understanding of Essentra and its operations.
Throughout a Directors tenure they are encouraged to develop their knowledge of the Group through meetings with senior management and site visits.
Directors are also provided with updates as appropriate on matters such as fiduciary duties Companies Act requirements share dealing restrictions and corporate governance matters.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
DIRECTORS REPORT  CORPORATE GOVERNANCE REPORT During the year two new NonExecutive Directors were appointed.
A comprehensive induction programme was embarked upon which has involved them visiting a number of sites both in the UK and overseas.
There have also been a number of meetings held with the senior management team in order to gain a better understanding of the Group and the key challenges surrounding its future strategic objectives.
One of the new NonExecutive Directors Ralf K.
Wunderlich undertook additional training to reinforce the key considerations that a NonExecutive Director should be aware of in relation to the role and responsibilities for a UK public limited company.
All Directors have access to the advice and services of the Company Secretary and General Counsel and for the year under review his advice was sought in relation to share dealings.
In the furtherance of their duties there are agreed procedures for the Directors to take independent professional advice if necessary at the Companys expense.
No Director took independent professional advice during the year.
Shareholder communications The Board recognises the importance of effective communication and seeks to maintain open and transparent relationships with its shareholders and other stakeholders including providers of finance customers and suppliers.
This is achieved by regular updates through public announcements the corporate website and other published material.
All shareholders can meet any of the Directors of the Company should they so wish.
In particular the SID is available to shareholders should they have concerns or wish to share their views.
Feedback from meetings with shareholders is provided to the Board so they are aware of any issues or concerns and ensures that the Board has a balanced view from the major investors.
Additionally the Board uses the AGM as an occasion to communicate with all shareholders including private investors who are provided with the opportunity to question the Directors.
At the AGM the level of proxy votes lodged on each resolution is made available both at the meeting and subsequently on the Companys website.
Each substantially separate issue is presented as a separate resolution and the Chairmen of the Audit Nomination and Remuneration Committees are available to answer questions from shareholders.
The Company also communicates regularly with its major institutional shareholders and ensures that all the Directors including the NonExecutive Directors understand the views and concerns of major shareholders and can explain business developments and financial results as appropriate.
The Chief Executive Group Finance Director and Investor Relations Director have primary responsibility for investor relations.
Presentations for analysts and shareholders were held during the year and meetings were also undertaken with key institutional investors to discuss strategy financial performance and investment activities.
Slide presentations are made immediately available after the full and half year results and are also available on the Companys website to view and download.
The Company ensures that any pricesensitive information is released to all shareholders at the same time in accordance with regulatory requirements.
Board roles The SID currently Terry Twigger can be contacted via the Companys registered office.
In that role he is available to shareholders to discuss and develop an understanding of their issues and any concerns which cannot be resolved by discussions with the Chairman the Chief Executive or Group Finance Director or where such contact is inappropriate.
Terry will retire as a Director following the 2018 AGM.
Tommy Breen will be appointed as the SID from that date subject to his reelection as a Director at the 2018 AGM.
Financial reporting The Directors have acknowledged in the Statement of Directors Responsibilities set out on page 112 their responsibility for preparing the Financial Statements of the Company and the Group.
The Directors are responsible for preparing the Annual Report and Accounts and they consider that the Annual Report and Accounts taken as a whole are fair balanced and understandable.
The External Auditor has included a statement about their reporting responsibilities in the Independent Auditors Report set out on pages 182 to 190.
The Directors are also responsible for the publication of half year results as required by the Disclosure and Transparency Rules of the Financial Conduct Authority.
This provides a general description of the financial position and performance of the Company and the Group during the relevant period.
Directors and Officers insurance In accordance with the Companys Articles of Association and to the extent permitted by the laws of England and Wales the Directors are granted an indemnity from the Company in respect of those liabilities incurred as a result of their office.
During the year the Deed of Indemnity was reviewed and updated to take into consideration current best practice and changes to the applicable legislation since the Deed was originally drafted.
In respect of those matters for which the Directors may not be indemnified the Company maintained a Directors and Officers Liability Insurance policy throughout the year.
It is anticipated this policy will be renewed.
Neither the Companys indemnity nor the insurance provides cover to the extent that a Director is proven to have acted dishonestly or fraudulently.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
DIRECTORS REPORT  CORPORATE GOVERNANCE REPORT Internal controls In accordance with the Code the Board acknowledges its overall responsibility to shareholders to ensure that an adequate system of risk management and internal control is in place.
This is essential for reliable financial reporting and also for the effective management of the Group.
Overseeing the effectiveness of the system has been delegated to the Audit Committee which assesses the quality of the control environment when monitoring and reviewing the integrity of the Groups Financial Statements and any significant judgements that were made in their preparation.
Essentras internal controls are designed to safeguard the Companys assets and to ensure the integrity and reliability of information used both within the businesses and for public announcements.
The Board has overall responsibility for the Companys system of internal control and risk management and for reviewing the effectiveness of this system.
Such a system can only be designed to mitigate rather than eliminate the risk of failure to achieve business objectives and can therefore only provide reasonable and not absolute assurance against material misstatement or loss.
In order to strengthen the Companys internal control systems and in accordance with the implementation of the Governance Improvement Programme a number of actions have been put in place which should serve to ensure a clear focus by the executive management team on the key requirements for effective internal control and appropriate reporting and monitoring.
The Audit Committee takes responsibility for reviewing the Essentra internal controls through its engagement with the Group Assurance function.
While Essentra has a wellestablished internal audit function potential opportunities for improvements in its effectiveness to drive a high quality internal control system to deliver value to the respective businesses and to support change management were identified.
The Audit Committee is committed to a prioritised and structured programme to drive improvements in the effectiveness of the internal audit function through better engagement with the businesses and further reduce the risk of error fraud or poor practice.
Template agendas for Divisional Boards have been implemented which ensures that a structured and detailed approach is adopted in reviewing governance strategy and performance reviews.
It is anticipated that this should deliver greater visibility on potential internal control concerns or process gaps and drive appropriate executive and management responses on a riskbased approach.
The following enables the Board to review the effectiveness of the system of internal control The Audit Committee meets regularly and reports to the Board no less frequently than at every Board meeting following an Audit Committee meeting The terms of reference provide a framework for the Audit Committee to review and oversee the quality integrity appropriateness and effectiveness of the Groups internal control framework The Board has the opportunity to review the internal control environment at local sites when Board meetings are held away from the Companys head office Every month each division submits detailed operating and financial reports covering all aspects of performance.
These are reviewed within the Groups central Finance function and summary reports are communicated to the GMC and the Board Certificates are required from the businesses to confirm compliance with the Groups policies including financial and procedures at both the half year and year end Policies and procedure  which are subject to ongoing review and updated as required in response to strategic operational business legal or regulatory developments with the approval of the Board or its respective Committees as appropriate are communicated across the Group.
The improvement initiatives for Essentras internal controls are designed to ensure significant risks investment decisions and management issues are identified considered and escalated as necessary at the earliest opportunity.
Divisional
Managing Directors and Presidents are responsible for ensuring the communication of and compliance with Essentras internal controls across their respective businesses.
Control of significant risks The Boards responsibility for risk and risk management in Essentra encompasses Determining the Companys approach to risk Setting and instilling the appropriate culture throughout the Company Identifying the risks inherent in the Companys business model and strategy including risks from external factors Monitoring the Companys exposure to risk and the key risks that could undermine its strategy reputation or longterm viability Providing an effective oversight of the risk management processes in the Company Ensuring the Company has effective crisis management systems There is a Group risk framework in place to support the Board in fulfilling these responsibilities and to ensure that risk review processes are embedded within the business.
Further details of the Companys risk management framework and activities during 2017 are provided on pages ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
DIRECTORS REPORT  CORPORATE GOVERNANCE REPORT Nomination Committee Committee Chairman Paul Lester Membership and attendance during the year Meetings during the year Paul Lester NonExecutive Chairman 4 4 Terry Twigger Senior Independent Director 4 4 Tommy Breen NonExecutive Director 4 4 Mary Reilly NonExecutive Director 1 1 Lorraine Trainer NonExecutive Director 4 4 Peter Hill NonExecutive Director 1 1 Figures in brackets denote the maximum number of meetings that could have been attended.
The Company Secretary and General Counsel acts as Secretary to the Nomination Committee.
Following a review of the Nomination Committees terms of reference the membership requirements were revised.
Membership of the Nomination Committee can now comprise a majority of independent NonExecutive Directors.
The Chief Executive Paul Forman was appointed as a member effective 15 December 2017 .
Terry Twigger will be retiring as a Director after the 2018 AGM along with his membership of the Nomination Committee and Ralf K.
Wunderlich has been appointed to the Nomination Committee with effect from 1 March 2018.
Other attendees During 2017  the Chief Executive and the Group Human Resources Director attended by invitation as appropriate.
The Nomination Committee is responsible for regularly reviewing the structure size and composition of the Board for any changes that it considers to be appropriate.
The Nomination Committee leads the process for board appointments and makes recommendations to the
In selecting and recommending candidates for appointment the Nomination Committee evaluates the balance of skills experience independence knowledge and diversity on the Board taking into account the future challenges and opportunities facing the Company.
During the year the Nomination Committee met four times to discuss general succession planning for the Board and the appointment of the new NonExecutive Directors.
The Nomination Committee and the Board as a whole supports the spirit of the recommendations set out in the Lord Davies Report Women on Boards .
Securing the right combination of skills experience and expertise allows the Board to effectively lead the sustainable growth and success of the Company for the benefit of all stakeholders.
The fundamental objective must be to ensure that the best people are appointed to do the best job for Essentra taking into consideration other factors such as market and international experience and diversity of thought and background.
Appointing people on merit without any form of discrimination is a key component of Essentra policies across its international operations at all levels.
Nomination Committee 2017 key activities Reviewed the composition and structure of the Companys Board and the Committees Reviewed the succession planning for the Board and senior executives and in doing so considered diversity experience knowledge and skills Reviewed the capabilities of external consultants to assist the Committee in the search for and evaluation and appointment of new individuals to the Board and its Committees Developed in conjunction with external consultation the key requirements for the new appointments to the Board and assessed the capabilities of potential candidates Made recommendations to the Board for the appointment of Ralf K.
Wunderlich and Mary Reilly as new NonExecutive Directors Agreed the appointment of Tommy Breen as the Senior Independent Director following the retirement of Terry Twigger at the 2018 AGM Agreed the appointment of Mary Reilly as the Chairman of the Audit Committee following the retirement of Terry Twigger at the 2018 AGM Reviewed and agreed revised Terms of Reference for the Nomination Committee Agreed the appointment of Paul Forman as a member of the Nomination Committee The Nomination Committee was satisfied that the appointment of Ralf K.
Wunderlich and Mary Reilly will provide the Board and the Group with the necessary skills and current experience relevant to the activities of the Company and its future development.
The biographies of Ralf and Mary are available on page 63.
Korn Ferry and Ridgeway Partners were engaged to assist the Nomination Committee in the potential recruitment of additional NonExecutive Directors as part of the succession planning activities.
There is no related party connection with Korn Ferry or Ridgeway Partners and the assignments were undertaken on an arms length basis.
NOMINATION COMMITTEE REPORT ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
DIRECTORS REPORT  NOMINATION COMMITTEE REPORT AUDIT COMMITTEE CHAIRMANS LETTER Dear Shareholder As Chairman of the Essentra plc Audit Committee I am pleased to present the 2017 Audit Committee Report to shareholders and to be able to confirm on behalf of the Board that the Annual Report is fair balanced and understandable.
The report aims to provide the following information How the Audit Committee operates and engages with the Company including with the Executive Directors the Group Assurance function and other key management The key activities which were reviewed by the Audit Committee including those items of regular annual review and other current areas of focus The discussions and actions undertaken in conjunction with the External Auditor on any significant accounting judgements and  or financial reporting issues Details of the ongoing review of the External Auditor and the amount of nonaudit work undertaken The arrival of Paul Forman as Chief Executive at the beginning of 2017  after a period of financial performance challenges for the Company provided the stimulus for a reassessment of the overall corporate governance practices across the Group.
The work of the Audit Committee during the year has continued to focus on the integrity of the financial reporting and monitoring the relationship with PwC following their formal appointment as the Companys External Auditor at the AGM in April 2017 .
In addition with Pauls commitment to the Governance Improvement Programme designed to deliver FTSE 250 top quartile best practice governance by 2020 the Audit Committee has spent considerable time assessing the nature and extent of the internal control environment and engaging with specialist external resource in conjunction with the Company to assess opportunities to improve the effectiveness of the existing risk management internal audit and compliance practices.
With the creation of a new Legal Risk and Governance function headed by the Company Secretary and General Counsel and the addition of new resource the Company has begun to implement a number of improvement initiatives in a prioritised and structured manner agreed by the Board and that programme will continue throughout 2018 and beyond into 2020.
In accordance with of reference and having regard to the continued evolution of the improvement programme in response to the demands of the Board.
The Audit Committee has engaged extensively in the review and assessment of potential improvement opportunities and overseen the implementation of a number of changes to policy processes and practice.
During the year the key projects in which the Audit Committee has participated include An independent assessment of the Companys internal audit processes and capability was undertaken by specialist external resource.
The review was focused on identifying potential improvements to the existing management framework and resourcing practices and priorities in order to drive better engagement with the businesses and effectively support the governance improvement initiatives.
The Company is continuing to work with specialist external resource in the delivery of an internal audit capability aligned with best practice risk assurance by 2020 while the Audit Committee maintains its focus on the robustness of the internal control environment through the activities of the internal audit team.
A comprehensive review by an expert external risk consultant assessing the nature and extent of the risk management practices within the
As a result of that review the Company has implemented new policies and management frameworks for the better identification assessment and mitigation of enterprise and business continuity risks.
Further details can be found on page 40 in the Management of Principle Risks Report.
During 2018 the Audit Committee will be carefully reviewing the consistent implementation of the changes which have been agreed and ensuring that the new frameworks and processes are providing the anticipated improvements in the quality and effectiveness of the Companys risk management practices.
Terry Twigger Audit Committee Chairman ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
DIRECTORS REPORT  AUDIT COMMITTEE CHAIRMANS LETTER An independent assessment on the effectiveness of Essentras data management and security processes and the new practices and procedures required in preparation for the new EU General Data Protection Regulations which come into effect in May 2018.
The Company is undertaking a number of actions in response to the findings and recommendations of that report and the Audit Committee has continued to track progress with the implementation programme.
A comprehensive review of the Companys insurance programme coverage and associated management practices and processes to assess the quality of the coverage and compliance with fair presentation disclosure and reporting requirements to ensure the effectiveness of the coverage available in response to any claims.
The review was undertaken by Mactavish and the Company is undertaking a number of activities in response to their recommendations and will continue to work with Mactavish during 2018.
I believe that the Audit Committee comprises the necessary experience expertise and financial understanding to continue to effectively fulfil its responsibilities and to continue to input significantly into the various improvement initiatives.
I am confident that Mary Reilly who has already made a significant impact as a member of the Audit Committee since her appointment in July and is succeeding me as Chairman will bring new and additional experience and a fresh perspective and approach which will provide a valuable addition to the capabilities of the Audit Committee and assist the Company considerably in the successful delivery of its 2020 governance objectives.
A key activity for the Audit Committee in 2018 will be to review the progress of the implementation activities and to assess the effectiveness of the improvements being made.
In order for the Audit Committee to provide positive assurance to the Board that the Annual Report when taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable  and also provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Companys position and performance business model and strategy the following processes and controls were followed during the year An annual update is made to the Audit Committee on the fair balanced and understandable requirement including early notification of the matters under consideration for inclusion or otherwise in the narrative reporting of the 2017 full year results.
The Audit Committee undertakes a similar assessment at the half year to ensure a consistent and diligent approach to the requirement covering the year An experienced core team with expertise covering financial reporting and regulatory compliance is responsible for the coordination of content submission and verification and ensuring that there is a detailed review and challenge of the reporting Senior management confirms that the content regarding their respective area of responsibility is considered to be fair balanced and understandable The diligent adherence to these comprehensive processes as overseen by the Audit Committee provide assurance to the Board that the statement required by the 2016 UK Corporate Governance Code can be given.
As previously reported following a tender process completed during 2016 PriceWaterhouseCoopers PwC were formally appointed as the external auditor following the 2017 AGM.
The transition from KPMG has been completed in a seamless way and PwC have performed very well during their first year.
I am sure that they will continue to work effectively with Mary and the rest of the Audit Committee in the future.
I would like to thank KPMG for their approach and assistance in ensuring the smooth transition and for their work as external auditor since 2005.
This is my final report as Chairman of the Audit Committee and I would like to thank the members and the Board as a whole for their work and support during my tenure at Essentra and to wish them and the Company as a whole every success for the future.
TERRY TWIGGER Audit Committee Chairman 2 March 2018 ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
DIRECTORS REPORT  AUDIT COMMITTEE CHAIRMANS LETTER Audit Committee Committee Chairman Terry Twigger Membership and attendance during the year Meetings during the year Terry Twigger Chairman 4 4 Mary Reilly NonExecutive Director 2 2 Tommy Breen NonExecutive Director 4 4 Lorraine Trainer NonExecutive Director 4 4 Peter Hill NonExecutive Director 1 1 Figures in brackets denote the maximum number of meetings that could have been attended.
The Company Secretary and General Counsel acts as Secretary to the Audit Committee.
Other attendees The External Auditor Chairman of the Board Group Finance Director Group Financial Controller Group Head of Assurance and members of the GMC attended meetings by invitation as appropriate.
During the year the Audit Committee met the External Auditor KPMG LLP up to April 2017 and PricewaterhouseCoopers PwC appointed after the 2017 AGM and the Group Head of Assurance without the Executive Directors being present.
During the course of the year the Audit Committee also received presentations from Ernst and Young KPMG LLP  the Group Head of Tax and the Group Chief Information Officer.
Governance
All the Audit Committee members are independent NonExecutive Directors and have financial and  or related business experience gained in senior positions in other large diverse organisations.
Terry Twigger has been the Chairman of the Audit Committee since 2009 and the Board is satisfied that Terry has recent and relevant financial experience.
Terry Twigger is retiring from the Board and as Chairman of the Audit Committee after the 2018 AGM.
Mary Reilly will be replacing Terry as the Chairman and is currently working with him to ensure a smooth transition of the role.
Further details of Marys qualifications can be found on page 63.
As a whole the Audit Committee believe that its members are competent in the business sectors within which the Essentra Group operates.
The Audit Committee supports the Board and reports to it on a regular basis and no less frequently than at every Board meeting following a meeting of the Audit Committee.
During early 2017  the Company engaged Lintstock Ltd to facilitate an interview driven review of the performance of the Audit Committee in conjunction with a full review of the Board and the other Board Committees.
The particular focus for the Committees was to ensure that the meeting mandates were fully addressed.
Recommendations concerning the performance of the meetings were made and an action plan put in place to address these points.
There is an annual cycle of items considered by the Audit Committee.
These items are scheduled in accordance with the requirements of the external audit cycle and any other requirements of the Audit Committees responsibilities as detailed in its terms of reference.
The annual agenda was reviewed during the year as part of the ongoing Governance Improvement Programme and as part of the transition to a new Audit Committee Chairman to ensure that it remains appropriate.
The current terms of reference for the Audit Committee are available at site A substantive review of the terms of reference is to be carried out after the conclusion of the FRC review of the UK Corporate Governance Code to ensure alignment with best practice in the context of Essentra.
The terms of reference provide a framework for the Audit Committees work during the year to review and oversee the quality integrity appropriateness and effectiveness of the Group including Financial statements and external financial reporting Significant financial judgements Tax activities Compliance programme Cyber security response Relationship with and performance of the external auditor System of internal control REPORT OF THE AUDIT COMMITTEE ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
DIRECTORS REPORT  REPORT OF THE AUDIT COMMITTEE Internal audit function Risk management processes and practices Financial Statements and External Financial Reporting As part of recommending for approval the 31 December 2017 Annual Report and Accounts and the 30 June 2017 Half Year Report the Audit Committee reviewed examined and challenged the Group Finance Director and External Auditor on their respective assessments including in particular going concern basis of preparation accounting policies and disclosures any financial reporting issues significant financial judgements made see below and levels of disclosure to ensure that the reports are fair balanced and understandable.
Additionally the Audit Committee reviewed the contents and suitability of the LongTerm Viability Statement was reviewed indepth and the Audit Committee challenged the risk scenarios and potential impacts outlined by the Company prior to confirming its support and approval of the statement.
The Audit Committee was presented with information and advice regarding new IFRS pronouncements that would be applicable to Essentra for the 2017 financial period and reviewed plans for the implementation in future years of IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers IFRS16 Leases and IFRS9 Financial Instruments Recognition and Measurement.
Significant financial judgements Tax liabilities The Group is from time to time subject to tax assessments that may represent potential future tax exposures which arise in the ordinary course of business from tax authorities in a number of the jurisdictions in which the Group operates.
The Group assesses all such exposures in the context of the tax laws of the countries in which it operates and where applicable makes provisions for any settlements which it considers appropriate.
The Group operates in a number of tax jurisdictions and recognises tax based on interpretation of local laws and regulations which are sometimes uncertain.
Where the amount of tax payable is uncertain the Directors are required to exercise significant judgment in determining the appropriate amount to provide in respect of potential tax exposures and uncertain tax positions.
The Audit Committee challenged the nature and extent of the tax provisioning of the Company and saught assurance that the Company was working diligently to resolve outstanding liabilities in an appropriate fashion.
Uncertain tax positions continue to be a focus of the full year work.
There is a focus on the uncertainty over the Groups transfer pricing position and deductibility of interest as a result of US debt financing and tax positions in respect of the Porous Technologies disposal.
The Audit Committee reviewed the tax liabilities which existed at the start of the year and those created during the year and the effective tax rate  together with their corresponding assumptions.
The Audit Committee questioned and challenged the Group Finance Director and Group Head of Tax as to the Companys risk attitude in this area.
Upon consideration of the Companys explanations and the External Auditors conclusions the Audit Committee was satisfied that the tax liabilities were appropriate and that the Groups tax disclosures were adequate given the nature of the Groups activities.
Revenue recognition There are a large number of sales transactions that are incurred across the
Given the risk that revenue may be recognised in the incorrect period over reporting dates the Group needs to ensure that there are effective controls regarding the recording of sales transactions.
Revenue recognition continued to be a key area of audit focus and the external auditor addressed the potential issue with the Audit Committee during the planning and scoping of the external audit process.
Goodwill and intangible assets As required by IAS 36 the Company undertakes an assessment of the carrying value of intangible assets on an annual basis or more frequently if there is an indication of impairment.
The details of the work carried out and the results are in note 8 of the Notes to the Financial Statements.
In the prior year an impairment loss of 123.9m was recognised against the Packaging division formerly Health and Personal Care Packaging HandPCP division and further potential impairment risk was assessed in the HandPCP division based on the underlying trading performance of particular components and the closure of the Newport folding cartons site in the UK.
The assumptions for 2018 and beyond such as the annual growth rate and the terminal growth rate are based on the 2018 annual plan and managements best estimates of the performance in subsequent years.
The impairment reviews performed by management contain a number of significant judgements and estimates including revenue growth profit margins and discount rates.
A change in these assumptions can result in a material change in the valuation of the assets and a further impairment charge.
The Audit Committee evaluated and challenged the methodology of the impairment review and the assumptions on which it was based including the financial plans approved by the Board.
Taking into account the external auditors review the Audit Committee is satisfied that the impairment assessment is appropriately carried out.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
DIRECTORS REPORT  REPORT OF THE AUDIT COMMITTEE Exceptional items The Financial Statements include certain items which are disclosed as exceptional.
The nature of these exceptional items is explained within the Group accounting policy and includes transaction costs and gains or losses relating to acquisitions and disposals of businesses acquisition integration and restructuring costs and other items such as impairment losses.
Following an extensive review the Audit Committee is satisfied that the Groups definition of exceptional items remains clear and that appropriate level of disclosure is included.
The definition remains consistent with the prior year and in the current year the Audit Committee has been involved in assessing the appropriateness of items presented within exceptional items including impairment and restructuring activities on the basis that they are oneoff material items which are presented separately to allow a better understanding of the Groups ongoing activities.
Further details can be found in note 2.
Tax activities The Group Head of Tax presented to the Audit Committee a report detailing the Companys tax strategy governance planning and attitude to tax risk.
The presentation set out the key activities that the tax department was engaged upon regarding the management of these taxrelated matters and the nature and extent of the tax provisions maintained by the Company.
The Audit Committee considered these activities in conjunction with advice from the Group Finance Director and was satisfied with the approach being taken by the Company.
Compliance programme The Audit Committee continued its regular review of the Groups compliance activities and received regular presentations from the Company Secretary and General Counsel including the recommendation for approval by the Board a revised Ethics Code and Right to Speak policy.
At each meeting reports are presented detailing any claims made under the Companys independent Right to Speak process.
The Audit Committee noted the continued investment being made by the Company in systems designed to better facilitate compliance policy management and training across the Group and to deliver due diligence processes to assist in the management of thirdparty risk while monitoring any developments in the regulatory environment and assessing any impact to the Company.
The Audit Committee has overseen the Companys proposals for the future delivery of further improved compliance practices with a new Group Risk and Compliance Manager assuming responsibility for the strategic development of the compliance programme into 2018 and beyond and additional support to better enable the delivery of the programme in response to key compliance risks.
Cyber security Cyber security risk remains an important matter for constant monitoring.
During the course of the year the Audit Committee further assessed the Companys programme to respond to potential threats to the integrity of its IT systems through a presentation provided by the Chief Information Officer.
External Auditor During the year the Audit Committee Reviewed and agreed the scope and strategic nature of the audit work to be undertaken Agreed the terms of engagement and fees to be paid to the External Auditor Reviewed the qualifications expertise resources and independence of the External Auditor and assessed its performance Reviewed proposals for the engagement of the External Auditor for nonaudit services and confirmed that their independence was safeguarded Reviewed the level of nonaudit work being carried out by the External Auditor and other external audit assignment providers ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
DIRECTORS REPORT  REPORT OF THE AUDIT COMMITTEE Assessment of the External Auditor The Audit Committee is provided with reports reviews information and advice throughout the year as set out in the terms of the External Auditors engagement.
Performance is formally assessed by the Audit Committee in conjunction with the GMC and the Audit Committee remains satisfied that the External Auditor is effective and provided appropriate independent challenge to the Companys management.
In making this assessment the Audit Committee had due regard to their expertise resourcing and independence.
Independence of the External Auditor In order to fulfil its responsibility the Audit Committee reviewed a report from the External Auditor describing the arrangements to identify report and manage any conflicts of interest and reviewed and considered the extent of nonaudit services provided by the External Auditor.
Effectiveness of the External Auditor The Audit Committee reviewed the External Auditors fulfilment of the agreed audit plan and variations therefrom reports highlighting the major issues that arose during the course of the audit and feedback from the businesses evaluating the performance of each audit team.
Engagement of the External Auditor The External Auditor is engaged to express an audit opinion on the truth and fairness of the Financial Statements.
The audit includes the review and testing of the system of internal financial controls and the data contained in the Financial Statements to the extent necessary.
As reported last year and in line with the changes made to the UK Corporate Governance Code in 2012 which recommended that the external audit is put out to tender at least every ten years PwC were selected as the Companys External Auditor for the year ending 31 December 2017 and were duly appointed at the 2017 AGM.
In order to protect independence and objectivity and provide fresh challenge to the business the External Auditor periodically changes the audit partners at a Group divisional and country level in accordance with professional and regulatory standards.
Such changes are carefully planned to ensure that the Group benefits from staff continuity without incurring undue risk of inefficiency.
The External Auditor is required to rotate the lead partner every five years and such changes will be carefully planned to ensure business continuity without undue risk or inefficiency.
The current audit partner is Nicholas Stevenson.
The Audit Committee has been kept uptodate with the development of new EUwide regulations concerning audit tenure and the longevity of audit firm relationships with companies they audit.
The Company will continue to consider on a regular basis any potential benefits from tendering the audit process having regard in particular to the importance of audit quality or the continued independence of the External Auditor .
There are no contractual obligations in place that restrict the Companys choice of statutory auditor .
Nonaudit services policy The Audit Committee believes that it is important to maintain the objectivity and independence of the External Auditor by minimising its involvement in projects of a nonaudit nature.
It is however also acknowledged that due to its detailed understanding of the Companys business it may sometimes be necessary to involve the External Auditor in nonaudit related work principally comprising further assurance services relating to due diligence and other duties carried out in respect of acquisitions disposals tax services outside the EU and other services.
The Audit Committee reviewed and agreed a new policy reflecting best practice in relation to the engagement of the External Auditor to supply nonaudit services with defined parameters and approval requirements in relation to any such appointments.
The Audit Committee Chairman is authorised by the Company to engage the External Auditor on nonaudit related work where the fees per project are not considered to be significant provided that the annual aggregate of nonaudit related fees shall not to exceed 70% of the average of the fees paid in the last three consecutive financial years without the approval of the Committee.
The External Auditor may not be engaged to provide a nonaudit service when the objectives of the service would be regarded by a reasonable and informed third party as conflicting with the objectives of the external audit.
Details of the fees paid to KPMG to April 2017  and afterwards PwC up until 31 December 2017  can be found in note 2 to the Financial Statements on pages 132 to 134 which includes fees paid to the External Auditor and its network firms for audit services auditrelated services and nonaudit services.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
DIRECTORS REPORT  REPORT OF THE AUDIT COMMITTEE Internal control and internal audit The Audit Committee reviewed the effectiveness of the Groups internal controls and disclosures made in the Annual Report and Financial Statements and takes responsibility for reviewing the Groups internal controls through its engagement with the Group Assurance function.
The Group Head of Assurance is responsible for providing assurances as to the adequacy of internal controls throughout the Company and attends each Audit Committee meeting presenting regular reports which included the consideration of any issues relating to the status of internal controls and potential risks and assessed the progress of actions in response to any identified concerns.
The Audit Committee agreed the annual internal audit plan which is drawn up by the Group Head of Assurance on a riskbased approach across a broad section of the Companys activities.
The
Audit Committee reviewed any significant findings from internal control audits undertaken during the year  to ensure they are appropriately investigated and necessary actions have been taken to address and rectify any weaknesses identified.
In preparation for their audit activities the new External Auditor carried out a review of the Companys existing IT systems and concluded that in keeping with the practice adopted by the previous External Auditor the external audit approach would continue to be a fully substantive one with a greater focus on detailed sample testing rather than full reliance on automated processes and controls.
The impact of these findings means that there are some additional risks the business faces.
The findings across applications supports the current IT strategy already instigated to improve the IT control environment.
Having regard to the findings of the internal control audits presented during the year the report of the external specialist resource and the report of the External Auditor the Audit Committee was satisfied that the Company maintains an appropriate and effective control system.
As reported in last years Report of the Audit Committee while Essentra has a wellestablished internal audit function potential opportunities for improvements to deliver additional value to the respective businesses and to support change management were identified.
Specialist external resource was engaged to conduct a comprehensive review of the internal audit function in order to benchmark Essentra against best practice and to recommend potential improvements to deliver a capability aligned with FTSE 250 upper quartile best practice.
The Audit Committee prioritised the development of a structured programme to drive the implementation of the effective recommendations and improvements identified by specialist external resource.
As detailed in the Audit Committee Chairmans Letter on pages 74 to 75 the best practice objective endorsed by the Audit Committee during 2017 envisages the development of the existing internal audit function into an integrated risk assurance capability by 2020.
Risk management processes and practices In addition to the work on internal audit the Audit Committee reviewed the effectiveness of the Companys risk management activities as assessed by expert external consultant.
The Audit Committees discussions and considerations on risk extended beyond enterprise risk into business continuity management as the Company assessed the quality of its existing practices.
A new policy and framework for the effective management of business continuity management risk was endorsed by the Audit Committee and it is anticipated that during the course of 2018 it will assess the outputs from the testing of newly developed business continuity plans.
Further details on the risk management initiatives reviewed by the Audit Committee can be found on pages 40 to 49 in the Management of Principal Risks Report.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
DIRECTORS REPORT  REPORT OF THE AUDIT COMMITTEE REMUNERATION COMMITTEE CHAIRMANS LETTER Dear Shareholder As Chairman of the Remuneration Committee I am pleased to present our Remuneration Report for the financial year ended 31 December 2017 .
Key principles There are three key principles that have underpinned our approach this year Linking reward to the new strategy The Remuneration Committee agreed with the Chief Executive to emphasise the incentive system to support the stability agenda and strategy development.
This will include recognising the importance of cash in the early stages of the recovery and use the reward policy to reinforce the cultural shift to achieve this.
We also discussed the importance of a capital return measure which we heard from shareholders was important to them.
This now forms part of our new policy and is already reflected in the Companys Key Performance Indicators on pages 20 to 21 and is most likely to be implemented in the 2019 Long Term Incentive Plan
Ensuring targets are appropriately stretching We recognise past outcomes have demonstrated that Essentras policy delivers a wide range of outcomes linked to performance and we want to continue this policy.
We believe we have set stretching targets which will drive the recovery in the life of the policy.
Ensuring we have the right reward tools to support Paul Forman in attracting and developing the team around him The Remuneration Committee has worked with the Chief Executive in ensuring he is able to attract talent into the business.
In addition the bonus structure for the Executives covers c.
180 managers not just the Executive Directors thus enabling the Chief Executive to focus his senior team on achieving the right outcomes in driving the recovery.
The personal objectives for the senior management throughout the Company were focused on delivering the outcomes that supported stability and strategy development.
Summary of key points 2017 saw widespread stability restored to Essentra and the development of a new strategy for the Company.
The remuneration outcomes for the year reflect the performance of the Company during this period Our new Chief Executive Paul Forman was appointed in January 2017 on a salary of 625000 per annum Paul Forman has chosen not to take a salary increase with effect from 1 April 2018.
The salary increase that had been recommended to the Board by the Remuneration Committee was in line with the average increase provided to the wider UK workforce The single figure for Paul Forman as Chief Executive for 2017 is 1267 000.
This is the first year for which Paul Forman was Chief Executive and as a result no longterm incentives vested in the year The annual bonus outcomes for 2017 were for the Chief Executive 48% of maximum and for the Group Finance Director 41% of maximum.
The levels of bonuses reflect the restoration of stability the development of the new strategy and the performance of Essentra during the year No LTIP awards vested in the year in line with threeyear performance Our proposed new Remuneration Policy is straightforward and updated.
It will be put to our shareholders for their approval at the AGM in April 2018 Lorraine Trainer Remuneration Committee Chairman ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
DIRECTORS REPORT  REMUNERATION COMMITTEE CHAIRMANS LETTER Rewarding performance in 2017 Following a challenging year in 2016 2017 saw widespread stability restored to Essentra  as well as the development and communication of a new strategy for the Company  as set out in the Chief Executives Review on pages 10 to 17 .
The Remuneration Committee set stretching targets for the year based on the key performance indicators for the Company.
The management of cash is vital to delivering our new strategy and the Net Working Capital target set for the year was exceeded.
Notwithstanding the significant progress made during 2017  the targets for Adjusted Operating Profit and Adjusted Net Income for the 2017 annual bonus were not achieved.
This was largely due to a shortfall in Health and Personal Care Packaging owing to the profit dropthrough impact from lower revenue a material operating loss at our Newport cartons facility and the impact of hurricane Maria on our two sites in Puerto Rico  together with a less profitable revenue and segment mix in Tapes.
The Remuneration Committee believes that the overall annual bonus outcomes for the Executive Directors shown below are a balanced reflection of what has been achieved in 2017 .
The performance targets for the 2015 to 2017 LTIP awards were not met and these awards lapsed in full.
More information on the financial and operating performance of Essentra in 2017 is set out on pages 22 to 39 in the Strategic Report.
2017 annual bonus outturn KPIs Threshold Target Maximum Actual Bonus payout % of max Adjusted Operating Profit 25% of maximum 95.1 100.1 105.1 83.7 0% Adjusted Net Income 25% of maximum 67.2 70.7 74.2 60.2 0% Net Working Capital 30% of maximum 50 bps 16.5% 50bps 130 bps 30% Personal objectives 20% of maximum Details of performance against preset personal objectives are set out on page 99.
Following assessment by the Remuneration Committee the Chief Executive and Group Finance Director received 18% and 11% of their respective maximum bonuses in relation to these objectives.
Bonus award to Chief Executive 48% of maximum Bonus award to the Group Finance Director 41% of maximum Based on internal forecast at constant exchange rates.
Average Net Working Capital as a percentage of sales.
One half of the bonuses earned will be deferred and payable in Essentra shares which will vest after three years in 2021.
Full details are set out on page 99.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
DIRECTORS REPORT  REMUNERATION COMMITTEE CHAIRMANS LETTER Aligning pay and strategy 2018 Remuneration Policy and shareholder approval The current Directors Remuneration Policy Report was approved by our shareholders at the AGM in 2015.
We are required by law to put a new Policy to our shareholders for approval three years later at the 2018 AGM.
Strategy alignment Since his appointment in January 2017  Paul Forman has completed a full strategic review of the Company.
The results of that review were set out during our Capital Markets Day on 28 July 2017 .
The strategy review emphasised that Essentras future success will be driven by a focus on restoring stability and delivering consistent growth in a sustainable and profitable manner .
The clear priorities of our new strategy are reflected in our straightforward updated Remuneration Policy.
Shareholder consultation We have proactively engaged with our major shareholders and proxy voting agencies on the updated Remuneration Policy prior to publication.
Summary of key changes The key proposed changes in our updated Policy are summarised below with full details set out on pages 86 to 96.
These changes bring our Policy in line with current mainstream market practice and are consistent with our new corporate strategy.
Policy change Rationale for change and implementation in 2018 Amended approach to LTIP awards Annual LTIP awards will be calculated as a percentage of salary.
This will replace the nonmarket standard feature of the 2015 Policy Report whereby the former Chief Executive and Group Finance Director received an award over a fixed number of LTIP shares each year.
Extended LTIP release date LTIP awards granted to Executive Directors will be released five years after grant.
Performance will be measured over an initial threeyear period and then there will be a new additional twoyear holding period.
Amended LTIP performance conditions LTIP awards may be subject to a combination of relative Total Shareholder Return TSR Earnings Per Share EPS cumulative adjusted operating cash flow and a capital return measure.
The addition of cash flow and capital return as potential measures reflect our evolving strategic priorities and feedback from our shareholders.
After careful consideration the Remuneration Committee has decided that 2018 LTIP awards will be subject to a combination of relative TSR EPS and cash flow measures.
The Remuneration Committee will most likely introduce a capital return measure for LTIP awards to be made in 2019 and subsequent years.
In the interests of simplicity we would try to have no more than three measures in any one award.
Amended approach to salary reviews Executive Director salaries will be reviewed on an annual basis in April each year.
This will replace the current nonmarket standard approach whereby the former Chief Executives and Group Finance Directors salaries were fixed throughout the Policy period.
Reduced future pension provision The revised Policy Report includes a commitment to reduce the maximum level of pension provision for any future Executive Director appointments to 20% of salary compared to the current 25% of salary maximum.
Amended minimum shareholding guideline Executive Directors will be expected to build up a minimum shareholding worth 200% of salary over six years.
This is consistent with the Remuneration Committees assessment of a reasonable period over which the Executive Directors should be expected to reach the guideline target given the level of annual LTIP awards that will be made.
This is a reduction from the previous shareholder requirements and reflects the relatively recent appointments of the Chief Executive and Group Finance Director.
Since Paul Formans appointment he has invested personally in the Company and has already made good progress in building his personal shareholding in Essentra.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
DIRECTORS REPORT  REMUNERATION COMMITTEE CHAIRMANS LETTER 2017 LTIP award As outlined in our 2016 Remuneration Report we delayed the granting of LTIP awards in 2017 until after the completion of our new Chief Executives strategic review.
This was to ensure that the awards would be appropriately aligned with our revised strategy and the updated Policy described above.
As disclosed in the 2016 Remuneration
Report our new Chief Executive
Executive.
He also received a oneoff recruitment award of shares of 100% of salary to compensate him for incentives forgone when he left his previous employer.
The Group Finance Director received a 2017 LTIP award over shares of 150% of salary.
Granting an LTIP award at a level linked to his salary rather than as a fixed number of shares represents a change from the approach envisaged in our 2016 Remuneration Report but is consistent with our updated Policy and the approach we adopted for 2017 LTIP awards throughout the Company.
Given the importance of the generation of cash in the successful execution of our new strategy LTIP awards granted in 2017 are partially subject to an adjusted operating cash flow measure in addition to the previous relative TSR and EPS measures.
Anticipating our updated Policy from 2018 the 2017 LTIP awards granted to the Chief Executive and the Group Finance Director are subject to a threeyear performance period plus an additional twoyear holding period.
Full details of these awards are shown on pages 100 to 101.
2018 pay decisions The annual base salaries of the Executive Directors will be reviewed now in April each year.
The Chief Executive chose not to take the recommended salary increase with effect from 1 April 2018.
The salary increase that had been recommended to the Board by the Remuneration Committee for both Executive Directors was in line with the average increase provided to the wider UK workforce.
The salary of the Group Finance Director will increase by 9700 from April 2018 to 369700 pa.
The structure of the 2018 annual bonus plan and 2018 LTIP awards for Executive Directors will be broadly unchanged from 2017 although the Remuneration Committee has decided to drop Adjusted Net Income as a separate measure in the bonus plan in order to simplify and focus our approach.
Adjusted Operating Profit will therefore now account for 50% of the 2018 annual bonus opportunity.
The LTIP award for the Chief Executive will be 200% of salary and the LTIP award for the Group Finance Director will be 150% of salary as applied at the start of the last Policy period in 2015.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
DIRECTORS REPORT  REMUNERATION COMMITTEE CHAIRMANS LETTER In summary the pay arrangements for the Executive Directors for 2018 will comprise the following elements Details Performance conditions Base salary Chief Executive 625000 with no increase in April 2018 at the request of the Chief Executive.
Group Finance Director 369700 after an increase of 2.7% effective 1 April 2018.
Pension allowance Chief Executive 25% of salary Group Finance Director 20% of salary.
Benefits Car or cash allowance plus private medical insurance and life insurance cover.
Annual bonus opportunity for 2018 Maximum opportunity  Chief Executive 150% of salary Group Finance Director 125% of salary.
Half of any bonus is deferred in shares for three years.
Adjusted Operating Profit 50% Net Working Capital 30% Personal Objectives 20% LTIP awards to be made in 2018 Chief Executive to receive award over shares worth 200% of salary Group Finance Director to receive award over shares worth 150% of salary.
Awards will be subject to threeyear performance period and an additional twoyear holding period.
EPS growth 33.33% Relative TSR 33.33% Cash flow 33.33% Committee membership I would like to thank my colleagues on the Remuneration Committee for their work this year.
Terry Twigger will be retiring as a Director from Essentra following the 2018 AGM and as such will be relinquishing his appointment on the Remuneration Committee and I would like to thank him for his contribution over the years.
I am delighted that Ralf K.
Wunderlich was appointed to the Remuneration Committee effective from 1 March 2018.
Conclusion
I hope you will find this report to be clear and helpful in understanding our remuneration practices and that you will be supportive of the resolutions relating to remuneration at the AGM.
As ever the Remuneration Committee welcomes any questions or comments from shareholders.
LORRAINE TRAINER Remuneration Committee Chairman 2 March 2018 ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
DIRECTORS REPORT  REMUNERATION COMMITTEE CHAIRMANS LETTER REMUNERATION POLICY REPORT Our Directors Remuneration Policy Report the Policy Report sets out the policies under which the Executive and NonExecutive Directors are remunerated.
The Policy Report is designed to be in full compliance with the requirements of the Large and Mediumsized Companies and Groups Accounts and Reports Amendment Regulations 2013 the UK Corporate Governance Code as issued by the Financial Reporting Council and the Listing Rules.
The current Policy Report was approved by shareholders at the 2015 AGM and therefore an updated Policy Report is required by law to be approved by shareholders at the 19 April 2018 AGM.
The current Policy Report can be found in full in the Essentra Annual Report 2014 a copy of which can be obtained from the Companys registered office or downloaded from site As outlined in the Remuneration Committee Chairs letter the Remuneration Committee has reviewed the continued appropriateness of the current Policy Report in the context of the Companys corporate strategy following the appointment of Paul Forman as Chief Executive.
Following that review shareholder approval will be sought at the 19 April 2018 AGM for the updated Policy Report set out below.
Subject to shareholder approval the updated Policy Report will take effect immediately after the 19 April 2018 AGM and will apply to the 2018 financial year.
The key changes in the updated Policy Report are outlined in the Remuneration Committee Chairmans Letter.
The updated Policy Report also contains a number of minor clarificatory changes and where relevant updated terminology to reflect our current strategic priorities.
Remuneration Policy Report
This section of the Remuneration Report will be subject to a binding shareholder vote at the 2018 AGM.
Overview
The Remuneration Committee determines and recommends to the Board the framework for the remuneration of the Executive Directors Company Secretary and the Chairman of the Board.
The remuneration of the NonExecutive Directors is the responsibility of the Board as a whole.
No Director is involved in determining or voting on their own remuneration.
The Chief Executives remuneration proposals for the other members of the Group Management Committee GMC are reviewed by the Remuneration Committee and recommendations as regards those proposals are made to the Board.
The Remuneration Committee also takes note of the remuneration policy as detailed by the Chief Executive in respect of other levels of management in the Company and makes such recommendations to the Chief Executive as the Remuneration Committee deems appropriate.
The Remuneration Committee has regard to the proposed remuneration policy for other management and employees across the Group when determining recommendations on remuneration for the Executive Directors and other senior executives.
The Remuneration Committee places significant focus on and spends considerable time reviewing the risks surrounding the Companys existing remuneration policies on an annual basis and has determined that there are no significant concerns with the structure or operation of the remuneration policy.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
DIRECTORS REPORT  REMUNERATION POLICY REPORT The Remuneration Committees main responsibilities are to Develop the Companys Remuneration Policy for the Executive Directors the Company Secretary and other senior executives covering basic salary bonus longterm incentives retirement provisions and other benefits Strike an appropriate balance between i the fixed and variable and ii the cash and equityrelated components of total remuneration packages Review and determine the terms of employment and remuneration of the individual Executive Directors including any specific retirement or severance terms Determine the remuneration of the Chairman of the Board Establish and review the operation of any employee share plans including the granting of awards the setting and testing of performance conditions and exercising of any awards under longterm incentive plans Select appoint and determine the terms of reference for independent consultants to advise the Remuneration Committee on remuneration matters In determining the policy for the Executive Directors the Remuneration Committees key objectives are to Ensure that senior executives remuneration is designed so as to attract retain and motivate high quality executives in a manner that aligns their remuneration with the interests of shareholders and other stakeholders particularly in the design of the performancerelated elements of their remuneration packages and their shareholding guidelines Promote the achievement of both the Companys annual and longerterm strategic objectives.
The Remuneration Committee considers the alignment of Company performance and the remuneration of its senior executives including the Executive Directors to be of the utmost importance.
It believes that senior executives should be highly rewarded on a marketcompetitive basis for the delivery of stretching goals but should also receive reduced rewards when the business does not perform to expectations Encourage Executive Directors to act in a fair and responsible manner without unnecessary risk taking having regard to the longterm performance of the Company The Remuneration Committee considers all elements of the remuneration package as a whole.
It looks to ensure that an appropriate balance is maintained between them so that the need for both shortterm success and longterm sustainable growth is recognised.
The
Remuneration Committee also ensures that nonfinancial business measures and individual objectives reflect adequately the Companys environmental social and governance ESG responsibilities.
Summary of components of Executive Directors remuneration The Remuneration Committee structures Executive Director remuneration in two distinct parts i fixed remuneration of basic salary pension and benefits and ii variable performancerelated remuneration in the form of cash bonuses deferred share bonuses and longterm incentive arrangements.
Remuneration for Executive Directors is structured so that the variable performancerelated pay element forms a significant portion of each package.
The majority of total remuneration at the maximum performance level will derive from the Companys longterm incentive arrangements.
All incentives are designed to be aligned to delivery of Essentras strategic priorities.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
DIRECTORS REPORT  REMUNERATION POLICY REPORT Policy table Purpose and link to strategy Operation Opportunity Performance measures Basic salary To reflect the particular skills and experience of an individual and to provide a competitive basic salary.
Generally reviewed annually with any increase normally taking effect from 1 April although the Remuneration Committee may award increases at other times of the year if it considers it appropriate.
The review takes into consideration a number of factors including but not limited to The individual Directors role experience and performance Business performance Pay and conditions elsewhere in the Group Market data for comparable roles in appropriate pay comparators No absolute maximum has been set for Executive Director base salaries.
Any annual increase in salaries is at the discretion of the Committee taking into account the factors stated in this table and the following principles Salaries would typically be increased at a rate consistent with the average salary increase in percentage of salary terms for permanent UK employees.
Larger increases may be considered appropriate in certain circumstances including but not limited to a change in an individuals responsibilities or in the scale of their role or in the size and complexity of the Group .
Larger increases may also be considered appropriate if a Director has been initially appointed to the Board at a lower than typical salary.
Not applicable.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
DIRECTORS REPORT  REMUNERATION POLICY REPORT Policy table Purpose and link to strategy Operation Opportunity Performance measures Annual bonus To ensure the delivery of shareholders.
One half of the total annual bonus is paid in cash shortly after the announcement of the annual results.
The other half is deferred into shares in the Deferred Annual Share Bonus the DASB which will normally vest after three years subject to continued service.
Performance is assessed against measures and targets which are established on an annual basis by the Remuneration Committee.
As performance increases so does the percentage payable up to the maximum.
The bonus is subject to malus and clawback provisions for a period of three years following the determination of the bonus.
Circumstances in which these provisions could be applied by the Remuneration Committee are material misstatement in the Companys Financial Statements error in assessing the performance conditions serious misconduct by an individual or serious reputational damage to the company or a relevant business unit.
An additional payment in the form of cash or shares may be made in respect of shares which vest under deferred awards to reflect the value of dividends which would have been paid on those shares during the vesting period this payment may assume that dividends had been reinvested in Company shares on a cumulative basis .
Chief Executive  150% of basic salary.
Other Executive Directors  125% of basic salary.
The bonus will be based on performance assessed over one year using appropriate financial strategic and individual performance measures.
The majority of the bonus will normally be determined by measures of the Companys financial performance.
The remainder of the bonus will be based on financial strategic or operational measures appropriate to the individual Director.
The selected measures for the next financial year are set out below in the Annual Report on Remuneration on page 105.
No more than 20% of each financial measure will vest at threshold performance.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
DIRECTORS REPORT  REMUNERATION POLICY REPORT Policy table Purpose and link to strategy Operation Opportunity Performance measures LongTerm Incentive Plan LTIP To drive the longterm delivery of the Companys strategic objectives aid retention and to align Directors interests with those of the Companys shareholders.
An annual award of performance share awards usually with a threeyear performance and additional twoyear holding period.
Awards are subject to malus and clawback provisions for a period of three years following the vesting of the awards.
Circumstances in which these provisions could be applied by the Remuneration Committee are material misstatement in the Companys Financial Statements error in assessing the performance conditions serious misconduct by an individual or serious reputational damage to the Company or a relevant business unit.
An additional payment in the form of cash or shares may be made in respect of shares which vest under LTIP awards to reflect the value of dividends which would have been paid on those shares during the period up to the release of the shares this payment may assume that dividends had been reinvested in Company shares on a cumulative basis .
An award to any Executive Director would be limited to a maximum of 300% of salary.
Vesting will be subject to performance conditions as determined by the Remuneration Committee on an annual basis.
The performance conditions will usually be some combination of relative TSR adjusted EPS adjusted cumulative operating cash flow and a capital return measure although the Remuneration Committee will retain discretion to include alternative performance measures which are aligned to the corporate strategy.
The Remuneration Committee may adjust the weightings of the performance conditions for each award although usually each condition would have a weighting in the range of 20%  40% of the award.
Performance will usually be measured over a three year period.
Up to 25% of each element vests at threshold performance usually rising on a straightline basis for performance up to the maximum level for full payment.
Below threshold performance that element of the award will not vest.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
DIRECTORS REPORT  REMUNERATION POLICY REPORT Policy table Purpose and link to strategy Operation Opportunity Performance measures All Employee Plans To create alignment of employees interests with those of shareholders and an awareness of the Companys share price performance.
Under the UK Sharesave employees including Executive Directors are invited to enter a savings contract of three years or five years whereby the proceeds can be used towards the exercise of an option granted at the time they participate.
The option price can be up to a 20% discount on the share price at the time invitations to participate are issued.
An equivalent US Plan is operated in a similar manner to the UK plan.
For the UK plan shares worth up to the value of the savings an Executive Director agrees to make over the saving period at the previously agreed option price.
The savings amount is subject to the HMRC limit currently 500 per month.
The US Plan is limited to the monthly dollar equivalent of the UK Sharesave plan and an option price of up to a 15% discount.
No performance conditions apply to All Employee Plans.
Pension
To provide costeffective longterm benefits comparable with similar roles in similar companies.
A contribution to a defined contribution plan or paid as a cash supplement.
Any future Executive Director appointment will have a maximum pension provision of 20% of salary.
The current Executive Directors have pension provision of 25% of salary Chief Executive and 20% of salary Group Finance Director.
Not applicable.
Other benefits To provide costeffective benefits comparable with similar roles in similar companies.
Other benefits include medical expenses life insurance and a company car or cash allowance.
The Remuneration Committee may vary these benefits from time to time to suit business needs but they will be provided on broadly similar terms to those offered to other Group employees.
Executive Directors are entitled to reimbursement of reasonable expenses.
There is no overall maximum as the level of benefits depends on the annual cost of providing individual items in the relevant local market and the individuals specific role.
Not applicable.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
DIRECTORS REPORT  REMUNERATION POLICY REPORT Policy table Purpose and link to strategy Operation Opportunity Performance measures Shareholding requirement To align the interests of Executive Directors and shareholders encourage a focus on longterm performance and risk management.
These shareholding guidelines are to be built up over six years from date of appointment.
The Remuneration Committee will review progress towards the guidelines on an annual basis and has the discretion to adjust the guidelines in what it feels are appropriate circumstances.
The guideline minimum level for Executive Directors is 200% of salary.
NonExecutive Directors are encouraged to hold a minimum of 7 500 shares.
Not applicable.
NonExecutive Directors To attract highcalibre
Directors with the relevant experience and skills.
A basic fee is payable to all NonExecutive Directors with supplementary fees for those with additional responsibilities such as acting as Senior Independent Director or chairing a Board Committee.
Fees are reviewed periodically with reference to market levels in companies of a comparable size and complexity and taking account of the responsibilities and time commitment of each role.
No NonExecutive Director participates in the Groups incentive arrangements or pension plan or receives any other benefits other than where travel to the Companys registered office is recognised as a taxable benefit in which case a NonExecutive Director may receive the grossedup costs of travel as a benefit.
NonExecutive Directors are entitled to reimbursement of reasonable expenses.
Fees for the current year are stated in the Annual Report on Remuneration.
Fee increases may be greater than those of the wider workforce in any particular year as they reflect changes to responsibilities and time commitments and the periodic nature of any increases.
A resolution to amend the Companys Articles of Association for aggregate annual fees for NonExecutive Directors fees to be increased to 1000000 will be proposed at the 2018 AGM.
Not applicable.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
DIRECTORS REPORT  REMUNERATION POLICY REPORT 0 100% 100% 51% 27% 16% 28% 56% 37% 32% 31% 29% 31% 20% 42% Paul Forman Stefan Schellinger Minimum Minimum Meeting expectations
Maximum Maximum Minimum Minimum LTIP LTIP
Meeting expectations Maximum Maximum Annual Bonus Annual Bonus Fixed Pay Fixed Pay Remuneration Committee discretion The Remuneration Committee will operate the annual bonus plan and longterm incentive plans according to their respective rules and will be consistent with normal market practice the Listing Rules and HMRC rules where relevant including flexibility in a number of regards.
These include When to make awards and payments How to determine the size of an award or a payment or when and how much of an award should vest Who receives an award or payment How to deal with a change of control or restructuring of the Group Whether a participant is a good bad leaver for incentive plan purposes and whether and what proportion of awards vest and timing of delivery How and whether an award or an award of shares outlined in this Policy that is yet to be granted may be adjusted in certain circumstances eg rights issues corporate restructuring events and special dividends What the weighting measures and targets should be for the annual bonus plan and LTIP from year to year The Remuneration Committee also retains the ability within the Remuneration Policy to adjust the targets and  or set different measures and alter weightings for the annual bonus plan and to adjust targets for the LTIP if events occur which cause it to determine that the conditions are unable to fulfil their original intended purpose.
The Remuneration Committee may make minor amendments to the Remuneration Policy set out in this Remuneration Policy Report for regulatory exchange control tax or administrative purposes or to take account of a change in legislation without obtaining shareholder approval for that amendment.
Existing awards The Remuneration Committee reserves the right to make any remuneration payments and  or payments for loss of office including exercising any discretions available to it in connection with such payments notwithstanding that they are not in line with the Remuneration Policy 2015 set out above where the terms of the payment were agreed i before the 2015 AGM the date the Companys first shareholderapproved Directors Remuneration Policy came into effect ii before the Remuneration Policy set out above came into effect provided that the terms of the payment were consistent with the shareholder approved Directors Remuneration Policy in force at the time they were agreed or iii at a time when the relevant individual was not a Director of the Company and in the opinion of the Remuneration Committee the payment was not in consideration for the individual becoming a Director of the Company.
For these purposes payments includes the Remuneration Committee satisfying awards of variable remuneration and in relation to an award over shares the terms of the payment are agreed at the time the award is granted.
Choice of performance measures and approach to target setting The Remuneration Committee sets performance metrics under both the annual bonus plan and LTIP which are clearly aligned to the Groups strategy and are usually part of its Key Performance Indicators KPIs.
Personal objective performance measures within the annual bonus are also directly linked to key strategic objectives.
Targets are set at the start of each performance period by the Remuneration Committee taking into account relevant internal and external reference points and are designed to be appropriately stretching.
Remuneration mix The graph below demonstrates the potential remuneration mix for both of the Executive Directors in 2018 in three theoretical scenarios minimum meeting expectations and maximum.
Assumptions
Salary received during 2018 Paul Forman 625000 Stefan Schellinger 360000 to 31 March 2018 and 369700 thereafter.
Pension Paul Forman 25% of salary Stefan Schellinger 20% of salary.
Benefits 2017 reported taxable benefits.
Bonus maximum of 150% of salary for Paul Forman and 125% of salary for Stefan Schellinger.
LTIP award of 200% of salary for Paul Forman and 150% of salary for Stefan Schellinger.
Meeting expectations scenario assumptions 50% of annual bonus maximum paid and 25% of LTIP award vests.
Maximum scenario assumptions  100% of annual bonus maximum paid and 100% of LTIP award vests.
No share price growth or dividend accrual considered.
Sharesave awards have been ignored.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
DIRECTORS REPORT  REMUNERATION POLICY REPORT New appointments Basic salary Will be set based on relevant market data experience and skills of the individual internal relativities across the Company and the individuals current basic salary.
Any annual increase in salary for a new appointment would be at the discretion of the Remuneration Committee and would typically be broadly consistent with the average salary increase for UK employees.
However larger increases may be considered appropriate in certain circumstances.
For example where new appointees have initial basic salaries set below market rates any shortfall will be managed with phased increases which may be greater than those offered to the wider workforce over a period of two to three years subject to their development in the role.
Pension
A contribution to a defined contribution plan or a cash supplement may be offered with the relevant maximum not exceeding the maximum in the Policy Table.
Other benefits As provided to current Executive Directors.
Where necessary the Remuneration Committee may approve the payment of relocation expenses to facilitate recruitment and flexibility is retained for the Company to pay for legal fees and other costs incurred by the individual in relation to their appointment.
Bonus
The annual bonus described in the Remuneration Policy Report Table on page 89 will apply to a new appointee with the relevant maximum not exceeding that for the current Chief Executive and in the first year being prorated to reflect the proportion of employment during the year.
In the first year the Remuneration Committee may set different performance measures and targets for the bonus to those of the other Executive Directors depending on the timing and scope of any appointment.
In order to facilitate recruitment the Remuneration Committee may compensate for any bonus forgone when the individual leaves their previous employer.
Share incentives New appointees will be granted awards under the LTIP up to the limit described in the Policy Table.
An award may be made shortly following a new appointment.
In the first year the Remuneration Committee may set different performance measures and targets for the LTIP to those of the other Executive Directors depending on the timing and scope of any appointment.
Buyout awards To potentially facilitate the recruitment through the buyout of existing awards and compensation arrangements from their current employer the Remuneration Committee will retain the ability to make a oneoff buyout award.
In doing so the Remuneration Committee will take account of all relevant factors including any performance conditions attached to incentive awards the likelihood of those conditions being met the proportion of the vesting  performance period remaining and the form of the award eg cash or shares.
The overriding principle will be that any buyout award should be of comparable commercial value to the compensation which has been forfeited.
Buyout awards will be made using existing incentive arrangements where possible but it may be necessary to use the exemption under Listing Rule 9 .4.2.
Shareholders will be informed of any such payments at the time of appointment.
In the case of internal appointments or appointments following the Companys acquisition of or merger with another company or business any variable pay element or legacy arrangements in respect of the prior role would normally be allowed to payout according to its terms adjusted as relevant to take into account the appointment.
For external and new internal appointments the Remuneration Committee may set lower share ownership guidelines or permit a longer period for them to be met.
NonExecutive Directors In the event of the appointment of a new NonExecutive Director remuneration arrangements will normally be in line with the structure set out in the Policy Table for Non Executive Directors.
In the event that a NonExecutive Director is required to temporarily take on the role of an Executive Director their remuneration may include any of the elements listed in the Policy Table for Executive Directors.
Service contracts and exit payments Service contracts normally continue until the Directors agreed retirement date or such other date as the parties agree.
The policy for executive service contracts is that notice periods will normally not exceed 12 months.
Paul
Forman has a service contract dated 2 January 2017 and Stefan Schellinger has a service contract dated 8 October 2015 both with a notice period of 12 months from either party.
The service contracts for the Executive Directors are available for inspection by shareholders at each AGM and during normal business hours at the Companys registered office.
The Remuneration Committees policy in relation to termination of service contracts is to apply an appropriate level of mitigation having regard to all of the circumstances of the individual the termination of employment and to any legal advice received.
The Company has the right to make a payment in lieu of notice such payment being made based on salary and at the Remuneration Committees discretion as to the value of benefits and any such payment may be made in monthly instalments at the Companys discretion with a requirement for the individual to make reasonable ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
DIRECTORS REPORT  REMUNERATION POLICY REPORT endeavours to find alternative employment and may be reduced to take into account any sums earned during the payment period by way of employment elsewhere.
There are no enhanced provisions on a change of control.
In certain circumstances such as gross misconduct the Company may terminate employment immediately without notice or payment.
The Remuneration Committee reserves the right to make any other payments in connection with a Directors cessation of office or employment where the payments are made in good faith in discharge of an existing legal obligation or by way of damages for breach of such an obligation or by way of a compromise or settlement of any claim arising in connection with the cessation of a Directors office or employment.
Any such payments may include but are not limited to paying any fees for outplacement assistance and  or the Directors legal and  or professional advice fees in connection with his cessation of office or employment.
The service contract for any new appointment would be on a similar basis to that described above.
The payment of any annual bonus will be at the Remuneration Committees discretion based on the individual circumstances and would usually be prorated for the period of service and may be paid entirely in cash.
In determining the level of bonus to be paid the Remuneration Committee may at its discretion take into account performance up to the date of cessation or over the financial year as a whole based on appropriate performance measures as determined by the Remuneration Committee.
Under the rules of the LTIP  outstanding awards may vest if a participant leaves for specified reasons including injury disability ill health death retirement with the Companys agreement redundancy or the business or company in which the participant is employed ceasing to be part of the Group or on a change of control.
In these circumstances a participants award vests on an appropriate time pro rata basis unless the Remuneration Committee decides it is inappropriate to do so subject to the satisfaction of the relevant performance criteria at the normal vesting date with the balance of the award lapsing.
The Remuneration Committee has discretion to determine that the performance period should end on the date of cessation of employment if it feels this is appropriate.
If however the termination of employment is not for one of the specified reasons and the Remuneration Committee does not exercise its discretion to allow an award to vest a participants award lapses in full on date of cessation.
The DASB awards may vest if a participant leaves for specified reasons including death the business or company in which the participant is employed ceasing to be part of the Group retirement with the agreement of the Company or at the discretion of the Board.
DASB awards will either vest on the normal vesting date or at the point of the participant leaving date if deemed a good leaver by the Remuneration Committee.
NonExecutive Directors The NonExecutive Directors do not have service contracts and do not participate in any Company pension share or incentive schemes.
In accordance with best practice letters of appointment have been issued for all NonExecutive Directors for an initial period of three years but may be terminated by either party with three months notice.
No compensation is payable on termination except for fees and expenses accrued to date.
These letters are available for inspection by shareholders at each AGM and during normal business hours at the Companys registered office.
Relationship between remuneration of Executive Directors and other employees The Remuneration Committee is kept informed of pay and employment conditions in the wider Group and this is factored into deliberations when setting the Remuneration Policy for Executive
The Groupwide salary increase budget and the proposed increase for UK based employees or employees of such other jurisdiction within which the Executive Directors operate or reside is considered by the Remuneration Committee when determining any basic salary increase for Executive Directors.
As stated previously the overall remuneration package for Executive Directors is structured so that the variable performancerelated pay element forms a more significant portion compared to pay for other employees.
This policy is to ensure there is a clear link between the individual and corporate performance achieved the value this creates for shareholders and the overall reward to Executive Directors.
The weighting of variable pay will vary throughout the Group based on the seniority of the individual the role and specific responsibilities.
The Essentra Annual Management Bonus Plan also provides a consistent approach for the Executive Directors and Managers within Essentra by aligning the same performance conditions for their bonus plans.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
DIRECTORS REPORT  REMUNERATION POLICY REPORT The Board are awaiting the finalised views of the Corporate Governance Code to consider the most appropriate future approach to employee consultation on remuneration decisions.
Essentra currently manages a number of employee forums including the European Information and Consultation forum Diversity and Inclusion Steering Group and employee engagement focus groups.
How the views of shareholders are taken into account The Remuneration Committee has consulted with major shareholders and investor bodies in the past when material changes to the Policy have been proposed and this approach will continue in the future with the overall aim to maintain an open and transparent dialogue.
A thorough consultation process was undertaken with our major shareholders and representative bodies before this updated Policy Report was submitted for the approval of all shareholders.
External appointments Essentra recognises its senior executives can benefit from serving in a personal capacity as NonExecutive Directors of nonEssentra Group companies.
It is at the same time conscious of the corporate governance recommendations that Executive Directors should take account of the time commitment required by a nonexecutive position.
Executive Directors are permitted to accept nonexecutive directorships offered by listed companies and other organisations which provide industry experience or public service.
Such outside appointments are subject to prior Board approval taking into account existing duties potential conflicts of interest and time commitments outside of Essentras responsibilities.
Any fees earned from these roles may be retained by the Executive Director.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
DIRECTORS REPORT  REMUNERATION POLICY REPORT ANNUAL REPORT ON REMUNERATION Remuneration Committee Committee Chair Lorraine Trainer Committee membership and meeting attendance Lorraine Trainer NonExecutive Director 4 4 Tommy Breen NonExecutive Director 4 4 Terry Twigger SI NonExecutive Director 4 4 Mary Reilly NonExecutive Director 2 2 Peter Hill NonExecutive Director 2 2 Peter Hill stepped down as a Non Executive Director on 20 April 2017 at the AGM.
Mary Reilly joined as a NonExecutive Director on 1 July 2017 .
The Company Secretary and General Counsel acts as Secretary to the Remuneration
Other attendees During the year the Chairman Chief Executive Group Finance Director Group Human Resources Director and Director of Compensation and Benefits were invited by the Remuneration Committee to provide views and advice.
Ralf K.
Wunderlich also attended as an observer.
None were present during discussions regarding their own remuneration.
In addition services and advice were received from the following independent and expert consultants Deloitte LLP  who are a member of the Remuneration Consultants Group and have signed up to its Code of Conduct provided advice to the Remuneration Committee on the Companys incentive plans and on the remuneration of the Executive Directors and other senior executives within the Company.
Fees charged for the year under review are 81450 Deloitte also provided other remuneration and tax services to the Company during 2017 .
New Bridge Street a part of Aon Hewitt who are a member of the Remuneration Consultants Group and have signed up to its Code of Conduct provided advice on the Companys longterm share incentive plans including the calculation of the TSR LTIP performance measure.
Fees charged for the year under review were 16880.
Aon
Hewitt also provided actuarial advice to the Company for its US pension scheme and are appointed as the Groups insurance broker.
The Remuneration Committee continuously monitors and reviews the Companys relationships with its independent advisers.
The Company is comfortable that no conflicts of interest exist.
Remuneration Committee 2017 key activities Reviewed and approved transactional bonus arrangements for specific employees and Group Management
Reviewed the 2017 Bonus Plan and the metrics for the Group Management Committee ensuring targets are appropriately stretching Reviewed and confirmed the departure terms particularly nonpayment of any bonus relating to 2016 for Colin Day Reviewed salary proposal for Group Management Committee members and agreed 2017 bonus proposal for Group Management Committee as recommended by the Board Reviewed and confirmed performance targets for LTIPs which vested during 2017 Approval of the Remuneration Report for inclusion in the 2017 Annual Report Approved 2017 UK and US SAYE invitations Exercised discretion over Dividend Roll Up for Good Leaver incentive awards Approval of Good Leaver recommendations Reviewed AGM voting results on remuneration related resolutions Consultation with shareholders regarding 2017 LTIP proposals Approved revised performance targets for 2017 LTIP award ensuring they are appropriately stretching Reviewed the changes to the Remuneration Policy to be put forward for approval at the 2018 AGM Implemented shareholder consultation with regard to the new Remuneration
Approval of revised Terms of Reference for the Remuneration Committee Approved Chief Executive and Group Finance Director 2018 Bonus rules Reviewed current Group Management Committee share ownership and approved new Group Management Committee and Executive Directors share ownership guidelines ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
DIRECTORS REPORT  ANNUAL REPORT ON REMUNERATION This section of the Remuneration Report will be subject to an advisory vote at the 2018 AGM.
Total Single Remuneration Table for 2017 audited The remuneration received by Executive Directors for the year ended 31 December 2017 and the 31 December 2016 comparative was as follows
Salary and fees for the year or from date of appointment
Cash in lieu of pension Bonus cash and deferred shared
Incentive
Plan
Other
Total
Executive Directors Paul Forman    1267 Stefan Schellinger Colin Day NonExecutive Directors Paul Lester 2017 250           215 Tommy Breen 2017 52      52 2016 52      52 Lorraine Trainer 2017 63      63 2016 63      63 Terry Twigger 2017 70      70 2016 70      70 Mary Reilly 2017 26      26 Ralf K.
Wunderlich
2017 26      26 Peter Hill 2017 17      17 2016 52      52 Taxable benefits comprise a fully expensed car and  or cash allowance plus private medical insurance and life insurance cover.
Paul Forman and Colin Day received a pension contribution of 25% of basic salary while Stefan Schellinger received a pension contribution of 20% of basic salary inclusive of 5% of salary paid into the Company scheme by the Company.
50% of any annual bonus is deferred into shares for a period of three years.
There was no bonus in relation to the performance in 2016.
The performance conditions for the 2015 LTIP B were not met.
Peter Hill stepped down as a NonExecutive Director on the 20 April 2017 .
Mary Reilly was appointed as a NonExecutive Director on the 1 July 2017 .
Ralf K.
Wunderlich was appointed as a NonExecutive Director on the 1 July 2017 .
NonExecutive fees paid from date of appointment.
The figures shown here relate to the period until 20 April 2017 when Colin Day retired from the Board and ceased employment with the Company.
Subsequent to this Mr Day received a contractual payment in lieu of notice of 599 911 for the remainder of his notice period based on salary and the value of benefits plus a payment in respect of accrued holiday of 54519 .
His outstanding DASB  SAYE awards vested  became exercisable upon retirement and his outstanding LTIP awards were time prorated and remain subject to threeyear performance conditions.
Full details of these termination arrangements are on page 79 of the 2016 Annual Report.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
DIRECTORS REPORT  ANNUAL REPORT ON REMUNERATION Outside appointments unaudited Colin Day held the following NonExecutive Director appointments as at his retirement on 20 April 2017 AMEC Foster Wheeler plc Meggitt PLC and FM Global.
Colin Day received fees of 306425 in respect of these directorships.
Paul Forman held a NonExecutive Director appointment during the year ended 31 December 2017 for Tate and Lyle Plc.
Paul received fees of 65950 in respect of this directorship.
Annual bonus audited Under the terms of the annual bonus arrangements for 2017  Paul Forman was potentially entitled to a maximum bonus of up to 150% of basic salary and Stefan Schellinger was potentially entitled to a maximum bonus of up to 125% of basic salary.
Bonus payments are normally made one half in cash and one half in shares in the Company the entitlement to such shares being deferred for three years in accordance with the rules of the DASB.
For the year ended 31 December 2017  the performance measures for the Executive Directors were based upon Adjusted Operating Profit and Adjusted Net Income Net Working Capital and personal objectives.
Performance measure Proportion of bonus determined by measure
Target performance
Actual performance % of maximum bonus payable
Operating Profit 25% 95.1 100.1 105.1 83.7 0% Adjusted Net Income 25% 67.2 70.7 74.2 60.2 0% of bonus payable 25% of bonus payable 50% of bonus payable Net Working Capital 30% 50 bps 16.5% 50 bps 130bps 30%
20% Chief Executive Strong performance in strategic review 55 Improved external communication of business strategy 55 Improvement in customer sentiment and employee engagement 45 Good progress in the consistent implementation of health and safety standards globally and significant reduction in lost days 45 Total 1820 18% Group Finance Director Strong performance in developing an integrated financial model for the Group 55 Improved communication of the external business strategy 55 Progress against other objectives was more limited 110 Total 1120 11% Total Chief Executive 48% Total Group Finance Director 41% Based on internal forecast at constant exchange rates.
Net Working Capital as % of external sales.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
DIRECTORS REPORT  ANNUAL REPORT ON REMUNERATION Equity incentives audited Details of the awards granted and outstanding during the year to the Executive Directors under the LTIP Part B LTIP 2015 and DASB are as follows
At 1 Jan
Transferred in year Lapsed At 31 Dec Share price at date of grant
Expiry date Paul Forman LTIP 2015 08Sept17  387076   387076 529.00p 08Sept20 07Sept23
Schellinger
LTIP Part B 29Apr13 19752    19752 706.00p 29Apr16 28Apr19 LTIP Part B 24Feb14 45662   45662  876.00p 24Feb17 23Feb20 LTIP 2015 30Apr15 36158    36158 950.50p 30Apr18 29Apr21 LTIP 2015 23Feb16 74222    74222 828.50p 23Feb19 22Feb22 LTIP 2015 08Sep17  111478  111478 529.00p 08Sept20 07Sept23 DASB 24Feb14 5279  5279   876.00p 01Mar17 01Mar17 DASB 01Apr15 3872    3872 993.50p 01Mar18 01Mar18 DASB 01Mar16 3792    3792 828.50p 01Mar19 01Mar19 Colin Day LTIP Part B 21Mar13 130057  130057   692.00p 21Mar16 20Mar19 LTIP Part B 24Feb14 211643   211643  876.00p 24Feb17 23Feb20 LTIP 2015 30Apr15 203109   69432 133677 950.50p 30Apr18 29Apr21 LTIP 2015 23Feb16 203109   124791 78318 828.50p 23Feb19 22Feb22 DASB 24Feb14 51369  51369   876.00p 01Mar17 01Mar17 DASB 01Apr15 26926  26296   993.50p 01Mar18 01Mar18 DASB 01Mar16 18820  18820   828.50p 01Mar19 01Mar19 Stefan Schellingers outstanding LTIP B LTIP 2015 and DASB awards granted in 2013 2014 and 2015 were all granted when he was a member of the Group Management Committee and before he was appointed as an Executive Director.
A total of 981251 2016 894904 share incentive awards under the LTIP 2015 and the DASB were granted during the year ended 31 December 2017 to Executive Directors and other senior executives on the Group Management Committee.
LTIP awards included in the Total Single Remuneration Table audited All LTIP awards except for 2017 are subject half to a relative TSR performance condition and half to an adjusted EPS performance condition.
The TSR performance conditions are measured against the FTSE 250 excluding investment trusts index at the beginning of the performance period over a threeyear performance period from the date of grant.
25% of the TSR element of the awards vests if Essentra is median ranked increasing to 100% vesting if Essentra is upper quartile ranked.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
DIRECTORS REPORT  ANNUAL REPORT ON REMUNERATION The adjusted EPS performance targets for April 2015 and April 2016 awards are 8.0% pa to 15.0% pa.
25% of the EPS element of the awards vests for achieving the lower target increasing to 100% vesting for achieving the higher target.
For the 2017 LTIP awards granted to the Executive Directors in 2017  one third of the awards is subject to a TSR performance condition as stated above one third is subject to an cumulative adjusted operating cash flow threshold of 226m to a maximum cumulative adjusted operating cash flow of 276m and one third of the awards is subject to an adjusted EPS performance condition with an adjusted EPS 2019 threshold of 27 .4p to a maximum of 32.0p.
The performance outturn for the LTIP awards included in the 2017 Total Single Remuneration Table is summarised below.
The LTIP B awards granted to Stefan Schellinger in April 2015 will vest in April 2018.
The EPS performance period for these awards is complete.
The TSR performance period will end in April 2018 so the figures below are estimates as at 31 December 2017 .
Performance condition Condition definition Threshold Maximum Actual outturn Vesting Relative TSR 50% of the total award TSR measured against the constituents of the FTSE 250 excluding investment trusts index over the three years from date of grant If median rank is achieved 25% of the TSR element vests If upper quartile rank is achieved 100% of the TSR element vests 46% Rank 163 out of 183 companies 0% EPS 50% of the total award Annualised adjusted EPS growth 8.0% pa for 25% of the EPS element to vest 15.0% pa for 100% of the EPS element to vest 18.07% 0% Subject to confirmation of the TSR outcome when the performance period ends in April 2018 it is anticipated that the outturn of the performance conditions for the LTIP grant will result in no LTIP vesting during 2018.
LTIP awards granted during the year audited The following LTIP awards were granted to Executive Directors on 8 September 2017 .
Executive Type of award Number of awards granted Share price used to determine award Face value Percentage which vests at threshold Paul Forman Performance share 387076 5.29 2047632 25% Stefan Schellinger Performance share 111478 5.29 589719 25% Face value is based on the midmarket closing share price on the day of grant 8 September 2017 .
In order to maintain a consistent approach with both our existing and proposed new 2018 Policy the number of shares to be awarded was determined by the closing share price on the date the Company released its 2016 yearend results 17 February 2017.
This was in line with the previously communicated position not to grant awards until after the Companys strategic review.
This award included shares worth 100% of salary as a one off compensatory award.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
DIRECTORS REPORT  ANNUAL REPORT ON REMUNERATION Save As You Earn scheme audited The Company also operates a Save As You Earn share option scheme SAYE.
Details of the awards granted and outstanding under the SAYE are as follows Date of grant At 1 Jan
At 31 Dec
Share price at date of exercise
Expiry date Paul Forman Stefan Schellinger 5year SAYE 01May14 2139  2139  701.0p  01Jun19 01Dec19 3year SAYE 01May15 1168  1168  770.4p  01May18 01Nov18 3year SAYE 01May17  4186  4186 430.0p  01May20 01Nov20 Colin Day 3year SAYE 01May15 2336  2336  770.4p  01Jun18 01Dec18 May 2014 and May 2015 SAYE options were granted when Stefan Schellinger was a member of the Group Management Committee.
The SAYE plan details and balances as at 1 January 2017 have been restated.
The middle market price of an ordinary share in the Company on 31 December 2017 was 5.30.
The middle market price of an ordinary share in the Company during the year ranged from 4.09 to 5.82.
Directors shareholdings audited The beneficial interests of the current Directors in office at 31 December 2017  in the issued ordinary share capital of the Company were as follows There have been no changes in the Directors interests since 31 December 2017 and the date of this Report.
Beneficially owned LTIP B  LTIP 2017 awards DASB SAYE 31 Dec 2016 31 Dec 2017 Vested Unvested Unvested Unvested Executive Directors Paul Forman  120000  387076 Stefan Schellinger  2792 19753 221858 7664 4186 NonExecutive Directors Paul Lester 7500 7500 Tommy Breen  10000 Lorraine Trainer 7942 8247 Terry Twigger 7500 7500 Ralf K.
Wunderlich 42300 52300 Mary Reilly Or date of appointment.
Salary used is the prevailing annual salary as at 31 December 2017 .
Paul Forman and Stefan Schellinger are required to build up a shareholding worth 200% of salary from the date of appointment.
Beneficially owned shares do not include unvested LTIP awards which do not count towards the limit and share options will only count once they have been exercised.
Current holdings as a percentage of salary are 101% for Paul Forman and 33% for Stefan Schellinger.
The Executive Directors are regarded as being interested in 1509936 2016 1517 883 ordinary shares in Essentra plc currently held by the Essentra Employee Benefit Trust EBT as they are together with other Essentra employees potential beneficiaries of the EBT.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
DIRECTORS REPORT  ANNUAL REPORT ON REMUNERATION Dec08 Dec09 Dec10 Dec11 Dec12 Dec13 Dec14 Dec15 Dec16 Dec17 1000p 0p These shares are held in order to satisfy employee entitlements relating to the Companys share plans.
As at 31 December 2017  potential and actual share issuance through employee related share plans totalled 1.89% which is well below UK institutional shareholder limits of 10% of the Companys issued share capital.
Performance graph unaudited The graph below represents the comparative TSR performance of the Company versus the FTSE 250 excluding investment trusts index for the last nine years.
This index has been selected as it is considered the most appropriate published general index in which the Company is a constituent.
Essentras total shareholder return compared against total shareholder return of the FTSE 250 excluding investment trusts index over nineyear period ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
DIRECTORS REPORT  ANNUAL REPORT ON REMUNERATION Nineyear Chief Executive table unaudited Mark Harper Colin Day
Forman
2009 2010 1 Jan 14 April
31 Decteltel 2017 Total remuneration 000 1038 2932 1715 1046 1570 3824 5661 2281 876 1267 Annual bonus % 20% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 60% 46.2% 0% 48% LTIP vesting % 73% 100% 100% na na 100% 100% 50% 0% 0% Mark Harper retired on 14 April 2011 and Colin Day was appointed as a Director on 1 April 2011.
Colin Day retired as Chief Executive on 31 December 2016 and Paul Forman was appointed as Chief Executive on 1 January 2017 .
The annual bonus and LTIP figures show the payout as a percentage of the maximum.
Percentage increase in the remuneration of the Chief Executive unaudited 000 % change % change UK
Management
Committee
Salary 625 675 7.4% Benefits 36 32 12.5% Bonus 450  relates to the remuneration of Paul Forman.
2016 relates to the remuneration of Colin Day.
The table above shows the percentage movement in the salary benefits and annual bonus for the Chief Executive and members of the UK Group Management Committee between the current and previous financial year.
UK senior executives have been chosen as the most appropriate comparator group as they represent those employees eligible to participate in the same reward plans as the Chief Executive.
Groupwide figures can be distorted by different reward practices in different geographies and movements in the number of employees.
Relative importance of spend on pay unaudited m % change Staff costs 277.5 272.7 1.7 Distributions to shareholders 54.1 54.0 0.3 Revenue  total 1043.0 1103.7 5.5 Adjusted operating profit  total 87.4 131.9 33.7 Staff costs are as per note 5 on page 136.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
DIRECTORS REPORT  ANNUAL REPORT ON REMUNERATION Implementation of Remuneration Policy for 2018 unaudited
Basic salary for each Executive Director is determined by the Remuneration Committee taking into account the roles responsibilities performance experience of the individual and market movement.
Salaries are reviewed in April each year and the budgeted pay increase for UK employees in 2018 is 2.7%.
Paul Forman has declined a pay increase for 2018 and therefore his basic salary will not increase.
Stefan Schellingers salary for 2018 will increase by 9700 to 369700.
This is the first pay increase since Stefans appointment in 2015.
Paul
Forman
Stefan
Schellinger
Annual salary effective from 1 April 2018 625000 369700 Annual salary effective from 1 April 2017 625000 360000
Executive Directors are provided with the following benefits Car fuel or car allowance Private medical insurance with family level cover Life insurance cover of four times basic salary
Paul Forman will receive a supplementary payment equal to 25% of annual salary to permit him to secure pension benefits.
Stefan Schellinger will receive a supplementary payment of 20% of his basic salary to permit him to secure pension benefits.
Annual bonuses Each year the Remuneration Committee reviews the annual bonus to ensure the performance measures and targets remain appropriate and aligned with the Companys shortterm strategy while remaining within the appropriate risk profile.
Under the terms of the annual bonus arrangements for 2018 Paul Forman is potentially entitled to a maximum bonus of up to 150% of basic salary and Stefan Schellinger is potentially entitled to a maximum bonus of up to 125% of basic salary.
Bonus payments are normally made one half in cash and one half in shares in the Company the entitlement to such shares being deferred for three years in accordance with the rules of the DASB.
It is an important principle of Essentras pay philosophy that the structure of pay should complement and support business strategy.
The Remuneration Committee has determined the performance measures for 2018 incentive plan that are consistent with current strategic priorities as shown below Performance criteria Weighting % Adjusted Operating Profit 50.0 Net Working Capital 30.0 Personal objectives 20.0 ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
DIRECTORS REPORT  ANNUAL REPORT ON REMUNERATION The Remuneration Committee believes that Adjusted Operating Profit and Net Working Capital targets are commercially sensitive and will not disclose the targets on a prospective basis.
The targets and actual performance against them will be disclosed on a retrospective basis in the 2018 Remuneration Report.
In addition to the financial measures the Remuneration Committee has also set personal performance targets for Paul Forman and Stefan Schellinger which are designed to deliver progress by the Company towards its strategic objectives.
The Remuneration Committee has the discretion within a threeyear period after the determination of the bonus to withhold or recover annual cash bonuses or DASB awards through malus and clawback provisions in specified circumstances.
These circumstances take into account where the original bonus was paid to a greater extent than it should have done due to a material misstatement in the Companys Financial Statements or due to an error in assessing the applicable performance conditions or if there has been serious misconduct by an individual or if there has been serious reputational damage to the Company or a relevant business unit.
Essentra LTIP An award granted under LTIP consists of a conditional right to receive shares in the Company subject to satisfaction of performance conditions.
The following LTIP awards are intended to be granted to Executive Directors during 2018.
Paul Forman Stefan Schellinger The award to be granted in April 2018 as annual award 200% 150% A share award under LTIP will not normally be exercisable before the third anniversary of its award and an additional twoyear holding period and may only be exercised to the extent that the applicable performance conditions have been satisfied.
The awards are structured as nil cost options.
For awards to be granted to the Executive Directors in 2018 one third of the awards will be subject to a TSR performance condition one third will be subject to cash flow and one third of the awards will be subject to an adjusted EPS performance condition.
The
Remuneration Committee believes that these conditions provide appropriate alignment with the strategic priorities.
In particular there will be a greater emphasis on balance sheet management.
The TSR performance condition assesses Essentras TSR performance relative to the constituents of the FTSE 250 excluding investment trusts index.
Performance is measured over three years from the time of grant.
25% of the TSR element vests for median performance increasing on a straightline basis to 100% vesting for upper quartile performance or above.
The Remuneration Committees determination of the targets for TSR EPS and Cumulative Adjusted Operating Cash Flow performance measures are as follows Performance Conditions 25% vests at threshold 100% vests at maximum Relative TSR Relative to FTSE 250 excluding investment trusts Threshold is median maximum is upper quartile Adjusted EPS 2018  2020 Threshold is 6% maximum is 15%.
Cumulative Adjusted Operating Cash Flow Threshold is 252m maximum is 292m.
Awards granted under the LTIP 2015 are subject to malus and clawback provisions for a period of up to three years following the vesting date of the award.
Potential circumstances in which the malus and clawback provisions may be applied are consistent with those applying to annual bonus awards as described above.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
DIRECTORS REPORT  ANNUAL REPORT ON REMUNERATION NonExecutive Director fees The fees for the Chairman are set by the Remuneration Committee while fees for the NonExecutive Directors are determined by the Board as a whole.
Chairman
NonExecutive
Director
Senior
Independent
NonExecutive
Director
Additional fee for chairing a Committee Annual fee effective from 1 January 2018 250000 52000 7000 11000 Annual fee effective from 1 January 2017 250000 52000 7000 11000 Statement of shareholder voting unaudited The results of shareholder voting in relation to the approval of the Directors Remuneration Report at the 2017 AGM were as follows Annual Report on Remuneration No.
Votes cast in favour 209563401 93.53 Votes cast against 14386865 6.42 Total votes cast 223950266 Abstentions 856281 This Report of the Remuneration Committee has been approved by the Board.
By order of the Board LORRAINE TRAINER Remuneration Committee Chair 2 March 2018 ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
DIRECTORS REPORT  ANNUAL REPORT ON REMUNERATION OTHER STATUTORY INFORMATION The Directors present their Report prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 2006 which requires the Company to provide a fair review of the business of the Group during the financial year ended 31 December 2017 and audited Financial Statements of the Company and its subsidiary undertakings for the year ended 31 December 2017 .
The Companys Registered Office is Avebury House 201  249 Avebury Boulevard Milton Keynes MK9 1AU.
The Directors Report comprises pages 60 to 113 and the sections of the Annual Report incorporated by reference are as set out below Membership of Board during 2017 financial year page 67 Financial instruments and financial risk management page 40 to 49 Greenhouse gas emissions page 56 Corporate Governance report pages 67 to 72 Future developments of the business of the Group page 19 to 20 Employee diversity page 53 In accordance with the UK Financial Conduct Authoritys Listing Rules LR 9 .8.4C the information to be included in the Annual Report and Accounts where applicable under LR 9.8.4 is set out in the Directors
Results and dividends The profit on ordinary activities after taxation of the total Group for the year ended 31 December 2017 was 115.8m 2016 loss 39.6m.
The profit on ordinary activities after taxation of the continuing operations for the year ended 31 December 2017 was 5.5m 2016 loss 51.0m.
As at 2 March 2018 the Company has paid the following dividend in respect of the year ended 31 December 2017 Per share
Interim dividend paid 30 October 2017 6.3 16.5 The Directors recommend that a final dividend of 14.4p 2016 14.4p per share be paid making a total dividend distribution for the year of 20.7p 2016 20.7p .
The final dividend subject to shareholder approval at the AGM will be paid on 1 May 2018 to shareholders on the register on 16 March 2018.
Directors
As at 31 December 2017  the Board of Directors comprised Paul Lester NonExecutive Chairman Paul Forman Chief Executive Terry Twigger Senior Independent
Stefan Schellinger Group Finance Director Tommy Breen NonExecutive Director Mary Reilly NonExecutive Director Lorraine Trainer NonExecutive Director Ralf K.
Wunderlich NonExecutive Director The Company is adopting the requirements of the UK Corporate Governance Code in relation to Directors appointments and in particular the annual reelection of all Directors.
Mary Reilly and Ralf K.
Wunderlich were appointed as NonExecutive Directors on 1 July 2017 and will be putting themselves forward for election at the 2018 AGM having been appointed since the 2017 AGM.
Terry Twigger will be retiring as a Non Executive Director following the 2018 AGM and therefore will not be standing for reelection.
Except for the above in accordance with provision B.7 .1 of the UK Corporate Governance Code all the Directors previously elected at an AGM and being eligible will offer themselves up for reelection.
None of the NonExecutive Directors have service contracts.
In accordance with the Companys Conflict of Interests policy Directors are required to review their potential conflict of interests at least on an annual basis and to notify any changes to the Company Secretary and General Counsel as soon as possible.
During 2017 the current register was approved at each Board meeting and no material conflicts of interest were identified during the year.
At no time during the year has any Director had any material interest in a contract with the Group being a contract of significance in relation to the Groups business.
A statement of Directors interests in shares of the Company is on page 102.
Share capital The issued share capital of the Company is shown in note 19 to the Financial Statements on page 163.
On 31 December 2017  there were 264129170 ordinary shares of 25p each in issue.
There were 1170925 ordinary shares of 25p each held in treasury.
The rights and obligations attaching to the Companys ordinary shares and the provisions governing the appointment and replacement of as well as the powers of the Companys Directors are set out in the Companys Articles of Association copies of which can be obtained from Companies House in the UK or by writing to the Company Secretary.
There are no restrictions on the voting rights attaching to the Companys ordinary shares or on the transfer of securities in the Company except in the case of transfers of securities That certain restrictions may from time to time be imposed by laws and regulations for example insider trading laws ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
DIRECTORS REPORT  OTHER STATUTORY INFORMATION Whereby pursuant to the Listing Rules of the Financial Conduct Authority certain employees of the Company require approval of the Company to deal in the Companys ordinary shares No persons hold securities in the Company carrying special rights with regard to control of the Company.
The Company is not aware of any agreements between holders of securities that may result in restrictions on the transfer of securities or on voting rights.
Unless expressly specified to the contrary in the Articles of Association of the Company the Companys Articles of Association may be amended by special resolution of the Companys shareholders.
Substantial shareholders At the close of business on 2 March 2018 the Company was advised of the following voting rights attaching to the Companys shares in accordance with the Disclosure and Transparency Rules % of total voting rights Prudential plc 5.86 Invesco 5.10 Heronbridge Investment Management LLP Standard Life Investments Holdings Limited Kames Capital 2.99
As at 31 December 2017  the Company employed 8283 people globally and 1219 people in the UK.
Information on the Groups policies on employee recruitment engagement and the employment of disabled persons can be found in the Corporate Responsibility statement on page 53.
Political contributions In line with Group policy the Company made no political contributions 2016 nil.
Environmental
The disclosures concerning greenhouse gas emissions required by law are included in the Corporate Responsibility statement on page 56.
Directors indemnities During the year and as at the date of this Report indemnities are in force under which the Company has agreed to indemnify the Directors and the Company Secretary and General Counsel in addition to other senior executives who are Directors of subsidiaries of the Company to the extent permitted by law and the Companys Articles of Association in respect of all losses arising out of or in connection with the execution of their powers duties and responsibilities as a Director or Officer of the Company or any of its subsidiaries including the pension scheme trustee companies.
The scope of the indemnities extends to include liabilities to third parties.
Significant agreements The Company has committed bank facilities dated November 2017 consisting of two fiveyear multicurrency revolving credit facilities of 285m and 100.8m.
Under the terms of these facilities the banks can give notice to Essentra to repay outstanding amounts and cancel the commitments where there is a change of control of the Company.
Under a note purchase agreement dated 29 April 2010 relating to US80m senior notes due 29 April 2020 and a further note purchase agreement dated 29 November 2017 relating to a total of US75.0m senior notes due between 29 November 2024 and 29 November 2029 on a change of control the Company must make an offer to prepay all the notes at par without any premium of any kind together with accrued and unpaid interest thereon.
All of the Companys share schemes contain provisions relating to a change in control.
Outstanding options and awards normally vest and become exercisable on a change of control subject to the satisfaction of any performance conditions at that time.
There are a number of other agreements involving the Company or its subsidiaries that take effect alter or terminate upon a change of control of the Company following a takeover bid such as commercial contracts and joint venture agreements.
None are considered to be significant in terms of their potential impact on the business of the Group as a whole to any potential bidder for the Company or Group.
Annual General Meeting The AGM of the Company will be held at the Hilton London Paddington 146 Praed Street London W2 1EE on 19 April 2018 at 12 noon.
In addition to the ordinary business of the AGM resolutions in respect of the following matters of special business are included in the Notice of Annual General Meeting Authority to allot unissued shares At the 2017 AGM the Directors were granted authority to allot relevant securities up to a nominal amount of 21907 373 which expires at the end of the forthcoming AGM.
At this years AGM shareholders will be asked to grant the Directors authority to allot shares or grant rights to subscribe for or convert any security into shares i up to an aggregate nominal amount of 21913187 representing approximately onethird of the Companys issued share capital excluding treasury shares at 2 March 2018 such an amount to be reduced by the nominal amount allotted or granted under section ii below in excess of such sum and iii comprising equity securities up to an aggregate nominal amount of 43826374 representing approximately twothirds of the issued share capital excluding treasury shares at 2 March 2018 such an amount to be reduced by any allotments or grants made under section i above in connection with an offer by way of a rights issue.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
DIRECTORS REPORT  OTHER STATUTORY INFORMATION The proposal conforms to the guidelines issued by the institutional investment protection bodies to ensure that existing shareholders interests are safeguarded.
The Directors have no present intention of exercising either of these authorities which will expire at the end of next years AGM or if earlier the close of business on 19 June 2019 except in relation to share options.
Allotment of shares for cash At the 2017 AGM shareholders approved a special resolution to enable the Directors to allot shares for cash without first offering them to existing shareholders in proportion to their existing shareholdings.
That approval expires at the end of the forthcoming AGM and resolutions 15 and 16 in the Notice of AGM seeks to renew it.
As per previous years the Company seeks a resolution which authorises disapplication of preemption rights in respect of up to an aggregate nominal amount of 3286978 representing 13147 912 ordinary shares.
This aggregate nominal amount represents approximately 5% of the issued ordinary share capital of the Company excluding treasury shares.
In addition to the above Resolution the Company seeks a Resolution which authorises disapplication of preemption rights in respect of up to an aggregate nominal amount of 3286978 representing 13147 912 ordinary shares in connection with acquisitions and other capital investments as contemplated by the PreEmption Groups Statement of
This aggregate nominal amount represents an additional 5% of the issued ordinary share capital of the Company excluding treasury shares.
These authorities will expire at the conclusion of the following AGM or if earlier on 19 June 2019.
The proposal conforms to the guidelines issued by the institutional investment protection bodies to ensure that existing shareholders interests are safeguarded.
Purchase of own shares At the 2017 AGM shareholders approved a special resolution to enable the Company to purchase its own shares.
That approval expires at the end of the forthcoming AGM.
At this years AGM the Directors consider it expedient to seek shareholders approval to enable the Company to purchase in the market up to 10% of its issued share capital excluding any treasury shares for cancellation or to be held in Treasury such power to apply until the end of next years AGM or if earlier 19 June 2019 .
In accordance with the requirements of the Listing Rules of the Financial Services Authority the minimum price exclusive of expenses which may be paid for a share is its nominal value and the maximum price exclusive of expenses for shares which may be paid is the highest of i an amount equal to 105% of the average market value for a share for the five business days immediately preceding the date of the purchase and ii the higher of the price of the last independent trade and the highest current independent bid on the trading venues where the purchase is carried out.
The Directors have no present intention of exercising the authority to make market purchases however the authority provides the flexibility to allow them to do so in the future.
The Directors will only utilise this authority if satisfied that to do so would be in the best interests of the Company and its shareholders generally and could be expected to result in an increase in earnings per share of the Company.
During the financial year ending 31 December 2017  116027 ordinary shares were transferred out of Treasury by the Company to satisfy share options under the Companys Sharesave and executive share incentive plans.
No dividends have been paid on shares while held in Treasury and no voting rights attach to the treasury shares.
Changes to aggregate annual limit of Director fees as set out in the Articles of Association Article 86 of the Companys Articles of Association limits the aggregate total fees which may be paid to Directors to 500000 per annum or such higher amount as may be decided by ordinary resolution of the Company.
At this years AGM shareholders will be asked to approve an increase to the level of this limit to 1000000 per annum in aggregate.
This limit will cover the total annual fees paid to the Chairman and the NonExecutive Directors.
The Directors believe it is desirable to increase this limit to provide flexibility for any future increases in Directors fees to attract the best Board members available.
The increase would also provide flexibility for any increase in the number of Directors thereby facilitating the effective review and management of the composition of the Board.
Any remuneration policy as may be approved by the shareholders from time to time will continue to apply.
If this increase is approved the Directors would not anticipate needing to propose any further change for a number of years.
External Auditor PricewaterhouseCoopers have expressed their willingness to continue to be appointed as External Auditor of the Company.
Upon the recommendation of the Audit Committee resolutions to appoint them as External Auditor and to authorise the Directors to determine their remuneration will be proposed at the AGM.
Recommendation
The Directors believe that the resolutions in the Notice of Annual General Meeting are in the best interests of the Company and its shareholders as a whole and unanimously recommend that shareholders vote in favour of each resolution.
Derivatives
Information related to derivatives is included in the Accounting Policies on page 124 and in note 14.
Going concern statement The Directors have a reasonable expectation that the Company has adequate resources to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future and accordingly have adopted ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
DIRECTORS REPORT  OTHER STATUTORY INFORMATION the going concern basis in preparing the consolidated Financial Statements.
Information regarding the financial position of the Group its cash flows liquidity position and borrowing facilities are described in the Financial Review on pages 22 to 23.
In addition note 18 to the Financial Statements includes the Groups objectives policies and processes for managing its capital its financial risk management objectives details of its financial instruments and hedging activities and exposures to credit market and liquidity risk.
Cash balances and borrowings are detailed in note 21.
Essentra is primarily funded by a series of US Private Placement Loan notes from various financial institutions.
An 80m Loan note which was repaid in April 2017 was refinanced in November 2017 with three new Loan notes totalling 75m and the new Revolving Credit Facility of 375.0m.
At 31 December 2017 available bank facilities totalled 374.2m 2016 414.2m.
The US Private Placement notes have original maturities ranging from seven and twelve years and the Revolving Credit Facility matures in November 2022.
The Directors have prepared plans and forecasts for a period of at least twelve months from the date of signing these Financial Statements.
Based on these and taking into consideration the risks detailed in note 18 the Directors have a reasonable expectation that the Company has adequate resources to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future and accordingly have adopted the going concern basis in preparing the consolidated Financial Statements.
This disclosure has been prepared in accordance with the Financial Reporting Councils UK Corporate Governance Code.
Viability statement In accordance with provision C.2.2 of the Corporate Governance Code the Directors have assessed the longerterm viability of the Group over the period to December 2020.
The assessment has been based on the Groups strategy and implementation programme balance sheet and financing position and the potential impact of the key risks and uncertainties described above.
The Group strategy has been translated into a threeyear strategic plan comprising a oneyear detailed budget and a financial forecast for the following two years.
The plan will be subject to annual updates by management and review by the Board.
As a consequence the Directors have chosen a threeyear time horizon for the LongerTerm Viability Statement LTVS as being an appropriate time frame for assessing the viability of the company.
However the Directors have also given due consideration to any potential risks beyond this time horizon In order to support the assessment of the viability the Directors have considered the following realistic and plausible scenarios Scenario 1 Brexit middle scenario Packaging under performance by 10  15% National catastrophic event Scenario 2 Brexit severe scenario Packaging under performance by 10  15% Supply chain single point failure Nottingham Tapes Scenario 3 Brexit middle scenario Cyber event Supply chain single point failure Nottingham Tapes In addition to the modelling of the three scenarios the Directors have also added a further stress test of the most severe scenario by aggregating the three scenarios.
In modelling the scenarios the Directors have assumed that the individual risks are independent and there is therefore a very remote probability that the three risks in each scenario would all crystallise in the time period considered.
In making the assessment the Directors have made a number of assumptions and considerations Capital markets and bank funding will continue to be available over the period In the event of a major risk crystallising the Company would take corrective capital action to preserve the cash resources of the firm Management would be in a position to implement effective mitigation action to reduce the impact a potential risk event Based on the modelling undertaken the Directors have a reasonable expectation that the Group will be able to continue in operational existence and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the period of the assessment.
Directors statement as to disclosure of information to the External Auditor As required by section  of the Companies Act 2006 the Directors who were members of the Board at the time of approving this Report having made enquiries of fellow Directors and of the external auditor confirm that As far as each Director is aware there is no relevant audit information of which the Companys External Auditor is unaware Each Director has taken all steps that they ought to have taken as a Director to ascertain any relevant audit information and to ensure that the Companys External Auditor is aware of that information The Strategic Report and Directors Report including the Report of the Remuneration Committee were approved by the Board on 2 March 2018.
By order of the Board JON GREEN Company Secretary 2 March 2018 ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
DIRECTORS REPORT  OTHER STATUTORY INFORMATION STATEMENT OF DIRECTORS RESPONSIBILITIES The Directors are responsible for preparing the Annual Report and the Financial Statements in accordance with applicable law and regulation.
Company law requires the Directors to prepare Financial Statements for each financial year .
Under that law the Directors have prepared the Group Financial Statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS as adopted by the European Union and Parent Company Financial Statements in accordance with United Kingdom Generally Accepted Accounting Practice United Kingdom Accounting Standards comprising FRS 101 Reduced Disclosure Framework  and applicable law .
In preparing the Group Financial Statements the Directors have also elected to comply with IFRSs issued by the International Accounting Standards Board IASB .
Under company law the Directors must not approve the Financial Statements unless they are satisfied that they give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Group and Parent Company and of the profit or loss of the Group and Parent Company for that period.
In preparing the Financial Statements the Directors are required to Select suitable accounting policies and then apply them consistently State whether applicable IFRS as adopted by the European Union and IFRS issued by IASB have been followed for the Group Financial Statements and United Kingdom Accounting Standards comprising FRS 101 have been followed for the Company Financial Statements subject to any material departures disclosed and explained in the Financial
Make judgements and accounting estimates that are reasonable and prudent Prepare the Financial Statements on the going concern basis unless it is inappropriate to presume that the Group and Parent Company will continue in business The Directors are responsible for keeping adequate accounting records that are sufficient to show and explain the Group and Parent Companys transactions and disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the financial position of the Group and Parent Company and enable them to ensure that the Financial Statements and the Directors Remuneration Report comply with the Companies Act 2006 and as regards the Group Financial Statements Article 4 of the IAS Regulation.
The Directors are also responsible for safeguarding the assets of the Group and Parent Company and hence for taking reasonable steps for the prevention and detection of fraud and other irregularities.
The Directors are responsible for the maintenance and integrity of the Parent Companys website.
Legislation in the United Kingdom governing the preparation and dissemination of Financial Statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
The Directors consider that the Annual Report and Accounts taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Group and Parent Companys performance business model and strategy.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
DIRECTORS REPORT  STATEMENT OF DIRECTORS RESPONSIBILITIES Each of the Directors whose names and functions are listed in Other Statutory Information confirm that to the best of their knowledge The Parent Company Financial Statements which have been prepared in accordance with United Kingdom Generally Accepted Accounting Practice United Kingdom Accounting Standards comprising FRS 101 Reduced Disclosure Framework and applicable law give a true and fair view of the assets liabilities financial position and profit of the Company The Group Financial Statements which have been prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union Dual IFRS European Union and IASB give a true and fair view of the assets liabilities financial position and profit of the Group The Directors Report includes a fair review of the development and performance of the business and the position of the Group and Parent Company together with a description of the principal risks and uncertainties that it faces PAUL FORMAN Chief Executive STEFAN SCHELLINGER Group Finance Director 2 March 2018 ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
DIRECTORS REPORT  STATEMENT OF DIRECTORS RESPONSIBILITIES FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 114 These Financial Statements contain The Consolidated Income Statement Statement of Comprehensive Income Balance Sheet Statement of Changes in Equity and Statement of Cash Flows pages 116 to 120 Accounting Policies pages 121 to 128 and Critical Accounting Judgements and Estimates page 129 and notes pages 130 to 169 Essentra plc Company Balance Sheet Statement of Changes in Equity Accounting Policies and notes pages 170 to 181 Independent Auditors Report to the Members of Essentra plc pages 182 to 190 Advisers and Investor Information pages 191 to 192 115 For the year ended 31 December 2017 note Revenue 1 1027.3 998.5 Operating profit before intangible amortisation and exceptional operating items 84.6 108.7 Amortisation of acquired intangible assets 22.9 30.2 Exceptional operating items 223 56.2 128.5 Operating profit  loss 5.5 50.0 Finance income 3 0.8 2.1 Finance expense 3 11.2 14.6 Loss before tax 4.9 62.5 Income tax credit 423 10.4 11.5 Profit  loss from continuing operations 5.5 51.0 Profit from discontinued operations 23 110.3 11.4 Profit  loss for the year 115.8 39.6 Attributable to Equity holders of Essentra plc 114.3 40.3 Noncontrolling interests 1.5 0.7 Profit  loss for the year 115.8 39.6 Earnings  loss per share attributable to equity holders of Essentra plc Basic 6 43.7p 15.4p Diluted 6 43.4p 15.4p Earnings  loss per share from continuing operations attributable to equity holders of Essentra plc Basic 6 1.5p 19.8p Diluted 6 1.5p 19.8p CONSOLIDATED INCOME STATEMENT ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  CONSOLIDATED INCOME STATEMENT For the year ended 31 December 2017 note Profit  loss for the year 115.8 39.6 Other comprehensive income  loss Items that will not be reclassified to profit or loss Remeasurement of defined benefit pension schemes 17 8.3 16.8 Deferred tax expense  credit on remeasurement of defined benefit pension schemes 415 2.8 5.0 Items that may be reclassified subsequently to profit or loss Effective portion of changes in fair value of cash flow hedges Net change in fair value of cash flow hedges transferred to the income statement 0.6 Effective portion of changes in fair value of cash flow hedges 0.6 0.3 Foreign exchange translation differences Attributable to equity holders of Essentra plc Arising on translation of foreign operations 51.6 145.9 Arising on effective net investment hedges 1.7 56.9 Income tax expense  credit 4 0.2 1.0 Attributable to noncontrolling interests 0.5 1.1 Other comprehensive loss  income for the year net of tax 45.1 79.0 Total comprehensive income 70.7 39.4 Attributable to Equity holders of Essentra plc 69.7 37.6 Noncontrolling interests 1.0 1.8 Total comprehensive income 70.7 39.4 ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME At 31 December 2017 note 31 December 31 December
Property plant and equipment 7 283.1 285.9 Intangible assets 8 547.7 581.7 Longterm receivables 8.6 3.5 Deferred tax assets 15 10.4 2.6 Retirement benefit assets 17 18.3 11.6 Total noncurrent assets 868.1 885.3 Inventories 9 114.3 115.1 Income tax receivable 3.9 7.5 Trade and other receivables 1018 201.0 218.4 Derivative assets 1418 0.4 1.2 Cash and cash equivalents 1118 52.0 54.0 Total current assets 371.6 396.2 Assets in disposal group held for sale 23  130.7 Total assets 1239.7 1412.2
Issued share capital 19 66.0 66.0 Merger relief reserve 298.1 298.1 Capital redemption reserve 0.1 0.1 Other reserve 20 132.8 132.8 Cash flow hedging reserve 0.3 0.3 Translation reserve 18.5 68.6 Retained earnings 20 362.7 295.7 Attributable to equity holders of Essentra plc 612.3 595.4 Noncontrolling interests 8.1 7.3 Total equity 620.4 602.7
Interest bearing loans and borrowings 1318 267.1 374.9 Retirement benefit obligations 17 31.7 34.7 Provisions 16 20.0 4.9 Other financial liabilities 18 3.7 Deferred tax liabilities 15 50.0 65.8 Total noncurrent liabilities 372.5 480.3 Interest bearing loans and borrowings 1318 0.5 65.1 Derivative liabilities 1418 0.9 1.7 Income tax payable 43.1 24.4 Trade and other payables 1218 197.5 204.3 Provisions 16 4.8 1.2 Total current liabilities 246.8 296.7 Liabilities in disposal group held for sale 23  32.5 Total liabilities 619.3 809.5 Total equity and liabilities 1239.7 1412.2 The consolidated Financial Statements on pages 116 to 169 were approved by the Board of Directors on 2 March 2018 and were signed on its behalf by Paul Forman Stefan Schellinger Chief Executive Group Finance Director CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEET ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEET For the year ended 31 December 2017
Merger relief reserve
Other
Cash flow hedging reserve
Retained earnings
Total equity Profit for the year 114.3 1.5 115.8 Other comprehensive loss  50.1 5.5 0.5 45.1 Total comprehensive income for the year      50.1 119.8 1.0 70.7 Share options exercised 0.3  0.3 Share option expense 1.3  1.3 Tax relating to sharebased incentives 0.3  0.3 Dividends paid 54.1 0.2 54.3
Merger relief reserve
Other
Cash flow hedging reserve
Retained earnings
Total equity Loss  profit for the year 40.3 0.7 39.6 Other comprehensive income 0.3 90.0 11.8 1.1 79.0 Total comprehensive income for the year     0.3 90.0 52.1 1.8 39.4 Share options exercised 2.3  2.3 Share option expense 2.0  2.0 Tax relating to sharebased incentives 2.0  2.0 Dividends paid 54.0 0.2 54.2 CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY For the year ended 31 December 2017 note Operating activities Profit  loss for the year 115.8 39.6 Adjustments for Income tax expense  credit 4 14.5 7.6 Net finance expense 3 10.4 12.5 Intangible amortisation 28 23.9 33.4 Exceptional operating items 2 76.2 133.7 Depreciation 27 35.3 34.3 Share option expense 5 17 0.7 2.0 Hedging activities and other movements 1.6 13.3 Increase  decrease in inventories 2.4 10.9 Decrease in trade and other receivables 15.5 36.9 Decrease in trade and other payables 7.5 46.1 Cash outflow in respect of exceptional operating items 28.9 10.6 Adjustment for pension contributions 0.1 0.8 Movements in provisions 1.6 3.5 Cash inflow from operating activities 97.8 170.4 Income tax paid 20.4 17.4 Net cash inflow from operating activities 77.4 153.0 Investing activities Interest received 0.5 0.7 Acquisition of property plant and equipment 47.2 42.8 Proceeds from sale of property plant and equipment 1.8 8.4 Payments for intangible assets 0.2 3.9 Acquisition of businesses net of cash acquired 23 15.4 0.1 Proceeds from sale of businesses net of cash disposed 23 210.8 Net cash inflow  outflow from investing activities 150.3 37.7 Financing activities Interest paid 13.0 12.0 Dividends paid to equity holders 54.1 54.0 Dividends paid to noncontrolling interests 0.2 0.2 Repayments of shortterm loans 64.6 Repayments of longterm loans 305.6 298.6 Proceeds from longterm loans 201.8 274.0 Proceeds from sale of employee trust shares 0.3 2.3 Net cash outflow from financing activities 235.4 88.5 Net decrease  increase in cash and cash equivalents 21 7.7 26.8 Net cash and cash equivalents at the beginning of the year 60.7 30.2 Net decrease  increase in cash and cash equivalents 7.7 26.8 Net effect of currency translation on cash and cash equivalents 1.0 3.7 Net cash and cash equivalents at the end of the year 1118 52.0 60.7 CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS a.
Basis of preparation The consolidated Financial Statements have been prepared and approved by the Directors in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as adopted by the European Union EU in accordance with EU law IAS Regulation EC 1606 2002 adopted IFRS and International Financial Reporting Standards as issued by the International Accounting Standards Board and with those parts of the Companies Act 2006 applicable to companies reporting under IFRS.
The Company has elected to prepare its individual company Financial Statements in accordance with Financial Reporting Standard 101 Reduced Disclosure Framework FRS 101 these are presented on pages 170 to 181.
The Financial Statements are prepared under the historical cost convention except for derivatives which are stated at fair value and retirement benefit obligations which are valued in accordance with IAS 19 Employee Benefits.
The preparation of Financial Statements that conform with adopted IFRS requires the use of estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the Financial Statements and the reported amounts of income and expense during the reporting period.
Although these estimates are based on managements best knowledge of the amount event or actions actual results may ultimately differ from those estimates.
For the purposes of these Financial Statements Essentra or the Group means Essentra plc the Company and its subsidiaries.
The estimates and underlying assumptions are reviewed on an ongoing basis.
Revisions to accounting estimates are recognised in the period in which the estimate is revised and future periods if relevant.
On 25 August 2016 Essentra entered into a sale and purchase agreement with Filtration Group to dispose of the Groups entire operations in Porous Technologies.
The transaction completed in March 2017 .
The results of the Porous Technologies business are presented as results from a discontinued operation in the income statement.
The assets and liabilities of Porous Technologies have also been presented as held for sale on the balance sheet as at 31 December 2016.
The accounting policies used in the preparation of these Financial Statements are detailed below.
These policies have been consistently applied to all periods presented.
Information regarding the financial position of the Group its cash flows liquidity position and borrowing facilities are described in the Financial Review on pages 22 to 23.
In addition note 18 to the Financial Statements includes the Groups objectives policies and processes for managing its capital its financial risk management objectives details of its financial instruments and hedging activities and exposures to credit market and liquidity risk.
Cash balances and borrowings are detailed in note 21.
Essentra is primarily funded by a series of US Private Placement Loan notes from various financial institutions.
An 80m Loan note which was repaid in April 2017 was refinanced in November 2017 with three new Loan notes totalling 75m.
A Revolving Credit Facility of 375m was made available upon completion of the November 2017 Loan note issuance.
At 31 December 2017 available bank facilities totalled 374.2m 2016 414.2m.
The US Private Placement notes have original maturities ranging from seven and 12 years and the Revolving Credit Facility matures in November 2022.
ACCOUNTING POLICIES The Directors have prepared plans and forecasts for a period of at least 12 months from the date of signing these Financial Statements.
Based on these and taking into consideration the risks detailed in note 18 the Directors have a reasonable expectation that the Company has adequate resources to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future and accordingly have adopted the going concern basis in preparing the consolidated Financial Statements.
This disclosure has been prepared in accordance with the Financial Reporting Councils UK Corporate Governance Code.
Changes in accounting policies In the current financial year Essentra adopted the following pronouncements Amendments to IAS 12 Recognition of Deferred Tax Assets for Unrealised Losses these amendments clarify how to account for deferred tax assets related to debt instruments measured at fair value.
Amendments to IAS 7 Disclosure Initiative require disclosure of information about changes in liabilities arising from financing activities including cash flows and noncash changes.
As Essentra provides disclosure on reconciliation of individual elements of net debt these amendments did not have a significant impact.
The adoption of these amendments did not have an impact on the Group in relation to measurement recognition and presentation.
Other than these the accounting policies and presentation in this set of Financial Statements are consistent with those applied in the prior years.
The following standards or interpretations have not yet been adopted by the Group.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  ACCOUNTING POLICIES a.
Basis of preparation continued IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers establishes a new fivestep model that will apply to revenue arising from contracts with customers and provides a more structured approach to measurement and recognition of revenue.
The review of the impact of IFRS 15 requires an assessment of each revenue stream and review of contracts and  or supply agreements in place with our customers in order to establish and confirm the full impact of adopting this standard.
Based on the review and assessment undertaken management conclude that the new standard will not have a material impact on revenue recognition for the Group given the nature of products and services offered by the Group.
Information on the nature of revenue recognition within each division is outlined below with key areas highlighted where the adoption of IFRS 15 will have an impact on the current accounting policies.
Further information about these individual divisions can be found on pages 4 to 5 Essentra at a Glance.
Component Solutions Within our Component Solutions division we supply over 90000 customers across the globe with more than 30000 products.
The majority of sales are for the supply of standard Essentra parts available from stock that are sold on standard terms.
Health and Personal Care Packaging In the Health and Personal Care Packaging division Essentra generally manufactures customer specific products.
There is no significant impact on the recognition of revenue on these products.
Filter Products Within the Filter Products division Essentra primarily manufactures customer specific products for the tobacco industry.
There is no significant impact on the recognition of revenue on these products.
The following areas were specifically considered by the Group Revenue will continue to be recognised net of any trade discount or rebate schemes and any anticipated warranty liabilities there is no material change under the new standard to the calculation of liabilities arising from rebate schemes or product warranties.
In a small number of instances Essentra provides services to the customers in addition to the supply of goods.
Where previously revenue was only recognised on the supply of goods under IFRS 15 an element of revenue will be attributed to the additional services provided where these are distinct from the goods being supplied.
The total value of revenue attributable to such services is not significant.
The incremental costs of obtaining a contract will be recognised as an asset if the Group expect to recover those costs.
These costs were not significant in the past and are not expected to be significant.
Where a customer has committed to purchase goods in advance of production revenue may be recognised on production rather than on transfer of control to the customer .
Such arrangements are rare and insignificant to the total Group revenue.
The individual and aggregate impact of the above is not material to the Group.
IFRS 9 Financial Instruments IFRS 9 Financial Instruments introduces new requirements for classification and measurement impairment and hedge accounting and replaces IAS 39 Financial Instruments Recognition and Measurement and all previous versions of IFRS 9.
The amendment to IFRS 9 is effective from 1 January 2018 and will be adopted by the Group in the accounting year beginning 1 January 2018.
Based on an analysis of the Groups financial assets and financial liabilities as at 31 December 2017 and on the basis of facts and circumstances that exist at that date the Directors of the Company have assessed the impact of IFRS 9 to the Groups consolidated Financial Statements as follows Classification and measurement IFRS 9 contains three principal classification categories for financial assets which are amortised cost fair value through other comprehensive income FVOCI and fair value through profit or loss FVTPL .
The standard eliminates the existing IAS 39 categories of heldtomaturity loans and receivables and availableforsale financial assets.
At 31 December 2017  the Group has no financial assets designated as heldtomaturity or availableforsale.
The Group has 251.1m of loans and receivables which have been reviewed against the requirements of IFRS 9 and will continue to be disclosed as amortised cost items following the implementation of IFRS Based on its assessment the Group does not believe that the new classification requirements will lead to a change in accounting treatment.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  ACCOUNTING POLICIES a.
Basis of preparation continued Impairment  Financial assets were assessed for impairment using the IAS 39 incurred loss model as at 31 December 2017 .
IFRS 9 replaces this with the expected credit loss model which requires expected credit losses and changes to expected credit losses at each reporting date to reflect changes in credit risk since initial recognition.
Financial assets measured at amortised cost or FVOCI will be subject to the impairment provisions of IFRS 9.
The Group intends to apply the simplified model to recognise lifetime expected credit losses for its trade receivables and other receivables including those due in greater than 12 months by making an accounting policy election.
The implementation of the expected credit loss model will lead to earlier and increased recognition of credit losses as the Group will no longer need to wait until a receivable is past due before recognising a provision.
Additionally the recognition of losses based on forwardlooking estimates reflecting current and forecast conditions may lead to greater volatility in credit loss provisions.
The quantitative impact of the implementation will be disclosed in the 2018 Financial Statements with a reconciliation between the closing IAS 39 and opening IFRS 9 loss provision and this is not assessed to be material.
Hedging  the new hedge accounting requirements of IFRS 9 will align hedge accounting relationships with the Groups risk management objectives and strategy and lead to the application of a more qualitative and forwardlooking approach to assessing hedge effectiveness.
The Group uses derivatives to manage currency and interest rate risk arising from underlying business activities.
The Group has confirmed that its current hedge relationships will continue to qualify as accounting hedges upon the adoption of IFRS 9.
The types of hedge accounting relationships that the Group currently designates meet the requirements of IFRS 9 and are aligned with the Groups risk management strategy and objective.
Consistent with the Groups current hedge accounting policy the Directors do not intend to exclude the forward element of foreign currency forward contracts from designated hedging relationships.
Therefore the Directors conclude that the application of the IFRS 9 hedge accounting requirements will not have a material impact on the Groups consolidated Financial Statements.
The Group will take advantage of the exemption allowing it not to restate comparative information for prior periods with respect to classification and measurement including impairment changes.
Differences in the carrying amounts of financial assets and financial liabilities resulting from the adoption of IFRS 9 will therefore be recognised in retained earnings and reserves as at 1 January 2018.
IFRS 16 Leases IFRS 16 Leases which is effective from 1 January 2019 eliminates the classification of leases as either operating leases or finance leases and introduces a single lessee accounting model under which a lessee is required to recognise assets and liabilities for all leases with a term of more than 12 months unless the underlying asset is of low value and depreciation of lease assets separately from interest on lease liabilities in the income statement.
The Group is currently assessing the impact of IFRS 16.
Other standards and interpretations The Group does not currently expect the adoption of the following standards or interpretations to have a material impact on the consolidated results or financial position of the Group.
Narrowscope amendments to IFRS 2 Sharebased Payment  Classification and Measurement of Sharebased Payment Transactions provide guidance on the accounting for the effects of vesting and nonvesting conditions on the measurement of cashsettled sharebased payments sharebased payment transactions with a net settlement feature for withholding tax obligations and modification to the terms and conditions of a sharebased payment that changes the classification of the transaction from cashsettled to equitysettled.
IFRIC 22 Foreign Currency Transactions and Advance Considerations addresses the exchange rates to be used for advance consideration paid or received in a foreign currency.
IFRIC 23 Uncertainty over Income Tax Treatments addresses how to reflect uncertainty in accounting for income taxes providing guidance on considering uncertain tax treatments separately or together examination by tax authorities the appropriate method to reflect uncertainty and accounting for changes in facts and circumstances.
Amendments to IAS 40 Transfer of Investment Property clarify the accounting requirements on transfers to or from investment property.
Amendments to IAS 19 Plan Amendment Curtailment or Settlement specify that in the event of a plan amendment curtailment or settlement during a reporting period an entity is required to use updated information to determine current service cost and net interest for the period following such an event.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  ACCOUNTING POLICIES b.
Basis of consolidation i Subsidiaries Subsidiaries are entities controlled by
Control exists when Essentra is exposed or has rights to variable returns from its involvement with the investee and has the ability to affect those returns through its power over the investee.
The
Financial Statements of subsidiaries are included in the Financial Statements from the date that control commences until the date that control ceases.
Intragroup balances and any unrealised gains and losses or income and expense arising from intragroup transactions are eliminated in preparing the consolidated Financial Statements. c.
Foreign currency Items included in the Financial Statements of the Groups subsidiaries are measured using the currency of the primary economic environment in which the subsidiary operates functional currency.
The consolidated Financial Statements are prepared in sterling functional currency of the Parent Company.
Transactions in foreign currencies are recorded at the rate of exchange at the date of the transaction.
Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies at the balance sheet date are translated into sterling at the exchange rate ruling at that date and recognised in the income statement unless hedge accounting criteria apply see policy for financial instruments.
The assets and liabilities of foreign operations including goodwill and fair value adjustments arising on consolidation are translated into sterling at the exchange rate ruling at the balance sheet date.
The revenues and expenses of foreign operations are translated into sterling at average exchange rates.
Exchange differences on retranslation at the closing rate of the opening balances of overseas entities are taken to other comprehensive income as are exchange differences arising on related foreign currency borrowings and derivatives designated as net investment hedges to the extent that they are effective.
Other
Differences arising prior to 1 January 2004 are included in retained earnings. d.
Financial instruments In accordance with IAS 39 Financial Instruments Recognition and Measurement IAS 39 interest bearing loans and borrowings and other financial liabilities excluding derivatives are held at amortised cost unless they are included in a hedge accounting relationship.
See note 14 for separate disclosure of hedge types.
Derivatives are measured initially at fair value.
Subsequent measurement in the Financial Statements depends on the classification of the derivative as follows i Fair value hedges Where a derivative is used to hedge the foreign exchange exposure of a monetary asset or liability any gain or loss on the derivative is recognised in the income statement.
Where a derivative is designated as a hedging instrument in a cash flow hedge the change in fair value is recognised in other comprehensive income to the extent that it is effective and any ineffective portion is recognised in the income statement.
Where the underlying transaction results in a financial asset accumulated gains and losses are recognised in the income statement in the same period as the hedged item affects profit or loss.
Where the hedged item results in a nonfinancial asset the accumulated gains and losses previously recognised in other comprehensive income are included in the initial carrying value of the asset.
The gain or loss on an instrument used to hedge a net investment in a foreign operation that is deemed effective is recognised in other comprehensive income.
Any ineffective portion is recognised in the income statement.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  ACCOUNTING POLICIES e.
Property plant and equipment Property plant and equipment are stated at cost less accumulated depreciation and impairment losses.
Previously revalued properties were treated as being held at deemed cost upon transition to adopted IFRS.
Where parts of an item of property plant and equipment or other assets have different useful lives they are accounted for as separate items.
The carrying values of property plant and equipment and other assets are periodically reviewed for impairment when events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying values may not be recoverable.
Property plant and equipment are depreciated over their estimated remaining useful lives on a straight line basis at the following annual rates Freehold land Not depreciated
2% or life of lease if shorter Plant and machinery 7  20% Fixtures fittings and equipment 10  33% The assets useful lives and residual values are reviewed and adjusted if appropriate at each balance sheet date. f.
Leases
Rentals associated with operating leases are expensed to the income statement on a straight line basis.
Lease incentives are amortised in the income statement over the life of the lease. g.
Intangible assets i Goodwill Goodwill is stated at cost less any impairment losses.
Acquisitions are accounted for using the purchase method.
For acquisitions that have occurred since 1 January 2004 goodwill represents the difference between the fair value of the assets given in consideration and the fair value of identifiable assets liabilities and contingent liabilities of the acquiree.
For acquisitions made before 1 January 2004 goodwill is included on the basis of its deemed cost which represents the amount previously recorded under UK GAAP .
Since 1 January 2010 the Group has expensed costs attributable to acquisitions in the income statement.
Given their oneoff nature these costs are generally presented within exceptional operating items.
Research costs are expensed to the income statement in the year in which they are incurred.
Development costs relating to new products are capitalised when the Group is able to demonstrate the technical feasibility of completing the intangible asset so that it will be available for use or sale its intention to complete and its ability to use or sell the asset how the asset will generate future economic benefits the availability of resources to complete the asset and the ability to measure reliably the expenditure during development.
An intangible asset acquired in a business combination is recognised at fair value to the extent it is probable that the expected future economic benefits attributable to the asset will flow to the Group and that its cost can be measured reliably.
Intangible assets principally relate to customer relationships which are valued using discounted cash flows based on historical customer attrition rates and developed technology which is valued using an income approach.
The cost of intangible assets is amortised through the income statement on a straight line basis over their estimated useful economic life.
Other intangible assets which are not acquired through a business combination nonacquired intangible assets are recognised at cost to the extent it is probable that the expected future economic benefits attributable to the asset will flow to the Group and that its cost can be measured reliably and amortised on a straight line basis over their estimated useful economic life.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  ACCOUNTING POLICIES h.
Impairment
All assets are reviewed annually to determine whether there is any indication of impairment.
Goodwill is tested annually.
An impairment loss is recognised whenever the carrying amount of a nonfinancial asset or the cash generating unit to which it belongs exceeds its recoverable amount being the greater of value in use and fair value less costs to sell and is recognised in the income statement.
Value in use is estimated based on future cash flows discounted using a pretax discount rate based upon the Groups weighted average cost of capital. i.
Inventories
Inventories are valued at the lower of cost on a first in first out basis and net realisable value.
For workinprogress and finished goods cost includes an appropriate proportion of labour cost and overheads. j.
Cash and cash equivalents Cash and cash equivalents comprise cash balances and fixed term investments whose maturities are three months or less from the date of acquisition.
Bank overdrafts repayable on demand form an integral part of Essentras cash management and are included as part of cash and cash equivalents in the statement of cash flows. k.
Loans and borrowings Loans and borrowings are initially measured at cost which is equal to fair value at inception and are subsequently measured at amortised cost using the effective interest method.
Any difference between the proceeds net of transaction costs and the settlement or redemption of borrowings is recognised in the income statement over the term of the borrowings. l.
Trade and other receivables Trade receivables are initially recognised at fair value and subsequently measured at amortised cost which is generally equivalent to recognition at nominal value less impairment loss. m.
Trade and other payables Trade payables are noninterest bearing and are recognised initially at fair value and subsequently at amortised cost. n.
Catalogue costs The costs associated with the production and printing of catalogues are expensed to the income statement when access is received to those goods. o.
Income tax Income tax in the income statement comprises current and deferred tax. income.
Current tax is the expected tax payable on the taxable income for the year using the applicable tax rates enacted or substantively enacted at the balance sheet date and any adjustment to tax payable in prior years.
Deferred tax is provided using the balance sheet liability method on temporary differences arising between the tax bases and the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities in the Financial Statements.
The following temporary differences are not provided for goodwill not deductible for tax purposes the initial recognition of assets or liabilities that affect neither accounting nor taxable profit or loss and differences relating to investments in subsidiaries to the extent that they will not reverse in the foreseeable future.
Deferred tax is determined using tax rates that are expected to apply when the related deferred tax asset or liability is settled using the applicable tax rates enacted or substantively enacted at the balance sheet dates.
A deferred tax asset is recognised only to the extent that it is probable that future taxable profit will be available against which the asset can be utilised.
Deferred tax assets are reduced to the extent that it is no longer probable that the related tax benefit will be realised.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are offset when there is a legally enforceable right to set off current tax assets against liabilities and when they relate to income taxes levied by the same tax authority and the Group intends to settle its current tax assets and liabilities on a net basis. p.
Revenue
Revenue from the sale of goods is recognised in the income statement net of expected returns when the significant risks and rewards of ownership have been transferred to the customer.
Revenue is measured at the fair value of consideration receivable.
A significant proportion of the Groups businesses sell goods on an exworks basis where the Group as a seller makes its goods ready for collection at its premises on an agreed upon sales date and the buyer incurs all transportation and handling costs and bears the risks for bringing the goods to their chosen destination.
The Group operates non exworks terms with customers in some of its businesses and in these businesses revenue is recognised when the significant risks and rewards of ownership have been transferred to the customer.
These terms include some consignment stock agreements where revenue is recognised when the customer removes the goods from consignment stock. q.
Finance income and expense Finance income and expense is recognised in the income statement as it accrues. r.
Segment reporting A segment is identified on the basis of internal reports that are regularly reviewed by the Group Management Committee in order to allocate resources to the segment and assess its performance.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  ACCOUNTING POLICIES s.
Pensions i Defined contribution schemes Obligations for contributions to defined contribution pension schemes are expensed to the income statement as incurred.
The significant pension schemes in Europe and the US have been accounted for on a defined benefit basis.
The net obligations in respect of defined benefit pension schemes are calculated separately for each scheme by estimating the amount of future benefit that employees have earned in return for their service in the current and prior periods that benefit is discounted to determine its present value and the fair value of any scheme assets is deducted.
The discount rate is the yield at the balance sheet date on AA creditrated bonds that have maturity dates approximating to the terms of Essentras obligations.
The calculation is performed by a qualified independent actuary using the projected unit credit method.
Net interest on defined benefit assets is presented within finance income and net interest on defined benefit liabilities is presented within finance expense.
Actuarial gains and losses that have arisen are recognised in full in the consolidated statement of comprehensive income.
The amounts charged to operating profit are the current service cost past service cost including curtailments and gains and losses on settlement.
The value of a net pension asset is limited to the amount that may be recovered either through reduced contributions or agreed refunds from the scheme. t.
Sharebased payments Essentra operates equitysettled sharebased incentive plans.
A charge is made in the income statement based on the fair value of option awards using the Monte Carlo or binomial valuation models and relevant quoted share price information with a corresponding increase in equity.
The fair value is measured at grant date and spread over the period between grant date and vesting date of the options.
The amount recognised as an expense will be adjusted to reflect the actual number of share options that vest with the exception of options that fail to vest because market conditions are not met. u.
Exceptional items in the consolidated income statement The exceptional operating items below are separated from other items by virtue of their size and incidence considered for each operating segment.
They are shown as a separate line item within operating profit on the face of the income statement in order for the reader to obtain a clearer understanding of the results from the ongoing operations.
These items exclude amortisation of acquired intangible assets which are also presented separately in the income statement.
In 2017 and 2016 Essentra incurred oneoff costs such as professional fees as a result of acquisitions including transactions that did not complete in 2016 refer to note 23.
In addition costs incurred in 2017 and 2016 in relation to the disposal of Porous Technologies which are presented as discontinued operations are also included in this category within discontinued operations refer to note 23.
Costs relating to the integration of acquired businesses and restructuring associated with acquisitions.
In 2017  this represented costs arising from the closure of the folded cartons facilities at Newport and amounts in respect of the strategic review undertaken during the period associated reorganisation costs and an adjustment on contingent deferred considerations on a prior acquisition.
In 2016 this represented impairment loss on certain assets of the Health and Personal Care Packaging Strategic Business Unit further costs arising from the closure of the Filter Products site in Jarrow offset by the net release of property provisions on disposal of properties and an adjustment on contingent deferred considerations on a prior acquisition. v.
Investment in own shares The shares held in the Essentra Employee Benefit Trust for the purpose of fulfilling obligations in respect of share option plans are treated as belonging to the Company and are deducted from its retained earnings.
The cost of shares held directly treasury shares are also deducted from retained earnings. w.
Provisions
A provision is recognised when there is a probable legal or constructive obligation as a result of a past event and a reliable estimate can be made of the outflow of resources that will be required to settle the obligation.
The outflow is the present value of managements best estimate of the expenditure required to settle the present obligation at the balance sheet date.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  ACCOUNTING POLICIES x.
Government grants Government grants are recognised when it is reasonable to expect that the grants will be received and that all related conditions will be met usually on submission of a valid claim for payment.
Government grants in respect of capital expenditure are included within the carrying amount of the related property plant and equipment and are released to profit or loss on a straightline basis over the expected useful lives of the relevant assets.
Grants of a revenue nature are credited to profit or loss so as to match them with the expenditure to which they relate. y.
Net debt Net debt is defined as cash and cash equivalents net of interest bearing loans and borrowings. z.
Dividends
Dividends are recognised as a liability in the period in which they are approved by the shareholders of the Company final dividend or paid interim dividend. aa.
Assets and disposal groups held for sale and discontinued operations Noncurrent assets or disposal groups comprising assets and liabilities are classified as heldforsale if it is highly probable that they will be recovered primarily through sale rather than through continuing use.
Such assets or disposal groups are generally measured at the lower of their carrying amount and fair value less costs to sell.
Impairment losses on initial classification as heldforsale and subsequent gains and losses on remeasurement are recognised in profit or loss.
A disposal group qualifies as discontinued operation if it is a component of an entity that either has been disposed of or is classified as held for sale and Represents a separate major line of business or geographical area of operations Is part of a single coordinated plan to dispose of a separate major line of business or geographical area of operations or Is a subsidiary acquired exclusively with a view to resale.
Discontinued operations are excluded from the results of continuing operations and are presented as a single amount as profit or loss after tax from discontinued operations in the income statement.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  ACCOUNTING POLICIES The following provides information on those policies that management considers critical because of the level of judgement and estimation required which often involves assumptions regarding future events which can vary from what is anticipated.
The Directors believe that the Financial Statements reflect appropriate judgements and estimates and provide a true and fair view of Essentras performance and financial position.
ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES
Essentra accounts for its defined benefit pension schemes in accordance with IAS 19.
The application of IAS 19 requires the exercise of judgement in relation to the assumptions used and for each assumption there is a range of possible outcomes see note 17.
In consultation with Essentras actuaries management decides the point within those ranges that most appropriately reflects Essentras circumstances.
Small changes to these assumptions can have a significant impact on valuations.
The Group performs a sensitivity analysis for the significant assumptions used in determining postemployment costs and liabilities as detailed in note 17 .
Business combinations and intangible assets IFRS 3 requires the identification of acquired intangible assets as part of a business combination.
The methods used to value such intangible assets require the use of estimates and judgements such as customer attrition cash flow generation from the existing relationships with customers and returns on other assets.
Future results are impacted by the amortisation periods adopted and changes to the estimated useful lives would result in different effects on the income statement and balance sheet.
Goodwill is not amortised but is tested annually for impairment along with the finitelived intangible assets and other assets of the Groups cash generating units.
Tests for impairment are based on discounted cash flows and assumptions including discount rates timing and growth prospects which are inherently subjective.
Judgement is also required in identifying the events which indicate potential impairment and in assessing fair value of individual assets when allocating an impairment loss in a cashgenerating unit or groups of cashgenerating units.
The Group performs various sensitivity analyses in respect of the tests for impairment as detailed in note 8.
The useful lives of the Groups finitelived intangible assets are reviewed following the tests for impairment annually.
Judgement may also be required in determining the fair value of other assets acquired and liabilities including contingent liabilities assumed.
Liabilities for tax contingencies require management judgements and estimates in respect of tax audit issues and exposures in each of the jurisdictions in which it operates.
Management is also required to make an estimate of the current tax liability together with an assessment of the temporary differences which arise as a consequence of different accounting and tax treatments.
Where management conclude that a tax position is uncertain a current tax liability is held for anticipated taxes that are considered probable based on the information available.
Key judgement areas for the Group include the pricing of intercompany goods and services as well as the tax consequences arising from restructuring operations.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING JUDGEMENTS AND ESTIMATES Included in the tax payable is a liability of 18.9m 2016 15.1m for transfer pricing matters and 19 .0m 2016 10.6m for other uncertain tax positions.
The movement is due to adjustments for current year transactions including the disposal of Porous Technologies foreign exchange movements expiry of statute of limitations following the passage of time and agreement reached with tax authorities on previous matters.
The group is aware of the European Commission press release on 26 October 2017 where the Commission opened an indepth investigation into the UKs finance company partial exemption from controlled foreign company rules to determine whether EU state aid rules have been breached.
Management do not consider it probable that an outflow of cost will arise to the group as a consequence of this and so no current or deferred tax liability is held.
Management consider it impracticable to calculate the potential contingent liability since there is too much uncertainty regarding how the process may conclude.
Management will monitor the progress of this investigation.
Management may engage with professional advisors in making their assessment and if appropriate will liaise with the relevant taxation authorities to resolve the matter.
The tax liability is reassessed in each period to reflect managements best estimate in light of information available.
If the final outcome of these matters differs to the liability held in the Financial Statements the difference may impact the income tax expense  credit in the year the matter is concluded.
ACCOUNTING JUDGEMENTS Exceptional items Judgement is required to determine whether items should be included within exceptional operating items by virtue of their size or incidence.
Details of the items categorised as exceptional are disclosed in note 2.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  CRITICAL ACCOUNTING JUDGEMENTS AND ESTIMATES 1.
Segment analysis In accordance with IFRS 8 Essentra has determined its operating segments based upon the information reported to the Group Management Committee.
These segments are as follows Component Solutions consists of the Components business the Extrusion business the Pipe Protection Technologies business and the Security business.
The
Components business is a global market leading manufacturer and distributor of plastic injection moulded vinyl dip moulded and metal items.
The Extrusion business is a leading custom profile extruder located in the Netherlands which offers a complete design and production service.
The Pipe Protection Technologies business specialises in the manufacture of high performance innovative products from commodity resins to engineering grade thermoplastics and polymer alloys for use in the oil and gas industry.
The
Card Solutions business has been at the forefront of ID technology for over 30 years and has access to the widest portfolio of products and services including printers software and consumables from leading manufacturers.
Health and Personal Care Packaging consists of the Health and Personal Care Packaging business and the Speciality Tapes business.
Health and Personal Care Packaging is a leading global provider of packaging and authentication solutions to a diversified blue chip customer base in the health and personal care consumer and specialist packaging sectors and to the paper and board industries.
The
Speciality Tapes business has expertise in coating multiple adhesive systems in numerous technologies.
The Filter Products business is the only global independent provider of filters and related solutions to the tobacco industry and supplies not only standard filters but also special variants which provide innovative solutions that meet the consumerdriven demands of the sector against a backdrop of ongoing legislative changes.
Discontinued operations represent the Porous Technologies business a leading developer and manufacturer of innovative custom fluidhandling components used in a variety of endmarkets engineered from a portfolio of technologies that included bonded and nonwoven fibre polyurethane foam and porous plastics.
The Porous Technologies business was disposed of on 6 March 2017 and the results are presented as results from discontinued operations in both the current and prior period.
The assets and liabilities of Porous Technologies have also been presented as held for sale on the balance sheet at 31 December 2016.
No finance income or expense related to discontinued operations and the income tax expense related to discontinued operations amounted to 24.9m 2016 3.9m.
The adjusted operating profit  loss presented for each operating segment includes the effect of allocation of certain functional costs such as finance human resources legal and IT as well as costs relating to management of the divisions on an internal management methodology.
NOTES
Therefore for continuing operations the adjusted operating profit presented below of 84.9m 2016 110.4m differs from the amount presented as operating profit before intangible amortisation and exceptional operating items of 84.6m 2016 108.7m as a result of costs allocated to Porous Technologies of 0.3m 2016 1.7m under the internal management methodology.
With effect from 1 January 2018 a new organisation structure has been implemented comprising four different divisions see note 28 for further details.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  NOTES 1.
Segment analysis continued
Solutions
Health and Personal Care
Filter
Products
Eliminations
Central
Services
Total
Continuing
Operations
Discontinued
Operations
Total
External revenue 342.3 407.5 277.5   1027.3 15.7 1043.0 Intersegment revenue 0.8 2.0  2.8 Total revenue 343.1 409.5 277.5 2.8  1027.3 15.7 1043.0 Operating profit  loss before intangible amortisation and exceptional operating items 58.7 7.2 34.8  15.8 84.9 2.5 87.4 Amortisation of acquired intangible assets 9.5 13.4    22.9  22.9 Exceptional operating items 7.2 39.0 0.5  9.5 56.2 132.4 76.2 Operating profit  loss 42.0 45.2 34.3  25.3 5.8 134.9 140.7 Intangible assets 175.0 372.6 0.1   547.7  547.7 Unallocated items Total assets 372.6 598.5 162.9  105.7 1239.7  1239.7 Segment liabilities 53.0 100.5 48.8  23.7 226.0  226.0 Unallocated items Total liabilities 53.0 100.5 48.8  417.0 619.3  619.3 Other segment items Capital expenditure cash spend 11.6 18.3 11.4  5.8 47.1 0.3 47.4 Depreciation 10.6 13.4 9.3  2.0 35.3  35.3 Average number of employees 2455 3746 1598  163 7962 89 8051 Central Services includes executive and nonexecutive management group finance tax treasury legal group assurance human resources information technology corporate development corporate affairs and other services provided centrally to support the operating segments.
The unallocated assets relate to income and deferred tax assets retirement benefit assets derivatives and cash and cash equivalents.
The unallocated liabilities relate to interest bearing loans and borrowings retirement benefit obligations derivatives deferred tax liabilities and income tax payable.
Intersegment transactions are carried out on an arms length basis.
The average number of employees within discontinued operations over the period from 1 January 2017 until the date of disposal of the Porous Technologies business was 531.
Continuing operations net finance expense of 10.4m 2016 12.5m and income tax credit of 10.4m 2016 11.5m cannot be meaningfully allocated by segment.
No customer accounted for more than 10% of revenue in either 2017 or 2016.
Analysed by destination revenue to Europe and Africa is 494.0m 2016 522.7m revenue to Americas is 338.3m 2016 387 .3m and revenue to Asia and Middle East is 210.7m 2016 193.7m.
Revenue to the UK is 116.0m 2016 141.7m with other significant countries being the USA with revenue of 258.0m 2016 307 .2m Ireland 50.9m 2016 47 .4m and Germany 53.1m 2016 47 .0m.
Noncurrent assets in the UK total 151.8m 2016 168.5m with the other significant location being the USA with 315.1m 2016 406.7m.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  NOTES 1.
Segment analysis continued
Solutions
Health and Personal Care
Filter
Products
Eliminations
Central
Services
Total
Continuing
Operations
Discontinued
Operations
Total
External revenue 301.8 427.6 269.1   998.5 105.2 1103.7 Intersegment revenue 0.8 2.6 0.1 3.5 Total revenue 302.6 430.2 269.2 3.5  998.5 105.2 1103.7 Operating profit  loss before intangible amortisation and exceptional operating items 54.4 34.5 37.5  16.0 110.4 21.5 131.9 Amortisation of acquired intangible assets 8.8 21.4    30.2 2.7 32.9 Exceptional operating items 0.8 126.7 1.0   128.5 5.2 133.7 Operating profit  loss 44.8 113.6 36.5  16.0 48.3 13.6 34.7 Intangible assets 190.2 391.4 0.1   581.7 51.1 632.8 Unallocated items Total assets 378.6 645.1 170.5  87.3 1281.5 130.7 1412.2 Segment liabilities 41.9 96.9 54.0  17.6 210.4 14.4 224.8 Unallocated items Total liabilities 41.9 96.9 54.0  584.2 777.0 32.5 809.5 Other segment items Capital expenditure cash spend 8.0 25.4 6.8  4.5 44.7 2.0 46.7 Depreciation 10.1 10.8 8.2  1.5 30.6 3.7 34.3 Average number of employees 2230 3893 1606  179 7908 521 8429 Central Services includes executive and nonexecutive management group finance tax treasury legal group assurance human resources information technology corporate development corporate affairs and other services provided centrally to support the operating segments.
The unallocated assets relate to income and deferred tax assets retirement benefit assets derivatives and cash and cash equivalents.
The unallocated liabilities relate to interest bearing loans and borrowings retirement benefit obligations derivatives deferred tax liabilities and income tax payable.
Intersegment transactions are carried out on an arms length basis.
Net operating expense Changes in inventories of finished goods and workinprogress 5.7 4.0 Raw materials and consumables 463.7 499.0 Personnel expense Depreciation of property plant and equipment 35.3 34.3 Amortisation of intangible assets 23.9 33.4 Exceptional operating items Operating lease expense 14.4 15.0 Exchange differences recognised in profit or loss 0.1 1.1 Other operating expenses 158.1 155.4 Net operating expense including discontinued operations 902.3 1138.4 Personnel expense totalling 9 .8m 2016 1.9m was charged to exceptional operating items during the year.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  NOTES 2.
Net operating expense continued No income or expense 2016 nil was recognised in operating expense during the year in respect of ineffective cash flow hedges.
Essentras hedges of net investments were also entirely effective in 2017 and 2016 as defined by IAS 39 and therefore no hedge ineffectiveness has been recognised in net operating expense in 2017 2016 nil.
Research and development expenses including relevant staff costs charged to profit or loss during the year amounted to 5.2m 2016 5.0m.
Other operating expenses include manufacturing selling general and administrative overheads Exceptional operating items including discontinued operations Gains  losses and transaction costs relating to acquisitions and disposals of businesses Continuing operations 1.6 0.3 Discontinued operations Porous Technologies 132.4 4.7 Acquisition integration and restructuring costs continuing operations  4.5 Impairment of acquired assets
Continuing operations 54.6 0.2 Discontinued operations Porous Technologies  0.5 Total exceptional operating items 76.2 133.7 Exceptional tax items Gains  losses and transaction costs relating to acquisitions and disposals of businesses are made up of a 132.4m net gain on disposal of the Porous Technologies business 1.3m net loss on disposal of the Health and Personal Care Packaging business in Bristol 0.5m of costs in relation to the acquisition of Micro Plastics and release of 0.2m of deferred consideration from the acquisition of Abric in 2014.
In 2016 transaction costs of 5.0m included 0.3m in respect of the acquisition of Kamsri Printing and Packaging PVT.
Ltd based in India and 4.7m costs in relation to the disposal of Porous Technologies including costs incurred on corporate reorganisation carried out as part of the closing conditions to complete the transaction and cost of a claim settlement associated with the exit from Porous Technologies.
Acquisition integration and restructuring costs were incurred during 2016 in respect of Additional integration costs primarily employee costs directly associated with the restructuring activities costs of site closures and directly attributable costs of sites which businesses are transferred into under the integration plan in relation to the ongoing integration of the Clondalkin SPD business 4.5m offset with the gain on disposal of certain properties which were acquired with that business 1.7m and The costs associated with the closure of the Components site at Xiamen China and integration of those operations into other sites in Asia as part of the Components Asia restructuring programme following the Abric acquisition 1.7m.
An impairment charge of 123.9m during 2016 was recognised in respect of the Health and Personal Care strategic business unit further details are provided in note 8.
Other exceptional items in 2017 of 54.6m relate to 35.4m associated with the closure of the folded cartons facility at Newport comprising 16.7m of propertyrelated costs in relation to remaining obligations for rent rates service charges and dilapidations 13.6m of asset writedowns primarily property plant and equipment and 5.1m of other costs in relation to redundancy and other closurerelated costs 17 .3m in respect of the strategic review undertaken during the period and associated reorganisation cost including 5.3m in relation to senior management restructuring and 4.7m writedown of ITrelated assets which are not in line with the Groups revised strategies.
The remaining costs relate to external consultancy and project costs attributable to reviews into the various aspects of the Groups operations systems and processes under the strategic review and 1.9m relating to the closure and relocation of the security seals production from Ipoh Malaysia to Rayong Thailand as a result of the strategic review.
Other exceptional items incurred in 2016 related to further costs of 2.7m associated with the closure of the Filters site in Jarrow and integration of previous Jarrow operations into the Hungary site offset with the net release of property provisions of 1.3m on the disposal of certain properties in Filtration Products including a 0.5m loss of property disposal in Porous Technologies and the release of 1.1m provision for contingent deferred consideration in relation to a prior period acquisition.
Exceptional tax items of 11.4m in 2017 primarily related to the revaluation of deferred tax balances as a result of tax reform in the US.
The tax effect of the exceptional items is an expense of 16.7m 2016 24.9m.
The tax effect of the exceptional items is an expense of 16.7m 2016 24.9m.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  NOTES 2.
Net operating expense continued Auditors remuneration including discontinued operations Audit of these Financial Statements 0.1 0.3 Amounts receivable by the Companys auditor and its associates in respect of Audit of Financial Statements of subsidiaries of the Company 1.1 1.1 Auditrelated assurance services Other services Total fees 1.3 1.7 Fees for other services relate principally to the review of the half year Financial Statements.
Fees of 17 810 were paid in relation to expatriate tax compliance services in Singapore.
In 2016 fees of 15335 were paid in relation to the audit of the Essentra pension schemes.
Audit fees presented in the table above represent auditors remuneration in respect of PwC and affiliates in the year ended 31 December 2017 and auditors remuneration in respect of KPMG and affiliates in the year ended 31 December 2016.
Net finance expense Finance income Bank deposits 0.4 0.7 Other finance income 0.1 0.4 Net interest on net pension scheme assets note 17 0.3 1.0 Finance expense Interest on loans and overdrafts 8.5 12.5 Amortisation of bank facility fees 1.0 0.7 Other finance expense 0.4 0.2 Net interest on pension scheme liabilities note 17 1.3 1.2 Net finance expense 10.4 12.5 ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  NOTES 4.
Income tax Amounts recognised in the consolidated income statement Current tax 39.3 18.0 Prior years tax 0.6 0.5 Deferred tax note 15 24.2 26.1 Income tax expense  credit including discontinued operations 14.5 7.6 Amounts recognised in the consolidated statement of comprehensive income Deferred tax expense  credit on remeasurement of defined benefit pension schemes 2.8 5.0 Income tax expense  credit in respect of foreign exchange 0.2 1.0 Income tax expense  credit including discontinued operations 3.0 6.0 Factors affecting income tax for the year Essentra operates in many countries and is subject to income tax in many different jurisdictions the most significant jurisdictions being the UK US Singapore Hungary Thailand and Indonesia.
Essentra calculates its average expected tax rate as a weighted average of the applicable corporate income tax rates in the tax jurisdictions in which it operates.
Profit  loss before income tax including discontinued operations 130.3 47.2 Tax at weighted average tax rate 2017 17 .6% 2016 39.8% Effects of Permanent disallowable items including exceptional costs Nondeductible impairment of goodwill Disposal of Porous Technologies entities Nontaxable exceptional items US tax reform Overseas state and local tax 0.9 1.4 Unrecognised tax attributes arising  utilised Adjustments in respect of prior periods 1.8 1.6 Withholding tax including on unremitted earnings Change in tax rates Other items Income tax expense  credit including discontinued operations 14.5 7.6 Income tax credit in the UK is 3.6m 2016 9.0m expense.
This is primarily due to the trading performance and exceptional costs of the UK businesses.
The change in the weighted average applicable tax rate is caused by a change in the geographical balance of the Groups profits and changes in corporate tax rates in these geographies.
The prior year weighted average tax rate was distorted due to the impairment loss in relation to the Health and Personal Care Packaging Strategic Business Unit.
This includes primarily depreciation on assets not qualifying for capital allowances costs incurred in relation to the disposal of the Porous Technologies businesses and closure of the cartons site in Newport UK.
Permanent disallowable items may vary in future years dependent on the nature of future expenditure.
The 2016 impairment to the Health and Personal Care Packaging goodwill was disallowable for tax purposes.
The disposal of the Porous Technologies businesses gives rise to taxable gains the basis of which is different to the accounting gains.
In 2016 gains from the adjustment to contingent deferred consideration in relation to prior acquisitions were nontaxable.
The US Tax Reform enacted during 2017 generates a tax credit as deferred tax liabilities are rebased to reflect the reduction to the US Federal tax rate from 1 January 2018.
Given the material nature of this impact it is presented as an exceptional tax credit.
See further information regarding deferred tax asset recognition in note 15.
Essentra is able to control the timing and amount of remitted earnings so this amount may vary in future years.
This reflects changes to substantially enacted or enacted corporate tax rates during the year excluding the impact of the US Tax Reform.
Adjustments to uncertain tax positions and sundry items.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  NOTES 5.
Personnel expense Wages and salaries 244.6 238.6 Social security expense 23.5 24.2 Pension expense note 17 8.7 7.9 Share option expense note 17 0.7 2.0 Total personnel expense including discontinued operations 277.5 272.7 Personnel expense totalling 9.8m 2016 1.9m was charged to exceptional operating items during the year.
The Annual Report on Remuneration on pages 97 to 107 sets out information on Directors remuneration.
Key management remuneration Shortterm employee benefits 4.4 3.6 Postemployment benefits 0.5 0.5 Sharebased payments 1.0 0.7 Termination benefits 2.0 Essentra considers key management personnel to be the Directors and the members of the Group Management Committee.
The amounts disclosed are on the same basis as those used to determine the relevant amounts disclosed in the Annual Report on Remuneration.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  NOTES 6.
Earnings per share Earnings Continuing operations Earnings  loss attributable to equity holders of Essentra plc 4.0 51.7
Amortisation of acquired intangible assets 22.9 30.2 Exceptional operating items 56.2 128.5 Tax relief on adjustments 14.0 30.8 Exceptional tax item 11.4 Adjusted earnings 57.7 76.2 Earnings Discontinued operations Earnings attributable to equity holders of Essentra plc 110.3 11.4
Amortisation of acquired intangible assets  2.7 Exceptional operating items 132.4 5.2 Tax relief on adjustments 24.1 0.7 Adjusted earnings 2.0 18.6 Weighted average number of shares Basic weighted average ordinary shares in issue million 261.6 261.1 Dilutive effect of employee share option plans million 2.0 Diluted weighted average ordinary shares million 263.6 261.1 Earnings per share Continuing operations pence Basic earnings  loss per share 1.5p 19.8p Adjustment 20.6p 49.0p Basic adjusted earnings per share 22.1p 29.2p Diluted earnings  loss per share 1.5p 19.8p Diluted adjusted earnings per share 21.9p 29.2p Earnings per share Discontinued operations pence Basic earnings per share 42.2p 4.4p Adjustment 41.5p 2.7p Basic adjusted earnings per share 0.7p 7.1p Diluted earnings per share 41.9p 4.4p Diluted adjusted earnings per share 0.7p 7.1p Earnings per share Total Group pence Basic earnings  loss per share 43.7p 15.4p Adjustment 20.9p 51.7p Basic adjusted earnings per share 22.8p 36.3p Diluted earnings  loss per share 43.4p 15.4p Diluted adjusted earnings per share 22.6p 36.3p Adjusted earnings per share is provided to reflect the underlying earnings performance of Essentra.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  NOTES 6.
Earnings per share continued For the prior year the employee share options were not considered as dilutive as they would increase loss per share from continuing operations.
The basic weighted average number of ordinary shares in issue excludes shares held in treasury and shares held by an employee benefit trust.
Property plant and equipment Land and buildings Plant and machinery
Total
Cost
Beginning of year 87.3 426.1 55.7 569.1 Acquisitions note 23 1.8 2.1 0.1 4.0 Additions 7.3 31.2 10.1 48.6 Disposals 3.7 29.2 2.6 35.5 Transfers 8.5 0.3 1.6 7.2 Currency translation 3.0 11.7 0.7 15.4 Depreciation and impairment Beginning of year 16.4 232.7 34.1 283.2 Charge in period 3.0 26.6 5.7 35.3 Disposals 1.4 27.8 2.4 31.6 Transfers 1.9  0.3 1.6 Impairment  12.0 0.3 12.3 Currency translation 0.2 5.1 0.6 5.9 Net book value at end of year 78.5 180.4 24.2 283.1 ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  NOTES 7 .
Property plant and equipment continued Land and buildings Plant and machinery
Total
Cost
Beginning of year 111.6 383.3 60.4 555.3 Acquisitions note 23  0.5  0.5 Additions 2.3 36.0 2.0 40.3 Disposals 14.8 13.0 3.6 31.4 Transfer to intangible assets   2.6 2.6 Transfer to assets in disposal group held for sale 27.5 42.5 6.5 76.5 Currency translation 15.7 61.8 6.0 83.5 Depreciation and impairment Beginning of year 24.4 208.5 33.6 266.5 Depreciation charge for the year 2.4 25.1 5.5 33.0 Impairment 0.3 3.4  3.7 Disposals 9.1 11.8 3.3 24.2 Transfer to intangible assets   0.5 0.5 Transfer to assets in disposal group held for sale 6.9 29.4 5.7 42.0 Currency translation 5.3 36.9 4.5 46.7 Net book value at end of year 70.9 193.4 21.6 285.9 Included within land and buildings and plant and machinery are assets in the course of construction of 11.0m 2016 25.1m which were not depreciated during the year.
Contractual commitments to purchase property plant and equipment amounted to 5.7m at 31 December 2017 2016 3.8m including Porous Technologies.
The net book value of assets under finance leases amounted to 2.7m as at 31 December 2017 2016 3.3m.
Impairment charge in 2017 of 12.3m related primarily to the writedown of assets as a result of the closure of the folded cartons facility at Newport see note 2 which was reported within the Health and Personal Care Packaging division for segmental reporting purposes.
The assets have been written down to their recoverable amount which represents fair value less costs of disposal.
Impairment charge in 2016 of 3.7m related primarily to the writedown of certain plant and machinery in the Health and Personal Care Packaging division as a result of detailed impairment assessment of assets held by the individual cash generating units in that division.
Further details are included in note 8.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  NOTES 8.
Intangible assets
Customer relationships
Total
Cost
Beginning of year 380.5 427.2 14.1 821.8 Acquisitions note 23 10.7   10.7 Additions   0.2 0.2 Currency translation 12.5 10.8 0.7 24.0 Amortisation and impairment Beginning of year 32.5 203.4 4.2 240.1 Charge for the year  22.2 1.7 23.9 Impairment   4.4 4.4 Currency translation 1.3 5.9 0.2 7.4 Net book value at end of year 347.5 196.7 3.5 547.7
Customer relationships
Total
Cost
Beginning of year 367.2 397.2 15.7 780.1 Acquisitions note 23 0.5 2.1 0.1 2.7 Additions   3.9 3.9 Transfer from property plant and equipment   2.6 2.6 Transfer to assets in disposal group held for sale 29.6 25.4 9.0 64.0 Currency translation 42.4 53.3 0.8 96.5 Amortisation and impairment Beginning of year  80.0 8.5 88.5 Charge for the year  30.6 1.8 32.4 Impairment 32.5 88.0  120.5 Transfer from property plant and equipment   0.5 0.5 Transfer to assets in disposal group held for sale  8.3 6.6 14.9 Currency translation  13.1  13.1 End of year 32.5 203.4 4.2 240.1 Net book value at end of year 348.0 223.8 9.9 581.7 ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  NOTES 8.
Intangible assets continued Other intangible assets principally comprise trade names acquired with Reid Supply developed technology acquired with Richco order backlog and eCommerce development costs.
Amortisation of intangible assets arising from business combinations acquired intangible assets is presented separately on the face of the income statement.
The eCommerce development costs were not acquired through a business combination and their amortisation is included within operating profit before intangible amortisation and exceptional operating items.
The eCommerce development costs were impaired by 4.4m during the year to their value in use.
The eCommerce development costs were incurred and reported within the Component Solutions division for segmental reporting purposes.
The weighted average remaining useful economic lives of customer relationships and other intangible assets including Porous Technologies at the end of the year were 9.2 years and 10.6 years 2016 10.3 years and 7 .2 years respectively.
Essentra tests intangible assets annually for impairment or more frequently if there are indications of impairment.
A discounted cash flow analysis is computed to compare the discounted estimated future operating cash flows to the net carrying value of the goodwill and other intangible assets for each cash generating unit or group of cash generating units as appropriate.
Goodwill is allocated to groups of cash generating units being the operating segments as follows Operating segment
Component Solutions 98.7 93.3 Health and Personal Care Packaging 248.8 254.7 Porous Technologies These are included in assets in disposal group held for sale as at 31 December 2016.
The disposal transaction completed in March 2017 see note 23.
With effect from 1 January 2018 a new organisation structure has been implemented comprising these strategic business units see note 28 for further details.
Goodwill is allocated to groups of cash generating units in accordance with the new operating segment structure as follows Operating segment
Components 83.8 Packaging 189.0
Specialist Components 74.7 ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  NOTES 8.
Intangible assets continued Intangible assets apart from goodwill are allocated to the businesses to which they relate as shown below Business Operating segment Customer relationships and other intangible assets Components  Businesses of former Moss and Skiffy Component Solutions 13.2 17.5 Components  Businesses of former Richco Component Solutions 28.9 35.2 Components  Business of former Reid Supply Component Solutions 5.7 7.6 Components  Business of former Mesan Component Solutions 9.0 11.8 Components  Abric Component Solutions 10.6 11.6 Healthcare  Europe Health and Personal Care Packaging 75.3 79.7 Healthcare  Americas Health and Personal Care Packaging 39.8 46.6 Healthcare  Asia Health and Personal Care Packaging 1.9 2.1 Porous St.
Charles
Discontinued operations  3.3 Porous Chicopee Discontinued operations  14.5 Porous Asia Discontinued operations  1.9 Tear Tapes Health and Personal Care Packaging 1.6 2.2 Speciality Tapes Health and Personal Care Packaging 6.8 8.2 Other businesses Multiple segments 7.4 11.2 These were included in assets in disposal group held for sale as at 31 December 2016.
The assets were disposed of with the Porous Technologies business in March 2017.
The Health and Personal Care Packaging business faced significant operational and commercial challenges during 2016.
Integration of the acquired Clondalkin operations and the associated site rationalisation programme has experienced significant issues and resulted in losses of customers particularly in the UK the US and the Netherlands.
Furthermore there has been significant scaling back of high margin security feature business in the tear tape operations.
Issues were also experienced in the integration of the European speciality tapes activities into the European tear tapes business.
As a result impairment losses were recognised in 2016 for 32.5m of goodwill 88.0m of customer relationship intangible asset and 3.4m of property plant and equipment primarily plant and machinery .
At 31 December 2017  management has performed impairment assessments of the assets in each division based on the new organisational structure which became effective from 1 January 2018.
In managements view as the annual impairment test of goodwill is performed on 31 December it is more appropriate to apply the new organisational structure for the test as at 31 December 2017 .
Following this impairment assessment no impairment loss was recognised in 2017 .
The impairment assessment for intangible assets excluding goodwill and property plant and equipment is performed on the cash generating units within the divisions.
The cash generating units are primarily the manufacturing sites.
Goodwill is tested at the divisional level which is the level that management monitor goodwill at.
The recoverable amount is estimated on the basis of value in use ie discounted cash flow projection expected to be generated by the group of cash generating units.
For assets in the cash generating units assessed to be impaired their fair value less costs to sell is also considered in determining the impairment loss to be recognised if any.
In these cases the fair value less costs to sell is based on estimated market prices reflecting the age and condition of the asset.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  NOTES 8.
Intangible assets continued The impairment tests for goodwill and intangible assets are based on the following assumptions Cash flows for the next year are based upon the Groups annual Plan the Plan .
The key assumptions in the cash flow projections for the Plan are the revenue growth and operating margin for each strategic business unit.
Operating
In relation to the test for the Components and Specialist Components divisions cash flows beyond the Plan period are based on Plan cash flows with growth rates specific to each business of up to 2% 2016 up to 2%.
The estimated cash flows are discounted using a pretax discount rate based upon Essentras estimated posttax weighted average cost of capital of 8.8% 2016 8.2%.
The specific pretax discount rates applied for each group of cash generating units to which significant goodwill is allocated are as follows 11.9% for Packaging 11.6% for Components and 11.3% for Specialist Components 2016 10.6% for Health and Personal Care Packaging 10.6% for Component Solutions and 10.6% for Filtration Products.
There is no goodwill held by the Filter Products division.
In relation to the test for the Packaging division management carried out a more detailed assessment of the growth and profit margin assumptions for each of the next four years after the Plan period and applied a terminal growth rate of 2.0% 2016 1.0  1.5% subsequently.
The growth and profit margin assumptions are based on managements assessment of market condition and scope for cost and profitability improvement taking into account realisable synergies following the recent integration activities.
The key assumption is that operating margins in this division will return to industry average margins by the end of the forecast period following a number of changes made as an outcome of the Groupwide strategic review.
The following reasonably possible change to key assumptions will cause the carrying amount to exceed the recoverable amount in the Packaging division An increase in discount rate of four basis points A reduction in terminal annual growth rate of four basis points A reduction in each years growth rate by 13 basis points A reduction of six basis points in the operating profit margin in the fifth year of the fiveyear period ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  NOTES 9.
Inventories
Raw materials and consumables 45.1 45.4 Workinprogress 11.7 10.4 Finished goods and goods held for resale 57.5 59.3 During 2017 inventories with a total value of 1.8m were written down as a result of site closures the amount written off in 2016 was not material.
Trade and other receivables Trade receivables 168.8 187.8 Other receivables 21.7 22.6 Prepayments and accrued income 10.5 8.0 Cash and cash equivalents Bank balances 48.0 27.4 Shortterm bank deposits and investments 4.0 26.6 Cash and cash equivalents 52.0 54.0 Amount in disposal group held for sale  6.7 Cash and cash equivalents in the statement of cash flows 52.0 60.7 Trade and other payables Trade payables 119.1 134.0 Other tax and social security contributions 9.1 11.8 Other payables 14.0 15.1 Accruals and deferred income 55.3 43.4 ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  NOTES 13.
Interest bearing loans and borrowings Noncurrent liabilities Unsecured bank loans 152.6 310.1 US Private Placement Loan notes 114.4 64.2 Finance lease liabilities 0.1 0.6 Current liabilities US Private Placement Loan notes  64.5 Finance lease liabilities 0.5 0.6 At 31 December 2017  the Group had 32.0m 2016 170.0m and 140.0m 2016 165.0m of unsecured bank loans drawn in sterling and euros at floating rates of interest set by reference to LIBOR.
Essentras 155.0m US Private Placement Loan notes are at a weighted average interest rate of 5.26% per annum 2016 5.64%.
The currency profile of the carrying and nominal values of Essentras loans and borrowings is as follows 2017 2016
Nominal value
Nominal value The difference between the total nominal and carrying value of loans and borrowings relates to the amortised value of prepaid facility fees of 3.7m 2016 1.2m.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  NOTES 14.
Derivatives
Essentra uses derivatives to hedge its exposure to foreign exchange and interest rate risks arising from operational financing and investment activities.
In accordance with its Treasury policy Essentra does not hold or issue derivatives for trading purposes.
Assets Liabilities Fair values
Fair values
At 31 December 2017 Derivatives held in net investment hedges Forward foreign exchange contracts 0.1 4.7 0.3 8.3 Derivatives held in cash flow hedges Forward foreign exchange contracts 0.3 32.0 0.6 73.1 Assets Liabilities Fair values
Fair values
At 31 December 2016 Derivatives held in net investment hedges Forward foreign exchange contracts 0.2 3.7 0.4 15.8 Derivatives held in cash flow hedges Forward foreign exchange contracts 1.0 43.5 1.3 166.7 Cash flow hedges are hedges of the currency risk exposure to variability in cash flows.
They relate to trading transactions and interest payments denominated in foreign currencies.
Hedges of net investments are hedges of the currency risk exposure to changes in the carrying value of net investments in foreign operations.
The net fair value gains or losses on open forward foreign exchange contracts that hedge foreign currency risk of anticipated future sales purchases and interest payments are accounted for as cash flow hedges.
The fair value will be transferred to the income statement when the forecast transactions occur.
All of the hedged transactions are expected to occur over the next 15 months and all derivative instruments mature within the next 15 months.
Essentra had US dollar and euro denominated borrowings which it designated as hedges of its net investments in subsidiary undertakings.
The exchange gains of 7 .4m 2016 losses of 40.8m on the US dollar borrowings and the losses of 4.4m 2016 losses of 16.1m on the euro borrowings were recognised in other comprehensive income.
In addition certain foreign exchange contracts were also designated as hedges of the Groups net investments in foreign operations.
Finance income and expense arising on financial assets and financial liabilities held at amortised cost are those amounts excluding interest on pension scheme assets and interest on pension scheme liabilities detailed in note 3.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  NOTES 15.
Deferred tax Deferred tax assets and liabilities including amounts relating to disposal group held for sale are attributable to the following 2017 2016
Liabilities
Net
Assets
Liabilities
Net
Property plant and equipment Intangible assets Employee benefits
Tax assets  liabilities 29.6 69.2 39.6 26.2 99.9 73.7 Set off of tax 19.2 19.2  23.6 23.6 Net tax assets  liabilities 10.4 50.0 39.6 2.6 76.3 73.7 A deferred tax liability arises on property plant and equipment as the tax value of assets is lower than the corresponding accounting value.
This arises as tax deductions are determined by the applicable tax laws in each country the Group operates in whereas accounting depreciation is calculated in line with the Groups accounting policy.
The decrease during the year is due to the disposal of the Porous Technologies business and the impact from the US Tax Reform.
A deferred tax liability is provided on temporary differences arising on the Groups intangible assets as in the majority of cases the local tax authorities do not allow deduction for amortisation of these intangible assets.
The decrease during the year is due to the disposal of the Porous Technologies business and the impact from US Tax Reform.
This represents deferred tax on the Groups defined benefit pension schemes and sharebased incentives.
This includes expenditure that will be deductible in future periods for tax purposes when the amounts are settled in cash tax losses expected to be utilised in future periods and withholding tax on overseas earnings from Group companies expected to be remitted in the foreseeable future of 4.5m 2016 4.2m.
Movements in the year Beginning of year 73.7 88.4 Credit to the income statement in respect of current year 23.0 27.1 Credit  charge to the income statement in respect of prior years 1.2 1.0 Credit to reserves on foreign exchange movements 0.8 Charge  credit to other comprehensive income 2.8 5.0 Charge to reserves on sharebased incentives 0.3 3.0 Reclassification to current tax 0.9 Acquisitions and disposals 10.9 Currency translation 2.2 13.4 End of year 39.6 73.7 Included in Disposal group held for sale see note 23  10.5 Rest of Group 39.6 63.2 No deferred tax liability is provided in respect of unremitted earnings of foreign subsidiaries where Essentra is able to control the remittance of earnings and it is probable that such earnings will not be remitted in the foreseeable future or where no liability would arise on the remittance.
At the year end it is expected that earnings from certain overseas Group companies will be remitted and a deferred tax liability of 4.5m 2016 4.2m has been recognised accordingly.
This represents withholding taxes payable on the remittance of these earnings under local tax laws.
The amount of temporary differences associated with investments in subsidiaries and branches for which deferred tax liabilities have not been recognised is 107 .8m as at 31 December 2017 2016 113.7m and the associated amount of unrecognised deferred tax is 11.5m 2016 11.7m.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  NOTES 15.
Deferred tax continued Based on available information management determined whether it is probable for some or all of the deferred tax assets to be realised.
In determining this management considered the cumulative losses in prior years the history of tax losses the manner in which assets can be used including time limitations under local laws future earnings potential and expectation of future reversal of taxable temporary differences.
Following management assessment gross deferred tax assets of 0.2m 2016 0.2m in respect of capital losses and unutilised tax losses of 31.9m 2016 46.1m have not been recognised as their realisation is not probable.
The capital losses have an unlimited expiry date.
The tax losses expire as follows 0.1m within five years 4.5m in five to ten years 0.1 in over 10 years and 27 .2m with no expiry.
If future conditions change the amount of unrecognised deferred tax assets will be reassessed.
This may impact the income tax expense  credit in the year of remeasurement.
Provisions
Reorganisation
Other
Total
Beginning of year 0.2 5.9 6.1 Provisions made during the year 21.4 6.2 27.6 Provisions released during the year  0.6 0.6 Utilised during the year 6.6 1.4 8.0 Transfer  0.3 0.3 End of year 15.0 9.8 24.8 Noncurrent 14.5 5.5 20.0 Current 0.5 4.3 4.8
Other
Total
Beginning of year 2.9 7.9 10.8 Provisions made during the year  0.4 0.4 Provisions released during the year 1.9 1.2 3.1 Utilised during the year 0.8 2.0 2.8 Acquisitions  0.1 0.1 Transferred to accruals and other payables  0.1 0.1 Currency translation  0.8 0.8 End of year 0.2 5.9 6.1 Noncurrent  4.9 4.9 Current 0.2 1.0 1.2 ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  NOTES 16.
Provisions continued Reorganisation provisions are generally held against restructuring and redundancy costs primarily related to the integration of acquired businesses and restructuring associated with acquisitions.
Reorganisation provisions made during 2017 primarily related to the exceptional restructuring costs arising from the closure of the folded cartons facility at Newport see note 2.
Other provisions relate primarily to vacant properties lease dilapidations employees compensation claims and other claims.
Noncurrent provisions are generally provisions for vacant properties and lease dilapidations which are expected to be utilised within the next 10 years.
The release of other provisions during the year relates mostly to claims and property related provisions.
Employee benefits Postemployment benefits The Group operates a number of defined benefit and defined contribution pension schemes around the world covering many of its employees.
The Group also has a number of other postemployment obligations in certain countries some of which are required under local law.
The defined benefit plans are administered by boards of trustees and the assets are held independently from Essentra.
The boards of trustees comprise member nominated trustees employer nominated trustees and independent advisory trustees.
The articles of the plans prohibit a majority on the boards to be established by either the member or employer nominated trustees.
The defined benefit plans operate within the wider regulatory framework of the country in which the plan is operated.
Pension costs of the defined benefit schemes are assessed in accordance with the advice of independent professionally qualified actuaries.
Full triennial actuarial valuations were carried out on the principal European defined benefit schemes as at 5 April 2015 and annual actuarial valuations are performed on the principal US defined benefit schemes.
The assets and liabilities of the defined benefit schemes have been updated to the balance sheet date from the most recently completed actuarial valuations taking account of the investment returns achieved by the schemes and the level of contributions.
The principal European defined benefit schemes entitle remaining members to a pension calculated on 1.25% or 2% of their capped final pensionable pay multiplied by the number of pensionable years of service.
Some members have historical entitlements to accrual rates of 1.67%  1.9% and 3% for certain tranches of their service.
The principal US defined benefit schemes entitle certain articipating employees to annuity benefits equal to 50% of final average pensionable salary reduced for years of service less than 30 and other participating employees to annuity benefits equal to 49 per month for each year of service.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  NOTES 17 .
Employee benefits continued The amounts included in the consolidated Financial Statements are as follows Amounts expensed against operating profit Defined contribution schemes 7.1 6.2 Defined benefit schemes  service cost 1.5 1.5 Other  curtailment gain 0.1 Other postemployment obligations 0.2 0.2 Total operating expense including discontinued operations 8.7 7.9 Amounts included as finance income  expense Net interest on defined benefit scheme assets note 3 0.3 1.0 Net interest on defined benefit scheme liabilities note 3 1.3 1.2 Net finance expense including discontinued operations 1.0 0.2 Amounts recognised in the consolidated statement of comprehensive income Return on defined benefit scheme assets excluding amounts in net finance income 11.2 24.0 Impact of changes in assumptions and experience to the present value of defined benefit scheme liabilities 2.9 40.8 Gains  losses on remeasurement of defined benefit schemes including discontinued operations 8.3 16.8 During 2015 the principal defined benefit pension schemes in the UK and the US were closed to future accrual and curtailment gains were recognised in profit or loss accordingly.
Following the closure of the Groups principal defined benefit pension schemes to future accruals the schemes are funded by the Groups subsidiaries and employees are not required to make any further contribution.
The funding of these schemes is based on separate actuarial valuations for funding purposes for which the assumptions may differ from those used in the valuation for IAS 19 purposes.
The principal assumptions used by the independent qualified actuaries for the purposes of IAS 19 are as follows 2017 2016 Europe US Europe US Increase in salaries pre2010 na na na na Increase in salaries post2010 na na na na Increase in pensions at RPI capped at 5% 3.10% na 3.30% na at CPI capped at 5% 2.20% na 2.40% na at CPI minimum 3% capped at 5% 3.10% na 3.20% na at CPI capped at 2.5% 1.90% na 2.00% na Discount rate 2.50% 3.60% 2.70% 4.15% Inflation rate  RPI 3.20% na 3.40% na Inflation rate  CPI 2.20% na 2.40% na For service prior to April 2010 pension at retirement is linked to salary at retirement.
For service after April 2010 pension is linked to salary at April 2010 with annual increases capped at 3%.
Due to the timescale covered the assumptions applied may not be borne out in practice.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  NOTES 17 .
Employee benefits continued The life expectancy assumptions used to estimate defined benefit obligations at the year end are as follows 2017 2016 Europe US Europe US Male retiring today at age 65 22.1 20.7 22.7 20.8 Female retiring today at age 65 23.9 22.7 24.5 22.8 Male retiring in 20 years at age 65 23.5 22.3 24.4 22.5 Female retiring in 20 years at age 65 25.4 24.2 26.4 24.4 The allocation of assets between different classes of investment is reviewed regularly and is a key factor in the trustees investment policies.
The allocation of assets is arrived at taking into consideration current market conditions and trends the size of potential returns relative to investment risk and the extent to which asset realisation needs to match liability maturity.
There are risks underlying these considerations.
If asset returns fall below the returns required for scheme assets to match the present value of scheme liabilities a scheme deficit results.
Persistent deficits represent an obligation the Group has to settle through increased cash contributions.
If asset maturities are not properly matched with liability maturities there is also the risk that the Group could be required to make unplanned shortterm cash contributions to resolve resulting liquidity issues.
Scheme assets are invested by the trustees in asset classes and markets that are considered to be reasonably liquid so this matching and liquidity risk is considered to be sufficiently mitigated.
The fair value of scheme assets which are not intended to be realised in the shortterm and may be subject to significant change before they are realised and the present value of the pension scheme liabilities which are derived from cash flow projections over long periods and are therefore inherently uncertain are
US
Total
Equities 33% 73.7 62% 34.4 108.1 Corporate bonds 18% 40.5 38% 20.9 61.4 Government bonds 49% 109.8   109.8 Other  1.1  0.2 1.3 Fair value of scheme assets 225.1 55.5 280.6 Present value of scheme liabilities 208.0 83.3 291.3 Net retirement benefit assets  obligations 17.1 27.8 10.7
US
Total
Equities 32% 69.9 61% 34.5 104.4 Corporate bonds 18% 39.0 38% 21.6 60.6 Government bonds 50% 111.1   111.1 Other  0.9 1% 0.8 1.7 Fair value of scheme assets 220.9 56.9 277.8 Present value of scheme liabilities 212.3 86.6 298.9 Net retirement benefit assets  obligations 8.6 29.7 21.1 ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  NOTES 17 .
Employee benefits continued The equity corporate bond and government bond assets are either direct investments or investments made via a managed fund for those asset classes.
All of these assets have a quoted market price in an active market.
The other asset class relates primarily to property and hedge funds which are valued at their cumulative unit offer price.
No direct investment in property is held.
No plan assets are invested directly in the shares of Essentra plc.
The pension surplus in Europe is not restricted as the asset is considered realisable on the basis of the Groups unconditional right to a refund.
The average expected duration of the Groups European defined benefit pension liability at 31 December 2017 is 20.0 years 2016 20.0 years.
The average expected duration of the Groups US defined benefit pension liability at 31 December 2017 is 12.7 years 2016 12.8 years.
The Groups contributions to its defined benefit pension schemes are determined in consultation with trustees taking into consideration actuarial advice investment conditions and other local conditions and practices.
In 2018 the Group expects to make defined benefit contributions of 3.5m to its US schemes.
As the Groups European schemes are in a surplus position the Group does not expect to make further contributions in 2018.
Movement in fair value of postemployment obligations including disposal group held for sale during the year 2017 2016
Defined benefit pension scheme liabilities
Total
Defined benefit pension scheme assets
Other
Total
Service cost and administrative expense 1.4 0.1 0.2 1.7 1.1 0.4 0.2 1.7 Employer contributions 1.2 0.1  1.3 0.8  0.2 1.0 Return on plan assets excluding amounts in net finance income 11.2   11.2 24.0   24.0 Actuarial losses arising from change in financial assumptions  9.5  9.5  45.2 0.3 45.5 Actuarial gains arising from change in demographic assumptions  4.4  4.4  3.4  3.4 Actuarial gains arising from experience adjustment  2.2  2.2  1.3  1.3 Finance income  expense 8.0 8.9 0.1 1.0 9.6 9.8  0.2 Benefits paid 10.9 10.9   11.2 11.2 Curtailments   0.1 0.1 Currency translation 4.6 7.5 0.2 2.7 9.0 13.6 0.3 4.9 Business disposals 0.7 1.0  0.3 ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  NOTES 17 .
Employee benefits continued
For the significant assumptions used in determining defined benefit costs and liabilities the following sensitivity analysis gives the estimate of the impact on the measurement of the scheme liabilities as at 31 December 2017 .
Scheme liabilities
US
Total
0.5% decrease in the discount rate 21.6 5.3 26.9 1.0% increase in the rate of inflation 18.8 na 18.8 1.0% increase in rate of salary  pension increases na na na 1 year increase in life expectancy 8.2 2.4 10.6 0.5% increase in the discount rate 18.8 4.7 23.5 1.0% decrease in rate of salary  pension increases na na na 1.0% decrease in the rate of inflation 16.2 na 16.2 Sharebased incentives Essentra operates equitysettled sharebased incentive plans for its Executive Directors and employees.
The total expense including discontinued operations in respect of these plans during the year was 1.3m 2016 2.0m of which 0.6m 2016 nil in relation to senior management restructuring was included within exceptional operating costs.
The expense also includes a credit of 1.9m which relates to the reversal of charges incurred in prior years on options which will no longer vest.
Details of these plans are set out below Share options outstanding At 1 Jan
Granted during the year
Lapsed during the year
Exercised during the year
At 31 Dec
Exercisable at 31 Dec
LTIP Part A 1580165 653.9p   327 777 811.7p 48410 219.0p 1203978 628.4p 624233 377.3p LTIP Part B 2343701  1671180  935665  155280  2923936  49781 DASB 238350    3694  162891  71765 SAYE 3year plan 268979 755.7p 630779 430.0p 295778 660.8p 697 430.0p 603283 462.1p SAYE 5year plan 182407 683.4p 174001 842.0p 137468 764.7p 20658 354.2p 198282 800.5p US SAYE 2year plan 60826 528.6p 35158 442.0p 30199 622.3p   65785 439.3p 6159 711.5p 4674428 2511118 1730581 387936 5067 029 680173 ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  NOTES 17 .
Employee benefits continued At 1 Jan
Granted during the year
Lapsed during the year
Exercised during the year
At 31 Dec
Exercisable at 31 Dec
LTIP Part A 1707 546 614.2p 429212 828.5p 265040 887.0p 291553 466.9p 1580165 653.9p 735847 380.6p LTIP Part B 2270114  843025  561196  208242  2343701  185308 DASB 329396  51879  19376  123549  238350 SAYE 3year plan 641923 691.6p 104466 787.0p 330333 743.4p 147077 525.7p 268979 755.7p SAYE 5year plan 321708 588.9p 64569 787.0p 133465 720.5p 70405 276.4p 182407 683.4p US SAYE 2year plan 94116 713.6p 32552 367.0p 65842 713.2p   60826 528.6p 7919 713.6p 5364803 1525703 1375252 840826 4674428 929074 The exercise prices of options outstanding at the end of the year range from nil to 997 .0p.
The weighted average share price at the date of exercise for options exercised during the year was 507 .2p 2016 768.1p.
The following table shows the weighted average fair value at the date of grant for options granted during the year
Part A
Part B DASB
3year plan
5year plan Year ended 31 December 2017 na 403.8p na 138.7p 114.4p Year ended 31 December 2016 158.7p 635.8p 777.4p 153.8p 176.3p Fair value model inputs for share options awarded
Part A
Part B DASB
3year plan
5year plan Weighted average fair value at grant 127.1p 514.9p 876.4p 147.2p 148.4p Weighted average share price at grant 621.2p 680.5p 931.4p 568.5p 600.8p Weighted average exercise price 628.4p   462.1p 482.6p Weighted average volatility 30.2% 34.8% 24.8% 40.4% 34.4% Weighted average dividend yield 2.66% 3.17% 2.07% 3.73% 3.43% Weighted risk free rate 1.04% 0.41% 0.52% 0.34% 0.79% Expected employee retention rates 85.2% 100.0% 100.0% 75.0% 75.0% Expected term 3.16 years 3.00 years 3.00 years 3.00 years 5.00 years Valuation model Binomial Monte Carlo Binomial Binomial Binomial ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  NOTES 17 .
Employee benefits continued
Part A
Part B DASB
3year plan
5year plan Weighted average fair value at grant 132.4p 660.2p 850.7p 235.6p 249.8p Weighted average share price at grant 648.0p 866.4p 900.8p 935.4p 850.8p Weighted average exercise price 653.9p   755.7p 683.4p Weighted average volatility 29.5% 25.2% 24.9% 24.7% 28.1% Weighted average dividend yield 2.57% 2.07% 1.94% 1.92% 1.98% Weighted risk free rate 1.10% 0.77% 0.80% 0.89% 1.30% Expected employee retention rates 86.7% 100.0% 100.0% 75.0% 75.0% Expected term 3.14 years 3.00 years 3.00 years 3.00 years 5.00 years Valuation model Binomial Monte Carlo Binomial Binomial Binomial Where relevant market conditions are taken into account in determining the fair value of the awards at grant date.
The threeyear average historic volatility at grant date has been used as the volatility input for the LTIP Part A LTIP Part B DASB and SAYE 3year awards and the fiveyear average historic volatility at grant date has been used as the volatility input for the SAYE 5year award.
2017 and 2016
Part A
Part B DASB
3year plan
5year plan Contractual life 3  10 years 3  6 years 3 years 3 years 5 years Details of the vesting conditions of the LTIP Part A LTIP Part B and DASB share option schemes are set out in the Annual Report on Remuneration on pages 97 to 107 .
Financial risk management Essentras activities expose the business to a number of key financial risks which have the potential to affect its ability to achieve its business objectives.
The Board has overall responsibility for Essentras system of internal control and financial risk management and for reviewing the effectiveness of this system.
Such a system can only be designed to mitigate rather than eliminate the risk of failure to achieve business objectives and can therefore only provide reasonable and not absolute assurance against material misstatement or loss.
Essentra has a centralised treasury function to manage funding liquidity and exposure to interest rate and foreign exchange risk.
Treasury policies are approved by the Board and cover the nature of the exposure to be hedged the types of derivatives that may be employed and the criteria for investing and borrowing cash.
Essentra uses derivatives only to manage currency and interest rate risk arising from underlying business activities.
No transactions of a speculative nature are undertaken.
The treasury function is subject to periodic independent reviews by the Group Assurance department.
Underlying policy assumptions and activities are reviewed by the Treasury Committee.
Controls over exposure changes and transaction authenticity are in place and dealings are restricted to those banks with the relevant combination of geographical presence expertise and suitable credit rating.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  NOTES 18.
Financial risk management continued The following describes Essentras financial risk exposure and management from a quantitative and qualitative perspective.
Credit risk is the risk of financial loss if a customer or counterparty to a financial asset or liability fails to meet its contractual obligations and arises principally from trade receivables and cash and cash equivalents.
Essentra has no significant individual concentrations of credit risk.
The following is an overview of how Essentra manages its credit risk exposures.
Trade and other receivables Essentras exposure to credit risk is driven by the profile of its customers.
This is influenced by the demographics of the customer base including the industry and country in which customers operate.
Essentra monitors significant customers credit limits and there is an allowance for impairment that represents the estimate of potential losses in respect of trade and other receivables.
The components of this allowance are a specific allowance for individual losses and a collective allowance for losses that have been incurred but not yet identified.
The collective allowance takes account of historical experience and the profile of customers.
As at 31 December 2017  gross trade receivables including amounts relating to disposal group held for sale were 173.3m 2016 220.1m of which 39.3m 2016 45.0m were past due but not impaired.
The ageing analysis of trade receivables past due but not impaired is as follows Up to 3 months 36.7 42.8 Over 3 months 2.6 2.2 As at 31 December 2017  trade receivables including amounts relating to disposal group held for sale of 4.5m 2016 4.7m were provided for as they were considered to be impaired.
The ageing of the impaired receivables provided for is as follows Up to 3 months Over 3 months 4.5 4.7 The movement in the provision for impaired receivables including amounts relating to disposal group held for sale is as follows Beginning of year 4.7 4.3 Impaired receivables acquired 0.3 Impairment loss recognised 1.5 2.4 Utilisation 2.0 2.0 End of year 4.5 4.7 ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  NOTES 18.
Financial risk management continued Derivative assets Credit risk with respect to derivatives is controlled by limiting transactions to major banking counterparties where internationally agreed standard form documentation exists.
The credit ratings of these counterparties are monitored.
Cash and cash equivalents Credit risk relating to cash and cash equivalents is monitored daily on a counterparty by counterparty basis.
The credit limits imposed specify the maximum amount of cash which can be invested in or with any single counterparty.
These limits are determined by geographic presence expertise and credit rating.
Essentra monitors the credit ratings of counterparties.
The following credit risk table provides information regarding the credit risk exposure of Essentra by classifying derivative assets and cash and cash equivalents including amounts relating to disposal group held for sale according to credit ratings of the counterparties.
AAA is the highest possible rating and all of the assets are neither impaired nor past due.
AAA
AA
BBB
BB
Not rated
Derivative assets   0.3 0.1   0.4 Cash and cash equivalents 0.1 2.8 29.9 16.3 2.7 0.2 52.0
AA
BBB
BB
Not rated
Derivative assets  0.2 0.6 0.4   1.2 Cash and cash equivalents  4.9 41.5 8.1 6.0 0.2 60.7 Essentras maximum credit risk exposure is 251.5m 2016 303.9m and no collateral is held against this amount 2016 nil.
Market price risk is the risk that changes in foreign exchange rates and interest rates will affect income or the value of financial assets and liabilities.
Essentra has produced a sensitivity analysis that shows the estimated change to the income statement and equity of a 1% 5% or 10% weakening or strengthening in sterling against all other currencies or an increase or decrease of 50 basis points bps 100bps and 200bps in market interest rates.
The amounts generated from the sensitivity analysis are estimates and actual results in the future may materially differ.
Essentra is exposed to two types of market price risk currency risk and interest rate risk.
Essentra publishes its consolidated Financial Statements in sterling but conducts business in several foreign currencies.
Therefore it is subject to currency risk due to exchange rate movements which affect the translation of results and underlying net assets of its operations and their transaction costs.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  NOTES 18.
Financial risk management continued Hedge of net investment in foreign operations The majority of Essentras net assets are in currencies other than sterling.
The Companys normal policy is to limit the translation exposure and the resulting impact on shareholders funds through measures such as borrowing in those currencies in which the Group has significant net assets.
Essentras US dollardenominated assets were approximately 36% 2016 32% hedged by the US dollar denominated borrowings.
Essentras eurodenominated assets were approximately 65% hedged by the eurodenominated borrowings 2016 73%.
Transaction exposure hedging The majority of Essentras transactions are carried out in the functional currencies of its operations and therefore transaction exposure is limited.
However where such exposure does occur Essentra uses forward foreign currency contracts to hedge its exposure to movements in exchange rates on its highly probable forecast foreign currency sales and purchases over a period of up to 18 months.
Essentra does not formally define the proportion of highly probable forecast sales and purchases to hedge but agrees an appropriate percentage on an individual basis with each business by reference to the Groups risk management policies and prevailing market conditions.
The Group documents currency derivatives used to hedge its forecast transactions as cash flow hedges.
To the extent that cash flow hedges are effective gains and losses are recognised in other comprehensive income until the forecast transaction occurs at which point the gains and losses are transferred either to the income statement or to the nonfinancial asset acquired.
The following table shows Essentras sensitivity to a 1% 5% and 10% weakening or strengthening in sterling against all currencies.
To calculate the impact on the income statement for the year all currencies average rates have been increased or decreased by 1% 5% or 10%.
The translational effect on equity is limited as a proportion of US dollar and euro exposure is hedged.
Accordingly the effect on equity is calculated by increasing or decreasing the closing rate of all currencies with an adjustment for the movement in currency hedges.
It is assumed that all net investment and cash flow hedges will continue to be 100% effective.
Weakening in sterling Strengthening in sterling 10% 5% 1% 1% 5% 10% Impact on the income statement  gain  loss 4.7 2.2 0.4 0.4 2.0 3.8 Impact on equity  gain  loss 56.7 26.8 5.2 5.0 24.3 46.4 Weakening in sterling Strengthening in sterling 10% 5% 1% 1% 5% 10% Impact on the income statement  gain  loss 3.9 1.8 0.4 0.3 1.7 3.2 Impact on equity  gain  loss 65.2 30.9 5.9 5.8 27.9 53.3 b Interest rate risk Essentras strategy is to ensure that at least 30% of the total debt with maturities of more than one year is protected with fixed interest rates or approved interest rate derivatives.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  NOTES 18.
Financial risk management continued The following table shows Essentras sensitivity to a 50bps 100bps and 200bps decrease or increase in sterling US dollar and euro interest rates.
To calculate the impact on the income statement for the year the interest rates on all external floating rate interest bearing loans and borrowings have been increased or decreased by 50bps 100bps or 200bps and the resulting increase or decrease in the net interest charge has been adjusted for the effect of Essentras interest rate derivatives.
Decrease in interest rates Increase in interest rates 200bps 100bps 50bps 50bps 100bps 200bps Impact on the income statement  gain  loss 4.4 2.2 1.1 1.1 2.2 4.4 Decrease in interest rates Increase in interest rates 200bps 100bps 50bps 50bps 100bps 200bps Impact on the income statement  gain  loss 6.2 3.1 1.6 1.6 3.1 6.2 See note 13 for interest rate disclosure on loans and borrowings.
Liquidity risk is the risk that Essentra although solvent will encounter difficulties in meeting obligations associated with financial liabilities that are settled by delivering cash or another financial asset.
Essentras objective is to maintain a balance between continuity of funding and flexibility.
Essentra is primarily funded by a series of US Private Placement Loan notes from various financial institutions totalling US155m and syndicated multicurrency fiveyear revolving credit facilities of 285.0m and 100.8m from its banks.
The 80m Loan note repaid on its due date in April 2017 was replaced with three new Loan notes totalling 75m in November 2017 .
A Revolving Credit Facility of 375m was made available upon completion of the November 2017 Loan note issuance .
The new series of Loan notes have original maturities ranging from seven and 12 years and the revolving credit facilities mature in November 2022.
The refinancing exercise undertaken in November 2017 also included the new Revolving Credit Facility of 375.0m.
At 31 December 2017  the available bank facilities totalled 374.2m 2016 414.2m of which 155.9m 2016 311.0m was drawn down.
In addition uncommitted and overdraft facilities are maintained to provide shortterm flexibility.
Amounts drawn by Essentra on its committed facilities are subject to standard banking covenants.
The financial covenants require the net debt to EBITDA ratio to be less than 3.0x and interest cover to be greater than 3.5x.
There has been no covenant breach during the period.
Essentras available undrawn committed facilities at 31 December were Expiring after two years 218.3 103.2 Any loans drawn on these facilities would bear interest at floating rates with reference to LIBOR for the currency and period of the loan.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  NOTES 18.
Financial risk management continued The maturity of Essentras financial liabilities including amounts relating to disposal group held for sale including estimated interest payments is analysed below.
Fair value
Contractual cash flows 1 yr 12 yrs 25 yrs 5 yrs Unsecured bank loans 155.9 152.6 167.8 2.4 2.4 163.0 US Private Placement Loan notes 117.8 114.4 148.6 6.0 6.0 68.6 68.0 Derivative liabilities 0.9 0.9 0.9 0.9 Trade and other payables 133.1 133.1 133.1 133.1 Finance lease liabilities 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.5 0.1 Deferred consideration 4.5 4.5 4.5 0.8 1.3 1.2 1.2
Carrying amount
1 yr 12 yrs 25 yrs 5 yrs Unsecured bank loans 310.1 310.1 320.7 3.9 3.9 312.9 US Private Placement Loan notes 136.5 128.7 144.1 70.1 3.8 70.2 Derivative liabilities 1.7 1.7 1.7 1.7 Trade and other payables 160.0 160.0 160.0 160.0 Finance lease liabilities 1.2 1.2 1.2 0.6 0.5 0.1 Total trade and other payables including amounts relating to disposal group held for sale carried at 197 .5m 2016 218.5m including accruals and deferred income of 55.3m 2016 46.3m and other taxes and social security contributions of 9.1m 2016 12.2m which are not financial liabilities and are therefore excluded from the above analysis.
All trade and other payables are due to be settled in less than six months.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  NOTES 18.
Financial risk management continued Total financial assets and liabilities The table below sets out Essentras accounting categories and fair value for each class of financial asset and liability including amounts relating to disposal group held for sale.
2017 2016
Loans and receivables
Total carrying value
Loans and receivables
Total carrying value Trade and other receivables  199.1  199.1  242.0  242.0 Cash and cash equivalents  52.0  52.0  60.7  60.7 Interest bearing loans and borrowings   267.6 267.6   440.0 440.0 Trade and other payables   132.3 132.3   158.7 158.7 Level 2 of fair value hierarchy Derivative assets 0.4   0.4 1.2   1.2 Derivative liabilities 0.9   0.9 1.7   1.7 Level 3 of fair value hierarchy Other noncurrent financial liabilities 3.7   3.7 Other current payables 0.8   0.8 1.3   1.3 Total trade and other receivables including amounts relating to disposal group held for sale carried at 209.6m 2016 250.4m include prepayments of 10.5m 2016 8.4m which are not financial assets and are therefore excluded from the above analysis.
Fair values of forward foreign exchange contracts and cross currency swaps have been calculated at yearend forward exchange rates compared to contracted rates.
These are determined to be level 2 in the fair value hierarchy.
The only financial instrument with fair value determined by reference to significant unobservable inputs which is classified as level 3 in the fair value hierarchy is the deferred contingent consideration of 4.5m relating to the acquisitions of Micro Plastics and a previous acquisition 2016 1.3m relating to previous acquisitions.
The fair value of the deferred contingent consideration is estimated based on an assessment of the likely outcome of the acquired business financial performance.
There have been no transfers between levels of the fair value hierarchy.
There are no nonrecurring fair value measurements.
During the year a fair value gain of 0.1m 2016 fair value gain of 1.1m in respect of financial instruments at level 3 fair value hierarchy was recognised within exceptional items see note 2 and nil 2016 nil was settled in cash.
No other fair value gains or losses were recorded in profit or loss and other comprehensive income.
Included within interest bearing loans and borrowings are 155m 2016 160m US Private Placement Loan notes.
The Loan notes are held at amortised cost with a carrying value of 114.8m 2016 128.7m.
The Group estimates that the total fair value of the Loan notes at 31 December 2017 is 117 .8m 2016 136.5m.
All other financial assets classified as loans and receivables and trade and other payables classified as amortised cost are held at amortised cost and mostly have short terms to maturity.
For this reason their carrying amounts at the reporting date approximate the fair values.
Unsecured bank loans included within interest bearing loans and borrowings incur interest at floating rates and as a result their carrying amounts also approximate their fair values at the reporting date.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  NOTES 18.
Financial risk management continued The table below shows the amount of bank overdrafts offset against the bank balances under enforceable master netting agreements with banks including amounts relating to disposal group held for sale Gross amount of recognised financial assets Gross amount of recognised financial liabilities set off in the balance sheet Net amount of financial assets presented in the balance sheet Cash and cash equivalents At 31 December 2017 53.6 1.6 52.0 At 31 December 2016 61.2 0.5 60.7 iv Capital structure Essentra defines its capital structure as its equity and noncurrent interest bearing loans and borrowings and aims to manage this to safeguard its ability to continue as a going concern so that it can continue to provide returns to shareholders and benefits for other stakeholders.
Essentra sets the amount of capital in proportion to risk.
Essentra manages the capital structure and makes adjustments to it in the light of changes in economic conditions and the risk characteristics of the underlying assets.
In order to maintain or adjust the capital structure Essentra may return capital to shareholders through dividends and share buybacks issue new shares or sell assets to reduce debt.
Essentra monitors its capital structure on the basis of the mediumterm net debt to EBITDA ratio.
EBITDA is defined as operating profit before depreciation and other amounts written off property plant and equipment share option expense intangible amortisation and exceptional operating items.
During 2017  Essentras strategy was to maintain the mediumterm net debt to EBITDA ratio in the range This represents a change from 2016 where the strategy was to maintain a ratio in the range 1.0 to 2.5.
The net debt to EBITDA ratios at 31 December were as follows note Net debt 210.6 379.3 Operating profit before intangible amortisation and exceptional operating items 87.4 131.9 Plus depreciation and other amounts written off property plant and equipment and amortisation of nonacquired intangible assets 36.3 34.8 Plus share option expense 17 0.7 2.0 EBITDA 124.4 168.7 Net debt to EBITDA ratio 1.7 2.3 ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  NOTES 19.
Issued share capital Issued and fully paid ordinary shares of 25p 2016 25p each 66.0 66.0 Number of ordinary shares in issue Beginning of year 264129170 264129170 Issue of shares during the year End of year 264129170 264129170 At 31 December 2017  the Company held 1170925 2016 1286952 of its own shares in treasury.
Reserves
Within retained earnings the Company has deducted the value of own shares purchased for an employee trust and treasury shares held by the Company with a total cost of 12.2m 2016 15.4m.
Employee trust shares are ordinary shares of the Company held in an employee benefit trust.
The purpose of this trust is to hold shares in the Company for subsequent transfer to Executive Directors and employees relating to deferred share awards and options granted under the Companys sharebased incentive plans.
Full details are set out in the Annual Report on Remuneration on pages The assets liabilities and expenditure of the trust have been incorporated in these Financial Statements.
At 31 December 2017  the trust held 1179507 2016 1517 883 shares upon which dividends have been waived with an aggregate nominal value of 0.3m 2016 0.4m and market value of 6.2m 2016 7 .0m.
The Company holds 1170925 2016 1286952 ordinary shares with a nominal value of 0.3m 2016 0.3m in treasury.
This represents 0.4% 2016 0.5% of the number of ordinary shares in issue.
The other reserve relates to the Group reorganisation which took place as part of the demerger from Bunzl plc.
It represents the difference between Essentra plcs share capital and Essentra International Limiteds share capital and share premium on 6 June 2005 and is not distributable.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  NOTES 21.
Analysis of net debt 1 Jan
Exchange movements
31 Dec Cash at bank and in hand 34.0 15.0 1.0  48.0 Shortterm bank deposits and investments 26.7 22.7   4.0 Cash and cash equivalents in the statement of cash flows 60.7 7.7 1.0  52.0 Debt due within one year 65.1 64.6   0.5 Debt due after one year 374.9 103.8 1.5 2.5 267.1 Loan receivable arising from disposal of Porous Technologies    5.0 5.0 The noncash movements represent the amortisation of prepaid facility fees.
1 Jan
Exchange movements
31 Dec Cash at bank and in hand 23.8 7.1 3.1  34.0 Shortterm bank deposits and investments 6.4 19.7 0.6  26.7 Cash and cash equivalents in the statement of cash flows 30.2 26.8 3.7  60.7 Debt due within one year 0.6   64.5 65.1 Debt due after one year 403.5 24.6 59.8 63.8 374.9 The noncash movements represent the amortisation of prepaid facility fees and reclassification of part of the US Private Placement Loan notes as current.
Commitments
Operating leases At 31 December Essentra had the following future minimum lease payments under noncancellable operating leases Payable within one year 11.5 10.9 Payable between one and five years 34.8 38.9 Payable after five years 11.2 19.8 ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  NOTES 23.
Acquisitions and disposals 2017 acquisition Micro Plastics On 12 December 2017  Essentra acquired 100% of the share capital of Micro Plastics Inc Micro Plastics.
Micro Plastics is a leading manufacturer and distributor of nylon fasteners and other plastic components for a wide range of industrial endmarkets  including general industrial automotives and white goods  and is reported under the Companys Component Solutions division Components under the new organisational structure  see note 28.
The acquisition of Micro Plastics expands the divisions product range adds manufacturing capacity in the US and extends the divisions geographical presence primarily in Mexico.
On acquisition the assets and liabilities of the business acquired were adjusted to reflect their fair values to Essentra.
Due to the timing of the transaction the purchase price allocations including the split between goodwill and intangible assets and fair value adjustments are provisional and subject to finalisation for up to one year from the date of acquisition.
Had the acquisition been completed on 1 January 2017  the contribution to the Groups revenue and operating profit would have been 20.1m and 1.4m higher respectively.
Related transaction costs of 0.5m were recognised in the income statement in exceptional operating items.
A summary of the acquisition of Micro Plastics is detailed below Fair value of assets  liabilities acquired Property plant and equipment 4.0 Inventories 3.2 Trade and other receivables 2.5 Cash and cash equivalents 4.3 Deferred tax 0.5 Trade and other payables 0.8 Goodwill 10.7 Consideration 23.4 Satisfied by Cash consideration 19.7 Deferred consideration 3.7 Cash consideration 19.7 Cash and cash equivalents acquired 4.3 Net cash flow in respect of the acquisition 15.4 Goodwill represents the expected operating synergies and financial synergies and the value of an assembled workforce.
Goodwill is not deductible for tax purposes.
2016 acquisition Kamsri The Group acquired the pharmaceutical assets of Kamsri Printing and Packaging PVT.
Ltd Kamsri based in India in January 2016.
This acquisition was not material.
Disposal of Porous Technologies On 25 August 2016 Essentra entered into a sale and purchase agreement with Filtration Group to dispose of the Groups entire operations in Porous Technologies.
The transaction completed on 6 March 2017 .
The results of Porous Technologies up to the date on which the transaction completed are presented as profit from discontinued operations in the Consolidated Income Statement.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  NOTES 23.
Acquisitions and disposals continued The assets and liabilities of Porous Technologies were presented as held for sale on the balance sheet as at 31 December 2016.
No finance income or expense related to discontinued operations and the income tax expense relating to discontinued operations amounted to 24.9m 2016 3.9m.
Included within exceptional operating items is a profit arising from the movement in foreign exchange reserve of 26.3m reclassified to and reported in the income statement.
The results of continuing and discontinued operations are as follows Year ended 31 December 2017
Discontinued operations
Group
External revenue 1027.3 15.7 1043.0 External expenses 942.7 12.9 955.6 Operating profit before intangible amortisation and exceptional operating items 84.6 2.8 87.4 Amortisation of acquired intangible assets 22.9  22.9 Exceptional operating items 56.2 132.4 76.2 Operating profit 5.5 135.2 140.7 Finance income 0.8  0.8 Finance expense 11.2  11.2 Loss  profit before tax 4.9 135.2 130.3 Income tax credit  expense 10.4 24.9 14.5 Profit after tax 5.5 110.3 115.8 Basic earnings per share 1.5p 42.2p 43.7p Basic adjusted earnings per share 22.1p 0.7p 22.8p Diluted earnings per share 1.5p 41.9p 43.4p Diluted adjusted earnings per share 21.9p 0.7p 22.6p Year ended 31 December 2016
Discontinued operations
Group
External revenue 998.5 105.2 1103.7 External expenses 889.8 82.0 971.8 Operating profit before intangible amortisation and exceptional operating items 108.7 23.2 131.9 Amortisation of acquired intangible assets 30.2 2.7 32.9 Exceptional operating items 128.5 5.2 133.7 Operating loss  profit 50.0 15.3 34.7 Finance income 2.1  2.1 Finance expense 14.6  14.6 Loss   profit before tax 62.5 15.3 47.2 Income tax credit  expense 11.5 3.9 7.6 Loss  profit after tax 51.0 11.4 39.6 Basic loss  earnings per share 19.8p 4.4p 15.4p Basic adjusted earnings per share 29.2p 7.1p 36.3p Diluted loss  earnings per share 19.8p 4.4p 15.4p Diluted adjusted earnings per share 29.2p 7.1p 36.3p ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  NOTES 23.
Acquisitions and disposals continued The results from discontinued operations are attributable entirely to the equity holders of Essentra plc.
The earnings per share of discontinued operations are disclosed in note 6.
Cash flows of discontinued operations are as follows Net cash from operating activities 19.1 23.0 Net cash from investing activities 210.5 1.0 Net cash flows for the year 191.4 22.0 The assets and liabilities of Porous Technologies at 31 December 2016 which were presented as assets and liabilities in disposal group held for sale and the assets and liabilities of the rest of the Group were as follows As at 31 December 2016
Technologies
Rest of
Total
Group
Property plant and equipment 35.2 285.9 321.1 Intangible assets 51.1 581.7 632.8 Longterm receivables  3.5 3.5 Deferred tax assets  2.6 2.6 Retirement benefit assets  11.6 11.6 Inventories 9.2 115.1 124.3 Income tax receivable  7.5 7.5 Trade and other receivables 28.5 218.4 246.9 Derivative assets  1.2 1.2 Cash and cash equivalents 6.7 54.0 60.7 Total assets 130.7 1281.5 1412.2 Trade and other payables 14.2 204.3 218.5 Interest bearing loans and borrowings  440.0 440.0 Provisions 0.2 6.1 6.3 Retirement benefit obligations 0.3 34.7 35.0 Derivative liabilities  1.7 1.7 Deferred tax liabilities 10.5 65.8 76.3 Income tax payable 7.3 24.4 31.7 Total liabilities 32.5 777.0 809.5 The cumulative income or expenses included in other comprehensive income relating to Porous Technologies amounted to a net loss of 26.3m 2016 18.1m.
The 210.5m of net cash from investing activities is made up of disposal proceeds of 214.7m less cash disposed of 3.9m and 0.3m cash outflow relating to acquisition of property plant and equipment.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  NOTES 24.
Dividends
Per share Total 2016 interim paid 30 October 2016 6.3 16.5 2016 final paid 3 May 2017 14.4 37.6 2017 interim paid 30 October 2017 6.3 16.5 2017 proposed final payable 1 May 2018 14.4 37.7 Transactions with related parties Other than the compensation of key management note 5 Essentra has not entered into any material transactions with related parties during 2016 and 2017 .
Parent company Essentra plc is a limited liability company incorporated in England and Wales and domiciled in the United Kingdom.
It operates as the ultimate Parent Company of the Essentra Group.
Its registered office is Avebury House 201  249 Avebury Boulevard Milton Keynes MK9 1AU United Kingdom.
The principal subsidiary undertakings of Essentra plc are listed in note 10 to the Essentra plc Company Financial Statements.
Adjusted measures Management reviews the adjusted operating profit and operating cash flow as measures of the performance of the business.
Adjusted operating profit is stated before amortisation of acquired intangible assets and exceptional operating items which are considered not relevant to measuring the performance of the business.
Operating cash flow is adjusted operating profit before depreciation share option expense and other noncash items less working capital movements and net capital expenditure as shown below Operating profit  loss including discontinued operations 140.7 34.7 Amortisation of acquired intangible assets 22.9 32.9 Exceptional operating items 76.2 133.7 Adjusted operating profit including discontinued operations 87.4 131.9 Depreciation 35.3 34.3 Amortisation of nonacquired intangible assets 1.0 0.5 Share option expense 0.7 2.0 Other noncash items 2.6 5.4 Working capital movements 5.6 1.7 Net capital expenditure 45.6 38.3 Operating cash inflow  adjusted including discontinued operations 81.8 126.7 ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  NOTES 28.
Additional segmental analysis With effect from 1 January 2018 Essentra implemented a new organisational structure comprising four divisions.
A new Specialist Components division has been created to ensure greater focus across the portfolio in the other divisions.
This new division includes the following smaller businesses of Essentra The Extrusion business is a leading custom profile extruder located in the Netherlands which offers a complete design and production service.
The Pipe Protection Technologies business specialises in the manufacture of high performance innovative products from commodity resins to engineeringgrade thermoplastics and polymer alloys for use in the oil and gas industry.
The Speciality Tapes business has expertise in coating multiple adhesive systems in numerous technologies and its products range from foam magnetic finger lift and acrylic high bond tapes to hook and loop and nonskid foam.
The Tear Tapes business is globally recognised as the leading manufacturer and supplier of pressuresensitive tear tapes which are largely used in the tobacco food and drink and specialist packaging sectors.
The Industrial Supply business provides a wide range of branded hardware supplies to a broad base of industrial customers largely located in the US MidWest.
The Card Solutions business has access to a side portfolio of products and services including printers software and consumables from leading manufacturers.
The Extrusion Pipe Protection Technologies Industrial Supply and Card Solutions businesses were included within the Component Solutions division in 2017 .
The Tear Tapes and Speciality Tapes businesses were included within the Health and Personal Care Packaging division in 2017 .
Following the creation of the new Specialist Components division the Components business and the Packaging business each forms a separate division on its own.
2017 results under the new organisational structure are shown below
Packaging
Filter
Products
Specialist
Components
Eliminations
Central
Services
Total continuing operations
Total
External revenue 241.1 348.8 277.5 159.9   1027.3 15.7 1043.0 Intersegment revenue 0.7 1.7  3.7 6.1 Total revenue 241.8 350.5 277.5 163.6 6.1  1027.3 15.7 1043.0 Operating profit  loss before intangible amortisation and exceptional operating items 53.6 1.8 34.8 14.1  15.8 84.9 2.5 87.4 Amortisation of acquired intangibles 7.5 12.8  2.6   22.9  22.9 Exceptional operating items 7.0 36.3 0.5 2.9  9.5 56.2 132.4 76.2 Operating profit  loss before financing and income taxes 39.1 50.9 34.3 8.6  25.3 5.8 134.9 140.7 ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  NOTES At 31 December 2017 note Fixed assets Investment in subsidiary undertaking 2 455.0 453.7 Current assets Debtors 3 376.6 394.2 Current liabilities Creditors amounts falling due within one year 4 1.0 65.7 Net current assets 375.6 328.5 Noncurrent liabilities Creditors amounts falling due after more than one year 5 114.6 64.2 Net assets 716.0 718.0 Capital and reserves Issued share capital 7 66.0 66.0 Merger relief reserve 298.1 298.1 Capital redemption reserve 0.1 0.1 Profit and loss account 8 351.8 353.8 Shareholders funds equity interests 716.0 718.0 The profit attributable to equity holders included in the accounts of the Company is 50.5m 2016 profit of 395.3m.
The Company Financial Statements on pages 170 to 181 were approved by the Board of Directors on 2 March 2018 and were signed on its behalf by Paul Forman Stefan Schellinger Chief Executive Group Finance Director ESSENTRA PLC COMPANY BALANCE SHEET ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  ESSENTRA PLC COMPANY BALANCE SHEET For the year ended 31 December 2017
Merger relief reserve
Profit and loss account
Retained earnings
Profit for the year 50.5 50.5 Other comprehensive income Total comprehensive income for the year    50.5  50.5 Shares issued to satisfy employee share option exercises 3.2 3.2 Share options exercised 0.3 0.3 Sharebased payments 1.3 1.3 Dividends paid 54.1 54.1
Merger relief reserve
Profit and loss account
Retained earnings
Profit for the year 395.3 395.3 Other comprehensive income Total comprehensive income for the year    395.3  395.3 Shares issued to satisfy employee share option exercises 3.6 3.6 Share options exercised 2.3 2.3 Sharebased payments 2.0 2.0 Dividends paid 54.0 54.0 ESSENTRA PLC COMPANY STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  ESSENTRA PLC COMPANY STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY a.
Authorisation of Financial Statements and statement of compliance with FRS 101 The Parent Company Financial Statements of Essentra plc the Company for the year ended 31 December 2017 were authorised for issue by the Board of Directors on 2 March 2018 and the balance sheet was signed on the Boards behalf by Paul Forman and Stefan Schellinger.
Essentra plc is a public limited company that is incorporated domiciled and has its registered office in England and Wales.
The Companys ordinary shares are publicly traded on the London Stock Exchange and it is not under the control of any single shareholder.
These Financial Statements were prepared in accordance with Financial Reporting Standard 101 Reduced Disclosure Framework FRS 101.
The profit and loss account of the Company is not presented as permitted by Section 408 of the Companies Act 2006. b.
Basis of preparation The Company transitioned to FRS 101 from the UK Generally Accepted Accounting Practice during the year ended 31 December 2015.
No adjustments were required as part of this transition.
In these Financial Statements the Company has applied the exemptions available under FRS 101 in respect of the following disclosures The requirements of paragraph 45b and 46  52 of IFRS 2 ShareBased
The requirements of paragraphs 62 B64b B64e B64g B64h B64j to B64m b64nii B64oii B64p B64qii B66 and B67 of IFRS 3 Business Combinations The requirement of IFRS 7 Financial Instruments Disclosures The requirement of paragraphs 91  99 of IFRS 13 Fair Value Measurement The requirement in paragraph 38 of IAS 1 Presentation of Financial Statements to present comparative information in respect of paragraph 79a iv of IAS 1 paragraph 73e of IAS 16 Property Plant and Equipment and paragraph 118e of IAS 38 Intangible Assets The requirements of paragraphs 10d 40B 40C 40D 111 and 134  136 of IAS 1 Presentation of Financial Statements The requirements of IAS 7 Statement of Cash Flows The requirements of paragraphs 30 and 31 of IAS 8 Accounting Policies Changes in Accounting Estimates and Errors The requirements of paragraph 17 of IAS 24 Related Party Disclosures The requirements in IAS 24 Related Party Disclosures to disclose related party transactions entered into between two or more members of a group provided that any subsidiary which is a party to the transaction is wholly owned by such a member The requirements of paragraphs of IAS 36 Impairment of Assets Where required equivalent disclosures are given in the consolidated Financial
The following principal accounting policies have been consistently applied.
ESSENTRA PLC COMPANY ACCOUNTING POLICIES c.
Investment in subsidiary undertaking Investment in subsidiary undertaking is held at cost less any provision for impairment.
The Company assesses at each balance sheet date whether the investment in its subsidiary has been impaired. d.
Sharebased payments The fair value of share options is measured at grant date.
It is recognised as an addition to the cost of investment in the subsidiary in which the relevant employees work over the expected period between grant and vesting date of the options with a corresponding adjustment to reserves.
Detailed disclosures for the sharebased payment arrangements of the Company are provided in note 17 to the consolidated Financial Statements. e.
Own shares The shares held in the Essentra Employee Benefit Trust for the purpose of fulfilling obligations in respect of share incentive plans are treated as belonging to the Company and are deducted from its retained earnings.
The cost of shares held directly treasury shares is also deducted from retained earnings. f.
Dividends
Dividend distributions to the Companys shareholders are recognised as a liability in the period in which they are approved by the shareholders of the Company final dividend or paid interim dividend.
Dividend income is recognised when the right to receive payment is established.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  ESSENTRA PLC COMPANY ACCOUNTING POLICIES g.
Foreign currencies Transactions in foreign currencies are recorded using the rate of exchange ruling at the date of the transaction.
Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are translated using the rate of exchange ruling at the balance sheet date and the gains or losses on translation are included in the profit and loss account.
Exchange differences arising from movements in spot rates are included in the profit and loss account as exchange gains or losses while those arising from the interest differential elements of forward currency contracts are included in external interest income or expense. h.
Financial assets Loans and receivables are nonderivative financial assets with fixed or determinable payments that are not quoted in an active market.
They are included in current assets except for those with maturities greater than 12 months after the end of the reporting period which are classified as noncurrent assets.
The Companys loans and receivables comprise receivables in the balance sheet.
Receivables are recognised initially at fair value and subsequently measured at amortised cost using the effective interest method less provision for impairment.
Interest income is recognised accordingly using the effective interest method. i.
Financial liabilities Interest bearing loans and borrowings and other financial liabilities excluding derivatives are initially recognised at fair value net of transaction costs incurred.
They are subsequently held at amortised cost using the effective interest method.
Any difference between the proceeds net of transaction costs and the settlement or redemption of borrowings is recognised in profit or loss over the term of the borrowings.
The Company holds financial instruments which hedge the net investments in the foreign operations of its subsidiary undertakings.
Gains and losses on these instruments are recognised in the profit and loss account of the Company. j.
Taxation
Income tax in the profit and loss account comprises current and deferred tax.
Income tax is recognised in the profit and loss account except to the extent that it relates to items recognised in equity or other comprehensive income.
Current tax is the expected tax payable on the taxable income for the year using the applicable tax rates enacted or substantively enacted at the balance sheet date and any adjustment to tax payable in prior years.
Deferred tax is provided using the balance sheet liability method on temporary differences arising between the tax bases and the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities in the Financial Statements.
The following temporary differences are not provided for goodwill not deductible for tax purposes the initial recognition of assets or liabilities that affect neither accounting nor taxable profit or loss and differences relating to investments in subsidiaries to the extent that they will not reverse in the foreseeable future.
Deferred tax is determined using tax rates that are expected to apply when the related deferred tax asset or liability is settled using the applicable tax rates enacted or substantively enacted at the balance sheet date.
A deferred tax asset is recognised only to the extent that it is probable that future taxable profit will be available against which the asset can be utilised.
Deferred tax assets are reduced to the extent that it is no longer probable that the related tax benefit will be realised.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  ESSENTRA PLC COMPANY ACCOUNTING POLICIES 1.
Net operating charges The auditor was paid 5125 2016 5125 for the statutory audit of the Company.
Fees paid to the Companys auditor for services other than the statutory audit of the Company are disclosed in note 2 to the consolidated Financial Statements.
The Directors remuneration which was paid by Essentra International Limited is disclosed in the Annual Report on Remuneration on pages 97 to 107 .
Investments held as fixed assets Investment in subsidiary undertaking Beginning of year 453.7 451.7 Additions 1.3 2.0 End of year 455.0 453.7
Amounts receivable from subsidiary undertakings 376.6 393.8 Corporate taxes  0.4 Creditors amounts falling due within one year US Private Placement Loan notes  64.5 Accruals and deferred income 0.8 1.2 Corporate taxes 0.2 Creditors amounts falling due after more than one year US Private Placement Loan notes 114.6 64.2 ESSENTRA PLC COMPANY NOTES ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  ESSENTRA PLC COMPANY NOTES 6.
Maturity of financial liabilities Non bank loans Debt can be analysed as falling due Within one year  64.5 Between one and five years 59.0 64.2 Over five years 55.6 Issued share capital Issued and fully paid ordinary shares of 25p 2016 25p each 66.0 66.0 Number of ordinary shares in issue Beginning of year 264129170 264129170 Issue of shares during the year End of year 264129170 264129170 At 31 December 2017  the Company held 1170925 2016 1286952 of its own shares in treasury.
Reserves
As permitted by Section 408 of the Companies Act 2006 the profit and loss account of the Company has not been separately presented in these Financial Statements.
The profit attributable to equity holders included in the accounts of the Company is 50.5m 2016 profit of 395.3m.
Included in retained earnings are accumulated sharebased payments of 38.3m 2016 37 .0m which are credited directly to reserves.
Full details of these sharebased payments are set out in the Annual Report on Remuneration on pages 97 to 107 .
Dividends
Per share Total 2016 interim paid 30 October 2016 6.3 16.5 2016 final paid 3 May 2017 14.4 37.6 2017 interim paid 30 October 2017 6.3 16.5 2017 proposed final payable 1 May 2018 14.4 37.7 ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  ESSENTRA PLC COMPANY NOTES 10.
Subsidiary undertakings The companies named below are subsidiary undertakings of Essentra plc and are included in the consolidated Financial Statements of the Group.
The investments in the companies below relate to ordinary shares or common stock.
The principal country in which each company operates is the country of incorporation.
All entities below are wholly owned subsidiaries of the Group except for ITC Essentra Limited India 50% owned Essentra MEA Pte.
Ltd Singapore 51% owned and Essentra FZE UAE 51% owned.
The ownership held by the Group in these companies are through holding of ordinary shares in these companies and they are accounted for as subsidiaries of the Group in the consolidated Financial Statements due to a control achieved via board membership.
Essentra International Limited is the only direct subsidiary of Essentra plc.
Country of incorporation Principal activity Address of registered office Essentra Bangor Limited UK Manufacturing Avebury House 201249 Avebury Boulevard Milton Keynes Buckinghamshire MK9 1AU United Kingdom Essentra Kilmarnock Limited UK Manufacturing Hurlford Road Riccarton Kilmarnock KA1 4LA Scotland United Kingdom Essentra Components Limited UK Manufacturing Avebury House 201249 Avebury Boulevard Milton Keynes Buckinghamshire MK9 1AU United Kingdom Essentra Filter Products Limited UK Manufacturing Avebury House 201249 Avebury Boulevard Milton Keynes Buckinghamshire MK9 1AU United Kingdom Essentra Finance Limited UK Treasury activities Avebury House 201249 Avebury Boulevard Milton Keynes Buckinghamshire MK9 1AU United Kingdom Essentra Packaging and Security Limited UK Manufacturing Avebury House 201249 Avebury Boulevard Milton Keynes Buckinghamshire MK9 1AU United Kingdom Essentra Packaging Limited UK Manufacturing Avebury House 201249 Avebury Boulevard Milton Keynes Buckinghamshire MK9 1AU United Kingdom Essentra Pension Trustees Limited UK Pension Trustee Avebury House 201249 Avebury Boulevard Milton Keynes Buckinghamshire MK9 1AU United Kingdom Micro Plastics International Limited UK Manufacturing Avebury House 201249 Avebury Boulevard Milton Keynes Buckinghamshire MK9 1AU United Kingdom P .
P .
Payne Limited UK Property Company Avebury House 201249 Avebury Boulevard Milton Keynes Buckinghamshire MK9 1AU United Kingdom Essentra Components Inc.
US Distribution Two Westbrook Corporate Center Suite 200 Westchester IL 60154 United States Essentra Components Japan Inc.
US Distribution Two Westbrook Corporate Center Suite 200 Westchester IL 60154 United States Essentra Filter Products Inc.
US Manufacturing Two Westbrook Corporate Center Suite 200 Westchester IL 60154 United States Essentra Packaging Inc.
US Manufacturing Two Westbrook Corporate Center Suite 200 Westchester IL 60154 United States Essentra Packaging US Inc.
US Manufacturing Two Westbrook Corporate Center Suite 200 Westchester IL 60154 United States Essentra Pipe Protection Technologies Inc.
US Manufacturing Two Westbrook Corporate Center Suite 200 Westchester IL 60154 United States Essentra Plastics LLC US Manufacturing Two Westbrook Corporate Center Suite 200 Westchester IL 60154 United States Micro Plastics Inc.
US Manufacturing 11 Industry Ln.
PO Box 149 Flippin AR 72634 United States Essentra Pty Ltd Australia Manufacturing 32 Clyde Street Rydalmere NSW 2116 Australia Essentra Components GmbH Austria Distribution Schubertring 6 1010 Wien Austria Essentra Industria E Commercio LTDA Brazil Manufacturing Rua Alvares Cabral 979 Serraria City of Diadema State of Sao Paulo 09980160 Brazil ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  ESSENTRA PLC COMPANY NOTES Country of incorporation Principal activity Address of registered office Essentra Limited Canada Distribution 2538 Speers Road Oakville Ontario L6L 5KY Canada Essentra Components International Trading Shanghai Co Ltd China Distribution Room 347 Xinmao Building 2 South Taizhong Road Shanghai Pilot Free Traded Zone China Essentra Plastic Trading Ningbo Co.
Ltd.
China Distribution 99 Huanghai Road Beilun District Ningbo Zhejiang China Essentra Precision Machinery Components Ningbo Co.
Ltd
China Manufacturing 99 Huanghai Road Beilun District Ningbo Zhejiang China Essentra Trading Ningbo Co.
Ltd.
China Distribution 99 Huanghai Road Beilun District Ningbo Zhejiang China Essentra Components sro Czech Republic Distribution Dornych 47 Brno 617 00 Czech Republic Essentra Components SAS France Distribution 280 rue de la Belle toile 95700 Roissy en France France Essentra Packaging S.
France Manufacturing F27200 Sarreguemines Rue Guillaume Schoettke France Essentra Components GmbH Germany Distribution Herrenpfad Sd 36 41334 Nettetal Germany Essentra Packaging GmbH Germany Manufacturing D06766 Wolfen Edisonstrasse Germany Essentra Components Kft Hungary Distribution 2040 Budaors Gyar u.
Hungary
Essentra Filter Products Kft Hungary Manufacturing 2310 Szigetszentmiklos Leshegy ut 30 Hungary Essentra India Private Limited India Manufacturing Survey No.
46 Jala Hobli Dodajala Village Bangalore North  562 157 Karnataka India ITC Essentra Limited India Manufacturing Doddajala Post Yarthiganahally via Bettahalasur Bangalore North 562 157 India PT Essentra Indonesia Manufacturing Jalan Berbek Industri 1 1820 Surabaya Industrial Estate Rungkut SIER Sidoario 61256 Indonesia Essentra Packaging Ireland Limited Ireland Manufacturing 8 Airways Industrial Estate Dublin 17 Ireland ESNT Finance Ireland Limited Ireland Treasury activities 7 Airways Industrial Estate Cloghran Dublin 17 D17 RR88 Ireland Essentra Finance Euro Limited Ireland Treasury activities 7 Airways Industrial Estate Cloghran Dublin 17 D17 RR88 Ireland Essentra Components srl Italy Distribution Via Massarenti 1 Loc 1 Maggio 40013 Castel Maggiore Italy Essentra Packaging srl Italy Distribution Via Copernico n.54 Loc.
1 Casoni Fraz.
Gariga
29027 Podenzano Italy Essentra Co.
Ltd Korea Republic of
Distribution 3F 70 Hyundai Knowledge Industry Center Doksandong Dusanro Geumcheongu Seoul Republic of Korea Essentra Asia Sdn Bhd Malaysia Manufacturing Unit 1110 Block A Pusat Dagangan Phileo Damansara II 15 Jalan 1611 Off Jlana Damansara 46350 Petaling Jaya Selangor Malaysia Essentra Malaysia Sdn Bhd Malaysia Distribution Unit 1110 Block A Pusat Dagangan Phileo Damansara II 15 Jalan 1611 Off Jalan Damansara 46350 Petaling Jaya Selangor Darul Ehsan Malaysia Essentra Pipe Protection Technologies SA de CV Mexico Manufacturing Avenida Framboyanes Lote 1 Manzana 4 Ciudad Industrial Bruno Pagliali Veracruz Mexico Essentra Pipe Protection Technologies Services S de r.
Mexico Services Avenida Framboyanes Lote 1 Manzana 4 Ciudad Industrial Bruno Pagliali Veracruz Mexico Micro Plastics International S. de C. de R.
Mexico Manufacturing Carretera a Huinala 510 Fracc.
Ind.
San Andres CP 66640 Apodaca N.
Mexico
Micro Plastics Servicios S de C. de R.
Mexico Services Carretera a Huinala 510 Fracc.
Ind.
San Andres CP 66640 Apodaca N.
Mexico
Essentra Components B.
Netherlands Distribution Den Belleman 9 5571 NR Bergeyk Netherlands Essentra Extrusion B.
Netherlands Manufacturing Beatrixstraat 7 9285 TV Buitenpost Netherlands Essentra Packaging B.
Netherlands Distribution Celsiusweg 37 8912 AM Leeuwarden Netherlands Essentra Filter Products S.
Paraguay Manufacturing Calle 12 Acacary Cuidad del Este Paraguay Essentra Packaging Spka z o.
Poland Manufacturing Tokarska 25 20210 Lublin Poland ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  ESSENTRA PLC COMPANY NOTES Country of incorporation Principal activity Address of registered office Essentra Sp. z o.
Poland Distribution 11 Lakowa Street 90562 Lodz Poland Essentra Packaging Puerto Rico Inc.
Puerto Rico Manufacturing Los Frailes Industrial Park Street C Guaynabo PR 00970 Essentra Components SRL Romania Distribution Burcuresti Sectorul 1 Strada Polana
6872 Etaj 2 Biroul NR.5 Romania Essentra St Petersburg Limited Liability Company Russia Distribution 4a Finlyandskiy Prospect  St.
Petersburg Russian
OOO Essentra Filter Products Russia Distribution Moskovskyi pr.
60129 Business Center Senator St Petersburg Russian Federation Essentra Filter Products Leasing
Limited
Singapore Leasing Company 36 Robinson Road 170106 City House  Singapore Essentra Pte.
Limited Singapore Distribution 36 Robinson Road 170106 City House  Singapore Essentra Components sro Slovakia Distribution Gogolova 18 852 02 Bratislava Slovakia Essentra Components Pty Limited South Africa Distribution Unit 2 Sage Corporate Park CNR Suni and Tsessebe Streets South Midrand Gauteng 1683 South Africa Essentra Components S.
Spain Manufacturing Carrer dels Fusters 1820 Poligono Industrial Can Cuyas Montcada I Reixac 08110 Barcelona Spain Essentra Packaging SA Spain Manufacturing Carrer dels Fusters 1820 Poligono Industrial Can Cuyas Montcada I Reixac 08110 Barcelona Spain Essentra Components AB Sweden Distribution Askims Verkstadsvag 13Sweden 436 34 Askim Vastra Gotalands Ian Goteborg kommun Sweden Essentra Components Sarl Switzerland Distribution Rue du GrandChene 2 co Pierre Alain Killias Lexartis Avocats 1003 Lausanne Switzerland Essentra Eastern Limited Thailand Manufacturing 1115 Moo 2 Tambon Makamku Amphur Nikom Pattana Rayong Province Thailand Essentra Limited Thailand Manufacturing 1163 Soi Thiantalay 24 BangkhunthianChaitalay Road Thakam Bangkhunthian Bangkok 10150 Thailand Mesan Kilit A.
Turkey Manufacturing Ilitelli Organzie Sanayi Bolgesi Metal Is SanSit .7.
Blok No24 Basaksehir Istanbul Turkey Essentra FZE United Arab
Manufacturing Plot No.
S20403 PO Box No.
Jafza Dubai United Arab Emirates Essentra International Gmbh Germany Holding Company Gutenbergstrasse 59 21465 Reinbek Germany ESNT Cherry Orchard Holdings Limited Ireland Holding Company Unit 629 Ida Industrial Park Northern Extension Old Kilmeaden Road Watherford Ireland ESNT Holdings SpA Italy Holding Company Podenzano Loc.
Casoni Fraz.
Gargia
Via Copernico no.
54 29027 Italy Blue NewCo 1 B.
Netherlands Holding Company Gustav Mahlerplein 68 1082 MA Amsterdam Netherlands Blue NewCo 2 B.
Netherlands Holding Company Gustav Mahlerplein 68 Ito Tower 9th floor MA Amsterdam 1082 Netherlands Blue NewCo 3 B.
Netherlands Holding Company Gustav Mahlerplein 68 Ito Tower 9th floor MA Amsterdam 1082 Netherlands Blue NewCo 4 B.
Netherlands Holding Company Gustav Mahlerplein 68 Ito Tower 9th floor MA Amsterdam 1082 Netherlands ESNT Holding B.
Netherlands Holding Company Den Belleman 9 5571 NR Bergeijk Netherlands ESNT Holdings Netherlands B.
Netherlands Holding Company Den Belleman 9 5571 NR Bergeijk Netherlands Essentra B.
Netherlands Holding Company Beatrixstraat 7 9285 TV Buitenpost Netherlands Essentra Holdings No.2 Cooperative WA Netherlands Holding Company Den Belleman 9 5571 NR Bergeijk Netherlands Essentra Holdings Cooperative WA Netherlands Holding Company Den Belleman 9 5571 NR Bergeijk Netherlands Essentra International B.
LLC Netherlands Holding Company Den Belleman 9 5571 NR Bergeijk Netherlands Boxes Prestige Poland Sp. z o.
Poland Holding Company Tokarska 25 20210 Lublin Poland Essentra MEA Pte.
Limited Singapore Holding Company 36 Robinson Road 1701 City House
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  ESSENTRA PLC COMPANY NOTES Country of incorporation Principal activity Address of registered office Clondalkin Holdings SA Spain Holding Company Carrer dels Fusters 1820 Poligono Industrial Can Cuyas Montcada I Reixac 08110 Barcelona Spain Pranakorn Holding Company Limited Thailand Holding Company 1163 Soi Thiantalay 24 BangkhunthianChaitalay Road Bangkhunthian Bangkok 10150 Thailand San Yai Holding Company Limited Thailand Holding Company 11163 Soi Thiantalay 24 BangkhunthianChaitalay Road Bangkhunthian Bangkok 10150 Thailand ESNT Group Holdings Limited UK Holding Company Avebury House 201249 Avebury Boulevard Milton Keynes Buckinghamshire MK9 1AU United Kingdom ESNT Filter Products Limited UK Holding Company Avebury House 201249 Avebury Boulevard Milton Keynes Buckinghamshire MK9 1AU United Kingdom ESNT Holdings No.1 Limited UK Holding Company Avebury House 201249 Avebury Boulevard Milton Keynes Buckinghamshire MK9 1AU United Kingdom ESNT Holdings No.2 Limited UK Holding Company Avebury House 201249 Avebury Boulevard Milton Keynes Buckinghamshire MK9 1AU United Kingdom ESNT International Limited UK Holding Company Avebury House 201249 Avebury Boulevard Milton Keynes Buckinghamshire MK9 1AU United Kingdom ESNT Packaging and Securing Solutions Limited UK Holding Company Avebury House 201249 Avebury Boulevard Milton Keynes Buckinghamshire MK9 1AU United Kingdom Essentra Filter Products International Limited UK Holding Company Avebury House 201249 Avebury Boulevard Milton Keynes Buckinghamshire MK9 1AU United Kingdom Essentra International Limited UK Holding Company Avebury House 201249 Avebury Boulevard Milton Keynes Buckinghamshire MK9 1AU United Kingdom Essentra Overseas Limited UK Holding Company Avebury House 201249 Avebury Boulevard Milton Keynes Buckinghamshire MK9 1AU United Kingdom ESNT Porous Holdings Inc.
US Holding Company Two Westbrook Corporate Center Suite 200 Westchester IL 60154 United States ESNT Holdings Inc.
US Holding Company Two Westbrook Corporate Center Suite 200 Westchester IL 60154 United States ESNT US Holdings Corp US Holding Company Two Westbrook Corporate Center Suite 200 Westchester IL 60154 United States Essentra Corporation US Holding Company Two Westbrook Corporate Center Suite 200 Westchester IL 60154 United States Essentra Holdings Corp.
US Holding Company Two Westbrook Corporate Center Suite 200 Westchester IL 60154 United States Liquidated China Nontrading Room 202 Building 11 327 East Songhui Road Songjiang District Shanghai China Abric Shanghai Co Ltd China Nontrading 8 Furong Road Yexie Town Songjiang District Shanghai
Essentra Components Xiamen Co.
Ltd China NonTrading Huizuo Road98 Xinyang Industrial Zone Haicang District Xiamen Fujian Province China Cigarette Components HK Limited Hong Kong Nontrading 36F Tower Two Times Square 1 Matheson Street Causeway Bay Hong Kong Essentra Hong Kong Ltd Hong Kong Nontrading 36F Tower Two Times Square 1 Matheson Street Causeway Bay Hong Kong Filtrona China Limited Hong Kong Nontrading 36F Tower Two Times Square 1 Matheson Street Causeway Bay Hong Kong CB Packaging Limited Ireland Nontrading 8 Airways Industrial Estate Dublin 17 Ireland ESNT Cherry Orchard Limited Ireland Nontrading 8 Airways Industrial Estate Dublin 17 Ireland ESNT Clonshaugh Limited Ireland Nontrading 8 Airways Industrial Estate Dublin 17 Ireland ESNT Cork Limited Ireland Nontrading 8 Airways Industrial Estate Dublin 17 Ireland ESNT Glasnevin Limited Ireland Nontrading 8 Airways Industrial Estate Dublin 17 Ireland Essentra Packaging Waterford Limited Ireland Nontrading 8 Airways Industrial Estate Dublin 17 Ireland Swiftbrook Limited Ireland Nontrading 8 Airways Industrial Estate Dublin 17 Ireland ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  ESSENTRA PLC COMPANY NOTES Country of incorporation Principal activity Address of registered office Venture Laminate Limited Ireland Nontrading 8 Airways Industrial Estate Dublin 17 Ireland WilkesCerdac Limited Ireland Nontrading 8 Airways Industrial Estate Dublin 17 Ireland Essentra Filter Products Spa Italy Nontrading Studio De Vivo SCIS 84123 Salerno Corso Garibaldi n.
143 Italy Essentra Packaging Luxembourg Sarl Luxembourg Nontrading 1 Zone Industrielle Bombicht L6947 Niederanven
Abric Encode Sdn Bhd Malaysia Nontrading Unit 1110 Block A Pusat Dagangan Phileo Damansara II 15 Jalan 1611 Off Jalan Damansara 46350 Petaling Jaya Selangor Darul Ehsan Malaysia Essentra Components SEA M Sdn Bhd Malaysia Nontrading D556 Solaris Dutamas 1 Jalan Dutamas 1 50480 Kuala Lumpur Malaysia Servicios Filtrona S DE R.
DE C.
Mexico Nontrading Avenida Industrias 150 Fraccionamiento Industrial PIMSA Oriente Apodaca N.
66603 Mexico Fijnmechanica Surhuisterveen B.
Netherlands Nontrading Beatrixstraat 7 9285 TV Buitenpost Netherlands Linde Vouwkartonnage B.
Netherlands Nontrading Hanzeweg 14 7591 BK Denekamp Netherlands Richco Benelux B.
Netherlands Nontrading Beeldschermweg 53 3821 AH Amersfoot Netherlands Skiffy B.
Netherlands Nontrading Den Belleman 9 5571 NR Bergeijk Netherlands ESNT Holdings Cooperative 1 WA Netherlands Nontrading Beatrixstraat 7 9285 TV Buitenpost Netherlands ESNT Holdings Cooperative 2 WA Netherlands Nontrading Den Belleman 9 5571 NR Bergeijk Netherlands Essentra Filter Products Development
Pte.
Limited
Singapore Nontrading 238A Thomson Road 250405 Novena Square
Essentra Components Pte.
Limited Singapore NonTrading 36 Robinson Road 170106 City House  Singapore Essentra Packaging Pte Limited Singapore NonTrading 36 Robinson Road 170106 City House  Singapore Apex Filters Company Limited Thailand NonTrading 312 Rama 3 Road Chongnonsee Yannawa Bangkok 10120
Chemical Resins Thailand Limited Thailand Nontrading 4th Floor 771 Soi Ruamrudee 2 Ploenchit Road Lumpini Pathumwan Bangkok 10330 Thailand Filtrona Thailand Limited Thailand Nontrading 776 Charoennakorn Road Bukkalo Thonburi Bangkok 10600 Thailand Alliance Plastics Limited UK Nontrading Avebury House 201249 Avebury Boulevard Milton Keynes Buckinghamshire MK9 1AU United Kingdom Cigarette Components Limited UK Nontrading Avebury House 201249 Avebury Boulevard Milton Keynes Buckinghamshire MK9 1AU United Kingdom Essentra Great Harwood Limited UK Nontrading Avebury House 201249 Avebury Boulevard Milton Keynes Buckinghamshire MK9 1AU United Kingdom Essentra Hull Limited UK Nontrading Avebury House 201249 Avebury Boulevard Milton Keynes Buckinghamshire MK9 1AU United Kingdom Essentra Kimbolton Limited UK Nontrading Avebury House 201249 Avebury Boulevard Milton Keynes Buckinghamshire MK9 1AU United Kingdom Essentra Northampton Limited UK Nontrading Avebury House 201249 Avebury Boulevard Milton Keynes Buckinghamshire MK9 1AU United Kingdom ESNT Components Limited UK Nontrading Avebury House 201249 Avebury Boulevard Milton Keynes Buckinghamshire MK9 1AU United Kingdom ESNT Group Limited UK Nontrading Avebury House 201249 Avebury Boulevard Milton Keynes Buckinghamshire MK9 1AU United Kingdom ESNT Limited UK Nontrading Avebury House 201249 Avebury Boulevard Milton Keynes Buckinghamshire MK9 1AU United Kingdom Essentra Services Limited UK Nontrading Avebury House 201249 Avebury Boulevard Milton Keynes Buckinghamshire MK9 1AU United Kingdom Essentra Speciality Tapes Limited UK Nontrading Avebury House 201249 Avebury Boulevard Milton Keynes Buckinghamshire MK9 1AU United Kingdom ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  ESSENTRA PLC COMPANY NOTES Country of incorporation Principal activity Address of registered office Filtrona Limited UK Nontrading Avebury House 201249 Avebury Boulevard Milton Keynes Buckinghamshire MK9 1AU United Kingdom North West Plastics Limited UK Nontrading Avebury House 201249 Avebury Boulevard Milton Keynes Buckinghamshire MK9 1AU United Kingdom Skiffy Limited UK Nontrading Avebury House 201249 Avebury Boulevard Milton Keynes Buckinghamshire MK9 1AU United Kingdom Stera Tape Limited UK Nontrading Avebury House 201249 Avebury Boulevard Milton Keynes Buckinghamshire MK9 1AU United Kingdom ESNT Components Inc US Nontrading Two Westbrook Corporate Center Suite 200 Westchester IL 60154 United States US Limited Liability Company US Nontrading The Corporation Services Company 2711 Centreville Road Ste 400 Wilmington Delaware 19808 United States US NewCo LLC US Nontrading Two Westbrook Corporate Center Suite 200 Westchester IL 60154 United States Filtrona Venezolana C.
Venezuela Nontrading Urbn.
Parque Comercio Industrial Castillito Lot No.
P8.
Street 103 cc Av.
66 San Diego Municipality Valencia Edo Carabobo Venezuela ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  ESSENTRA PLC COMPANY NOTES INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT TO THE MEMBERS OF ESSENTRA PLC Report on the audit of the financial statements
In our opinion Essentra plcs Group financial statements and parent company financial statements the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the Groups and of the parent companys affairs as at 31 December 2017 and of the Groups profit and cash flows for the year then ended the Group financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union the parent company financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with United Kingdom Generally Accepted Accounting Practice United Kingdom Accounting Standards comprising FRS 101 Reduced Disclosure Framework and applicable law and the financial statements have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006 and as regards the Group financial statements Article 4 of the IAS Regulation.
We have audited the financial statements included within the Annual Report which comprise the Consolidated and Company Balance Sheets as at 31 December 2017 the Consolidated Income Statement and Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income the Consolidated and Company Statements of Changes in Equity and the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows for the year then ended and the notes to the financial statements which include a description of the significant accounting policies the accounting policies and the notes to the financial statements.
Our opinion is consistent with our reporting to the Audit Committee.
Separate opinion in relation to IFRSs as issued by the IASB As explained in the Accounting Policies to the financial statements the Group in addition to applying IFRSs as adopted by the European Union has also applied IFRSs as issued by the International Accounting Standards Board IASB.
In our opinion the Group financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRSs as issued by the IASB.
Basis for opinion We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing UK ISAs UK and applicable law.
Our responsibilities under ISAs UK are further described in the Auditors responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements section of our report.
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion.
Independence
We remained independent of the Group in accordance with the ethical requirements that are relevant to our audit of the financial statements in the UK which includes the FRCs Ethical Standard as applicable to listed public interest entities and we have fulfilled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with these requirements.
To the best of our knowledge and belief we declare that nonaudit services prohibited by the FRCs Ethical Standard were not provided to the Group or the parent company.
Other than those disclosed in note 2 to the financial statements we have provided no nonaudit services to the Group or the parent company in the period from 1 January 2017 to 31 December 2017 .
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT Our audit approach
Overall Group materiality 3.7m based on 5% of profit before tax before intangibles amortisation and exceptional items.
Overall parent company materiality 7 .1m based on 1% of net assets.
There were no significant components within the Group.
We performed full scope audit work on 25 reporting units and specified procedures over certain balances on 33 reporting units.
This provided coverage of 67% revenue 62% profit before tax and 67% net assets.
Tax liabilities.
Goodwill impairment.
Presentation of exceptional items.
The scope of our audit As part of designing our audit we determined materiality and assessed the risks of material misstatement in the financial statements.
In particular we looked at where the directors made subjective judgements for example in respect of significant accounting estimates that involved making assumptions and considering future events that are inherently uncertain.
We gained an understanding of the legal and regulatory framework applicable to the Group and the industries in which it operates and considered the risk of acts by the Group which were contrary to applicable laws and regulations including fraud.
We designed audit procedures at Group and significant component level to respond to the risk recognising that the risk of not detecting a material misstatement due to fraud is higher than the risk of not detecting one resulting from error as fraud may involve deliberate concealment by for example forgery or intentional misrepresentations or through collusion.
We focused on laws and regulations that could give rise to a material misstatement in the Group and parent company financial statements including but not limited to the Companies Act 2006 the Listing Rules Tax legislation Employment regulation Health and Safety legislation and other legislation specific to the industries in which the Group operates.
Our tests included but were not limited to review of correspondence with the regulators review of correspondence with legal advisors enquiries of management enquiries with component auditors and review of internal audit reports in so far as they related to the financial statements.
There are inherent limitations in the audit procedures described above and the further removed noncompliance with laws and regulations is from the events and transactions reflected in the financial statements the less likely we would become aware of it.
We did not identify any key audit matters relating to irregularities including fraud.
As in all of our audits we also addressed the risk of management override of internal controls including testing journals and evaluating whether there was evidence of bias by the directors that represented a risk of material misstatement due to fraud Key audit matters Key audit matters are those matters that in the auditors professional judgement were of most significance in the audit of the financial statements of the current period and include the most significant assessed risks of material misstatement whether or not due to fraud identified by the auditors including those which had the greatest effect on the overall audit strategy the allocation of resources in the audit and directing the efforts of the engagement team.
These matters and any comments we make on the results of our procedures thereon were addressed in the context of our audit of the financial statements as a whole and in forming our opinion thereon and we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters.
This is not a complete list of all risks identified by our audit.
Materiality Materiality Key audit matters Key audit matters
Audit scope ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT Key audit matter How our audit addressed the key audit matter Tax liabilities The Group operates in a number of tax jurisdictions and recognises tax based on interpretation of local laws and regulations which are sometimes uncertain.
At 31 December 2017  the Group has current and noncurrent tax payables of 43.1m.
Where the amount of tax payable is uncertain the directors are required to exercise significant judgment in determining the appropriate amount to provide in respect of potential tax exposures and uncertain tax positions.
We focused on the judgements made by management in assessing the likelihood and quantification of material exposures.
See page 129 for managements disclosure of this significant judgement.
We assessed managements process for identifying uncertain tax positions and the accounting policy for providing for tax exposures.
We considered managements assessment of known areas of uncertainty and the provisions held against these.
Through review of managements analysis of these positions including testing of detailed workings and consideration of advice received from their tax advisors we determined that the provisions recognised and the disclosures in the financial statements were reasonable.
Goodwill impairment The Group has goodwill of 347 .5m.
In the prior year an impairment of 123.9m was taken against the Health and Personal Care Packaging HPC division and further impairment risk was identified in the HPC division based upon underlying trading performance of particular components and the planned closure of a site in the UK.
All cash generating units CGUs containing goodwill and indefinitelived intangible assets must be tested for impairment annually.
Management must also determine the recoverable amount for other finitelived assets where impairment indicators are identified.
The impairment reviews performed by management contain a number of significant judgements and estimates including revenue growth profit margins and discount rates.
A change in these assumptions can result in a material change in the valuation of the assets.
See page 129 for managements disclosure of this significant judgement.
We have assessed the methodology applied by management in performing their impairment review including the identification of CGUs under the new divisional structure and the appropriateness of the valuation models.
We evaluated the future cash flow forecasts for each CGU including short term cash flows and the process by which they were drawn up and tested the underlying value in use calculations.
In doing this we compared the cash flow forecasts to the latest Board approved plans and compared prior year budget to actual data in order to assess the quality of the forecasting process.
The results of our evaluation proved to be satisfactory.
We also tested key assumptions including exchange rates and longterm growth rates by comparing them to third party published economic and industry forecasts and the discount rate by recalculating the Groups cost of capital.
In respect to the HPC division we specifically considered the assumptions regarding the recovery of site operating margin to industry average levels across the forecast period in light of managements action plans to improve the performance of the business.
We also verified the assumptions regarding industry average performance levels to third party data.
We found the assumptions to be reasonable.
We performed sensitivity analysis around the key assumptions to ascertain the extent of change in those assumptions that either individually or collectively would be required for the goodwill to be impaired.
As included within note 8 a reasonably possible change in assumptions for the HPC division would result in an impairment.
However this is expected as the value was impaired down to the value in use during 2016 and therefore the headroom against which assumptions are sensitised is low.
Disclosures included within note 8 have also been assessed for compliance with requirements and deemed reasonable.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT Key audit matter How our audit addressed the key audit matter Presentation of exceptional items The financial statements include certain items which are disclosed as exceptional.
The nature of these exceptional items is explained within the Group accounting policy and includes transaction costs relating to acquisitions and disposals of businesses acquisition integration and restructuring costs and other items such as impairment.
In continuing operations these exceptional costs relate to the fundamental restructuring programme of 19.2m the closure of the Newport cartons site of 35.4m and acquisition and disposal costs of 1.6m.
In discontinuing operations exceptional items comprise a gain on disposal of the Porous Technologies business of 132.4m.
In addition 114m relating to the benefit arising as a result of the US tax reform has been disclosed as exceptional.
We focused on this area because items classified as exceptional require judgement by the directors as to whether the items meet the definition in the Groups accounting policy.
Consistency in identifying and disclosing items as exceptional is important to maintain comparability of the results year on year.
See page 129 for managements disclosure of this significant judgement.
We assessed the appropriateness of the Groups accounting policy for the recognition of exceptional items with reference to the applicable accounting standards.
We evaluated whether each of the items disclosed as exceptional met the criteria set out in the accounting policy and were consistent with the treatment adopted in previous accounting periods to confirm that items were appropriately classified.
We agreed a sample of restructuring costs incurred to invoices or other form of evidence such as payroll records.
Specifically we have considered the inclusion of certain asset impairment charges and an onerous contract as part of the exceptional item and we are satisfied that these charges have arisen as a result of the strategic review process.
We tested a sample of site closure costs incurred to invoices or other form of evidence such as payroll records and the property lease agreement.
We have specifically considered the nature of these costs and concluded that the classification as exceptional is appropriate.
We read the sale and purchase agreement for disposal of the Porous Technologies business and verified the proceeds to bank receipts.
Adjustments to the profit on disposal were also sampled and agreed to supporting documentation such as invoice or asset write off details.
We consider the classification to be appropriate given the nature of the disposal meets the definition of a discontinued operation.
Other acquisition and disposal costs were agreed to invoices to confirm they meet the group policy definition for exceptional items.
We have considered the presentation of benefit arising as a result of the US tax reform as exceptional and agreed the calculation of the benefit to managements impact assessment and detailed deferred tax workings without exception.
The disclosures included in note 2 were read and deemed reasonable.
We determined that there were no key audit matters applicable to the parent company to communicate in our report.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT How we tailored the audit scope We tailored the scope of our audit to ensure that we performed enough work to be able to give an opinion on the financial statements as a whole taking into account the structure of the Group and the parent company the accounting processes and controls and the industry in which they operate.
The Group is split into three divisions being Components Solutions Health and Personal Care Packaging and Filter Products.
Each division consists of a large number of controller sites spread globally across 37 territories.
There are 268 reporting units within the consolidation which include the controller sites and other consolidation units.
We did not identify any individually significant components within the Group with the largest contribution to revenue being 6% from one controller site and the average being 1%.
We determined the most effective approach was to engage PwC local component teams to perform full scope procedures over 20 reporting units with the Group audit team performing full scope audit work over a further 5 reporting units.
In addition specified audit procedures were performed by component auditors over certain balances including revenue at a further 6 reporting units in the Americas.
This approach ensures that appropriate audit coverage has been obtained over all financial statement line items.
Where work was performed by component auditors we determined the appropriate level of involvement we needed to have in that audit work to ensure we could conclude that sufficient appropriate audit evidence had been obtained for the Group financial statements as a whole.
We issued written instructions to all component auditors and had regular communications with them throughout the audit cycle.
This included a clearance meeting with each component team and review of all significant matters reported.
In addition the Group engagement partner has visited controller sites in the US Singapore Thailand and UK including meeting with local audit teams and local management as part of these visits.
Based on the detailed audit work performed across the Group we have gained coverage of 67% of total revenue 62% of profit before tax and 67% of net assets.
Materiality
The scope of our audit was influenced by our application of materiality.
We set certain quantitative thresholds for materiality.
These together with qualitative considerations helped us to determine the scope of our audit and the nature timing and extent of our audit procedures on the individual financial statement line items and disclosures and in evaluating the effect of misstatements both individually and in aggregate on the financial statements as a whole.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT Based on our professional judgement we determined materiality for the financial statements as a whole as follows Group financial statements Parent company financial statements Overall materiality 3.7m 7.1m How we determined it 5% of profit before tax before intangibles amortisation and exceptional items.
1% of net assets.
Rationale for benchmark applied The Group is profitoriented therefore it is considered most appropriate to apply a rule of thumb based upon a profitbased benchmark.
The directors management and the users of the Group financial statements focus on adjusted numbers being adjusted operating profit adjusted net income or adjusted pretax profit.
The Group defines adjusted as excluding the impact of intangible amortisation and exceptional items.
Based on this we consider an adjusted metric of profit before tax before intangibles amortisation and exceptional items to be the most appropriate benchmark.
The entity is a holding company of the rest of the Group and is not a trading entity.
Therefore an asset based measure is considered appropriate.
For each component in the scope of our Group audit we allocated a materiality that is less than our overall Group materiality.
The range of materiality allocated across components was between 0.2m and 3.3m.
Certain components were audited to a local statutory audit materiality that was also less than our overall Group materiality.
We agreed with the Audit Committee that we would report to them misstatements identified during our audit above 0.2m Group audit and 0.2m Parent company audit as well as misstatements below those amounts that in our view warranted reporting for qualitative reasons.
Going concern In accordance with ISAs UK we report as follows Reporting obligation Outcome We are required to report if we have anything material to add or draw attention to in respect of the directors statement in the financial statements about whether the directors considered it appropriate to adopt the going concern basis of accounting in preparing the financial statements and the directors identification of any material uncertainties to the Groups and the parent companys ability to continue as a going concern over a period of at least twelve months from the date of approval of the financial statements.
We have nothing material to add or to draw attention to.
However because not all future events or conditions can be predicted this statement is not a guarantee as to the Groups and parent companys ability to continue as a going concern.
We are required to report if the directors statement relating to Going Concern in accordance with Listing Rule 9.8.6R3 is materially inconsistent with our knowledge obtained in the audit.
We have nothing to report.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT Reporting on other information The other information comprises all of the information in the Annual Report other than the financial statements and our auditors report thereon.
The directors are responsible for the other information.
Our opinion on the financial statements does not cover the other information and accordingly we do not express an audit opinion or except to the extent otherwise explicitly stated in this report any form of assurance thereon.
In connection with our audit of the financial statements our responsibility is to read the other information and in doing so consider whether the other information is materially inconsistent with the financial statements or our knowledge obtained in the audit or otherwise appears to be materially misstated.
If we identify an apparent material inconsistency or material misstatement we are required to perform procedures to conclude whether there is a material misstatement of the financial statements or a material misstatement of the other information.
If based on the work we have performed we conclude that there is a material misstatement of this other information we are required to report that fact.
We have nothing to report based on these responsibilities.
With respect to the Strategic Report and Directors Report we also considered whether the disclosures required by the UK Companies Act 2006 have been included.
Based on the responsibilities described above and our work undertaken in the course of the audit the Companies Act 2006 CA06 ISAs UK and the Listing Rules of the Financial Conduct Authority FCA require us also to report certain opinions and matters as described below required by ISAs UK unless otherwise stated.
Strategic report and Directors report In our opinion based on the work undertaken in the course of the audit the information given in the Strategic Report and Directors Report for the year ended 31 December 2017 is consistent with the financial statements and has been prepared in accordance with applicable legal requirements.
CA06
In light of the knowledge and understanding of the Group and parent company and their environment obtained in the course of the audit we did not identify any material misstatements in the Strategic Report and Directors Report.
CA06
The directors assessment of the prospects of the Group and of the principal risks that would threaten the solvency or liquidity of the Group We have nothing material to add or draw attention to regarding The directors confirmation on page 72 of the Annual Report that they have carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Group including those that would threaten its business model future performance solvency or liquidity.
The disclosures in the Annual Report that describe those risks and explain how they are being managed or mitigated.
The directors explanation on page 111 of the Annual Report as to how they have assessed the prospects of the Group over what period they have done so and why they consider that period to be appropriate and their statement as to whether they have a reasonable expectation that the Group will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the period of their assessment including any related disclosures drawing attention to any necessary qualifications or assumptions.
We have nothing to report having performed a review of the directors statement that they have carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Group and statement in relation to the longerterm viability of the Group.
Our review was substantially less in scope than an audit and only consisted of making inquiries and considering the directors process supporting their statements checking that the statements are in alignment with the relevant provisions of the UK Corporate Governance Code the Code and considering whether the statements are consistent with the knowledge and understanding of the Group and parent company and their environment obtained in the course of the audit.
Listing Rules.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT Other code provisions We have nothing to report in respect of our responsibility to report when The statement given by the directors on page 71 that they consider the Annual Report taken as a whole to be fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for the members to assess the Groups and parent companys position and performance business model and strategy is materially inconsistent with our knowledge of the Group and parent company obtained in the course of performing our audit.
The section of the Annual Report on pages 77 to 78 describing the work of the Audit Committee does not appropriately address matters communicated by us to the Audit Committee.
The directors statement relating to the parent companys compliance with the Code does not properly disclose a departure from a relevant provision of the Code specified under the Listing Rules for review by the auditors.
Directors remuneration In our opinion the part of the Directors Remuneration Report to be audited has been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 2006.
CA06.
Responsibilities for the financial statements and the audit Responsibilities of the directors for the financial statements As explained more fully in the Statement of Directors Responsibilities set out on pages 112 to 113 the directors are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements in accordance with the applicable framework and for being satisfied that they give a true and fair view.
The directors are also responsible for such internal control as they determine is necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error.
In preparing the financial statements the directors are responsible for assessing the Groups and the parent companys ability to continue as a going concern disclosing as applicable matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless the directors either intend to liquidate the Group or the parent company or to cease operations or have no realistic alternative but to do so.
Auditors responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error and to issue an auditors report that includes our opinion.
Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with ISAs UK will always detect a material misstatement when it exists.
Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if individually or in the aggregate they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these financial statements.
A further description of our responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements is located on the FRCs website at www. rc. iteauditorsresponsibilities.
This description forms part of our auditors report.
Use of this report This report including the opinions has been prepared for and only for the parent companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006 and for no other purpose.
We do not in giving these opinions accept or assume responsibility for any other purpose or to any other person to whom this report is shown or into whose hands it may come save where expressly agreed by our prior consent in writing.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT Other required reporting Companies Act 2006 exception reporting Under the Companies Act 2006 we are required to report to you if in our opinion we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit or adequate accounting records have not been kept by the parent company or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or certain disclosures of directors remuneration specified by law are not made or the parent company financial statements and the part of the Directors Remuneration Report to be audited are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns.
We have no exceptions to report arising from this responsibility.
Appointment
Following the recommendation of the audit committee we were appointed by the directors on 20 April 2017 to audit the financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 and subsequent financial periods.
This is therefore our first year of uninterrupted engagement.
NICHOLAS STEVENSON Senior Statutory Auditor for and on behalf of PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP Chartered Accountants and Statutory Auditors Milton Keynes 2 March 2018 ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT Secretary and Registered Office Jon Green Avebury House 201249 Avebury Boulevard Milton Keynes Buckinghamshire MK9 1AU Company Number site Financial adviser and joint corporate broker Deutsche Bank Winchester House 1 Great Winchester Street London EC2 2DB Joint corporate broker Peel Hunt LLP Moor House 120 London Wall London EC2Y 5ET
Slaughter and May One Bunhill Row London EC1Y 8YY
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP Exchange House Central Business Exchange Milton Keynes Buckinghamshire MK9 2DF Principal bankers BNP Paribas London Branch 10 Harewood Avenue London NW1 6AA Citibank N.
London Branch Citigroup Centre Canada Square Canary Wharf London E14 5LB DBS Bank Ltd.
London Branch 4th Floor Paternoster House 65 St Pauls Churchyard London EC4M 8AB HSBC Bank plc 8 Canada Square London E14 5HQ ING Bank NV London Branch 810 Moorgate London EC2R 6DA Lloyds Bank plc 10 Gresham Street London EC2V 7AE National Westminster Bank plc 250 Bishopsgate London EC2M 4AA Santander UK plc Santander House 201 Grafton Gate East Milton Keynes Buckinghamshire MK9 1AN ADVISERS AND INVESTOR INFORMATION ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  ADVISERS AND INVESTOR INFORMATION Registrar If you have any questions about your shareholding please contact in the first instance Computershare Investor Services plc PO Box 82 The Pavilions Bridgwater Road Bristol BS99 7NH Telephone 44 0tel Computershare also has an internet facility whereby shareholders in Essentra plc are able to access details of their shareholding.
Electronic communication As an alternative to receiving documentation through the post the Company offers shareholders the option to receive by email a notification that shareholder documents including Annual Reports Notice of Shareholder Meetings Proxy Forms etc are available for access on the Companys website.
If you wish to make such an electionsitesite If you have already made such an election you need take no further action.
Registration is entirely voluntary and you may request a hard copy of the shareholder documents or change your election at any time.
ANNUAL REPORT 2017  WWW.
SSENTRAPLC.
OM
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  ADVISERS AND INVESTOR INFORMATION The printer and paper manufacturing mill are both accredited with ISO 14001.
Environmental Management Systems and are both Forest Stewardship Council certified.
CPI Colour is also a certified company.
Designed and produced by Superunion formerly Addison Group site Essentra plc Avebury House 201249 Avebury Boulevard Milton Keynes MK9 1AU United Kingdom
