ITV delivers strong operational performance in an uncertain economic environment ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 We are an integrated producer broadcaster creating owning and distributing highquality content on multiple platforms.
Contents
Strategic Report Provides a comprehensive review of ITVs business and strategy.
2017 Highlights 2 ITV at a Glance 4
Chairmans Statement 6
Investor Proposition 8 Market Review 10
Chief Executives Report 14
Our Strategy and Business Model 18 Corporate Responsibility 20 Operating and Performance Review 22 Alternative Performance Measures 34 Key Performance Indicators 36 Finance Review 40 Risks and Uncertainties 50
Presents a clear view of ITVs governance.
Chairmans Governance Statement 60
Board of Directors 62 Management Board 64 Corporate Governance 66 Audit and Risk Committee Report 72
Remuneration Report 82
Directors Report 98 Financial Statements ITVs audited nancial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 .
Financial Statements
Independent Auditors Report 108
Primary Statements 114 ITV plc Company Financial Statements 179 Additional InformationGlossary 194 Strategic Report The Strategic Report explains in detail how we have performed this year and sets out a fair review of the business a balanced and comprehensive analysis of our performance the use of key performance indicators to explain the progress we have made a description of the principal risks and uncertainties facing the Company and an indication of potential future developments.
The Strategic Report is prepared in line with the relevant provisions of the Companies Act 2006 and the Company has had regard to the guidance issued by the Financial Reporting Council.
It is intended to provide shareholders with a better understanding of the Company of its position in the markets within which it operates and of its prospects.
In setting out the Companys main risks and uncertainties an indication of potential future developments and in other content this report and accounts contains statements that are based on knowledge and information available at the date of preparation of the Strategic Report and what are believed to be reasonable judgements and therefore cannot be considered as indications of likelihood or certainty.
A wide range of factors may cause the actual outcomes and results to differ materially from those contained within or implied by these various forwardlooking statements.
None of these statements should be construed as a prot forecast.
Corporate website We maintain a corporate website at site containing our nancial results and a wide range of information of interest to institutional and private investors.
C o n t e n t s pa g e  Liar F r o n t c ove r The Voice UK 1 Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information
Management and Divisional
Operational
Risk Steering
Audit and Risk
The Board Operation and Assurance Three lines of defence  business divisions Group functions Internal Audit
See page
Statement
See page 6
Review
See page 40 Our performance in 2017 See page 22 How we manage risk See page 50
Read more content within this report Read more content online Key nancial highlights Group external revenue 3132m 2% 2016 3064m NonNAR revenue 2066m 11% 2016 1855m Adjusted EBITA 842m 5% 2016 885m Adjusted EPS 16.0p 6% 2016 17 .0p Statutory EPS 10.2p 9% 2016 11.2p Dividend per share p ordinary 7 .8p 8% 2016 7 .2p Chief Executives
See page 14
Alternative Performance Measures We use both statutory and adjusted measures in our Strategic Report the latter of which in managements view reflects the underlying performance of the business and provides a more meaningful comparison of how the business is managed and measured daytoday.
A full reconciliation between our reported and adjusted results is provided in our Alternative Performance Measures denitions on pages 34 and 35.
Our KPIs are set out on pages 36 to 39.
The Strategic Report also refers to total revenue which includes all ITV revenue both internal and external.
NonNet Advertising Revenue NonNAR includes all ITV revenue both internal and external except Net Advertising Revenue NAR.
EBITA before exceptional items has been adjusted to reflect the inclusion of production tax credits adjusted EBITA.
Statutory EBITA is 810 million 2016 857 million and statutory prot before tax is 500 million 2016 553 million.
2 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report ITV formats sold in 2017 66% of ITV original commissions supplied by ITV Studios new commissions and 240 recommissions
Highlights
Good Morning Britain achieved a 19% share of viewing in 2017 which was its highest ever share since it launched in 2010.
Im A Celebrity Get Me Out Of Here The 17th series averaged 10 million viewers and a 38% share.
It was the most watched series for 1634s on any channel in 2017 with 2.5 million viewers and a 54% share.
The Chase goes from strength to strength with an average 3.2 million viewers and a 25% share in 2017.
The format was sold to four countries in 2017.
Cold Feet returned for a second series averaging 5.1 million viewers and a 21% share.
It has been recommissioned for a third series.
Broadchurch was the most watched drama in 2017.
It averaged 10.7 million viewers and a 36% share over a million more viewers than the previous two series.
ITV delivered another strong performance in 2017 as we continued to strengthen rebalance and grow the business.
Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information 2017 Highlights 21.7% share of viewing for the ITV Family up from 21.3% in 2016 34% increase in longform video requests 17% increase in ITV2s 1634s share of commercial impacts Coronation Street remains the most watched soap in the UK.
It averaged 7.6 million viewers in 2017 and a 35% share which was up one share point yearonyear.
The Voice launched on ITV in 2017 and averaged 5.6 million viewers and a 24% share with a 29% share for 1634s.
The Voice format has been sold to 65 counties.
American Dad Family Guy and The Cleveland Show continue to perform well on ITV2 attracting a combined average share of 11% of 1634s in 2017.
Love Island averaged 2.5 million viewers with a 34% share of 1634s and 43% of 1624s.
It had the biggest 1624 audience of all digital channels in 2017.
In 2017 99% of all commercial audiences over 5 million were on ITV 4 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report ITV at a glance ITV as an integrated producer broadcaster creates owns and distributes highquality content on multiple platforms globally.
We operate the largest commercial family of channels in the UK and deliver our content through linear television broadcasting as well as on demand via the ITV Hub and across other platforms globally.
We have built signicant scale in key creative markets around the world creating and producing programmes and formats that return and travel namely drama entertainment and factual entertainment.
Broadcast and
ITV Studios ITV broadcasts a wide variety of content on its family of freetoair channels.
Our investment in programming is primarily funded by television advertising revenue.
ITV has the largest share of the UK television advertising market with a share of broadcast SOB of 47.6% in 2017.
We sell all of our key demographics across 13 regional licences.
ITV Studios creates and produces content in the UK and internationally while our distribution business Global Entertainment sells nished programmes and formats worldwide.
47.6% largest share of the UK TV advertising market hrs of original content produced and delivered in 2017 21.7 % share of viewing for the ITV Family in 2017 labels in 11 different countries supplying over 200 channels registered users of the ITV Hub ITV formats sold in 2017 5 Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information ITV at a glance ITV Studios UK ITV Studios UK is the largest commercial producer in the UK.
We produce programming across a diverse range of genres such as drama entertainment and factual entertainment for ITVs own channels as well as for other UK broadcasters such as the BBC Channel 4 Channel 5 and Sky.
ITV America ITV America is the largest independent producer of unscripted content in the US.
We are also growing our presence in scripted content using our strong cash flows to produce highprole dramas with the potential to travel and build international appeal.
ITV Studios Rest of World ITV Studios also operates in the Netherlands through Talpa Media Germany France Italy Australia and the Nordics.
Talpa produces and distributes entertainment formats while the other businesses produce scripted and unscripted content for local broadcasters in these regions.
This content is either created locally or are formats that have been created elsewhere by ITV primarily the UK and Talpa.
Global Entertainment Global Entertainment ITVs distribution business owns the rights to ITV programmes and formats and acquires thirdparty content distributing this to other broadcasters and platforms internationally.
Within this business we also nance productions for ITV and third parties to acquire global distribution rights.
The family of channels attracted a total share of viewing SOV of 21.7% in 2017 the largest audience of any UK commercial broadcaster.
Our main channel is the largest commercial channel in the UK delivering 99% of all commercial audiences over ve million.
Our freetoair digital channels provide more targeted demographics for advertisers such as 1634s ABC1s Men and Housewives with Children and consist of ITV2 and ITV3 the two largest digital channels in the UK ITV4 CITV and ITVBe.
We also have high denition versions of our digital channels available on pay platforms.
In addition to linear broadcast ITV delivers its content across multiple platforms.
This is either through our overthetop OTT service the ITV Hub available on 29 platforms including ITVs website site pay providers such as Virgin and Sky and through direct content deals with services such as Amazon Apple and Netflix.
ITV has the ITV Hub which is a Subscription Video on Demand SVOD service where subscribers have access to advertising free content and the ability to download catch up content.
We have partnered with the BBC to launch a new SVOD service BritBox in the US and Canada.
The streaming service allows subscribers to access the best of British television.
We also own a best of British SVOD service Cirkus in the Nordics and Germany and an online service ITV Choice an entertainment channel for emerging markets available in 100 countries.
ITV total revenue inc.
Broadcast and Online 2075m ITV Studios 1582m ITV adjusted EBITA Broadcast and Online 599m ITV Studios 243m 6 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Statement
Were reporting on a challenging year but one in which ITV has made signicant progress.
ITV delivered a strong operating performance with great onscreen and online viewing.
Against this net advertising revenue NAR reacted to political and economic uncertainty contracting by just under 5% though as we report this trend improved towards the end of the period.
Our rebalanced company saw continued growth in nonNAR revenues  from sponsorship from digital and from production both at home and abroad.
We thank our former Chief Executive Adam Crozier along with the executive team for these important advances.
And Im very grateful to Ian Grifths who added the role of Chief Operating Ofcer to Group Finance Director.
ITVs mass commercial audience is at the heart of our offer to viewers and advertisers.
We own the only such mass audience in the UK.
Weve now grown our share of television viewing for two years in a row.
And our broadcast schedule offers the most trusted medium of brand advertising where an impact is watching an entire full screen advertisement with the sound up where no impacts are fake where a brand is guaranteed adjacency to trusted content and where theres no adblocking.
Meanwhile ITV Studios now produces for over 200 channels in 11 countries around the world.
This underlines the enduring strengths on which well build our new revenue streams in the future.
So with our strong balance sheet were able to deliver good returns to shareholders while also investing in that future.
In line with our dividend policy and reflecting the Boards condence in the business and the outlook for 2018 the Board is proposing a nal dividend of 5.28p which equates to a full year dividend of 7.8p up 8%.
Sir Peter Bazalgette Chairman 7 Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information
Chairmans Statement
Dividend
Dividend per share p ordinary 8%
Our awardwinning daytime shows thriving soaps and major dramas are a vital part of Britains national conversation exploring topical social issues that dene our culture.
And as a major employer of creative talent in Manchester Leeds and London our role in the nations growing creative economy is very important to us.
Id like to thank my Board colleagues for their valuable support and input during 2017.
We welcome Margaret Ewing as our vastly experienced new Chair of the Audit and Risk
And we shortly bid farewell to Andy Haste and John Ormerod each of them having committed ten fruitful years to the Company.
We have a clear plan to continue to improve the diversity of the
At the time of writing our gender balance is now 40% female and 60% male.
And we intend in the medium term also to widen our ethnic diversity beyond our current one BAME member.
Finally on behalf of the Board I want to thank all ITV colleagues for their excellent contribution in 2017.
With that quality of commitment well prosper in the future.
Sir Peter Bazalgette
As we work hard on ITVs next chapter of growth we are thinking about our digital competitors.
And we see just as many opportunities to seize as threats to ward off.
Netflix and Amazon may compete with us for viewers but they also buy our programmes and coproduce major new series.
Talking of that future we were delighted to welcome Carolyn McCall as our new Chief Executive at the beginning of 2018.
Investors will be familiar with her background in media her experience of direct to consumer relationships and use of consumer data her ability to design and implement astute strategy and her understanding of what it is to run an international company.
In short shes someone with a track record of delivering value to shareholders.
As she explains shes already started her strategy refresh.
Today theres quite rightly a growing emphasis on company culture and social purpose.
These are qualities ITV as a Public Service Broadcaster has always kept front of mind hand in hand with entertainment.
But now theyre in even sharper focus.
As a producer of trusted sourced national news regional news and current affairs in an age of fake news we take our contribution to a functioning democracy very seriously.
Joanna Lumleys India was a threepart documentary broadcast on ITV in 2017.
8 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report A strong platform for delivery As an integrated producer broadcaster ITV is in a unique position to create and own worldclass content broadcast it on one of the biggest marketing platforms in the UK and distribute it globally through its international network.
ITV is an increasingly global and diversied organisation with signicant nonadvertising revenue streams reducing its dependency on UK advertising.
ITV has delivered a strong operational and nancial performance over many years and is in a good position to continue to do this underpinned by its strategic assets and competitive advantage.
ITV is currently undertaking a strategic refresh to ensure it has a clear strategy and priorities which reflect what ITV needs to be in three ve and ten years time.
Strong market position The Broadcast and Online business is robust.
Our onscreen and online viewing performance is strong and we continue to deliver unrivalled audience scale and reach for advertisers as well as more targeted demographics on our digital channels and on the ITV Hub.
Online Pay and Interactive is a material fastgrowing and protable part of the business and we are building our digital business through our direct to consumer SVOD services BritBox Cirkus and the ITV Hub.
ITV Studios our international content business is now a global player of scale creating owning and managing rights and we will continue to grow in key creative markets driving value from the strong demand for quality content.
99% of all commercial audiences over 5 million were on ITV 54% of total ITV Studios revenue was from outside the UK in 2017
Proposition
ITV continues to make signicant progress in growing and strengthening the business creatively commercially and nancially.
Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information Investor Proposition Clockwise from top left Tokio Myers winner of Britains Got Talent in 2017 England versus Slovakia in the World Cup Qualiers new ITV Studios drama Bancroft.
Highly cash generative We are a highly cash generative business and our disciplined approach to cash costs and capital gives us a strong balance sheet and enables us to continue to invest across the business.
Investment
In line with our strategic refresh and key priorities we will explore investment opportunities to develop and grow the business and enhance shareholder value while maintaining capital discipline.
Compelling shareholder returns The Board is committed to a longterm sustainable dividend policy.
Ordinary dividends will grow broadly in line with earnings targeting dividend cover of around 2x adjusted earnings per share over the medium term.
8% growth in the ordinary dividend yearonyear 10 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Review
The market environment in which we operate is rapidly changing and becoming increasingly competitive.
Consolidation of media and telecoms companies the increasing influence of technology and the evolution in the way viewers consume media what they watch when they watch it and how they watch it bring both challenges and opportunities.
Key market trends Over recent years there has been a signicant change in the availability and delivery of content with a substantial increase in the number of ways to watch television with viewers able to choose a variety of platforms both free and pay to watch live catch up and box set content.
This has led to the rapid growth of online viewing.
However linear television viewing remains resilient and is still the most popular way to consume content for all demographics.
The proliferation of channels platforms and new entrants has caused a signicant increase in the global demand for content with spend growing on highquality programming.
We estimate that the global content market is growing at around 5% per annum with some genres such as drama rising faster than others.
This growth can be attributed to a number of factors including a larger international pay television market the consolidation of pay providers with content companies and distributors coupled with the convergence in the television market where telecoms and new media companies are competing with traditional media companies for content and viewers online players such as Netflix and Amazon investing heavily in new original content and online advertising driven platforms such as Google and Facebook creating a new market for short form and digital content.
Global content The US is by far the largest content market in the world dominating the global production sector with the UK the second largest market.
This represents a signicant opportunity for ITV Studios which has a strong presence in both regions.
Demand for drama particularly US drama has increased signicantly in the last few years.
Original scripted content is brand dening for broadcasters and OTT players in an increasingly competitive global environment.
US studios continue to dominate the market for drama in the US and internationally.
However the rise of Netflix and Amazon which are investing heavily in creating highquality original scripted content has signicantly increased competition in the market.
Suburra is the rst original Italian Netflix crime drama produced by Cattleya which was acquired by ITV Studios in 2017.
Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information Market Review This increased competition coupled with the fact that viewers are now expecting higher quality content has driven up the cost of production.
Decit nancing and coproductions or partnerships have therefore become increasingly important in nancing productions where distributors are often funding the difference between what the content buyer is paying for the original broadcast and the cost of production.
This decit is covered through global sales our windowing strategy of making content available in different territories on different broadcast platforms and at different times either exclusively or nonexclusively along with sales to OTT platforms.
As a distributor as well as a producer ITV is in a strong position to decit nance its own productions and therefore produce highquality content and retain the rights to it as well as acquiring rights for thirdparty productions.
Leveraging our network relationships and international distribution network we have expanded our global scripted business and developed a strong portfolio of international and returning drama.
We are taking advantage of the increased demand from OTT platforms and other viewing windows around the world with our UK and US studios having a number of original commissions conrmed or in the pipeline for international distribution in 2018 and beyond.
Conrmed commissions for international rights outside of the UK include Harlots S2 for Hulu Vanity Fair and War of the Worlds for Amazon and Robozuna for
In the UK these programmes will be broadcast on either ITV or the BBC.
The OTT deals for international distribution will make Netflix the biggest customer for our Global Entertainment business in 2018.
ITV America has developed several scripted programmes over the last few years and has a healthy pipeline of content in development.
Our 2017 scripted deliveries included Good Witch Sun Records Somewhere Between and a pilot of Snowpiercer.
2018 deliveries and beyond are expected to include a fourth series of Good Witch and a tenpart series of
In the UK there is stronger demand and higher viewing gures for UK content over imported series.
We are a major producer of scripted content and have further reinforced this position through our acquisition of World Productions in 2017.
Our 2017 scripted deliveries in the UK included Victoria Cold Feet Poldark Unforgotten The Loch and Fearless.
Scripted deliveries in 2018 include Vanity Fair Next of Kin Trauma The City And The City Poldark S4 Unforgotten S3 and The Bodyguard all of which have international appeal.
In Europe we have seen a resurgence in demand for local scripted content because acquired US content is not performing as well as it has historically on broadcast channels.
There is now also global demand for highquality foreign language scripted content.
As such we have strengthened our position in this area through our acquisitions of Tetra Media Studio in France and Cattleya in Italy along with our investment in Apple Tree Productions a Danish scripted production company.
These acquisitions produce longrunning critically acclaimed foreignlanguage dramas for freetoair pay and OTT platforms locally and internationally.
Titles include Prolage for TF1 Gomorrah for Sky Italia and Suburra for Netflix and Rai.
While not growing as quickly as scripted content demand for unscripted content remains strong as networks continue to require lower cost high volume popular series.
The UK remains the dominant producer of unique unscripted formats.
Along with the established entertainment and factual entertainment genres unscripted reality programming where we have focused our US acquisitions has grown quickly with formats such as Real Housewives Four Weddings The First 48 and Alone.
OTT platforms have also started to supplement their catalogue with unscripted titles which provides a lower cost alternative to expensive scripted titles.
In 2018 we will have multiple original unscripted commissions in production or development including Queer Eye for the Straight Guy and Girl Incarcerated with Netflix and several shows in development with Facebook.
ITV is now a genuine global player in unscripted content being a leading unscripted independent producer in the US and Europe as well as the largest commercial production company in the UK.
The large independent production companies such as Endemol Shine Group and Fremantle Media continue to be ITV Studios main competitors in nonscripted content.
Good Witch is a scripted format produced by ITV America for the Hallmark channel in the US.
It will go into its fourth season in 2018.
Hells Kitchen has been a huge international success with 38 format sales worldwide over the last ten years.
12 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report Market Review continued Broadcast television and digital Changes in viewing habits The multiple ways in which viewers are now able to watch content has impacted viewing habits globally and we have seen a signicant increase in OTT viewing as a result.
This varies by demographic with younger viewers spending proportionately more time consuming video content on nonTV devices such as smartphones games consoles and tablets compared with older demographics who spend more time on linear television.
Digital viewing while currently only a small proportion of total viewing is growing fast particularly via OTT services such as Netflix and Amazon which have seen exponential growth over the last few years.
We continue to invest in ITVs online offering the ITV Hub along with rolling out our SVOD services BritBox in the US and Canada and Cirkus in the Nordics and Germany to enable us to compete in this market.
Linear television viewing In the UK linear television viewing still remains the most popular form of media entertainment.
UK average linear television viewing in 2017 was 203 minutes per day down from 212 minutes in 2016.
The decline is partly driven by the absence of a major sporting event in 2017 and is similar to 2013 a no sporting year which also saw a nine minute decline in average viewing yearonyear.
The average for 1634s was 123 minutes per day which declined by 11% 2016 138 minutes.
The corresponding decline for 1634s across the ITV family of channels was 5% and as such ITV saw share growth for this demographic yearonyear Source BARB.
Younger viewers are more skewed to watching content outside of the sevenday BARB measurement window and often on nonTV devices and as such this viewing is not currently captured by BARB further detail below.
While it is clear that younger viewers do watch less linear television than other demographics if the right content is delivered they will watch it either via linear television or online.
Love Island on ITV2 was an example of this in 2017 with an average of 1.4 million 1634s viewers across the series and 0.9 million 1634s catch up requests online per day.
ITV competes for linear viewers with the BBC and commercial broadcasters including Channel 4 Sky and Channel 5.
ITV and BBC1 continue to be the only channels consistently able to deliver mass audiences as well as targeted demographics and in 2017 ITV again delivered 99% of all commercial audiences over ve million viewers and 96% over three million.
In 2017 the ITV family of channels increased their SOV to 21.7% 2016 21.3% and is second only to the BBCs Family of channels at 31.4% which lost share during the year 2016 31.9% due to the move of key entertainment shows from BBC1 to commercial broadcasters.
Digital viewing Digital viewing includes catch up viewing of broadcaster content via the television set or other devices such as tablets and mobiles and video on demand VOD delivery of other longform content such as box sets and movies via services such as Sky Netflix and Amazon.
While digital viewing has grown fast it still accounts for a small proportion of total viewing time.
In the UK we estimate 75% of all viewing of legal longform content is live excluding online simulcast viewing 2016 79% with a further 13% timeshifted via a Personal Video Recorder PVR and watched within 28 days of the original broadcast date 2016 12%.
Of the estimated 12% of content viewed on demand 2016 9% 4% is catch up viewing of broadcaster content via the television set or to other devices such as tablets and mobiles 2016 4%.
The remaining 8% of content is other VOD viewing where viewing of box sets via services such as Sky Netflix and Amazon are replacing viewing of DVDs 2016 5%.
This is growing quickly driven by accessibility of these services on smartphones tablets and connected televisions which allows viewers to watch content whenever and wherever they want.
Nonlinear viewing Longform content viewing Live including simulcast 75% T i m esh i f t e d  P V R up to 28 days 13% V O D  B r oa dc a st e r catch up 4% VOD Other 8% Source 2017 BARBThinkbox data Linear Television viewing SOV by broadcaster ITV Family 21.7% BBC Family 31.4% Channel 4 Family 10.5% Five Family 6.5% Sky Family 8.0% Other 21.9% Source BARB 13 Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information Market Review Pay television The platform mix in the UK is roughly 50% freetoair and 50% linear pay TV There is currently no industry measure for online viewing in the UK.
BARB is developing a jointindustry audited measure of online viewing across all devices used to watch content which will include viewing across PCs tablets and smartphones.
Initial ndings from this project are expected to be published during 2018.
Pay television Freetoair television in the UK is delivered through services including Freeview YouView and Freesat while linear pay television is delivered through operators such as Sky BT Virgin and TalkTalk.
The platform mix between freetoair and linear pay television has remained constant for a number of years at around 5050.
The market dynamics of the pay market are changing as established pay television providers such as Sky and Virgin face increasing competition from BT and OTT providers Netflix and Amazon.
Increasingly homes are supplementing their free and pay television with other forms of paid content including SVOD services such as Netflix or by purchasing additional channels through nocontract providers such as Now TV or TalkTalk TV Store.
Around 30% of homes in the UK have an SVOD service and this is weighted towards those homes that have linear pay TV Source BARB.
Including SVOD pay services the platform mix in the UK is roughly 40% freetoair and 60% paid viewing which is unchanged from 2016.
ITV earns revenue from various third parties including Sky and Virgin through the licensing of channels and content including our HD digital channels ITV2 HD ITV3 HD and ITV4 HD and catch up VOD.
ITV has also launched BritBox a SVOD service in the US and Canada which is a joint venture with the BBC.
The service offers a signicant amount of content from both broadcasters and gives ITV access to the fastgrowing SVOD market in the US.
Advertising revenue As an integrated producer broadcaster ITV generates revenues from advertising through linear television sponsorship and online and competes with commercial broadcasters and other advertising media for its advertising revenues.
Cash from these revenue streams is then used to fund the creation of content in the UK and internationally.
In the UK television advertising including VOD sponsorship and other television revenues continues to hold a signicant share of the overall advertising market with a 25.5% share in 2017 2016 27.5%.
The decrease yearonyear can be attributed to the ongoing political and economic uncertainty in the UK with advertisers reducing spend on television as they try to manage margins.
Historically we have seen that television advertising loses share in an economic downturn however it recovers quickly when the cycle reverses.
Internet
Internet advertising has beneted in the current climate from the way it is sold when compared with television.
Online advertising is normally sold as annual volume deals rather than share deals for television which enables advertisers to reduce their television spend quickly.
Print advertising continues to decline at 13.1% in 2017 2016 15.6%.
While online advertising has grown rapidly there are concerns about what some online advertising delivers especially when compared with television that online has no trusted measurement system the adverts may not be seen by a human in full or at all and the content around the advertising may not be appropriate for that brand.
The ITV Hub delivers the key demographics and a highquality trusted and measured environment for online advertisers.
The UK television advertising market is extremely difcult to measure as all broadcasters have different denitions.
We estimate ITVs SOB which is based on pure linear television advertising excluding VOD sponsorship and selfpromotion to be 47.6% in 2017 up from 47.4% in 2016.
This increase is because of ITVs unique ability to deliver mass audiences across multiple regions and in key demographics.
Advertising revenue Televisions share of the advertising market Television 25.5% Press 13.1% Radio 3.3% Cinema 1.4% Outdoor 5.5% Internet 51.2% Source Advertising Association January 2018 14 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Chief Executives Report
Carolyn McCall Chief Executive I was very pleased to join ITV in January as Chief Executive.
It is still early days but I have already visited many parts of the business and met many very talented ITV people.
I have visited our ofces in London Manchester and Leeds a number of our newsrooms production companies as well as two cornerstones of our schedule Coronation Street and Emmerdale.
I have been struck by the pride and passion ITV people have for what they do and the critical role ITV plays in society and the media ecology.
ITVs operational performance was strong in 2017 in what clearly was a challenging year with continued economic and political uncertainty impacting the demand for television advertising.
Share of viewing was up for the second year running a rst ever for ITV there was a signicant increase in online viewing up over 30% and with good revenue growth and the Studios business also delivered good revenue growth both in total and excluding acquisitions.
Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information
Chief Executives Report
ITV has a strong consumer proposition and fantastic content which drives mass audiences and key demographics which are so valuable to advertisers.
It also has the potential to do more targeted advertising.
Live television remains the preferred way of watching content even for younger audiences.
And it gives immediate scale reach and fame for advertisers that just cannot be achieved anywhere else.
It also provides a safe trusted and transparent environment in which to advertise and generates the highest return on investment of any media.
Recent research by Ebiquity found that for every pound spent TV generates over 4 of prot compared to just over 2 for online video and less than 1 for online display.
While online advertising continues to grow advertisers are challenging its effectiveness and what it actually delivers  we are now starting to see many more questions being asked about unacceptable content measurability and trust in online media.
The Board is proposing a full year dividend of 7.8p up 8% which reflects condence in the business and the outlook for 2018.
This is in line with ITVs ordinary dividend policy.
The business remains highly cash generative but given that there is now a more normal ordinary dividend ve consecutive special dividends leverage around 1x and a strategic refresh underway the Board has decided not to pay a special dividend for 2017.
ITV is in good shape but we recognise that the media landscape continues to change rapidly with more content to watch and more ways to watch it.
The economics are also changing.
We are operating in an increasingly competitive market traditional broadcasters are no longer our only competitors for viewers for advertising and for quality content.
These relatively new competitors are also customers.
We have kicked off a strategy refresh to address all of these areas and we have identied three major areas in this refresh content advertising and direct to consumer.
We will have a clear strategy together with welldened priorities to establish what ITV needs to be in three and ve years time and what we need to do to face the challenges and exploit the opportunities ahead.
Trauma was a threepart drama broadcast on ITV main channel in February 2018 and produced by Tall Story Pictures part of ITV Studios UK.
Six Nations Rugby Championships was successfully broadcast on ITV main channel for the second year in 2018.
16 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Chief Executives Report continued
Netflix and Amazon are important buyers of our content  this year Netflix will become the biggest customer of Global Entertainment our distribution business.
And the focus isnt just on drama they also want unscripted content in the US.
And ITV Studios is an international production business of scale with total revenues of over 1.5bn  54% of which was generated outside the UK  and is active in 11 countries with a library of over 45000 hours.
We have strong relationships through our global production and distribution network and sell content to over 200 channels globally.
The ITV Hub delivers a high quality trusted and measured environment for advertisers.
It also allows us to build direct to consumer relationships around our great content and programme brands  something we are just at the start of  but already we have 75% of all 16 to 34 year olds registered.
And through voting and competitions within our programmes we had over 100 million interactions last year.
Creating and owning quality content is a real advantage.
The integrated producer broadcaster model is also a benet  we have a great opportunity to make content famous on our channels in the UK before selling it round the world.
Not only does our success onscreen and online depend on having fantastic content but the global demand for high quality programming remains strong as broadcasters and platform owners look for brand dening content.
Emmerdale performed strongly in 2017 with an average of 6.5 million viewers and a 33% share this was its highest share in four years.
Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information
Chief Executives Report
An Hour to Catch a Killer Trevor McDonald presented this oneoff documentary as part of ITVs Crime and Punishment season broadcast on the main channel in 2017.
While the economic outlook remains uncertain we expect ITV Family NAR to be positive in the rst half with Q1 up 1% a continuation of the improvement we saw towards the end of 2017.
In 2018 we expect online to show double digit revenue growth.
We have kicked off our strategic refresh and when we report to you at the interims we will be able to give you an update and some of the key headlines.
In the meantime we remain very focused on the business.
There is a lot to do and the energy and commitment of ITV people both creatively and commercially will help us deliver all of this.
We have a solid foundation to build on and a strong balance sheet and healthy cash flows gives ITV the flexibility to make the right strategic decisions for the long term future of ITV in an increasingly competitive environment whilst still delivering sustainable returns to shareholders.
Carolyn McCall Chief Executive We have had a great start to 2018.
Viewing has been very strong with a schedule including the return of Dancing On Ice The Voice Vera Endeavour Trauma Six Nations rugby record viewing for our key daytime shows and the sixth episode of Coronation Street.
Our family share of viewing so far is up 7% and total viewing volumes are actually up too by 3% with online viewing up 22%.
And we have a great schedule to come for the rest of the year including the FIFA World Cup in June Vanity Fair Clean Break White Dragon Britains Got Talent and Little Big Shots.
ITV Studios has a great pipeline of new and returning shows including Unforgotten Vanity Fair Survival of the Fittest and Im A CelebrityGet Me Out Of Here for ITV Poldark Bodyguard and Shetland for BBC Living the Dream for Sky and internationally Love Island The Voice The Chase Big Stars Little Star Snowpiercer and Good Witch.
We have already secured over 60% of our expected revenue for 2018 about 100 million more than this time last year and expect to deliver good organic revenue growth in ITV Studios over the full year.
Dancing on Ice returned to ITV in January 2018 after a fouryear break for its tenth series.
It has been recommissioned for an 11th series.
18 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report Our Strategy and Business
Our strategic assets Our strategic assets underpin ITVs competitive advantage We are focused on being an owner  producer distributor and broadcaster of content.
We are currently undertaking a strategic refresh to ensure that ITV has a clear strategy and welldened priorities to establish what ITV needs to be in three and ve years time.
Our talented commercial and creative people Our sources of competitive advantage Delivering unrivalled commercial audiences The scale of our channels and the signicant investment we make in quality content give ITV unique scale and reach across the key demographics on our main channel and more targeted audiences on our family of channels and the ITV Hub.
Worldclass content At the core of ITV is our focus on creativity and content whether selling our unique content around the world or investing in thirdparty content to broadcast across multiple platforms.
Internationally
Global distribution ITV has built relationships globally with major networks platform owners and local broadcasters and owns the rights to a diverse portfolio of shows particularly drama and entertainment for international distribution.
Our strategy has been to diversify and grow the business reducing our reliance on UK advertising Broadcast and Online Building our freetoair online and pay business ITV Studios Growing an international content and distribution business 60% Our channels reach over 60% of the UK population each week 1bn We invest over 1bn annually in content for our family of channels hours of television and lm content Our strong trusted brand and culture Creating and owning the rights to quality content 19 Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information Our strategy and business model
Advertisers
Through delivering unique scale and breadth of demographics and new innovative ways of engaging with consumers around quality programme brands
Through a varied highquality programming schedule which they can watch and engage with on a variety of platforms
Through delivering quality programming that they can then monetise through their own business models
Through a track record of creating shareholder value and delivering signicant shareholder returns Our people Through investing in and developing our talent and creating a culture that nurtures them to become both commercial and creative Our diversied revenue streams By developing and managing the rights to content ITV is able to maximise the value of its programme brands across a range of revenue streams making ITV a more balanced business and enabling it to drive value from different revenue models.
Advertising
Our family of channels and the ITV Hub drive signicant advertising revenues from the ability to deliver both mass audiences and more targeted demographics to advertisers this funds our investment in the programme budget.
Commercial partnerships We work with advertisers and advertising agencies to provide unique commercial partnerships and sponsorship opportunities that extend beyond pure spot advertising.
Pay and interactive We earn pay revenues from platforms in the UK primarily by licensing our HD channels and our online VOD services.
In March 2017 we launched a joint venture with the BBC BritBox US a SVOD service offering the best of British television.
The service launched in Canada in February 2018.
We also monetise our consumer interaction with our biggest shows through competitions and voting.
Going forward we need to ensure we are paid the appropriate value for our content on all platforms.
Original production We produce original content commissions for broadcasters and platform owners internationally from our production bases in the UK the US the Netherlands Germany France Italy Australia and the Nordics.
Distribution revenues We own the rights to a signicant catalogue of programmes and formats that we sell and license to broadcasters and platform owners internationally.
The strong global demand for content provides a signicant opportunity for us.
11% growth in total revenue derived from sources other than spot television advertising 20 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Responsibility
Building a responsible business that benets all stakeholders.
We want to continue to build a successful creative commercial and global organisation.
We believe that conducting our business in a responsible way has a fundamental role in achieving this goal.
As the largest commercial broadcaster in the UK and a growing international business we reach millions of people on a daily basis through our programmes and channels.
We are woven into the fabric of society both mirroring and shaping popular culture.
As well as complying with our legislative and regulatory requirements we believe in using the power of our content to make a difference in society for our viewers our people and our communities.
To help shape our corporate responsibility CR strategy we engage with our stakeholders to identify the issues most important to them and our business.
Our approach Our strategy focuses on three priorities people planet and partnerships.
Each of our priorities highlights the risks and opportunities that are most relevant to us and we have made four commitments under each that incorporate our main assets and business operations.
These three pillars are underpinned by core responsible business practices such as good governance business ethics data protection responsibility of content and performance management.
Employee gender split is based on total headcount at 31 December 2017.
With the arrival of Carolyn McCall in January 2018 the Board of Directors gender split is now 60% male 40% female.
An employee who is a director of a subsidiary of the Company or who has responsibility for planning directing or controlling the activities of the entity or a strategically signicant part of it.
Diversity at ITV Gender split  at 31 December 2017 Board of Directors 66.7% 33.3% Senior management 57.1% 42.9% All employees 47.3% 52.7% ITV will be publishing its rst gender pay gap report in line with new reporting requirements.
The report will be published separately and available online.
Priority Leveraging our reach
Responsible business daytoday How we work with others People Inclusive programming To ensure our programmes portray the diversity of modern society by the people onscreen and the editorial content.
Inclusive
To ensure our workforce reflects the diverse makeup of modern society.
Inclusive culture To build awareness and capacity and create a culture that attracts develops and retains the best talent possible and enables everyone to be their best.
Inclusive access to programmes and services To work with our supply chain to encourage inclusivity standards and to make sure our services are accessible.
Planet Greener programming To ensure our programmes communicate responsible environmental messaging through the editorial content directly or indirectly.
Greener workforce To build the awareness and capacity of our workforce to have a positive impact on the environment.
Greener footprint To minimise our direct environmental footprint of energy water and waste in our operations.
Greener partners To work with our value chain to encourage environmentally responsible standards and behaviours.
Partnerships Empowering charities and causes To use our mass audience reach and influence to raise awareness or donations for national and international causes.
Empowering our workforce To empower our workforce to give back through time and skills to support local communities and causes.
Empowering our viewers To use our programmes at the heart of popular culture to raise awareness of pressing social topics and inspire change.
Empowering communities To inspire and engage our local communities to make a positive difference.
Responsible business To embed responsible business practices at the heart of everything we do including good governance business ethics and stakeholder engagement and to strive for continual improvements.
Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information Corporate responsibility
We strive to ensure diversity in our onscreen programming and in our workforce ensuring that were relevant and accessible to all.
Our people are the driving force of ITV.
We run our business in a way that nurtures an engaged and inclusive workforce.
This means attracting people from all backgrounds to work at and with ITV enabling everyone to be their best at work.
Planet
Our aim is to increase awareness of environmental sustainability through our programmes while minimising the environmental impact of our operations.
Through our reach and value chain we have the chance to create longterm change by bringing environmental awareness and sustainable behaviour into the heart of popular culture.
Partnerships
We believe partnerships mean collaborating with others to make a positive contribution to society.
Every week our programmes reach over 60% of the UK population.
As a producer broadcaster our biggest impact is the influence our content has on the thoughts and actions of our viewers.
We recognise the opportunity this presents to reflect modern society shape conversations and encourage action on the things that matter.
Our onscreen social cause strategy is focused on health and wellbeing to inspire engage and empower people to make a difference to their own and other peoples health.
ITVs Employee Network Groups Active networks like ITV Ambassadors ITV Pride and The Womens Network help connect colleagues and help identify ways to make ITV an even more inclusive place to work.
In 2017 we launched two new networks ITV Balance for working parents grandparents and carers and ITV Embrace the Black Asian and Minority Ethnic network.
Low emission vehicles Improving the environmental impact of our operations is an important focus at
In 2017 our ITV Daytime team who look after Good Morning Britain Lorraine This Morning and Loose Women bought a range of Plugin Hybrid Electric vehicles to replace older diesel models.
These vehicles each drive about 40000 miles a year to broadcast footage from outside the studio.
Not only do the new vehicles save fuel and money they are technically more advanced and so transmit better quality footage.
1 million minutes In the UK more than one million older people are chronically lonely and Christmas is one of the loneliest times.
Thats why in December 2017 Good Morning Britain repeated its award winning campaign 1 Million Minutes asking viewers to pledge just 30 minutes of their time to support an older person.
Partnering with a number of charities the campaign was promoted onair in the UK and abroad including Austria Australia Canada and South Africa.
The response from viewers was amazing with over 22.7 million minutes pledged during the month of the campaign which makes a real difference to so many lives.
Further information More information on our responsibility initiatives can be found online.
22 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Operating and Performance Review ITV has delivered a good performance in 2017 as we continue to rebalance and strengthen the business creatively and commercially.
Victoria averaged 6.4 million viewers and a 25% share for its second series.
It has been recommissioned for a third series in the UK and has been sold to over 150 countries.
Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information
Operating and Performance Review
ITV has delivered a strong operational performance in a challenging year with ongoing economic and political uncertainty in the UK.
ITV took action early to reduce overhead costs but the uncertainty has undoubtedly had an impact on the demand for television advertising and therefore as expected ITVs nancial performance.
We set ourselves challenging objectives to grow our onscreen and online viewing and deliver good growth in nonNAR.
And ITV has delivered on these as we have continued to rebalance and strengthen the business creatively and commercially.
Onscreen our share of viewing was up for the second year up 2% the ITV Hub continues to deliver strong viewing up 39% Online Pay and Interactive revenue grew 7% and total ITV Studios revenue grew 13% including currency benet.
We have a strong creative pipeline of highquality programmes particularly drama and entertainment and we continue to perform well across the key genres that return and travel.
We measure performance through a range of metrics particularly through our alternative performance measures and KPIs as well as our statutory results all of which are set out later in the report.
External revenue was up 2% to 3132 million 2016 3064 million with 11% growth in nonNAR more than offsetting the decline in NAR a clear indication that our strategy of rebalancing the business is working.
56% of total revenues came from sources other than spot television advertising nonNAR.
Adjusted EBITA declined 5% to 842 million 2016 885 million and adjusted EPS declined 6% to 16.0p 2016 17.0p impacted by a 5% decline in NAR and the ongoing investment across the business and the fact that the prior year includes the full 37 million revenue and prot benet of the four year licence deal for The Voice of China.
We did however benet from the delivery of 29 million of overhead cost savings and 25 million lower schedule costs.
Broadcast and Online adjusted EBITA declined 7% and ITV Studios adjusted EBITA was flat.
Key highlights NAR revenue 1591m 2016 1672m Total nonNAR revenue 2066m 2016 1855m Group external revenue 3132m 2016 3064m Adjusted EBITA 2016 885m Adjusted EPS 2016 17.0p Statutory EPS 2016 11.2p Net debt 2016 637m Dividend per share ordinary 2016 7.2p Statutory prot before tax declined by 10% to 500 million 2016 553 million and statutory EPS declined by 9% to 10.2p primarily due to the decline in earnings and higher amortisation and impairment of acquired assets which is explained in more detail in the Finance Review.
We have a strong balance sheet and the business continues to be highly cash generative.
Our prot to cash conversion remains high at 91% and we ended the year with net debt of 912 million 2016 637 million after the effect of acquisitions and investments of 95 million dividend payments of 494 million and pension contributions of 80 million.
The Board has proposed an ordinary dividend of 7.8p an increase of 8% reflecting our condence in the underlying strength of the business and the outlook for 2018.
This is in line with the Boards commitment to a longterm sustainable dividend policy and for ordinary dividends to grow broadly in line with earnings targeting dividend cover of around 2x adjusted earnings per share over the medium term.
We remain focused on being a creator owner distributor and broadcaster of content and in 2017 we continued to deliver on our strategy to diversify the business and grow new revenue streams further reducing our reliance on UK spot advertising and making ITV a stronger and more resilient business.
We continue to build our freeto air online and pay businesses through Broadcast and Online and are further growing our international content and distribution business ITV Studios.
We are currently undertaking a strategic refresh to ensure we have a clear strategy and welldened priorities which reflect what ITV needs to be in three and ve years time.
The Voice Kids launched in the UK in 2017.
It has been recommissioned for a second series.
The format has been sold to 35 countries.
24 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report Operating and Performance Review continued Twelve months to 31 December  on a continuing basis
Change % NAR 1591 1672 81 5 Online Pay and Interactive revenue SDN external revenue Other commercial income Broadcast and Online nonNAR revenue Total Broadcast and Online revenue 2075 2 132 57 3 Total schedule costs 1025 1050 25 2 Other costs 451 440 11 3 Total Broadcast and Online adjusted EBITA 599 642 43 7 Adjusted EBITA margin 29% 30%
Onscreen we performed strongly with viewing up for the second consecutive year.
We increased our spend on entertainment but sports costs were lower as a result of there being no major sports tournament in 2017.
ITV Family SOV grew 2% with a strong performance across the schedule.
This level of growth is the second biggest in ITVs recent history and never before has ITV delivered two years of consecutive growth.
Daytime shows including Good Morning Britain This Morning and The Chase grew their audiences and Coronation Street and Emmerdale continue to perform well and are now the UKs two largest soaps.
We launched the sixth weekly episode of Coronation Street in September which has further strengthened its performance.
We successfully aired a range of new dramas street was weak while supermarkets increased their spend and some of the FMCGs returned to spend in the second half of 2017.
Entertainment and Leisure was down impacted by tough comparatives from the European Football Championship in 2016.
Cars and Telecommunications increased their spend around product launches and digital brands continue to spend heavily on television to build brand awareness.
Total costs were down as the cost savings and lower schedule costs offset the increased investment on the ITV Hub ITV Hub and ITV Box Ofce our payperview channel used to show boxing matches.
Overall Broadcast and Online adjusted EBITA declined 7% to 599 million 2016 642 million which has led to a one percentage point reduction in the adjusted EBITA margin to 29% 2016 30%.
Broadcast and Online The media environment in which we operate is constantly changing.
Our Broadcast and Online business is robust and evolving to take advantage of the signicant opportunities for growth.
ITV through its freetoair channels offers unique audience scale and reach as well as the key demographics demanded by advertisers.
The ITV Hub the digital home for all our channels and content is growing rapidly driven by viewers appetite for catch up and VOD and the quality of our content.
We continue to explore and trial new ways both free and pay to distribute content to broadcasters and platform owners as well as directly to consumers.
Financial performance Broadcast and Online total revenue was down 3% in the year at 2075 million 2016 2132 million.
We delivered 7% growth in Online Pay and Interactive driven by double digit growth in online advertising but this was offset by the 5% decline in NAR.
Including
ITV total advertising was down 3%.
Advertising categories such as Retail Finance and Food continued to see declines due to the uncertain economic outlook along with the weaker pound causing inflationary pressures leading advertisers to reduce spend in order to maintain margins.
Within
Retail spending has been mixed the high Good Karma Hospital was the third most watched drama on ITV in 2017 averaging 6.9 million viewers and a 26% share.
It has been recommissioned for a second series in 2018.
Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information
Operating and Performance Review
Fearless Bancroft and Little Boy Blue and new entertainment shows The Voice The Voice Kids The Keith and Paddy Picture Show and Five Gold Rings as well as new sitcom Bad Move.
We continued to drive signicant audiences with our returning brands such as Broadchurch  which was the most watched drama in the year  Vera Unforgotten Victoria Cold Feet Ant and Decs Saturday Night Takeaway Im A Celebrity Get Me Out Of Here and Britains Got Talent.
Our news programming continues to perform well with highlights including our General Election coverage as does our sporting schedule with the Six Nations Rugby Championships and the launch of horse racing on ITV.
Some of our schedule did not perform as well as we had hoped for example The Nightly Show Fearless and Bigheads so will not return in 2018.
We continue to target the hard to reach demographics demanded by advertisers particularly young and male audiences through our digital channels and online and have seen a signicant increase in our target demographics on ITV2 and ITV4.
Our 1634s share of commercial impacts SOCI on ITV2 was up 17% helped by the phenomenal success of Love Island as well as Celebrity Juice Family Guy and American
Male SOCI on ITV4 was up 12% helped by ITVs horse racing coverage The French Open and the Isle of Man TT Races.
TV3s viewing performance improved in the year due to the strong performance of dramas such as Midsomer Murders Lewis and
ABC1 adults SOCI on ITV3 was up 1% making it the most popular digital channel for this demographic.
ITV Hub The ITV Hub which is now available on 29 platforms continues to grow rapidly driven by viewing on mobile and connected televisions.
The ITV Hub is now preinstalled on around 90% of all connected televisions sold in the UK and launched on Apple TV Apples new TV app and Microsoft XBox in 2018.
Longform video requests were up 34% and online viewing consumption which measures how long viewers are spending online was up 39%.
The ITV Hub has now been the fastestgrowing public service broadcaster online service for the last three years driven by the good user experience and great content and now has 21 million registered users.
The ITV Hub helps ITV reach valuable younger audiences  75% of the UKs 1624 year olds are registered together with 65% of the UKs 1634 year olds.
Younger viewers increasingly use the ITV Hub for simulcast viewing as well as catch up with programmes such as Love Island delivering record viewing with 1.3 million simulcast requests for the nal.
We are using the insight we gain from our registered users to develop more targeted advertising solutions and to increasingly drive viewing through personalisation.
In the year we launched personalised ITV Hub home pages for our audiences and have introduced datadriven recommendations and mobile notications to registered users.
Diana Our Mother Her Life and Legacy was ITVs highest rated factual in over 14 years.
It had 9.4 million viewers and a 36% share.
Unforgotten returned to ITV for its second series.
It is produced by Mainstreet Pictures part of ITV Studios UK.
It averaged 6.1 million viewers and has been recommissioned for a third series in 2018.
26 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report Over 3 million Over 5 million % 96% ITV commercial audiences As a result ITVs Other commercial income increased by 2% with new sponsorship around ITV horse racing and The Voice offset by a reduction in thirdparty airtime sales commission and revenue primarily from UTV following ITVs acquisition in February 2016 and successful integration of the business.
Digital advertising is growing rapidly and we have seen doubledigit growth in our VOD advertising revenues on the ITV Hub which delivers more targeted demographics and a highquality trusted and measured environment for online advertisers.
In 2017 ITV announced a trial for addressable advertising with Sorenson on connected Smart televisions.
We have also launched a trial of a selfservice portal so that any business however small can easily access advertising on ITV.
Remain responsive to a changing media environment Linear television viewing remains resilient despite signicant changes in the availability and delivery of content.
On average viewers watched 203 minutes of television a day in 2017.
This is lower than 212 minutes in 2016 and partly is due to there being no major sports tournament in 2017.
The majority of viewing remains live at over 75% as television continues to have the power to bring audiences together.
VOD viewing continues to grow rapidly while PVR recorded viewing has remained relatively constant over the last few years at around 13%.
Younger viewers are watching less linear television than they used to but through delivering great content such as The Voice Britains Got Talent Saturday Night Takeaway and Love Island television reaches around 90% of young people each week and remains their dominant choice of media.
Developing ITVs digital broadcast assets We are further developing our social media assets across our international portfolio of programmes as live television continues to demonstrate a growing relevance as viewers increasingly connect and engage through social media.
We now have over 160 YouTube branded channels and had around 20 owned and operated programme apps across the year which together with our quality content is driving signicant growth in viewer engagement.
Our programmes generated over 100 million interactions in 2017.
Strong advertising proposition While political and economic uncertainty has led advertisers to reduce their current spend television remains one of the most efcient and effective mediums for advertisers to achieve mass simultaneous reach.
As viewing and advertising becomes more fragmented the scale of advertising that television and particularly ITV delivers becomes increasingly valuable.
ITVs unique ability to deliver mass audiences as well as more targeted demographics across the family of channels has enabled us to again increase our share of the television advertising market SOB to 47.6% from 47.4%.
ITV delivered 99% of all commercial audiences over ve million and 96% of all commercial audiences over three million.
SOV provides an overall measure of viewing performance but because advertisers are buying scale and breadth of audience SOV is not necessarily a direct indicator of advertising performance.
ITV aims to maximise further the value of its airtime and drive new revenue streams through sponsorship interactivity and branded extensions.
ITV utilises the core assets of its strong brand and reputation unique commercial relationships and quality production capability to deliver a wide variety of marketing solutions.
Horse Racing moved to ITV from Channel 4 in 2017 with races broadcast across ITV main channel and ITV4 during the year.
Operating and Performance Review continued 27 Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information
Operating and Performance Review
We are continuing to develop the ITV Hub our adfree subscription version of the ITV Hub which while relatively small tripled its subscribers in the year.
We have extended the service across all platforms so subscribers can now watch on mobile PC and connected televisions and launched it on Amazon.
Over the last few years we have also established a number of smaller pay propositions.
We own a majority stake in Cirkus a best of British SVOD service in the Nordics and Germany.
We also have a general entertainment channel ITV Choice for emerging markets available in over 100 countries.
We are trialling ITV Box Ofce a direct to consumer pay per view offering which currently focuses on boxing and we have a number of live events based around our key brands which build relationships directly with our viewers.
For example we have the Emmerdale Studios Experience which showcases the process of creating an episode of the soap and This Morning Live a shopping and lifestyle festival.
ITV also continues to license its channels and content across multiple platforms including our HD digital channels and catchup VOD on Sky and Virgin Media set top boxes and all our live channels and catch up VOD across their connected platforms.
We announced that ITV Encore will close as an exclusive Sky channel in 2018 which allows ITV to distribute box sets more widely across multiple platforms.
The closure of Encore will impact ITVs pay revenues in 2018.
SDN
SDN generates revenue by licensing capacity to broadcast channels radio stations and data providers on digital terrestrial television or Freeview.
It holds a licence with capacity for 16 broadcast channels including ITV services and thirdparty channels.
SDN external revenue grew 4% driven by the full year impact of the 16th stream which was launched in 2016.
Building our pay offering in the UK and internationally As a creator owner and distributor of sought after content ITV is well positioned to take advantage of the opportunities that arise from the changes we are seeing in digital media and consumer behaviour.
We must ensure that however our content is viewed and on whatever platform it is viewed on we are paid the appropriate value for it.
As we look to build our pay offerings we are developing SVOD services to target direct to consumer pay revenues.
In March 2017 we launched our US joint venture with the BBC BritBox with AMC Networks taking a minority share an adfree SVOD service offering the most comprehensive collection of British content in the US.
A version of the service also launched in Canada in February 2018 and we now have over 250000 subscribers in total.
In 2018 we will explore opportunities for BritBox on other platforms include original commissions and look to roll it out further internationally.
Saturday Night Takeaway returned for its 14th series in 2017 and averaged 7.9 million viewers and a 37% share across the series returns for a 15th series in 2018.
Our pay offerings 28 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report Total organic revenue which excludes our current year acquisitions and foreign exchange was up 7% and acquisitions continue to deliver with a 13% return on investment in 2017.
Reflecting our growth in key production markets in Europe and the US 54% of ITV total revenue was generated outside the UK 2016 50%.
ITV is the number one commercial producer in the UK and a leading producer in Europe and the US.
As our Studios business grows internationally foreign currency movements have an increasing impact on our results.
In 2017 the foreign currency benet was 43 million on revenue and 7 million on adjusted EBITA.
Adjusted EBITA was flat yearon year at 243 million.
There was good underlying prot growth but adjusted EBITA was impacted by our ongoing investment in US drama and the fact that the prior year includes the full 37 million benet of the four year licence deal for The Voice of China.
Adjusted EBITA margin declined by two percentage points to 15% impacted by revenue mix on new and returning shows.
ITV Studios Growing an international content business has been central to ITVs strategy as an integrated producer broadcaster.
As ITV creates and owns more content our channels in the UK provide a platform to showcase our programmes before distributing them across multiple platforms in the UK and internationally.
Growing demand for content The strong global demand for content from broadcasters and platform owners provides signicant opportunity for ITV Studios.
We estimate that the global content market is growing at around 5% per annum with some genres such as drama growing more rapidly.
To capitalise on this growth we continue to develop own and manage rights in genres that return and travel internationally namely drama entertainment and factual entertainment and we have built a healthy pipeline of new and returning programmes.
Financial performance ITV Studios is now a global producer of scale and total revenues grew 13% to 1582 million 2016 1395 million including currency benet with growth across the business as we continue to build our capability in key creative markets.
Profilage is a French crime drama produced by Tetra Media Studio which was acquired by ITV Studios in 2017.
Prolage is in its eighth season and is broadcast on TF1.
Operating and Performance Review continued Twelve months to 31 December
Change % Studios UK ITV America Studios RoW Global Entertainment Total Studios revenue 1582 1395 187 13 Total Studios costs 1339 1 152 187 16 Total Studios adjusted EBITA Studios adjusted EBITA margin 15% 17% Includes the benet of production tax credits.
Twelve months to 31 December
Change % Sales from ITV Studios to Broadcast and Online External revenue 1Total Studios revenue 1582 1Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information
Operating and Performance Review
Big Stars Little Star is a UK primetime entertainment format produced by ITV Studios.
The format has been sold to 14 countries.
Key new and returning scripted programmes Building scale in key creative markets ITV Studios has three production divisions Studios UK ITV America and Studios Rest of World RoW.
Across these divisions ITV produced over 8400 hours of programming compared to 7800 in 2016 and secured 240 recommissions and 239 new commissions in the year.
The US and the UK are the dominant creative markets with the US the largest exporter of scripted content and the UK the world leader in exported formats.
Over the last few years we have built scale in these key markets both organically and through acquisitions and we now have a signicant portfolio of successful series and formats that travel.
The UK performed well with total revenue up 11% at 692 million 2016 626 million.
We continue to grow our sales to ITV which were up 13% with deliveries including The Voice The Voice Kids Love Island Next of Kin Bancroft Fearless Unforgotten Little Boy Blue and an extra episode of Coronation
We have again grown ITV Studios UK share of original content on ITV main channel from 63% to 66%.
Our offITV revenues grew 10% with deliveries including The City And The City Shetland Moorside and Motherland for BBC Back for Channel 4 Blind Date for Channel 5 and Living the Dream for Sky.
We strengthened our UK drama business with the acquisition in April of a majority stake in World Productions the producer of Line of Duty and our entertainment business with an investment in startup Koska in October.
ITV America total revenue grew 33% to 313 million 2016 235 million including foreign exchange.
We delivered ve drama commissions  the third series of the Good Witch for Hallmark which has been commissioned for a fourth series Sun Records for CMT Somewhere Between for ABC and two pilots for TNT Highland and Snowpiecer which has been commissioned for a tenpart series.
We have also delivered a high volume of programmes from our entertainment portfolio including two series of Hells Kitchen Pawn Stars Alone Forged in Fire and First 48 and new commissions including Sideserf World Hip Hop Star and Big Stars Little Star.
Studios RoW has production bases in Australia Germany France the Netherlands the Nordics and Italy where we produce original content as well as local versions of ITV Studios UK and Talpa formats.
Revenue grew 10% to 390 million 2016 355 million including foreign exchange driven particularly by good growth in Australia France and the Nordics.
Across the territories our entertainment and format deliveries included The Voice in Australia and Germany The Chase in Australia and Germany and Love Island in Germany.
30 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report Operating and Performance Review continued We have further strengthened our international business with a number of other small investments.
In April we acquired a 45% stake in Blumhouse Television established by Jason Blum the renowned lm and television producer which nances and produces original scripted and unscripted dark genre programming for global audiences including The Jinx and Cold Case Files.
In May we entered into a joint venture with the US talent agent and production company Circle of Confusion and in June we acquired Elk Production a Swedish entertainment production company.
Investing in content with international appeal We have continued to expand our portfolio of successful formats and series that return and can be distributed internationally.
With the acquisition of Talpa Media in 2015 we have signicantly strengthened our global capability in entertainment formats.
Across the business we have grown a solid portfolio of high volume and high margin formats that travel internationally and that we produce locally.
For example during 2017 we produced The Voice in ve countries and The Voice Kids and Four Weddings in four countries.
Demand for drama is growing strongly as standout original content becomes brand dening for both broadcasters and OTT players.
To capitalise on this we are investing in our global scripted business particularly in the US to build on the success of our UK drama business.
We are strengthening our development and creative capabilities internally and have invested in a number of development relationships.
In 2017 we increased our investment in drama across the business investing 243 million 2016 160 million.
We nance our largescale scripted projects through our strong underlying cash flows or through coproductions and partnerships with broadcasters and OTT platforms.
The production costs are partly funded by the initial sale of the series to a broadcaster while the decit the difference between the cost and what the broadcaster pays is recovered through distribution revenue from selling the nished product globally to other broadcasters and platforms.
Talpa continues to develop its formats including The Voice Senior A Year To Remember I Love My Country A Whole New Beginning and Around The World With 80 Year Olds.
Our international scale now enables ITV to make The Voice and these other formats in all our international production territories and therefore earn the production revenue as well as the format fee.
Some of our content will not be recommissioned in 2018 as they have not performed as expected for example The Loch and Sun Records.
We are making real progress in building a European scripted business.
In February 2017 ITV acquired a majority stake in Tetra Media Studio a French scripted production company and in October ITV acquired a majority stake in Cattleya the Italian scripted production company behind Gomorrah and Suburra.
We also took a stake in a Danish scripted producer Apple Tree Productions in December.
These along with our existing European drama businesses will enable us to benet from the increasing demand for locally produced content with global appeal.
Marriage Boot Camp is a US reality entertainment format produced by ThinkFactory Media which is part of ITV America and is now in its 11th season.
Poldark is produced by Mammoth Screen part of ITV Studios UK for the BBC.
It has been recommissioned for a fourth season in 2018 and has been sold to over 150 countries.
Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information
Operating and Performance Review
We balance our nancial exposure through building a portfolio of programmes across genres and across their content life cycle with successful international dramas offsetting the risk that we will not recover the full decit on every show.
We are seeing increasing demand from OTT platforms for original longform content and secondary rights.
As well as distributing library content to OTT platforms through Global Entertainment we are also producing and jointly commissioning a number of scripted and unscripted programmes with OTT platforms including Vanity Fair with Amazon Robozuna and Queer Eye for the Straight Guy for Netflix Harlots for Hulu and we are in development with a number of shows for Facebook.
Expanding our global distribution business Global Entertainment the distribution arm within ITV Studios delivered revenue growth of 4% to 187 million 2016 179 million as we continue to drive value from our investment in creating and owning the rights to quality content with international appeal.
As well as funding and creating new content from ITV Studios we also invest in thirdparty producers and their content from all over the world.
Global
Entertainments pipeline of new projects is strengthening with projects such as Vanity Fair The City And The City and World On Fire expected for 2018.
Our content continues to sell well internationally to broadcasters and OTT platforms and in particular our scripted programmes with titles including Victoria Poldark Vera Good Witch The Murdoch Mysteries Schitts Creek The Loch Fearless and Harlots.
Over 15 of our scripted programmes have been sold to more than 100 countries Our entertainment and factual entertainment formats are highly demanded and include programmes such as The Voice Love Island The Chase Big Stars Little Star This Time Next Year Five Gold Rings Come Dine With Me and Four
In 2017 we sold 62 different formats internationally 17 of which are being produced by ourselves or other producers in three or more countries including Love Island Keeping the Nation Alive and Hells Kitchen.
We currently have over 250 programme supply agreements in place with online platforms including Netflix Amazon and Hulu.
Love Island is a UK reality entertainment format the third series of which was broadcast on ITV2 in 2017.
The format has been sold to six countries including Australia and Germany.
5 Gold Rings is a new entertainment format coproduced by Talpa Media and Possessed part of ITV Studios UK.
It was broadcast in the UK in 2017 and will return for a second series in 2018.
The format was sold to four countries in 2017.
32 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report Operating and Performance Review continued Pictured Behind the scenes on Coronation Street We consistently seek to drive productivity across the Group by investing in our people new broadcast and production technology as well as up to date ofce facilities.
By investing in these areas we aim to transmit our content and advertisements more efciently increase our production output and the rights we own and improve our viewer experience.
People
During the year we continued to invest in our people rolling out a new conversation based performance management process and continuing to provide general and more specic training for staff across the business.
We use employee engagement scores as a key measure.
We will undertake our next engagement survey in 2018.
Our 2016 survey showed that ITV continues to have high levels of engagement 90% see the KPIs section on pages 36 to 39 for details on how this is measured.
We always seek to recruit and promote internally where possible with 34% of vacancies in 2017 lled from within ITV.
Broadcast and content technology One of the key initiatives in our Broadcast business is to improve our processes around our content supply chain which includes how we store our content and how our content is managed and ultimately played out via our transmission centres.
We have sought to reduce the time taken from live transmission to content being available for catch up on the ITV Hub.
We are in the process of upgrading our advertising sales system and during the year we began investigating how robotic process automation may benet ITV in the future.
Production facilities September 2017 saw the launch of a sixth weekly episode of Coronation Street which required a signicant step up in productivity and investment in expanding the production site with new streets as well as new equipment sound stages and a state of the art production control room.
We refresh our regional news production facilities on a continuous rotation basis and this year we built new facilities for our UTV licence in Northern Ireland.
During 2018 we are relocating our Daytime studios to a new state of the art facility as part of our London property move.
We also seek to use established and emerging technology to drive productivity where it makes commercial sense to do so.
In our Studios business we have recently implemented a new process and technology for script editing and management.
We commenced rollout of a bespoke artist payment system which has reduced duplication across the business and uses less paper.
Our regional news teams are taking advantage of new production technologies and increasingly use mobile kits that enable reporters to shoot more efciently and transmit highquality live reports.
Productivity 33 Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information
Operating and Performance Review
Pictured Broadchurch 34 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report The Annual Report includes both statutory and adjusted measures the latter of which in managements view reflect the underlying performance of the business and provide a more meaningful comparison of how the business is managed and measured on a daytoday basis.
Our APMs and KPIs are aligned to our strategy and business segments and together are used to measure the performance of our business and form the basis of the performance measures for remuneration.
Adjusted results exclude certain items because if included these items could distort the understanding of our performance for the year and the comparability between periods.
Key adjustments for adjusted EBITA profit before tax and EPS Adjusted EBITA is calculated by adding back exceptional items and high end production tax credits to EBITA.
Further adjustments which include amortisation and impairment of assets and net nancing costs are made to remove their effect from adjusted prot before tax and EPS.
The tax effects of all these adjustments are reflected in the adjusted tax charge.
These adjustments are detailed below.
Production tax credits The ability to access tax credits which are rebates based on production spend is fundamental to our Studios business when assessing the viability of investment in greenlighting decisions especially with regards to highend drama.
ITV reports tax credits generated in the US and other countries e.
Ireland Hungary Canada and South Africa within cost of sales whereas in the UK and Italy tax credits for highend drama must be classied as a corporation tax item.
However in our view all tax credits relate directly to the production of programmes.
Therefore to align treatment regardless of production location and to reflect the way the business is managed and measured on a daytoday basis these are recognised in adjusted EBITA.
Our cash measures including prot to cash conversion and free cash flow are also adjusted for the impact of production tax credits.
Further detail on this is included below.
Exceptional items These include acquisitionrelated costs reorganisation and restructuring costs property costs and nonroutine legal costs.
These items are excluded to reflect performance in a consistent manner and are in line with how the business is managed and measured on a daytoday basis.
They are typically gains or losses arising from events that are not considered part of the core operations of the business or are considered to be oneoff in nature though they may cross several accounting periods.
We also adjust for the tax effect of these items.
Note 2.2 includes further detail on exceptional items.
Acquisitionrelated costs We structure our acquisitions with earnouts or put and call options to allow part of the consideration to be based on the future performance of the business as well as to lock in and incentivise creative talent.
Where consideration paid or contingent consideration payable in the future is employmentlinked it is treated as an expense under accounting rules and therefore part of our statutory results.
However we exclude all consideration of this type from adjusted EBITA adjusted prot after tax and adjusted EPS as in our view these items are part of the capital transaction and do not form part of the Groups core operations.
The Finance Review explains this further.
Acquisitionrelated costs including legal and advisory fees on completed deals or signicant deals that do not complete are also treated as an expense under accounting rules and therefore on a statutory basis form part of our reported results.
In our view these items also form part of the capital transaction and are excluded from our adjusted measures.
Restructuring and reorganisation costs These arise from Groupwide initiatives to reduce the ongoing cost base and improve efciency in the business.
We consider each project individually to determine whether its size and nature warrant separate disclosure.
Where there has been a material change in the organisational structure of a business area or a material Groupwide initiative these costs are highlighted and are excluded from our adjusted measures.
Property costs In 2018 ITV will relocate to various properties on a temporary basis while its headquarters are redeveloped.
The tout costs will be capitalised but the incremental oneoff property project costs including move costs rental payments for these properties and accelerated depreciation for assets made redundant due to the move will be ringfenced as they relate to a oneoff property project and are therefore excluded from our adjusted measures.
As a ringfenced cost rental payments will continue to be excluded from our adjusted measures until we move back which is expected in 2023.
Amortisation and impairment Amortisation and impairment of assets acquired through business combinations and investments are not included within adjusted earnings.
As these costs are acquisitionrelated and in line with our treatment of other acquisition related costs we consider them to be capital in nature and they do not reflect the underlying trading performance of the Group.
Amortisation of software licences and development is included within our adjusted results as management consider these assets to be core to supporting the operations of the business.
Net financing costs Net nancing costs are adjusted to reflect the underlying cash cost of interest for the business providing a more meaningful comparison of how the business is managed and funded on a daytoday basis.
The adjustments made remove the impact of marktomarket on swaps and foreign exchange imputed pension interest and other nancial gains and losses which do not reflect the relevant interest cash cost to the business and are not yet realised balances.
A full reconciliation between our adjusted and statutory results is provided on the following page.
Alternative Performance Measures 35 Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information Alternative Performance Measures Reconciliation between statutory and adjusted results Twelve months to 31 December  on a continuing basis
Adjustments
Adjusted
Statutory
Adjustments
Adjusted
EBITA
Exceptional items operating Amortisation and impairment Operating prot 55tel269 873 Net nancing costs Share of losses on JVs and Associates 4  4 Gain on sale of noncurrent assets and subsidiaries nonoperating exceptional items 1 1 Prot before tax 50tel294 847
Prot after tax 41tel234 687 Noncontrolling interests 4  4 4  4 Loss from discontinuing operations net of tax    1 1 Earnings 40tel235 683 Shares million weighted average 4006  4006 4010  4010 EPS p 10.2p 16.0p 11.2p 17.0p Diluted EPS p 10.2p 16.0p 11.1p 17.0p 32 million adjustment relates to production tax credits which we consider to be a contribution to production costs and working capital in nature rather than a corporate tax item.
Exceptional items largely relate to acquisition costs primarily employment linked consideration as well as restructuring and property costs and an insured trade receivable provision in relation to The Voice of China.
Further detail is included on page 42.
97 million adjustment relates to amortisation and impairment of assets acquired through business combinations and investments.
We include only amortisation on purchased intangibles such as software within adjusted PBT.
17 million adjustment is primarily for noncash interest cost.
This provides a more meaningful comparison of how the business is managed and funded on a daytoday basis.
Tax adjustments are the tax effects of the adjustments made to reconcile PBT and adjusted PBT.
A full reconciliation is included on page 43.
Other Alternative Performance Measures Total revenue As an integrated producer broadcaster we look at the total revenue generated in the business which includes internal revenue which is the sale of ITV Studios programmes to Broadcast and Online.
Our broadcast channels are a signicant customer for ITV Studios and selling programmes to Broadcast and Online is an important part of our strategy as it ensures we own all the rights to the content.
A reconciliation between external revenue and total revenue is provided below.
Twelve months to 31 December External revenue Reported 3132 3064 Internal supply 525 463 Total revenue Adjusted 3657 3527 Adjusted net debt Net debt as dened in note 4.1 is adjusted for all our nancial commitments.
This better reflects how credit rating agencies look at our balance sheet.
A reconciliation between net debt and adjusted net debt is provided below.
Twelve months to 31 December Net debt 912 637 Expected contingent payments on acquisitions 292 328 Net pension decit 83 328 Operating leases 143 344 Adjusted net debt 1430 1637 Adjusted net debt to adjusted EBITDA 1.6x 1.8x Reported net debt to adjusted EBITDA 1.0x 0.7x 2017 excludes transponder costs which are now treated as service contracts.
See page 128 for further detail.
The comparator has not been represented.
Net pension decit This is our dened benet pension decit under IAS 19 adjusted for other pension assets mainly gilts over which the pension scheme holds a charge which are held by the Group as security for future unfunded pension payments of four former Granada executives.
A full reconciliation is included within note 3.7.
Prot to cash conversion This is our measure of our effectiveness of cash generation used for working capital management.
It is calculated as our adjusted cash flow as a proportion of adjusted EBITA.
Adjusted cash flow which reflects the cash generation of our underlying business is calculated on our statutory cash generated from operations before exceptional items net of capex on property plant and equipment excluding capex relating to the redevelopment of our London headquarters and intangible assets and including the cash impact of high end production tax credits.
Free cash flow This is our measure of free cash flow after we have met our nancial obligations.
It takes our adjusted cash flow see above and removes the impact of net interest adjusted cash tax which is total tax paid adjusted to exclude the receipt of production tax credits and pension funding.
A full reconciliation is included on pages 45 and 46.
36 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Performance
Indicators
We have dened our KPIs to align our performance and accountability to our business segments and strategy.
Financial
Adjusted EBITA
This is the key protability measure used across the whole business.
Adjusted earnings before interest tax and amortisation EBITA is calculated by adding back exceptional items and high end production tax credits.
It reflects the underlying performance of the business and provides a more meaningful comparison of how the business is managed and measured on a daytoday basis.
Further detail on this measure is included within the Alternative Performance Measures section page 34.
Performance
In 2017 adjusted EBITA decreased by 43 million or 5% predominantly due to a 81 million or 5% decline in NAR.
This was partially offset by growth from high margin Online Pay and Interactive 25 million lower programming budget due to the absence of a major sports tournament delivery of 29 million of overhead savings and foreign exchange benet.
Group adjusted EBITA margin decreased by two percentage points to 27% driven by the decline in NAR and revenue mix within ITV Studios.
Adjusted EPS
Adjusted EPS represents the adjusted prot for the year attributable to equity shareholders.
Adjusted prot is dened as prot for the year attributable to equity shareholders after adding back exceptional items and high end production tax credits.
Further adjustments include amortisation and impairment of assets net nancing costs and the tax effects relating to these items.
It reflects the business performance of the Group in a consistent manner and in line with how the business is managed and measured on a daytoday basis.
Further detail on this measure is included within the Alternative Performance Measures section page 34.
Performance
Adjusted EPS decreased by 6% from 17.0p to 16.0p.
This is higher than the corresponding decrease in adjusted EBITA of 5% due to higher adjusted nancing costs in the year of 33 million 2016 26 million.
Prot to cash conversion
Prot to cash conversion represents the proportion of adjusted EBITA converted into a measure of adjusted cash flow after capex on property plant and machinery excluding capex relating to the redevelopment of our London headquarters.
Further detail on this measure is included within the Alternative Performance Measures section page 34.
This measures the effectiveness of our working capital management and capital expenditure control.
Performance
Prot to cash remains high at 91% 2016 97%.
In the year we saw an increase in working capital.
This was due to the payment schedule for sports rights for future years and the timing difference between the production and the nal delivery and payment of scripted and entertainment titles such as Snowpiercer Good Witch Vanity Fair Poldark Dancing on Ice and Survival of the Fittest.
91% NonNAR revenue
NonNAR reflects all ITV revenue both internal and external except NAR spot advertising revenues.
Online Pay Interactive Sponsorship SDN and ITV Studios revenues are all included within NonNAR with the key drivers of growth being Online and ITV Studios.
Growing nonNAR is key to the strategy as we aim to rebalance the business away from our reliance on television advertising revenue.
Performance
NonNAR revenue increased by 11% in 2017 as we continue to rebalance the business away from a reliance on NAR.
We delivered strong growth in ITV Studios total revenue and doubledigit growth in Online.
NonNAR revenues were 56% of total revenue which has increased from 53% in 2016.
2066m
Employee engagement
Continuing to develop a creative commercial and global organisation requires highquality employees who are engaged in and motivated by the work that they do.
Employee engagement measures pride in the work we do pride in working for ITV and also what we say about our programmes and services.
Performance
There was no employee engagement survey in 2017.
Employee engagement for the last survey performed in 2016 was 90% with an 80% participation rate.
A full employee engagement survey is expected in 2018.
90% Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information Key Performance Indicators
Adjusted EBITA
This is the key protability measure used across the whole business.
Adjusted earnings before interest tax and amortisation EBITA is calculated by adding back exceptional items and high end production tax credits.
It reflects the underlying performance of the business and provides a more meaningful comparison of how the business is managed and measured on a daytoday basis.
Further detail on this measure is included within the Alternative Performance Measures section page 34.
Performance
In 2017 adjusted EBITA decreased by 43 million or 5% predominantly due to a 81 million or 5% decline in NAR.
This was partially offset by growth from high margin Online Pay and Interactive 25 million lower programming budget due to the absence of a major sports tournament delivery of 29 million of overhead savings and foreign exchange benet.
Group adjusted EBITA margin decreased by two percentage points to 27% driven by the decline in NAR and revenue mix within ITV Studios.
Adjusted EPS
Adjusted EPS represents the adjusted prot for the year attributable to equity shareholders.
Adjusted prot is dened as prot for the year attributable to equity shareholders after adding back exceptional items and high end production tax credits.
Further adjustments include amortisation and impairment of assets net nancing costs and the tax effects relating to these items.
It reflects the business performance of the Group in a consistent manner and in line with how the business is managed and measured on a daytoday basis.
Further detail on this measure is included within the Alternative Performance Measures section page 34.
Performance
Adjusted EPS decreased by 6% from 17.0p to 16.0p.
This is higher than the corresponding decrease in adjusted EBITA of 5% due to higher adjusted nancing costs in the year of 33 million 2016 26 million.
Prot to cash conversion
Prot to cash conversion represents the proportion of adjusted EBITA converted into a measure of adjusted cash flow after capex on property plant and machinery excluding capex relating to the redevelopment of our London headquarters.
Further detail on this measure is included within the Alternative Performance Measures section page 34.
This measures the effectiveness of our working capital management and capital expenditure control.
Performance
Prot to cash remains high at 91% 2016 97%.
In the year we saw an increase in working capital.
This was due to the payment schedule for sports rights for future years and the timing difference between the production and the nal delivery and payment of scripted and entertainment titles such as Snowpiercer Good Witch Vanity Fair Poldark Dancing on Ice and Survival of the Fittest.
91% NonNAR revenue
NonNAR reflects all ITV revenue both internal and external except NAR spot advertising revenues.
Online Pay Interactive Sponsorship SDN and ITV Studios revenues are all included within NonNAR with the key drivers of growth being Online and ITV Studios.
Growing nonNAR is key to the strategy as we aim to rebalance the business away from our reliance on television advertising revenue.
Performance
NonNAR revenue increased by 11% in 2017 as we continue to rebalance the business away from a reliance on NAR.
We delivered strong growth in ITV Studios total revenue and doubledigit growth in Online.
NonNAR revenues were 56% of total revenue which has increased from 53% in 2016.
2066m
Employee engagement
Continuing to develop a creative commercial and global organisation requires highquality employees who are engaged in and motivated by the work that they do.
Employee engagement measures pride in the work we do pride in working for ITV and also what we say about our programmes and services.
Performance
There was no employee engagement survey in 2017.
Employee engagement for the last survey performed in 2016 was 90% with an 80% participation rate.
A full employee engagement survey is expected in 2018.
90% Broadcast and Online  building our freetoair online and pay business ITV Studios  growing an international content and distribution business 38 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report Key Performance Indicators continued Broadcast and Online ITV Family share of viewing
Keeping our freetoair proposition strong and our audiences healthy is vital for the Broadcast and Online business and ITV Family SOV helps measure this.
ITV Family SOV is the total viewing audience over the year achieved by ITVs family of channels as a proportion of total television viewing including the BBC Family.
Performance
ITV Family SOV grew 2% in 2017 to 21.7%.
Within this the ITV main channel was up 1% with strong performances from daytime the soaps drama and entertainment.
The digital channels were up 3% in the year mainly across ITV2 and ITV4.
ITV2 viewing amongst 1634s continues to grow with 1634s SOV up 18% in the year.
It remains the most popular digital channel in the UK based on SOV and is the largest digital channel for 1634s.
ITV also continues to deliver mass audiences and in 2017 delivered 99% of all commercial audiences over ve million and 96% over three million which is unchanged from 2016.
21.7% ITV Family share of commercial impacts
To maintain our position as a leading commercial broadcaster we need to have strong ITV Family SOCI.
SOCI is the trading currency in the television advertising market and since it only covers commercial television it does not include the BBC.
This is the share of total UK television commercial impacts which is delivered by ITVs family of channels.
An impact is one viewer watching one 30second commercial.
SOCI provides an overall measure of viewing performance.
However because advertisers are buying scale and breadth of audience SOCI is not necessarily a direct indicator of advertising performance.
Performance
ITV Family SOCI was broadly flat yearonyear with ITV main channel flat and the digital channels up 1%.
ITV2 is now more targeted towards younger viewers with SOCI amongst 1634s up 17% in the year.
ITV4 is more targeted towards male viewers with Men SOCI up 12% in the year.
ITV3 is targeted to ABC1 adults with SOCI up 1% in the year for this demographic.
The move of The Great British Bake Off from BBC1 to C4 affected ITV main channels SOCI performance in the year.
34.5% ITV Family share of broadcast
ITVs share of UK television spot advertising revenue is known as its share of broadcast SOB.
Our SOB has always been based on our estimate of the pure spot advertising market excluding sponsorship VOD and all broadcasters selfpromotion revenues on their own channels which this year has seen a signicant increase and therefore further distorts the external spot market.
It is increasingly difcult to measure the total television advertising market as all broadcasters have different denitions and include other sources of revenue such as sponsorship and VOD in their estimates of television advertising.
Performance
We again gained share in 2017 as a result of our unique ability to deliver mass audiences across the key demographics to our advertisers and more targeted demographics on our digital channels.
This was helped by ITVs coverage of the horse racing which targets the male demographic and is highly demanded by advertisers.
Our SOB increased to 47.6% in the year.
47.6% Total longform video requests
We remain focused on growing our audience share from our freetoair broadcast and increasingly from our VOD business as well.
Longform video requests is a measure of the total number of our videos requested across all platforms on which the ITV Hub is available and therefore provides a key measure of how much of our content is being viewed online.
A longform video is a programme that has been broadcast on television and is available to watch online and on demand in its entirety.
Performance
Longform video requests were up 34% in 2017 to 1426 million views supported by our continued investment and focus on the ITV Hub mobile apps and simulcast offering.
Online consumption which is the measure of how long viewers are spending online is an important indicator of online performance and this increased by 39% in 2017.
1426m ITV Studios Number of new commissions for ITV Studios
As we grow our international content business tracking the performance of the creative renewal pipeline and the number of new commissions won is a key indicator.
This gure includes programmes shown both on ITV and on other broadcasters and both in the UK and internationally.
Performance
There was strong growth in the number of new commissions for ITV Studios in 2017  up 5% to 239.
Eighty three of these new commissions came from the UK business with the remaining 156 coming from our international businesses.
In addition there were 240 recommissions in the year 2016 188 with 106 from ITV Studios UK and 134 from the international businesses.
We continue to invest in our creative pipeline building on our existing portfolio of programmes and formats.
We are particularly focused on the genres that can return and travel namely drama entertainment and factual entertainment.
Percentage of ITV output from ITV Studios ITV main channel only.
Definition
As an integrated producer broadcaster part of our strategy is to use our broadcast channels as a platform for ITV Studios content where we aim to make them famous and then sell them around the world.
The proportion of the total spend on original commissions on ITV transmitted in the year delivered by ITV Studios demonstrates this and our current aim is to increase ITV Studios supply of programmes to ITV.
Performance
The percentage of ITV output from ITV Studios increased to 66% in 2017 driven by new entertainment programmes in the year such as The Voice The Voice Kids and Cannonball as well as an extra episode of Coronation Street during 2017.
Many of the ITV Studios programmes broadcast in 2017 have now been distributed around the world including Victoria Cold Feet The Chase The Voice and Im A Celebrity Get Me Out Of Here 66% Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information Key Performance Indicators Broadcast and Online ITV Family share of viewing
Keeping our freetoair proposition strong and our audiences healthy is vital for the Broadcast and Online business and ITV Family SOV helps measure this.
ITV Family SOV is the total viewing audience over the year achieved by ITVs family of channels as a proportion of total television viewing including the BBC Family.
Performance
ITV Family SOV grew 2% in 2017 to 21.7%.
Within this the ITV main channel was up 1% with strong performances from daytime the soaps drama and entertainment.
The digital channels were up 3% in the year mainly across ITV2 and ITV4.
ITV2 viewing amongst 1634s continues to grow with 1634s SOV up 18% in the year.
It remains the most popular digital channel in the UK based on SOV and is the largest digital channel for 1634s.
ITV also continues to deliver mass audiences and in 2017 delivered 99% of all commercial audiences over ve million and 96% over three million which is unchanged from 2016.
21.7% ITV Family share of commercial impacts
To maintain our position as a leading commercial broadcaster we need to have strong ITV Family SOCI.
SOCI is the trading currency in the television advertising market and since it only covers commercial television it does not include the BBC.
This is the share of total UK television commercial impacts which is delivered by ITVs family of channels.
An impact is one viewer watching one 30second commercial.
SOCI provides an overall measure of viewing performance.
However because advertisers are buying scale and breadth of audience SOCI is not necessarily a direct indicator of advertising performance.
Performance
ITV Family SOCI was broadly flat yearonyear with ITV main channel flat and the digital channels up 1%.
ITV2 is now more targeted towards younger viewers with SOCI amongst 1634s up 17% in the year.
ITV4 is more targeted towards male viewers with Men SOCI up 12% in the year.
ITV3 is targeted to ABC1 adults with SOCI up 1% in the year for this demographic.
The move of The Great British Bake Off from BBC1 to C4 affected ITV main channels SOCI performance in the year.
34.5% ITV Family share of broadcast
ITVs share of UK television spot advertising revenue is known as its share of broadcast SOB.
Our SOB has always been based on our estimate of the pure spot advertising market excluding sponsorship VOD and all broadcasters selfpromotion revenues on their own channels which this year has seen a signicant increase and therefore further distorts the external spot market.
It is increasingly difcult to measure the total television advertising market as all broadcasters have different denitions and include other sources of revenue such as sponsorship and VOD in their estimates of television advertising.
Performance
We again gained share in 2017 as a result of our unique ability to deliver mass audiences across the key demographics to our advertisers and more targeted demographics on our digital channels.
This was helped by ITVs coverage of the horse racing which targets the male demographic and is highly demanded by advertisers.
Our SOB increased to 47.6% in the year.
47.6% Total longform video requests
We remain focused on growing our audience share from our freetoair broadcast and increasingly from our VOD business as well.
Longform video requests is a measure of the total number of our videos requested across all platforms on which the ITV Hub is available and therefore provides a key measure of how much of our content is being viewed online.
A longform video is a programme that has been broadcast on television and is available to watch online and on demand in its entirety.
Performance
Longform video requests were up 34% in 2017 to 1426 million views supported by our continued investment and focus on the ITV Hub mobile apps and simulcast offering.
Online consumption which is the measure of how long viewers are spending online is an important indicator of online performance and this increased by 39% in 2017.
1426m ITV Studios Number of new commissions for ITV Studios
As we grow our international content business tracking the performance of the creative renewal pipeline and the number of new commissions won is a key indicator.
This gure includes programmes shown both on ITV and on other broadcasters and both in the UK and internationally.
Performance
There was strong growth in the number of new commissions for ITV Studios in 2017  up 5% to 239.
Eighty three of these new commissions came from the UK business with the remaining 156 coming from our international businesses.
In addition there were 240 recommissions in the year 2016 188 with 106 from ITV Studios UK and 134 from the international businesses.
We continue to invest in our creative pipeline building on our existing portfolio of programmes and formats.
We are particularly focused on the genres that can return and travel namely drama entertainment and factual entertainment.
Percentage of ITV output from ITV Studios ITV main channel only.
Definition
As an integrated producer broadcaster part of our strategy is to use our broadcast channels as a platform for ITV Studios content where we aim to make them famous and then sell them around the world.
The proportion of the total spend on original commissions on ITV transmitted in the year delivered by ITV Studios demonstrates this and our current aim is to increase ITV Studios supply of programmes to ITV.
Performance
The percentage of ITV output from ITV Studios increased to 66% in 2017 driven by new entertainment programmes in the year such as The Voice The Voice Kids and Cannonball as well as an extra episode of Coronation Street during 2017.
Many of the ITV Studios programmes broadcast in 2017 have now been distributed around the world including Victoria Cold Feet The Chase The Voice and Im A Celebrity Get Me Out Of Here 66% Broadcast and Online ITV Studios 40 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Review
ITVs strong operational performance in a challenging year reflects the continued benet of rebalancing the business.
Ian Grifths Chief Operating Ofcer and Group Finance Director 41 Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information Finance Review ITV delivered a strong operational performance in a challenging year with ongoing economic and political uncertainty in the UK.
ITV took action early to reduce overhead costs but the continued uncertainty has undoubtedly had an impact on the demand for television advertising and therefore as expected on ITVs nancial performance.
We set ourselves challenging objectives to grow our onscreen and online viewing and deliver good growth in nonNAR and we have delivered on these.
Onscreen our share of viewing grew for the second consecutive year up 2% online viewing was up 39% Online Pay and Interactive revenues grew 7% and ITV Studios total revenues grew 13% including currency.
In total ITV delivered 2% external revenue growth to 3132 million with the 11% increase in nonNAR to 2066 million more than offsetting the 5% decline in spot advertising revenue.
Twelve months to 31 December on a continuing basis
Change % NAR 1591 1672 81 5 Total nonNAR 2066 1855 211 11 Total revenue 3657 3527 130 4 Internal supply 525 463 62 13 Group external revenue 3132 3064 68 2 Group adjusted EBITA 842 885 43 5 Group adjusted EBITA margin 27% 29% Adjusted EPS 16.0p 17.0p 1.0p 6 Statutory EPS 10.2p 11.2p 1.0p 9 Dividend per share 7.8p 7.2p 0.6p 8 Net debt as at 31 December 912 637 275 Adjusted EBITA declined 5% to 842 million with the 81 million decline in NAR partly offset by 29 million overhead savings 25 million lower programme budget due to no major sports tournament growth from high margin Online Pay and Interactive and foreign exchange benet.
ITV Studios showed good underlying prot growth but the comparator included 37 million benet of the four year licence deal for The Voice of China which was recognised in full in accordance with accounting standards.
ITV Studios adjusted EBITA was flat at 243 million.
Group adjusted EBITA was also impacted by 15 million of investment including in the ITV Hub ITV Box Ofce and ITV Studios creative capability particularly in America.
Adjusted EBITA tracker 2016 NAR Network
Online
Pay and
ITV
Studios
Underlying
The Voice of China FX and
Cost
Savings
Invest
Adjusted nancing costs were higher yearonyear due to the bond issue.
We made a number of investments in associates including Blumhouse Television and Circle of Confusion and our joint venture BritBox US and our adjusted tax rate was the same yearonyear.
The net of these movements and the decline in NAR resulted in a 6% decline in adjusted EPS to 16.0p.
Statutory EPS was down 9% to 10.2p due to the decline in EBITA and higher amortisation and impairment which is explained over the following pages.
Our key strengths include our high margins and healthy cash flows which together with our ongoing focus on costs places us in a good position to continue to invest in growing an even stronger and more resilient business going forward while delivering sustainable returns to our shareholders.
This Finance Review focuses on the more technical aspects of our nancial results while the operating and nancial performance has been discussed within the Operating and Performance Review on pages 22 to 32.
Our Alternative Performance Measures which are detailed on pages 34 and 35 explain the adjustments we make to our statutory results and focus on the key measures that we report on internally and use as KPIs across the business.
42 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report Finance Review continued Exceptional items Twelve months to 31 December Operating exceptional items Acquisitionrelated expenses 96 131 Restructuring and propertyrelated costs 30 14 Insured trade receivable provision 27 Pension curtailment  19 Total operating exceptional items 153 164 Nonoperating exceptional items 1 Total exceptional items 154 164 T otal exceptional items in the year were 154 million 2016 164 million.
Operating exceptional items principally relate to acquisitionrelated expenses which are mainly performance based employmentlinked consideration.
Restructuring and property related costs of 30 million include 24 million of incremental oneoff property project costs associated with our planned London property move in 2018 primarily related to temporary rent and accelerated depreciation on xtures and ttings.
We will continue to incur exceptional rental costs over the next four or ve years until we return to our headquarters at The London Television
Further details can be found later in the section.
Restructuring and propertyrelated costs also include 6 million of redundancy costs in relation to the closure of the London Studios business.
The insured trade receivable provision of 27 million relates to the unpaid portion of revenue from the four year licence deal for The Voice of China with Talent Television and Film Co.
Ltd Talent the revenue for which was fully recognised in 2016 in accordance with accounting standards as ITV had no further obligations under the terms of the agreement.
Following a breach of the agreement by Talent as they had not fullled their payment obligations we have taken back the licence for The Voice of China.
ITV is pursuing Talent vigorously for the 30 million still due under the agreement.
Further ITV has credit insurance in place and a claim has been submitted.
ITV will continue to pursue the amounts due and believes there will ultimately be no material impact.
Whilst ITV is condent that it will recover the amount due accounting standards set very specic requirements for the recognition of contingent assets which is how the recovery of the amount due will be accounted for.
As discussions with the insurers and the claim against Talent are in progress at this early stage of pursuing recovery ITV is not able to demonstrate sufcient certainty for accounting purposes to be able to recognise a cash receivable at the year end.
Accordingly ITV has made a provision amounting to 27 million 30 million net of 3 million insurance excess against the Talent receivable recorded in our accounts in the year ended 31 December 2017.
The cash received in future will also be treated as an exceptional item.
The cash cost of exceptionals in 2017 was 126 million.
The pension curtailment in 2016 related to the closure of the dened benet pension sections of the ITV pension scheme to future benet accrual.
Net financing costs Twelve months to 31 December Financing costs directly attributable to loans and bonds 30 22 Cashrelated net nancing costs 2 3 Amortisation of bonds 1 1 Adjusted nancing costs 33 26 Marktomarket on swaps and foreign exchange  3 Imputed pension interest 9 5 Unrealised foreign exchange and other net nancial losses 8 17 Net nancing costs 50 51 Adjusted nancing costs increased to 33 million 2016 26 million primarily due to the full year impact of the new 500 million Eurobond issued in December 2016.
Net nancing costs were 50 million in 2017 which was broadly flat yearonyear 2016 51 million.
The increase in adjusted nancing costs was offset by lower unrealised foreign exchange and other net nancial losses.
These costs largely relate to the movement in the value of put and call options for unowned equity on acquisitions we have made when it is not dependent on the seller remaining within the business.
The put and call options normally run for three to ve years.
The value in the put and call option will fluctuate with currency and the expected performance of the business.
JVs and associates The share of losses from JVs and associates has increased to 4 million 2016 nil and is in relation to losses arising on our investments in BritBox US a US based SVOD service launched as a joint venture with the BBC in the US in 2017 along with Blumhouse Television and Circle of Confusion both of which are scripted talent investments within ITV Studios.
Profit before tax Adjusted prot before tax after amortisation and impairment of assets and nancing costs was down 6% at 800 million 2016 847 million.
Statutory prot before tax decreased by 10% to 500 million 2016 553 million due to the decline in EBITA as explained earlier along with higher costs associated with amortisation and impairment of acquired assets in the year.
Prot before tax PBT Twelve months to 31 December  on a continuing basis Prot before tax 500 553 Production tax credits 32 28 Exceptional items 154 164 Amortisation and impairment 97 77 Adjustments to net nancing costs 17 25 Adjusted prot before tax 800 847 In respect of assets arising from business combinations and investments.
Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information Finance Review
Adjusted tax charge The total adjusted tax charge for 2017 was 154 million 2016 160 million corresponding to an effective tax rate on adjusted prot before tax PBT of 19% 2016 19% which is broadly in line with the standard UK corporation tax rate of 19.25% 2016 20%.
We expect this effective tax rate to be sustainable over the medium term.
The adjustments made to reconcile the tax charge with the adjusted tax charge are the tax effects of the adjustments made to reconcile PBT and adjusted PBT as discussed earlier.
Twelve months to 31 December Tax charge 87 100 Production tax credits 32 28 Charge for exceptional items 12 15 Charge in respect of amortisation and impairment 19 11 Charge in respect of adjustments to net nancing costs 4 6 Adjusted tax charge 154 160 Effective tax rate on adjusted prots 19% 19% In respect of intangible assets arising from business combinations and investments.
Also reflects the cash tax benet of tax deductions for US goodwill.
Implications of US tax reforms As a result of the recent enactment of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act in the US ITV has recognised a noncash tax charge of 9 million resulting from the revaluation of our US deferred tax assets to reflect the reduction in the US federal corporate tax rate to 21% from 1 January 2018.
We are working through the new legislative provisions in order to assess the full impact on our tax prole going forward however we do not expect them to have a material impact on the Groups effective tax rate.
Cash tax Cash tax paid in the year was 95 million 2016 90 million the majority of which was paid in the UK.
The 2017 cash tax gure is net of 23 million of production tax credits received in the year 2016 36 million.
The cash tax paid is higher than the full year tax charge for 2017 of 87 million largely due to the timing of receipt of production tax credits in the UK and Italy and the tax treatment of allowable pension contributions.
A reconciliation between the tax charge for the year and the cash tax paid in the year is shown below.
Twelve months to 31 December Tax charge 87 100 Temporary differences recognised through deferred tax 17 13 Prior year adjustments to current tax 2 10 Current tax current year 102 123 Phasing of tax payments  UK 12 5 Phasing of tax payments  overseas 11 5 Production tax credits  timing of receipt 9 7 Cash tax impact of allowable UK pension payments 15 16 Cash tax paid 95 90 Tax strategy ITV is a responsible business and we take a responsible attitude to tax recognising that it affects all of our stakeholders.
In order to allow those stakeholders to understand our approach to tax we have published our Global Tax Strategy which is available on our corporate website.
We have four key strategic tax objectives Engage with tax authorities in an open and transparent way in order to minimise uncertainty Proactively partner with the business to provide clear timely relevant and business focused advice across all aspects of tax Take an appropriate and balanced approach when considering how to structure tax sensitive transactions Manage ITVs tax risk by operating effective tax governance and understanding our tax control framework with a view to continuously adjusting our approach to be compliant with our tax obligations Our tax strategy is aligned with that of the business and its commercial activities and establishes a clear Groupwide approach based on openness and transparency in all aspects of tax reporting and compliance wherever the Company and its subsidiaries operate.
Within our overall governance structure the governance of tax and tax risk is given a high priority by the Board and Audit and Risk Committee including through the operation of the Tax and Treasury
Further details of the Committee can be found on page The ITV Global Tax Strategy as published on the ITV plc website is compliant with the UK tax strategy publication requirement set out in Part 2 Schedule 19 of the Finance Act 2016.
44 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report Finance Review continued EPS  adjusted and statutory Overall adjusted prot after tax was down 6% at 646 million 2016 687 million.
After noncontrolling interests of 4 million 2016 4 million adjusted basic earnings per share was 16.0p 2016 17.0p down 6% which is marginally higher than the decrease in adjusted EBITA of 5% due to an increase in adjusted nancing costs to 33 million 2016 26 million and our investment in associates in the year.
The weighted average number of shares declined marginally to 4006 million 2016 4010 million because ITV bought shares during the year on behalf of the Employee Benet Trust and in line with accounting standards shares held by the Trust are not included in the total share count.
Diluted adjusted EPS in 2017 was 16.0p 2016 17.0p reflecting a weighted average diluted number of shares of 4017 million 2016 4029 million.
The weighted average diluted number of shares was down year onyear because of a decrease in the number of shares expected to vest in ITVs long term incentive plans in the future.
Statutory EPS declined by 9% to 10.2p 2016 11.2p due to the decline in statutory EBITA as explained earlier along with higher costs associated with amortisation and impairment of acquired assets in the year.
A full reconciliation between statutory and adjusted EPS is included within the Alternative Performance Measures section.
Dividend per share The Board has declared a nal dividend of 5.28p an increase of 10% 2016 4.8p.
This equates to a full year dividend of 7.8p an increase of 8% yearonyear which gives a cover of 2.1x and reflects our condence in the underlying strength of the business and the outlook for 2018.
This is in line with the Boards commitment to a longterm sustainable dividend policy and for ordinary dividends to grow broadly in line with earnings targeting dividend cover of around 2x adjusted earnings per share over the medium term.
ITV plc had 1.6 billion of distributable reserves at 31 December 2017 available immediately to support the dividend policy.
Given that there is now a more normal ordinary dividend ve consecutive special dividends leverage of 1x net debt to adjusted EBITDA and the strategic refresh under way the Board has decided not to pay a special dividend in respect of 2017.
Dividend per share p ordinary 8%
Acquisitions
Since 2012 we have acquired a number of content businesses in the UK US and creative locations across Europe developing a strong portfolio of programmes that return and travel.
As we have grown in size and expanded our network relationships and distribution capability this has helped to renew and strengthen our creative talent and build our reputation as a leading European producer and distributor and a leading unscripted independent production company in the US.
During the year we have strengthened our UK business with the acquisition in April of a majority stake in World Productions the drama production company behind the critically acclaimed and multiawardwinning Line of Duty.
In October we acquired a 25% stake in Koska Limited a UK factualentertainment production startup founded by Nick Emmerson cocreator of Supernanny.
We are also making real progress in building a European scripted business.
In February we acquired a majority stake in Tetra Media Studios the French television production group behind leading dramas including crime series Prolage now in its seventh series and Les Hommes de lOmbre the critically acclaimed political thriller.
In October we acquired a majority stake in Cattleya the leading Italian independent producer behind international hit TV dramas Gomorrah Suburra and Romanzo Criminale and in December we acquired a 25% stake in Apple Tree Productions a Danish scripted production company headed up by the award winning producers of The Killing and The Bridge.
We have further strengthened our international business with a number of other small investments and acquisitions.
In April we acquired a 45% stake in Blumhouse Television established by Jason Blum the renowned lm and television producer which nances and produces original scripted and unscripted dark genre programming for global audiences including The Jinx and Cold Case
In May we acquired a 49% stake in Circle of Confusion a premier talent management and production company in the US to launch Circle of Confusion Television Studios.
The new television studio label will source develop and produce premium scripted programming.
Additionally in June we acquired a majority stake in Elk Production one of the leading independent production companies in Sweden.
The company produces original formats such as the awardwinning reality TV series Parneviks along with acquired formats including Ninja Warrior and Dessertmstarna.
We have strict criteria for evaluating potential acquisitions.
Financially we assess ownership of intellectual property earnings growth and valuation based on return on capital employed and discounted cash flow.
We have a corporate cost of capital WACC which we flex when assessing investment opportunities reflecting the size risk prole geography and type of investment.
We also use our WACC to assess the performance of our investments and in the year we had a 13% return on capital employed from our acquisitions well in excess of our WACC.
Strategically we ensure an acquisition target has a strong creative track record and pipeline in content genres that return and travel namely drama entertainment and factual entertainment as well as succession planning for key individuals in the business.
Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information Finance Review Acquisitions  2012 to 2017 undiscounted Company Geography Genre
Additional consideration paid in 2017
Total expected consideration
Total maximum consideration Various Various Content 81 tel2024 418 Total for 2017 81  44 125 418 Total for 20122016 Various Content and Broadcast TV 860 91 248 1199 20182021 1923 Total 941 91 292 1324 2341 Undiscounted and adjusted for foreign exchange.
All future payments are performance related.
Undiscounted and adjusted for foreign exchange including the initial cash consideration and excluding working capital adjustments.
We generally structure our deals with earnouts or with put and call options in place for the remainder of the equity capping the maximum consideration payable.
By basing a signicant part of the consideration on future performance in this way not only can we lock in creative talent and ensure our incentives are aligned but we also reduce our risk by only paying for the actual not expected performance delivered over time.
We believe this is the right way to structure our deals as we should not pay upfront for future performance and should incentivise and reward delivery by the business over time.
The majority of earnouts or put and call options are dependent on the seller remaining within the business the most signicant of which is for Talpa Media whereby the total maximum consideration including the payment made to date is up to 1.1 billion which is contingent on Talpa Media continuing to deliver signicant prot growth to 2022 as well as John de Mols continued commitment to the business during this time.
To date we have paid 600 million to John de Mol including 100 million for the rst tranche of the earnout which was paid out in full in May 2017.
Under the deal structure because all future payments are directly related to John de Mol remaining with the business these payments are treated as employment costs and therefore are part of our statutory results.
However we exclude them from adjusted prots and adjusted EPS as an exceptional item as in our view for the reasons set out above these items are part of capital consideration reflecting how we structure our transactions and do not form part of the core operations.
This is consistent with our treatment of all costs of this type.
The table above sets out the initial consideration payable on our acquisitions our expected future payments based on our current view of performance and the total maximum consideration payable which is only payable if exceptional compound earnings growth is delivered.
We closely monitor the forecast performance of each acquisition and where there has been a change in expectations we adjust our view of potential future commitments.
Expected future payments of 292 million have decreased by 36 million since 31 December 2016 which is the net of the additional future payments relating to our 2017 acquisitions the 100 million payment made to John de Mol for the rst tranche of his earnout and foreign exchange on future payments denominated in foreign currency.
At 31 December 2017 161 million of expected future payments had been recorded on the balance sheet.
In 2018 around 78 million will be payable on our acquisitions primarily to those based in the US.
Cash generation Prot to cash conversion Twelve months to 31 December Adjusted EBITA 842 885 Working capital movement 58 28 Adjustment for high end production tax credits 9 8 Depreciation 30 31 Sharebased compensation and pension service costs 13 10 Acquisition of property plant and equipment and intangible assets 71 44 Adjustment for capex relating to redevelopment of London headquarters 16 Adjusted cash flow 763 862 Prot to cash ratio 91% 97% Note Except where disclosed management views the acquisition of operating property plant and equipment and intangibles as business as usual capex necessary to the ongoing investment in the business.
46 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report Finance Review continued One of ITVs key strengths is its healthy cash flows reflecting our ongoing tight management of working capital balances and our disciplined approach to cash and costs.
This is particularly important when there is wider political and economic uncertainty.
Remaining focused on cash and costs means we are in a good position to continue to invest across the business and deliver sustainable returns to our shareholders.
In the year we generated 763 million 2016 862 million of operational cash from 842 million 2016 885 million of adjusted EBITA which equates to a strong prot to cash ratio of 91% after capex 2016 97%.
In the year we saw an increase in working capital.
This was due to the payment schedule for sports rights for future years and the timing difference between the production and the nal delivery and payment of scripted and entertainment titles such as Snowpiercer Good Witch Vanity Fair Poldark Dancing on Ice and Survival of the Fittest.
To facilitate our working capital management we have a 100 million nonrecourse receivables purchase agreement free of nancial covenants which gives us the flexibility to access additional liquidity when required.
At the 31 December 90 million of receivables were sold under the purchase agreement 2016 35 million.
Free cash flow Twelve months to 31 December Adjusted cash flow 763 862 Net interest paid 38 20 Adjusted cash tax 118 126 Pension funding 80 80 Free cash flow 527 636 Adjusted cash tax of 118 million is total cash tax paid of 95 million excluding receipt of production tax credits which are included within adjusted cash flow from operations as these production tax credits relate directly to the production of programmes.
While our free cash flow after payments for interest cash tax and pension funding remained healthy in the period it was down 17% to 527 million 2016 636 million.
This was primarily due to the yearonyear decline in adjusted EBITA along with the increase in working capital as explained earlier.
Overall after dividends ordinary and special acquisitions and acquisitionrelated costs pension and tax payments we ended the year with net debt of 912 million compared with net debt of 1074 million at 30 June 2017 and net debt of 637 million at 31 December 2016.
Our net cash generation was weighted towards the second half of 2017 due to the payment in the rst half of the special dividend the Talpa earnout and content acquisitions.
Net debt tracker Dec 16 Net debt
Cash ow Dividends Acquisi tions and invest ments
Excep tional items
Other London property capex Dec 17 Net Debt Funding and liquidity Debt structure and liquidity Our balance sheet strength together with our healthy free cash flow enables us to continue to invest in opportunities to grow the business and to make sustainable returns to our shareholders.
We have a number of facilities in place to preserve our nancial flexibility.
We have a 630 million Revolving Credit Facility RCF in place until 2022 with the option to extend to 2023.
We also have a bilateral nancing facility of 300 million which is free of nancial covenants and matures in 2021.
This provides us with sufcient liquidity to meet the requirements of the business in the short to medium term.
The RCF has the usual nancial covenants for this type of nancing.
Of the total 930 million of facilities in place 60 million was drawn down at 31 December 2017.
Our policy is to maintain at least 250 million of available liquidity at any point.
In January 2017 we repaid the 161 million Eurobond as it matured.
Net debt At 31 December Gross cash 126 561 Gross debt 1038 1 198 Net debt 912 637 47 Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information Finance Review Foreign exchange As ITV continues to grow internationally we are increasingly exposed to foreign exchange on our overseas operations.
We do not hedge our exposure to revenues and prots generated overseas as this is seen as an inherent risk.
We may elect to hedge our overseas net assets where material.
To date we have hedged a signicant portion of the euro net assets arising from the Talpa Media acquisition.
ITV is also exposed to foreign exchange risk on transactions we undertake in a foreign currency.
Our policy is to hedge a portion of any known or forecast transaction where there is an underlying cash exposure for the full tenor of that exposure to a maximum of ve years forward where the portion hedged depends on the level of certainty we have on the nal size of the transaction.
Finally ITV is exposed to foreign exchange risk on the retranslation of foreign currency loans and deposits.
Our policy is to hedge such exposures where there is an expectation that any changes in the value of these items will result in a realised cash movement over the short to medium term.
The foreign exchange and interest rate hedging strategy is discussed and approved by the ITV plc Board and implemented by our internal Tax and Treasury Committee which oversees governance and approval of tax and treasury related policies and procedures within the business.
During 2017 we reviewed our foreign exchange risk management policies and made some amendments.
There were no signicant changes to the previous policy.
Foreign exchange sensitivity The following table highlights ITVs sensitivity on a full year basis to translation resulting from a 10% appreciationdepreciation in sterling against the US dollar and euro assuming all other variables are held constant.
An appreciation in sterling has a negative effect on revenue and adjusted EBITA a depreciation has a positive effect.
Currency
Revenue
Adjusted
EBITA
US dollar 5060 68 Euro 4050 45 Financing  gross debt We are nanced using debt instruments and facilities with a range of maturities.
Borrowings at 31 December 2017 were repayable as follows Amount repayable as at 31 December 2017 m Maturity 630 million Revolving Credit Facility 60 2022 600 million Eurobond 529 Sep 2022 500 million Eurobond 424 Dec 2023 Other loans 25 Various Total debt repayable on maturity 1038 Option to extend to 2023.
Net of 20 million crosscurrency swaps.
At 31 December 2017 570 million of the 630 million RCF was undrawn.
Capital allocation and leverage Our objective is to run an efcient balance sheet.
We have always believed that maintaining leverage below 1.5x net debt to adjusted EBITDA 2017 Adjusted EBITDA was 872 million will optimise our cost of capital and maintain our investment grade credit.
At 31 December 2017 reported net debt to adjusted EBITDA was 1.0x 2016 0.7x.
Our priority has been to invest to drive organic growth and we have made acquisitions where we have found the right opportunities.
We balanced this investment with attractive returns to shareholders.
Our investment decisions are based upon value creation and returns analysis.
Our returns analysis looks at the 360 degree value creation and the longterm future value of our investments in Broadcast and Studios.
We also look at an adjusted measure of net debt taking into consideration all of our other debtlike commitments including the expected undiscounted contingent payments on acquisitions the net pension decit net of gilts held as security against a proportion of those liabilities and the undiscounted operating lease commitments which mainly relate to property.
This adjusted leverage measure better reflects how the credit rating agencies look at our balance sheet.
This is important to monitor as our investment grade rating is a key criteria when considering our overall capital allocation.
At 31 December 2017 adjusted net debt was 1430 million 31 December 2016 1637 million and adjusted net debt to adjusted EBITDA was 1.6x 31 December 2016 1.8x.
A reconciliation of net debt to adjusted net debt is provided in the Alternative Performance Measures section on page 35.
Credit ratings We are rated investment grade by two ratings agencies BBB stable outlook by Standard and Poors and Baa3 stable outlook by Moodys Investor Services.
The factors that are taken into account in assessing our credit rating include our degree of operational gearing exposure to the economic cycle as well as business and geographical diversity.
Continuing to execute our strategy will strengthen our position against all these metrics.
48 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
The net pension decit for the dened benet schemes at 31 December 2017 was 83 million 31 December 2016 328 million.
The yearonyear reduction in the decit reflects gains from asset values in the year more accurate data on scheme members based on the preliminary results of 1 January 2017 actuarial valuation and our decit funding contributions of 80 million.
The net pension decit includes 38 million of gilts which are held by the Group as security for future unfunded pension payments of four former Granada executives the liabilities of which are included in our pension obligations.
A full reconciliation is included within note 3.7.
Actuarial valuation The last actuarial valuation was undertaken in 2014.
On the basis agreed with the Trustee the combined decits as at 1 January 2014 amounted to 540 million and are estimated to be at a broadly similar level today.
The Trustee is in the process of undertaking a full actuarial valuation of all sections of the Scheme as at 1 January 2017 which we expect to agree during H1 2018.
Net pension decit tracker Dec 16 Decit funding
Change in assets Change in ination assump tions
Other Dec 17 Decit funding contributions The Group continues to make decit funding contributions in line with the most recent actuarial valuation in order to eliminate the decits in each section.
The acccounting decit does not drive the decit funding contribution.
The total decit funding contribution for 2017 was 80 million which is consistent with the contributions payable in 2016.
We do not expect a material change in the decit funding contribution for 2018.
Further details are included within note 3.7.
New accounting standards IFRS 9 Financial Instruments is effective from 1 January 2018.
From our assessment there is no material impact on the Groups results.
IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers is effective from 1 January 2018.
An assessment of the impact on all of the Groups material revenue streams has been completed.
The new standard requires the Group to reclassify various costs attributable to revenue in the income statement.
For the year ending 2017 there will be no material impact on the Groups revenue and no impact on the Groups prot or the Groups adjusted EBITA as detailed below Impact in 2017 Revenue line NAR 11 Other commercial income 1 Online Pay and Interactive 10 Total Broadcast revenue 2 Operating costs 2 Adjusted EBITA IFRS 16 Leases is effective from 1 January 2019.
The detailed assessment of the impact on the Groups performance is ongoing.
During the early impact assessment the Group has reviewed the current accounting for the existing key service agreements including satellite transponder and playout agreements and concluded that those do not meet denition of a lease and therefore should be classied as service agreements under the regulations of IFRS 16 and current accounting standards.
Outside
See pages 122 and 123 for further detail on these new accounting standards.
Finance Review continued 49 Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information Finance Review 2018 full year planning assumptions Prot and Loss impact Total schedule costs are expected to be 1055 million to 1060 million an increase of around 30 million and weighted to H1 due to the Football World Cup Total investments of around 1520 million in ongoing new property online and initial data investments Adjusted interest is expected to be around 35 million which is broadly unchanged from 2017 The adjusted effective tax rate is 19% which is unchanged and expected to be sustainable over the medium term The translation impact of foreign exchange assuming rates remain at current levels could have a 35 million negative impact on revenue and 5 million negative impact on prot Exceptional items are expected to be around 85 million mainly due to acquisition accounting and the London Property redevelopment project.
Cash impact Total capex is expected to be around 100 million comprising of 60 million of regular capex to support the business and 40 million relating to the redevelopment of our London site The cash cost of exceptionals will be around 85 million largely relating to accrued earnouts Prot to cash is expected to be around 85% reflecting our continued strong cash generation and investment in Studios working capital Total pension decit funding is expected to be 80 million unchanged subject to agreeing the triennial valuation Ian Grifths Chief Operating Ofcer and Group Finance Director London property In 2017 the Board made the decision to redevelop our headquarters at The London Television Centre for which we own the freehold.
This requires relocating staff and studios for four to ve years to alternative accommodation before moving back into a new freehold building.
Therefore ITV has taken rented ofce and studios space in the interim while the new headquarters are constructed.
During the course of the project ITV will ringfence all incremental costs in relation to the redevelopment.
Move costs dual rates and rent will be treated as exceptional costs in the PandL as they relate to the oneoff property project that runs over several years but we will no longer incur them once we return to The London Television Centre.
Capital items will be capitalised as investment capex.
Investment capex is excluded from capex for our adjusted cash measurements.
In 2017 ITV incurred 24 million of costs in relation to accelerated depreciation for assets made redundant as a result of the move move costs dual rates and rent.
These were exceptionalised as explained above.
ITV also incurred 16 million of costs for the t out of the interim ofces and studios and in relation to planning for the redevelopment of The London Television Centre which were capitalised.
In 2018 ITV will incur move costs dual running costs dual rates and rent which will be exceptionalised as explained above.
ITV will incur around 40 million of cash costs for further tout of the interim ofces and studios space and further costs associated with the redevelopment of The London Television Centre which will be capitalised.
Depreciation associated with the tout of the interim ofces and studios space will not be exceptionalised.
In February 2018 Lambeth Council planning committee passed a resolution to grant planning permission for the new headquarters.
The application now goes forward to the Greater London Authority for endorsement.
Once all approvals have been granted we expect to commence demolition of the current building in 2018.
All build costs will be capitalised until we move back which is expected in 2023 with the most signicant investment capex to be incurred in 2021 and 2022.
Following the step up in London property operating costs in 2018 we do not expect future costs to be materially different from 2018 when we move back in 2023.
50 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Boards
Operational
Risk Steering
Audit and Risk
The Board Operation and Assurance Three lines of defence  business divisions Group functions Internal Audit Risks and
As a producer and broadcaster ITVs business carries a number of risks which we manage through our risk management framework.
Our continuing success is dependent on how well we understand and manage our risks.
Risk management framework The risk management framework sets out our processes for identifying reviewing and managing our risks and is regularly assessed and adapted as the Company industry and macro environment evolves.
Risks are primarily controlled through the risk management process.
The Board has carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Company and details of these are set on out on the following pages.
Our ongoing process for risk identication review and management is set out below and is consistent with last year.
Management and Divisional Boards Have responsibility for The development and operation of the risk management framework and for the operation of our systems of internal control.
This includes Risk identication and assessment and establishing controls and procedures to monitor and mitigate risks Assessment and review of nancial controls policies and procedures to ensure risks are identied and the processes and procedures are in accordance with and aligned to the strategy Reviewing and monitoring the effectiveness of internal controls and putting in place remedial plans where controls are weak or there are opportunities for improvement.
Serious control weakness if any is reported to the Board and action taken as appropriate Routinely reviewing and challenging risks and mitigations.
Operation and Assurance  three lines of defence We are continuing to develop our three lines of defence model to better manage our risks.
We are moving our approach to risk away from a rules and process driven system to a cultural people driven solution which we believe encourages a focus on prevention rather than reaction to failure.
The Leading Risk training programme in place for ITV Studios production management continues to be developed Risk appetite and culture Board 51 Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information Risks and Uncertainties Operational Risk Steering Group Has responsibility for Considering and setting actions for improving controls and mitigations for pan ITV risks and for ongoing monitoring of those actions Reviewing incident reports and other statistics Reviewing policies and processes to ensure they remain t for purpose Identifying and reporting emerging risks Identifying and resolving issues Risk areas in scope of the group and subcommittees that deal with specic risk areas are set out in the governance framework on page 66.
The Chairman of the Audit and Risk Committee attends meetings of the Operational Risk Steering Group periodically.
Audit and Risk Committee Has responsibility for Overseeing and advising the Board on risk exposures and future mitigation strategy Reviewing internal controls and their effectiveness.
Reviewing the effectiveness of the risk management framework Conducting indepth reviews of highrisk business areas or processes Setting the internal audit plan to ensure key risks are covered in respect of providing assurance Reviewing internal audit actions and management responsiveness to the ndings Details of risk reviews undertaken during the year are set out in the Audit and Risk Committee Report on page 72.
Sets strategic objectives Identies and evaluates principal risks and uncertainties Sets our strategy on risk and establishes tolerance levels and risk appetite Ensures a robust and appropriate risk management framework is in place Continually monitors the risk management and internal control systems The Board is responsible for setting the level of risk the Company is willing to take in line with our strategy.
There are clear approval frameworks in place and we continue to develop our approach to ensure that the business understands the Boards risk appetite and the tolerance levels and track the key risk indicators to help manage each risk.
Throughout the year we have continued to focus on and strengthen our risk culture.
We have an open communication culture where information is shared and issues are escalated as appropriate.
1 Business divisions The business divisions own the management of their risks and are responsible for Identifying and reporting local risks Maintaining risk registers and business continuity plans where appropriate Reviewing and implementing mitigating actions and controls 2 Group functions Including Group Finance Legal Human Resources Group Secretariat Technology Procurement Health and Safety Tax and Treasury and Insurance Support the business divisions in managing risks.
3 Internal audit Internal Audit provides objective assurance as to the effectiveness of the Groups systems of internal control and risk management reporting to the Management Board Divisional boards and the Audit and Risk Committee.
The internal audit plan is driven from ITVs risk management framework.
Internal
Audit reviews the auditable elements of the principal and operational risks and this review informs the areas and topics that Internal Audit focuses on.
52 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report Risks and Uncertainties continued Potential Risk Key Drivers Mitigating Factors and Risk Direction Link to business
The Market There is a major decline in advertising revenue due to economic uncertainty and ITV does not build sufcient nonNAR revenue streams to mitigate the nancial impact of this decline.
The current economic environment is uncertain which may impact demand for advertising ITV has made signicant progress in rebalancing the business and 56% of our total revenue comes from sources other than television spot advertising Growing nonNAR in areas such as ITV Studios and Online Pay and Interactive remains a key priority of the business The Company has adequate nancial liquidity and balance sheet flexibility to continue to invest as ITV maintains its focus on cash and costs A faster than expected shift to VOD or other new technologies such as internet enabled televisions or online only services causes a sustained loss of viewing and advertising revenue.
Television is now available on many different devices and platforms which is changing the way people are consuming television and viewers are now spending more time watching content online This structural shift is impacting the advertising market in the UK as digital advertising continues to grow strongly While growing rapidly online viewing remains a small percentage of total viewing at around 12% 2016 9% source BARBThinkbox data and television advertising represents 25.5% of total advertising in the UK which is slightly down on 2016 2016 27.5% The business continues to develop the ITV Hub VOD services maximise the distribution of the ITV Hub and grow its VOD advertising business ITV monitors the market for new technology and where appropriate explores how ITV can participate ITV continues to invest around 1 billion in its programme budget annually ITV is focused on ensuring that television provides a trusted and safe environment for advertisers and delivers the highest return on investment of any advertising media.
ITV has launched its SVOD proposition Britbox in the US and Canada Cirkus our SVOD proposition has been rolled out further and is now in the Nordics and Germany This risk has increased since last year as online viewing is growing particularly amongst younger viewers.
Principal risks For each principal risk mitigating actions have been identied and the risk has been mapped to its relevant business segment and where possible assigned key risk indicators.
Risk direction has also been given to each risk which is after mitigation.
Where appropriate the key risk indicators are aligned to our key performance indicators KPIs on pages 36 to 39.
All principal risks are owned by at least one member of the Management Board.
The Management and Divisional Boards have reviewed ITVs principal risks and uncertainties and these potential risks are predominantly unchanged.
Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information Risks and Uncertainties Potential Risk Key Drivers Mitigating Factors and Risk Direction Link to business
Talent and People A signicant event removes a number of the key management team from the business on a longterm or permanent basis.
In the ordinary course of business activities there will be times when the Management Board is in one location or travel together as a group There is a business resilience plan in place which includes succession plans or nominated replacements for all key positions within the Company ITV fails to evolve its organisational structure and culture and therefore fails to attract develop and retain key creative commercial and management talent.
Employing the best creative commercial and management talent is key to our success Failing to create the right culture to attract and retain this talent increases this risk Employee engagement is critical and we continue to monitor it through our employee surveys which take place every two years 90% engagement in 2016 employee survey ITV constantly reassesses the business to create a tforpurpose organisation ITV is focused on working across the business to embed and strengthen the culture of One ITV way of working ITV invests in training and development programmes Succession plans are in place for all key positions within the Company
There is signicant loss of programme rights or ITV fails to identify and obtain the optimal rights packages.
There is increased competition for highquality programme rights as broadcasters and platform owners demand brand dening content The signicant budgets of the new platforms such as Netflix and Amazon have changed the market for onscreen and offscreen talent which has impacted the cost of content ITV is focused on both protecting and exploiting existing rights and ensuring that future rights generated accrue to ITV As an integrated producer broadcaster ITV produces a signicant proportion of the broadcast schedule.
In 2017 this increased to 66% of the main channels original commissions ITV invests in creating and owning quality content through ITV Studios ITV maintains good relationships with independent producers to ensure it has opportunities to acquire quality content ITV has a detailed model to evaluate the value of thirdparty rights to ensure it only buys rights that make economic sense This risk and opportunity has increased since last year as OTT platforms are increasing their programme spend.
This presents an opportunity for ITV Studios to supply content to them.
ITV fails to create own and protect the rights to a sufcient number of hit programmesformats across its international portfolio of content companies.
Our ability to create and own hit programmes depends on the quality of our content business ITV is the largest UK commercial producer and a leading independent nonscripted producer in the US and Europe ITV maximises opportunities for ITV Studios to create successful shows by investing in the creative pipeline and focusing on programmes and genres that can return and travel internationally i.
ITV is focused on hiring and retaining the right key creative talent Broadcast and Online  building our freetoair online and pay business ITV Studios  growing an international content and distribution business Risk direction after mitigation since 2016 Increased risk Risk stayed the same Reduced risk 54 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report Risks and Uncertainties continued Potential Risk Key Drivers Mitigating Factors and Risk Direction Link to business
Operational
ITV does not react quickly enough to changes in the broader market and fails to properly resource nancially creatively and operationally the new growth businesses in particular online and international content.
In a fastchanging media environment there is an increased risk that suboptimal investment decisions are made Investment opportunities and decisions are made by the relevant board based on their strategic t and return on investment prole Talent management plans have been developed and reviewed to ensure adequate succession planning across ITV ITV continues to embed and strengthen the culture of One ITV way of working Lessons from recent investments are captured through postacquisition reviews
A major incident results in ITV being unable to continue with scheduled broadcasting for a sustained period of time.
ITVs broadcast technology chain is complex because it operates in multiple regions and links to many platforms Risk can therefore materialise within ITV or with third parties responsible for servicing the broadcast supply chain With the move out of Southbank ITV will be using thirdparty managed studio facilities for some of its daytime shows A risk register of broadcast operations including key outsourced functions is in place and reviewed on a regular basis There are business continuity and disaster recovery plans in place in high risk areas to help deliver a rapid and flexible response Major incident scenario testing takes place biannually ITV has ongoing modernisation projects to ensure transmission and distribution technologies are tforpurpose ITV continues to proactively manage its broadcast chain partners and suppliers to ensure the risk of incidents and regulatory breaches is minimised ITV remains heavily reliant on legacy systems which could potentially restrict the ability to grow the business.
These systems and processes may not be appropriate for new nonadvertising revenue or rapid international growth.
Our system requirements change as we continue to rebalance the business grow new revenue streams and become increasingly international System requirements are kept under review with business growth and system modernisation projects implemented as appropriate A modernisation plan is in place for the legacy systems which remains under constant review and development to ensure technology systems meet the needs of the business Cyber risk mitigations in relation to all of our systems are set out on page 55.
Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information Risks and Uncertainties Potential Risk Key Drivers Mitigating Factors and Risk Direction Link to business
Technology
Impact of cyber attack on ITV There is a sustained cyber attack causing prolonged system denial or major reputational damage for example The ability to broadcast our channels The availability of ITV Hub ITV loses a signicant volume of personal or sensitive data Corporate systems are compromised Cyber security is an increasing risk as our business develops new revenue streams and direct to consumer propositions With increasingly sophisticated technology and proliferation of cyber hacking tools along with increased amounts of company data the risk of a cyber attack has increased across the world There are a growing volume of software and hardware vulnerabilities being identied by technology providers in their own products Further we are higher risk as a result of being a media company and operating in a public environment By establishing further internal cyber controls across our devices apps networks and servers we have improved our ability to monitor detect and respond to cyber threats We continue to educate our colleagues in order to improve our ability to spot avoid and report cyber attacks We have worked with specialist security organisations to implement 24x7 monitoring of our network trafc and during the year they conducted cyber simulation and phishing exercises We have enhanced our process for the risk assessment of thirdparty security as our cyber risk extends to our supply chain There are disaster recovery and incident management plans in place for highrisk areas of the business This risk has increased since last year as our technology becomes more sophisticated.
Reputation
An event with public interest causes signicant reputational and brand damage.
WIth our Broadcasting and Studios businesses the Company operates in a public environment and is exposed to the risk of a highprole incident for example through our association with the actions of our talent ITV has a crisis management policy and process in place and is increasing emphasis on its development and application ITV proactively manages its broadcast chain partners and suppliers to ensure the risk of incidents and regulatory breaches is minimised There is a major health and safety incident that results in a signicant loss of human life on a production.
As ITV Studios expands there is a continued increase in the number of production hours and an increased potential to produce certain types of programming that have higher inherent risks ITV has a central health and safety team and health and safety policies and procedures in place with appropriate training for employees where required We have developed our safety management approach to align with our studios label model to ensure ownership of risk in the appropriate business areas.
To reflect this we are developing our training programme initially through Leading Risk see case study on page 79 We are continually reviewing our processes and overall approach to production safety see case study on page 78 and have built a comprehensive online resource to provide easily accessible production focused health and safety advice and support We are developing our reporting tools to provide increased oversight of risks across the Studios division This risk has increased since last year as ITV undertakes more complex productions.
Broadcast and Online  building our freetoair online and pay business ITV Studios  growing an international content and distribution business Risk direction after mitigation since 2016 Increased risk Risk stayed the same Reduced risk 56 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report Risks and Uncertainties continued Potential Risk Key Drivers Mitigating Factors and Risk Direction Link to business
Regulation
There is a signicant or unexpected change in UK regulation or legislation.
ITV could be affected if there is a change in UK media regulation or legislation for example if there is a change in advertising restrictions in key categories ITV regularly communicates with appropriate groups and its legal panel and Ofcom to monitor potential policy legal and regulatory developments Impact of exiting the European Union The political and economic uncertainty arising from the UKs referendum vote to leave the EU could result in continued macro uncertainty.
This may impact the overall health of the UK television advertising market with corporate and consumer condence both weakening since the outcome.
Further there is considerable uncertainty regarding the likely terms of the post Brexit trading arrangement between the UK and the EU which is expected to continue for the foreseeable future.
While the potential changes and the impact of any such changes will remain unknown for a while ITV could for example be affected by Changes to EU broadcasting legislation andor rules around EU market access for example if the UK does not retain classication of UK content as European.
This could potentially reduce the scale of the market opportunity for UK content in the EU Restrictions to the free movement of our staff impacting our operating model and ability to attract and retain the best talent New nonEU worldwide trade deals that could for example see pressure to weaken requirements for UK broadcasters to purchase original content made in the UKEU or for the UK to broaden exceptions from intellectual property protection.
This could potentially reduce the scale of the market opportunity for our content in the UK.
Changes in taxation free movement of capital and transfer pricing regulation The likelihood or extent of any impact is currently unknown however we continue to work closely with industry bodies and discuss key issues with key UK Government departments We will closely monitor negotiations with the EU as well as emerging nonEU worldwide trade deals and will evaluate any potential areas of risk 57 Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information Risks and Uncertainties Potential Risk Key Drivers Mitigating Factors and Risk Direction Link to business
Financial
ITV loses its credit status or lines of funding with existing lenders or there is an event that impacts nancial arrangements availability of credit.
There is a repeat of the 200809 nancial crisis as a result of a major bank collapse or there is a similar nancial outcome as a result of an unexpected world event The business is cash generative and working capital management remains a key focus ITV has a balance sheet policy to maintain adjusted net debt below 1.5x adjusted EBITDA and have available liquidity headroom of at least 250 million ITV has a 630 million Revolving Credit Facility with a number of core relationship banks and 300 million of nancial covenant free facilities The relatively low levels of ITV debt and our two investment grade ratings mean ITV continues to have good access to both bank and bond nancing There is a major collapse in investment values or a material change in liabilities leading to an impact on the pension scheme decit.
As a result of macroeconomic changes there can be material movements in the Groups dened benet pension scheme For example the Bank of Englands monetary policy may impact gilt yields and corporate bonds rates increasing the schemes liabilities Or if there is an unexpected world event that impacts property values andor impacts share prices There is regular communication between ITV and the pension trustees The pension schemes assets are invested in a diversied portfolio with a signicant amount of the fund held in bonds ITV has worked with the pension trustees to limit the potential decit by a series of assetbacked arrangements.
Further it has taken some mortality risk out of the scheme with a longevity swap and hedged a portion of inflation and interest rate variability Broadcast and Online  building our freetoair online and pay business ITV Studios  growing an international content and distribution business Risk direction after mitigation since 2016 Increased risk Risk stayed the same Reduced risk 58 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report What is the process ITV follows At an annual strategy meeting the Board assesses ITVs prospects and risks.
Amongst other topics the Board reviews the ve year nancial plan which is based on our strategic priorities.
Pages 18 to 19 of the Annual Report provide detail of ITVs prospects in the Strategy and Business Model section.
What is the assessment period for viability In its assessment of viability the Board reviewed the planning horizon and is of the view that a three year period to 31 December 2020 continues to be most appropriate.
The factors the Board considered in adopting this timeframe were as follows Visibility over ITVs broadcast advertising business is relatively short term as advertising remains cyclical and closely linked to the UK economic growth impacted by Brexit and the uncertain UK macroeconomic climate The commissioning process and life cycle of programming gives the Studios division more medium term outlook.
However while nonreturning brands are replaced with new commissions over time there is less visibility as programmes can experience changes in viewer demand or come to a natural expiration Technology in the media industry continues to change the demand for content and also how it is consumed Pension funding which is one of ITVs key funding obligations is also agreed triennially with the Trustees of the pension scheme ITVs business model does not necessitate investment in large capital projects that would require a longerterm horizon assessment or returns Assessment of viability When considering the longer term viability of ITV the Board reviewed each of ITVs principal risks and taking into account current operational and nancial performance has in particular analysed the impact of Scenario modelled Link to principal risks pages 52 to 57 Scenario 1 The Broadcast division experiencing a signicant and sharp downturn similar to the 200809 nancial crisis with advertising revenues declining for two years followed by a year of flat revenue.
This scenario could be regarded as cautious as recessions in the advertising market have historically not exceeded a twoyear period and showed growth following that period.
There is a major decline in advertising revenues and ITV does not build sufcient nonNAR revenue streams to mitigate the nancial impact of this decline.
Scenario 2 A number of key programme brands within the Studios division are not recommissioned.
While the scheduling decisions of commissioners are made in advance a number of key shows could come to an end at the same time.
ITV fails to create and own a sufcient number of hit programmesformats across its international portfolio of content companies.
Viability Statement 59 Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information Risks and Uncertainties In line with prior years the Board has considered a scenario involving changes in pension funding obligations.
However while the nal actuarial valuation as at 1 January 2017 has not been agreed the Board does not anticipate any material changes in funding obligations in the three year period under assessment.
The Board will continue to monitor the risk as the next valuation as at 1 January 2020 could have an impact on the periods assessed in future viability statements.
Further the impact of the London Property project on the Groups viability was considered.
Due to the mediumterm nature of the project it is not currently anticipated to have a signicant impact on liquidity in the period reviewed in this statement.
The Board will continue to monitor the impact of the project as it progresses.
The viability review involved flexing the underlying strategic forecast for the above impacts both individually and concurrently and no specic mitigations were assumed.
The underlying strategic forecast assumed business as usual capital spending the ongoing availability of the nancing facilities as ITV remains within the covenants current bank facilities are secured for more than three years and there are no major bond repayments due in this period and the Group maintains the stated dividend policy.
The scenarios used are hypothetical but are considered appropriate to model risks that could impact the viability of the Group.
In addition there are options at the disposal of the Board to maintain liquidity and continue operations in the event of any of the scenarios arising such as reducing MandA activity and nonessential capital expenditure as well as reviewing the Groups dividend policy.
Viability statement Based on the results of this review the Board has a reasonable expectation that ITV will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the three year period ending 31 December 2020.
The assessment has been made with reference to ITVs strategy and the current position and prospects.
The Strategic Report was approved by the Board and signed on its behalf by Ian Grifths Chief Operating Ofcer and Group Finance Director 28 February 2018 60 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Chairmans Governance Statement
I am pleased to present our Corporate Governance Report for 2017.
We believe that corporate governance is essential to our success and as such the Board is committed to upholding the highest standards of governance and works closely with the executive team in order to do so.
We are engaged in considering the proposals for the revised UK Corporate Governance Code the Code and will seek to ensure compliance with that Code in due course.
This year has seen an increase in Board membership which builds on our already diverse Board and brings additional experience ensuring there is an appropriate balance of skills and knowledge.
This current Board consists of a strong team with a wide range of experience across various industries and territories.
Information on what we focused on in the year can be found on page 67.
Board composition Following the departure of Adam Crozier we announced in July of last year the appointment of Dame Carolyn McCall as Chief Executive.
I am very pleased to welcome Carolyn who with her track record in media experience of international operations clear strategic acumen and strong record of delivering value to shareholders will help to continue to build on the success of ITV.
The decision to appoint Carolyn was taken after a rigorous selection process.
More detail can be found on page 68.
The Board is mindful of the need to refresh its membership at appropriate intervals and after more than nine years on the board Andy Haste and John Ormerod will step down following the AGM in May.
The Board agreed last year that Margaret Ewing would be the best candidate to succeed John as Chair of the Audit and Risk Committee.
Salman Amin was also appointed during the year and has been a great addition to the Board.
More details on our approach to Board diversity can be found on page 69.
Directors other commitments are kept under review to ensure that they have sufcient time to dedicate to our business.
Details of appointment dates and length of tenure for each director can be found on page 68.
All Directors are required by the Companys Articles of Association to be elected by shareholders at the rst AGM following their appointment by the Board.
Subsequently all Directors are subject to annual reelection by shareholders as recommended by the Code.
In the Governance section This section of the Annual Report contains a statement from our Chairman and information about the Directors and Management Board.
It explains our governance structure and corporate governance compliance and includes reports from the Audit and Risk and Remuneration Committees and the Directors Report.
The Board is mindful of the need to refresh its membership at appropriate intervals.
Board experience Sector experience Media 40% Finance 60% Advertising and Marketing 30% Retail 40% International experience 61 Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information
Chairmans Governance Statement
Board induction and evaluation We believe that a comprehensive induction programme is important for all of our new Board members as well as a programme of continuing evaluation for the Board to assess its effectiveness.
Full details of our evaluation and induction processes in the year are set out on page 69.
Stakeholder engagement Our stakeholders are very important to us and we remain committed to maintaining regular open dialogue and effective communication with them.
We believe that continued engagement is highly benecial to all parties as it helps to build a greater understanding of their views opinions and concerns.
Further information on how we engage with our stakeholders can be found on page 71.
Compliance with the UK Corporate Governance Code ITV is required to report on how it has complied with the principles of governance set out in the Code.
The Board considers that during 2017 the Company has complied with the provisions of the Code but notes the following Provision B.7.1  Independence John Ormerod has served on the Board for more than nine years.
The Board believes he remains independent and as explained last year the Board agreed that he should remain as a Director until a successor as Chair of the Audit and Risk Committee could be found.
Margaret Ewing was appointed in October 2017 to ll this position.
Provision A.2.1  Separation of Chairman and CEO Following Adam Croziers departure the Board agreed that I would step up as Executive Chairman from July 2017 until a new Chief Executive joined the business.
Dame Carolyn McCall was appointed to the Board in January 2018 to ll this position.
The Board notes that this was not compliant with the Code.
Further information on corporate governance and a schedule setting out how we comply with the Code can be found on our website.
A copy of the Code is available on the FRC website. www. rc.
Looking ahead It has been a year of change for ITV and we enter 2018 with a new Chief Executive who the Board strongly believes will put ITV in the best position to face the challenges of a competitive and rapidly changing industry.
Sir Peter Bazalgette
28 February 2018
Q What is ITVs culture A ITV believes in an open and collaborative culture across all areas of the business.
At its core ITV puts trust and an open and honest working environment for all as its most important values.
Q How does the Board engage with the corporate culture A The Board places a high importance on the value of corporate culture within ITV and the role it provides in the development and retention of employees as well as ITVs external reputation.
As mentioned openness and communication are key at ITV and as such it is imperative that the Board is visible throughout the organisation.
The Board participates in site visits to our different locations and is in regular communication with senior executives and other employees.
Q How is the corporate culture embedded across the organisation A We seek to instill the One ITV way of working our global network of Ambassadors to enhance communication and information sharing across all levels of the business.
The Board considers and acts upon feedback from employee engagement surveys.
We also aim for our senior executives and our Board members to be as visible as possible and use open plan ofce space to encourage openness and collaboration.
Our London property strategy is a big step to achieve a more coherent and joinedup business.
Q What is next for ITV A We believe that an effective and well embedded corporate culture helps create a successful business.
We will continue to focus on building a strong corporate culture and will keep this under consideration as part of our strategy refresh.
62 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Board of Directors 1 Ian Griffiths Chief Operating Ofcer and Group Finance Director Appointed September 2008 Key areas of prior experience Corporate nance and nancial restructuring.
Current external appointments Nonexecutive Director of DS Smith Plc.
Previous experience Group Finance Director and other senior nance roles within Emap plc Manager in audit and corporate nance at Ernst and Young.
2 Carolyn McCall Chief Executive Appointed January 2018 Key areas of prior experience Strategy and change management media retail and airline industries.
Current external appointments Nonexecutive Director Burberry Group plc and Department of Business Energy and Industrial
Director Corporate Board of Royal Academy of Arts.
Previous experience Chief Executive of easyJet plc Guardian Media Group plc Guardian News and Media plc Nonexecutive Director of Lloyds TSB Limited Tesco plc New Look plc Director of French Chamber of Commerce Chair Opportunity Now President Women in Advertising and Communications London.
3 Sir Peter Bazalgette
Appointed June 2013 Key areas of prior experience Media consultant digital media investor and former television producer.
Current external appointments Member of Advisory Board for YouGov plc and Bartle Bogle Hegarty.
Previous experience President the Royal Television Society Chairman the Arts Council of England Nonexecutive Director of Nutopia Nonexecutive Director and Chairman of the Remuneration Committee and member of the Audit Committee of YouGov plc Non executive Director of Mirriad Ltd DCMS Rightster Critical Information Group plc and Channel Four Television Corp Trustee of DebateMate Chairman of the ENO and Endemol UK Deputy Chairman and Director of the National Film and Television School Adviser to Sony Musics television division Chairman of the UK production business of Sony Pictures Television Inc.
Chief Creative Ofcer at Endemol Group BV and Endemol Entertainment UK Limited.
4 Margaret Ewing Nonexecutive Director Appointed October 2017 Key areas of prior experience Financial accounting corporate nance mergers and integration strategic and corporate planning.
Current external appointments Nonexecutive Director and member of the Audit and Risk Committee of ConvaTec Group plc Trustee the Board of Great Ormond Street Hospital Childrens Charity External member of the Audit Committee The Lawn Tennis Association.
Previous experience Executive member of the Board Executive Committee member Managing Partner Vice Chairman and Partner of Deloitte LLP.
External member of the Audit and Risk Committee John Lewis Partnership.
Nonexecutive
Director Standard Chartered plc Member of the Financial Reporting Review Panel Chairman of the Audit Committee Confederation of British Industry Nonexecutive Director and Chair of the Audit Committee Whitbread plc Group Chief Financial Ofcer BAA plc Group Finance Director Trinity Mirror.
5 John Ormerod Nonexecutive Director Chairman of the Audit and Risk Committee Appointed January 2008 Key areas of prior experience Finance developing strategy and growth.
Current external appointments Nonexecutive Director Constellium NV Gemalto NV.
Previous experience Nonexecutive
First Names Group Limited Tribal Group plc Merlin Claims Service Holdings Limited Senior Independent Director Misys plc Trustee The Design Museum The Roundhouse Trust Nonexecutive Director and Chairman of Audit Committee of Computacenter plc Nonexecutive Director Negative Equity Protection Holdings Limited Millen Group Limited BMS Associated Limited Member of Audit and Retail Risk Control Committees of HBOS plc Chairman Wallbrook Group Chairman of the Audit Committee for Transport for London Practice Senior Partner Deloitte and Touche Regional Managing Partner Arthur Andersen.
6 Salman Amin Nonexecutive Director Appointed January 2017 Key areas of prior experience General management marketing advertising and media planning.
Current external appointments
Previous experience Chief Operating Ofcer Global Commercial Division and Chief Operating Ofcer North America of SC Johnson and Son Inc various positions at Pepsico including Chief Operating Ofcer Purchase President PepsiCo UK and Ireland other marketing and various positions within brand management personal care paper products and food in the US Saudi Arabia Germany and Switzerland at Procter and Gamble.
7 Andy Haste Senior Independent Director Appointed August 2008 Key areas of prior experience International and emerging markets change management restructuring and business turnaround.
Current external appointments Chairman Wonga Group Limited Senior Independent Deputy Chairman of the Council of Lloyds.
Previous experience Group Chief Executive RSA Insurance Group plc Chief Executive AXA Sun Life plc Director AXA UK plc life and pensions President and Chief Executive Ofcer of GE Capital Global Consumer Finance UK Western Europe and Eastern Europe President the US Consumer Credit Business and Senior Vice President and Head of the US Consumer Loan Products Division of National Westminster Bank.
8 Mary Harris Nonexecutive Director Chair of the Remuneration
Appointed July 2014 Key areas of prior experience Business management consulting sales and marketing mergers and acquisitions media television and interactive media investments and digital rights management.
Current external appointments Nonexecutive Director and Chair of the Remuneration Committee Reckitt Benckiser Group PLC Member of the supervisory board of Unibail Rodamco SE.
Previous experience Nonexecutive Director J.
Sainsbury plc Member of the supervisory board TNT Express NV TNT NV Scotch and Soda NV and Irdeto BV Partner McKinsey and Company Amsterdam various positions worldwide with McKinsey and Company Maxwell Entertainment Group Pepsi Cola Beverages and Goldman Sachs and Co.
Committee membership G General Purpose A Audit and Risk N Nomination R Remuneration Full biographies can be found on our website siteabout boardofdirectors 63 Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information Board of Directors Anna Manz Nonexecutive Director Appointed February 2016 Key areas of prior experience Strategy and nance and nancial planning.
Current external appointments Chief Financial Ofcer Johnson Matthey plc.
Previous experience Various appointments at Diageo plc including Group Strategy Director Regional Finance Director Asia Pacic Group Treasurer Finance Director Global Marketing Sales and Innovation other nance roles at Quest International Unilever and ICI.
10 Roger Faxon Nonexecutive Director Appointed October 2012 Key areas of prior experience Broad commercial digital and media rights experience development of business strategy and nance.
Current external appointments Chairman Mirriad Advertising Ltd Nonexecutive Director Pandora Media Inc Director The John Hopkins
Previous experience Director EMI Group Global Limited and EMI Group plc Chief Executive Ofcer of EMI Group Limited Chairman and CEO of EMI Music Publishing Director the Songwriters Hall of Fame other appointments at the American Society of Composers and Authors and Lancit Media Entertainment Ltd in the US Chairman of VIVA Television in Germany and Channel V Networks in Asia.
64 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Full biographies can be found on our website siteaboutboardofdirectors Management Board 1 Julian Bellamy Managing Director ITV Studios Appointed February 2016 Experience Julian joined ITV in 2014 as Managing Director of the Studios business in the UK and was promoted to Managing Director of ITV Studios in February 2016.
Julians previous roles included Creative Director and Head of Commissioning at Discovery Networks International Head of Programming at Channel 4 and prior to that he ran BBC3 and E4.
He also spent time as Channel 4s Head of Factual Entertainment and was a commissioning editor of Channel 4 News and Current Affairs.
2 David Osborn Group HR Director Appointed October 2014 Experience David joined ITV as the HR Director for ITV Studios in May 2011 and was appointed to the Management Board in October 2014 as Group HR Director responsible for delivering the Groups People
David gained previous experience in both the UK and internationally while working in a variety of businesses including EMI Music Vodafone Visa Europe and Marks and Spencer.
3 Carolyn McCall Chief Executive Appointed January 2018 Experience Full biography on page 62.
4 Kevin Lygo Director of Television Appointed August 2010 Experience Kevin joined ITV as Managing Director ITV Studios in 2010 and became Director of Television in February 2016.
Kevins previous roles included Director of Television and Content at Channel 4 Director of Programmes at Channel 5 and a number of positions at the BBC including Head of Independent Commissioning for Entertainment.
5 Rufus Radcliffe Group Marketing and Research Director Appointed April 2017 Experience Rufus joined ITV in August 2011 and was promoted to the Management Board in 2017.
He also sits on the Freeview Board and is a Fellow of the Marketing
Before joining ITV Rufus spent 10 years at Channel 4 and prior to that held various positions at McCann Erickson and JWT.
6 Ian Griffiths Chief Operating Ofcer and Group Finance Director Appointed September 2008 Experience Full biography on page 62.
7 Kelly Williams Managing Director Commercial Appointed December 2014 Experience Kelly joined ITV in August 2011 as Group Commercial Director and joined the Management Board as Managing Director Commercial in December 2014.
He is also Chairman of Thinkbox sits on the BARB Strategy board and is Vice Chairman of the Advertising Association.
Before joining ITV Kelly was the Sales Director at Channel 5 and prior to that held various positions at UKTV Sky and Thames Television.
8 Julian Ashworth Director of Strategy and Direct to Consumer Appointed February 2018 Experience Julian recently joined ITV to lead the strategy review and development of the ITV Direct to Consumer business.
Before joining ITV Julian was Global Director of Policy Strategy at BT and prior to that held various strategy and business development and commercial roles at RELX plc Centrica plc and Bain and Company.
He has also served as a member of the UK Governments Digital Economy Council a board member of TECHUK the British Screen Advisory Council the Royal Taskforce against cyberbullying and a member of the UK Council for Child Internet Safety.
9 Andrew Garard Group Legal Director and Company Secretary Appointed November 2007 Experience Andrew joined ITV as Group Legal Director in 2007 and took on the additional role of Company Secretary in 2009.
He is also on the board of ITN is responsible for content management and the ITV archive Group Secretariat and corporate responsibility.
Previously Andrew was a partner in the corporate department of LeBoeuf Lambs London ofce.
Prior to this Andrew was Group General Counsel and Company Secretary at Cable and Wireless plc where he was a member of the Group Executive responsible for Group Legal.
Prior to that he was Global Head of Legal and Deputy General Counsel for Reuters Group plc in the UK and before that General Counsel Asia.
Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information Management Board ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Corporate Governance Audit and Risk Committee See the Audit and Risk Committee Report on page 72.
ITV Studios Board Executive directors and senior executives of divisional business.
Meets to consider and approve operational matters and assesses and manages risk in relation to the Studios business.
ITV Broadcast Board Executive Directors and senior executives of divisional business.
Meets to consider and approve operational matters and assesses and manages risk in relation to the Broadcast business.
Programme Compliance Advisory Group Manages and considers issues and risks in relation to the programme compliance framework the interactive business and regulation.
Corporate
Responsibility Board Manages the direction and delivery of ITVs responsibility strategy including in relation to diversity and inclusion environment communities and social causes.
See page 20.
Operational Risk Steering Group Manages and considers a number of existing and emerging operational risks and ensures that the business addresses the controls and mitigations appropriately including in relation to health and safety child protection business resilience data protection insider dealing whistleblowing antibribery and corruption information security fraud technology and cyber risk.
Business Resilience Response Team Acts as tactical response team in the event of an incident supporting the Management Board in dealing with a crisis.
Develops business area response plans testing programmes and incident reporting.
Disclosure Committee COO and CFO and other senior managers Meets to ensure compliance with the continuing obligations under the Disclosure Guidance and Transparency Rules DTRs.
Nomination Committee Chairman and Nonexecutive Directors Meets to review the structure size and composition of the Board including skills knowledge and experience.
Identies and nominates for Board approval candidates to ll Board vacancies and considers succession planning for Directors and other Senior Executives.
Considers and reviews any conflicts of interest that may be reported by the Directors.
Remuneration Committee See the Remuneration Report on page 82.
Tax and Treasury Committee COO and CFO and other senior managers Meets to consider and approve tax and treasury related matters in respect of corporate transactions or other activities.
Monitors compliance with tax and treasury related policies and procedures.
General Purpose Committee Executive Directors Meets as required to conduct business within clearly dened limits set by the Board.
Our Governance structure Matters reserved for the Board and Committee terms of reference are available on our website siteinvestorsgovernance Management Board Meets to consider approve and implement strategy and operational plans monitors operating and nancial performance and assesses and manages risk.
Board 67 Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information Corporate Governance Board and Committee meetings The number of meetings held during the year and attendance of Directors is set out in the table on page 68.
The Board agrees an annual schedule of matters it wishes to consider at each of its meetings and those of its Committees.
The schedule ensures that all relevant matters are considered and receive appropriate attention.
Meetings are normally held at one of the London sites or one of the regional or international ofces.
Board meetings are structured around the following areas Operational and functional updates Financial updates
Progress against strategy Business plan and performance against plan Risk management framework key risk areas and risk appetite Other reporting and items for approval Senior executives are regularly invited to attend meetings for specic items.
In addition to formal Board and Committee meetings meetings take place between Board members and Management Board members Chairman and Nonexecutive Directors Individual Nonexecutive Directors meeting with members of senior managers management Senior Independent Director and Nonexecutive Directors without the Chairman present Key matters discussed in 2017 and focus for 2018 Operational matters Plans for redevelopment of London site Cost savings Mergers and acquisitions
Developments
The ITV Hub and ITV Hub Targeted advertising Airtime sales modernisation International production ITV brand Changing viewers perception of ITV Marketing for lighter viewers 1634 year old viewing
Cyber security Data protection and GDPR Technology resilience Daytime studio migration Other important matters Britbox US launch Succession planning Integrated producer broadcaster Acquisition integration Gender pay gap reporting Drama development Areas of focus for 2018 Strategic refresh Consumer data Future of advertising Impact of the EU referendum vote
68 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Corporate Governance continued Board and Committee membership and attendance Board and Committee membership and attendance at scheduled meetings in 2017 are set out below.
Attendance at meetings Status Notes Date of appointment to the Board
Nomination
Committee
Remuneration
Committee
Audit and Risk
Peter Bazalgette Chairman 1 1 June 2013 14 May 2014 99 11 66 Salman Amin Independent 2 9 January 2017 10 May 2017 99 11 Adam Crozier Executive 36 26 April 2010 7 May 2010 39 Margaret Ewing Independent 4 31 October 2017 10 May 2018 29 11  16 Roger Faxon Independent 5 31 October 2012 15 May 2013 99 11 46 Ian Grifths Executive 6 9 September 2008 14 May 2009 99 Mary Harris Independent 28 July 2014 14 May 2015 99 11 66 66 Andy Haste Independent SID 7 11 August 2008 14 May 2009 99 11 26 66 Anna Manz Independent 5 1 February 2016 12 May 2016 99 11 46 66 John Ormerod Independent 8 18 January 2008 15 May 2008 89 11 66 66 Peter Bazalgette was appointed as Executive Chairman with effect from 1 July 2017 until 8 January 2018.
Salman Amin was appointed to the Board and Nomination Committee on 9 January 2017.
Adam Crozier stepped down as Chief Executive on 3 May 2017.
Margaret Ewing was appointed to the Board Audit and Risk Committee and Nomination Committee with effect from 31 October 2017.
Roger Faxon and Anna Manz were appointed to the Remuneration Committee with effect from 1 May 2017.
Executive Directors have rolling service contracts that provide for 12 months notice by either party.
Andy Haste stepped down as a member of the Remuneration Committee with effect from 10 May 2017.
John Ormerod was unable to attend the Board meeting in September due to a prior commitment.
Succession planning and diversity Succession planning The Board recognises that effective succession planning is key to the Companys ability to achieve its strategic objectives and is also integral to maintaining an effective Board.
The Board has in place a framework which it reviews regularly to ensure that The Board is refreshed appropriately in order to encourage new ideas There is a diverse Board with a wide range of skills and experience Board tenure is appropriate and Board members remain independent During the year the Board has undergone some changes as set out below Chief Executive In May 2017 we announced that Adam Crozier would leave ITV in June 2017.
Following this we commenced the recruitment process for a successor.
As part of its succession planning process the Board had already discussed the key skills experience and other requirements of the role.
They established a small committee comprised of Peter Bazalgette Andy Haste Roger Faxon and Mary Harris to manage the process.
The Board engaged Spencer Stuart to assist and provided them with a clear brief.
Throughout the process the Committee met regularly and gave careful consideration to the candidates proposed.
Face to face interviews were held and after much debate a strong shortlist was agreed who were asked to meet with all members of the Board.
The Board unanimously agreed that Carolyn McCall should be asked to join ITV as Chief Executive which we announced in July 2017.
Carolyn joined the business on 8 January 2018 and in the interim period the Board agreed that Sir Peter Bazalgette should take the role of Executive Chairman and Ian Grifths was promoted to COO and CFO.
Nonexecutive Directors During the year we welcomed two new Nonexecutive Directors Salman Amin with effect from 9 January 2017 and Margaret Ewing with effect from 31 October 2017.
Details of the recruitment process for Salman Amin are set out in the Annual Report and Accounts for 2016.
When considering the recruitment of Margaret Ewing the Board was mindful of the need to ensure succession planning for the Chairman of the Audit and Risk Committee as John Ormerod the current Chairman of that Committee is stepping down from the Board in May 2018 and wanted to ensure an appropriate handover period.
The Board engaged Zygos to assist with the recruitment of Margaret Ewing following a similar process as that set out above for the Chief Executive.
Both John Ormerod and Andy Haste will step down from the Board following the AGM in May 2018 and the Board is considering the current diversity of the Board with a view to considering further appointments if appropriate.
Committees The Board also reviewed Committee membership and during 2017 Mary Harris succeeded Andy Haste as Chair of the Remuneration Committee.
In addition Anna Manz and Roger Faxon joined the Remuneration Committee.
Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information Corporate Governance
It is our policy to retain a talented and diverse but relatively small board bringing a balance of indepth commercial and creative experience.
The Board does not have a separate diversity policy but instead relies on the ITV Equal Opportunities policy.
ITV encourages diversity throughout the business and recognises a range of characteristics.
More information on this can be found on pages 20 and 99.
We believe that the ITV Board is a diverse group in terms of experience age gender and educational and professional background.
We consider diversity as part of our succession planning process but recognise it is important to ensure that the most appropriate person is chosen for the relevant position.
Induction training and development All Directors who join ITV receive a comprehensive induction.
It is intended to provide the Director with an overview of the industry and important key themes for the Company.
It is also used to familiarise each Director with the different areas of the business and employees within the Company.
During the year Margaret Ewing and Salman Amin were appointed as Nonexecutive Directors and Carolyn McCall as Chief Executive.
Margaret joined as a successor to the Audit and Risk Committee Chair and as such her induction was tailored accordingly.
More details can be found below.
During a Directors period of appointment they are continually updated on the Groups different business areas and the competitive and regulatory environment in which they operate.
This is done through Updates and papers which cover changes affecting the Group and the market in which it operates and meetings with senior executives across the Group and key advisers Regular updates on changes to the legal and governance requirements of the Group and in relation to their own position as Directors Presentations given at Board and Committee meetings on business matters and technical update sessions from external advisors where appropriate Executive Directors may accept external appointments as Nonexecutive Directors of other companies and retain any fees paid to them.
Further details of external positions held by Directors can be found on page 96.
Board tenure as at date of publication 02 years 25 years 59 years 3 More than 9 years 1 Board gender diversity as at date of publication 40% 60% General Board Induction All Directors Operational overview
Financial review
Strategic overview Directors duties and responsibilities Governance structure Review of previous minutes and meeting papers Other key documents including strategy and budget Meetings with other Board members
Visits to key sites Build relationship with Chairman and Management Board members including the Senior Leadership Team Meetings with senior executives Meetings with shareholders
Meetings with shareholders as appropriate Meetings with internal and external advisers as appropriate Customised Executive Director induction Carolyn McCall Visits to main hub sites studios sets and regional news teams.
Meetings with shareholders Meetings with Management Board members and divisional board members Site visit to the new London ofce Customised Nonexecutive Director induction Margaret Ewing Health and safety Tax and Treasury Committee and Operational Risk Steering Group Data Protection and GDPRs impact on ITV Visit to the shared service centre London property strategy update 70 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Corporate Governance continued Board evaluation
The Board undertakes an external evaluation every three years to review its effectiveness.
The last external Board evaluation took place in 2016.
Internal
The work of the Board and its committees is reviewed annually.
The evaluation takes the form of a detailed questionnaire and interviews with the Board and Committee members eliciting feedback on a wide range of topics.
In addition input is sought from the Executive Directors other relevant senior executives and external advisers.
Results are then passed to the relevant Committee Chairman and a report of actions is submitted to the Board and Committees and actioned as appropriate.
The table below indicates the important themes that were identied for the Board from the exercise for 2017.
Committee actions are set out on pages 73 and 85.
Actions for 2018 Composition  Ensure there is a broad range of experience and perspective on the Board in particular recent media technology and digital experience Consider the successor for the Senior Independent Director when Andy Haste steps down from the Board.
Effectiveness  Review meeting structure to enhance productivity and efciency and allow for greater in depth discussions Stakeholder engagement  Engage more regularly on wider stakeholder engagement Spend more time understanding and visiting UK and international acquisitions Terms of engagement for the Nonexecutive Directors and job descriptions for the Chairman Chief Executive and Senior Independent Director are available on our website.
Board visit During 2017 a Board meeting was held in Manchester which included a visit to the Coronation Street set and a lunch with employees.
Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information Corporate Governance Stakeholder engagement The Board has a responsibility to create value for all its stakeholders and we believe it is vital to engage and listen to their views.
As one of the biggest national broadcasters in the UK ITV has a wide range of stakeholders and more on how we engage with some of these different groups is detailed below Investors The Board attaches a high priority to effective communication with investors and has regular open dialogue with them.
During the year meetings were routinely held with institutional investors to keep them updated on the Companys performance against our strategy.
The Board is kept informed of any feedback from these meetings.
Further details can be found in our investor calendar below.
Our AGM provides a forum for private shareholders to raise questions with the Board directly should they wish.
They have ample opportunity to ask questions during the meeting and before and after the event.
The Chairman and Senior Independent Director are always available to all shareholders.
Employees Engagement with employees is facilitated in a number of ways.
We have engagement surveys and Carolyn McCall has introduced weekly podcasts to keep employees up to date with what she has been doing and to communicate important issues for ITV in an effective and engaging way.
In addition a separate email has been set up for employees to ask Carolyn any questions they may have.
Further details of what else we do around employee engagement can be found on page 100 including information on our annual roadshows.
Viewers ITV reaches a vast audience across the UK and the Board recognises the important role it plays for viewers.
Viewers are able to tell us their thoughts directly via email or telephone with contact details provided on our website.
They are also able to use our regulator Ofcom to raise any concerns they may have.
The Board has delegated the review of such issues to the Broadcast Board where a compliance report is received monthly detailing viewer or regulator concerns.
Our dedicated viewer services team was awarded the Best Customer Services in Telecoms and Media for the seventh year running in 2017 and is on hand to resolve any technical issues or other questions our viewers may have.
We now also provide bespoke support for all of our live Daytime shows ITV Box Ofce events and the ITV Hub to enhance our viewer experience.
Our investor calendar
Full year results published and roadshow in London Citi Annual Media conference in London
Q1 Trading Update published JP Morgan conference Roadshow in the US
Interim results published and roadshow in London
Interim results roadshow in London Barclays conference in London European roadshows in Frankfurt and Milan
Q3 Trading Update published Morgan Stanley TMT conference in Barcelona US roadshow
Interim results roadshow in London
US roadshow
Bank of America Merrill Lynch conference in
April
Full year results roadshow in London and US Investor prole The percentage of issued capital by type of holder is as follows Institutional shareholders 97.26% Private shareholders 2.72%
0.02% 72 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
We have engaged with the HSE our insurers and unions on a new approach to health and safety risk on production which ensures local ownership of risks.
Dear Shareholder On the following pages we set out the Audit and Risk Committees report for 2017 which provides an overview of the areas considered by the Committee during the year.
As expected 2017 was more challenging than recent years for ITV.
Economic uncertainty in particular associated with Brexit has resulted in lower UK advertising revenues and prots.
However the Committee has continued to ensure that judgements remain balanced.
During the year ITVs 2016 Annual Report and Accounts were included as part of a sample within the FRC thematic review of reporting on Alternative Performance Measures APMs with the object of improving the quality of disclosures and identifying good practices.
As a result of the review our denitions of APMs on page 34 have been claried to aid shareholders understanding.
Our risk management process continues to develop.
We have included some case studies on page 78 and 79 to highlight some initiatives that we have developed to consider the approach of our leadership teams in relation to risk on production and development of our three lines of defence model for the approach to health and safety in production.
During the year we were delighted to welcome Margaret Ewing as a Nonexecutive Director and successor to me as Chair of the Audit and Risk Committee.
I will be stepping down as a Director of the Company following the AGM in May 2018.
Margaret brings very broad experience to the Committee having been a senior partner at Deloitte Group Finance Director of listed companies and is an experienced Nonexecutive Director.
Further information on corporate governance and a schedule setting out how we comply with the Code can be found on our website site As mentioned in previous years we seek to respond to shareholders expectations in our reporting.
We reiterate that we welcome feedback from shareholders.
John Ormerod Chairman Audit and Risk Committee 28 February 2018 In this report The purpose of this report is to highlight areas that the Committee has reviewed during the year.
We report to shareholders on the signicant nancial reporting issues and judgements made in connection with the preparation of the Companys nancial statements.
Also highlighted is how the Committee has assisted the Board in reviewing the Companys internal control and risk environment.
We explain what the Committee has done to review the effectiveness of our internal and external auditors.
Audit and Risk Committee Report 73 Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information Audit and Risk Committee Report Who is on the Committee The Committee is composed entirely of independent Nonexecutive Directors.
Full details of attendance at Committee meetings can be found on the table on page 68.
The current members are John Ormerod Chairman Margaret Ewing appointed 31 October 2017 Mary Harris Andy Haste Anna Manz The Committee members have between them a wide range of business and nancial experience.
The Committee considers that John Ormerod Anna Manz and Margaret Ewing have recent and relevant nancial experience for the purposes of the Code.
Detailed biographies can be found on page 62 and 63.
Annual review The Committees terms of reference can be accessed on our website.
An annual review of the performance of the Committee was conducted for the year.
In addition to feedback from members of the Committee input was sought from the Chief Executive COO and CFO Director of Group Finance members of the external and internal audit teams and the Chairman of the Board.
Overall the review concluded that the Committee is responding appropriately to its terms of reference and will continue to develop its role.
Priorities for the year will include revisiting the internal audit model after the strategic refresh and reviewing how the Committee engages with the risk functions to ensure they continue to meet the needs of the business.
The Committee will continue to review its membership to ensure the skills and experience align with the business as it develops.
Meetings
February
Year end nancial reporting issues and judgements Fair balanced and understandable review of the Annual Report and Accounts Viability Statement verication KPMG audit conclusions and ndings APMs and exceptional items Compliance checklist Draft Annual Report and Accounts Audit opinion
Half year nancial reporting issues and judgements External audit strategy Internal audit independence and evaluation
Half year report KPMG review conclusions and ndings
Emerging and business specic risk reviews
Year end planning Full year nancial reporting issues and judgements Distributable reserves planning KPMG interim controls review ndings Review effectiveness of internal audit and the following years internal audit plan At each meeting the Committee receives a report from the Head of Internal Audit on the progress of the work and internal audit ndings.
In addition to the September risk focused meeting the Committee also considers specic risk topics at meetings throughout the year.
In addition to Committee members the Chairman of the Board Chief Executive COO and CFO Director of Group Finance Group Legal Director Head of Internal Audit Director of Treasury Director of Tax and the external audit partner regularly attend meetings.
The Committee members meet regularly with the external auditor partner and Head of Internal Audit without executives present.
Our role Following each meeting the Committee communicates its main discussion points and ndings to the Board.
The main role of the Committee is to Monitor the integrity of published nancial information and review signicant nancial reporting issues and judgements Provide advice to the Board on whether the Annual Report and Accounts are fair balanced and understandable and the appropriateness of the going concern statement and the longerterm viability statement Assist the Board to establish and articulate overall risk appetite and oversee and advise the Board on specic strategic risk exposures and mitigations Review the risk identication and assessment processes and undertake deep dives of high risk business areas or processes Review the effectiveness of the internal control and risk management processes Monitor and review the effectiveness and independence of the internal audit function Provide advice to the Remuneration Committee on nancial reporting matters and related judgements and risk management as they affect executive remuneration performance objectives and Review the quality and effectiveness of the external audit and the procedures and controls designed to ensure auditor independence.
74 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Our focus in 2017 In planning its own agenda and reviewing the audit plans of the internal and external auditors the Committee takes account of signicant issues and risks both operational and nancial likely to have an impact on the Companys nancial statements andor the Companys execution and delivery of its strategy.
The Committee also addresses specic queries referred to it by the Board or Remuneration Committee.
During 2017 there were no topics where there was signicant disagreement between management the external auditor and the Committee or unresolved issues that needed to be referred to the Board.
Set out in the tables below is information on the key matters considered during the year.
Regular reviews and recurring transactions The following table summarises the regular reviews and activities undertaken by the Committee.
Some of these areas may require the application of judgement by management or have underlying complexity.
Audit and Risk Committee Report continued
Financial results announcements Annual Report and Accounts Accounting judgements and estimates Developments in nancial reporting Fair balanced and understandable Viability Statement page 58 Going concern page 120 Goodwill impairment note 3.3 page 143 Tax note 2.3 page 131 Deal debt see page 75 Pension accounting note 3.7 page 153 Decit nancing see below Revenue recognition IFRS 15 page 75 Appropriateness of Alternative Performance Measures page 78 Litigation provisions page 76 Auditor engagement and fees Auditor independence and objectivity Auditor Independence policy including nonaudit fees Audit plans Auditor performance and effectiveness Key areas of judgement Auditor management reports Audit report
Principal risks and uncertainties and risk mitigations Effectiveness of the risk management process Cyber security page 77 Business continuity Information security and GDPR Technology modernisation page 77 Health and safety Regulatory and programme compliance Bonus and share plan outcomes Further information on our risk management framework can be found on pages 50 to 57 Risk Internal control Internal Audit independence and effectiveness Internal Audit plan Internal Audit report ndings and outcomes Effectiveness of internal controls Postacquisition reviews Monitoring acquisition earnouts and related accounting Whistleblowing process Material litigation Insurance programme Fraud controls Antibribery controls Technology controls Tax policy and controls Treasury policy and reports Tax and Treasury Committee review 75 Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information Audit and Risk Committee Report Most of the topics mentioned above are relevant to all businesses.
However matters specic to ITV include Deal debt this is where management estimates the over and under delivery of advertising value to agencies.
The Committee reviews managements approach and method of determining the provisions required for net under delivery.
Decit nancing as part of our strategy to expand our content portfolio signicant investment in highend drama is made.
The Committee reviews the accounting implications including revenue recognition and recoverability of the amounts invested.
Complex discrete transactions The Group completed certain transactions during the period that were in line with strategy but could have been considered outside the normal course of business as set out below.
The Committee carefully reviewed these transactions to ensure that the judgements applied by management were reasonable and any complex accounting guidance followed correctly.
During 2018 the Committee will also undertake postacquisition reviews of signicant investments in subsidiaries and associates over the past ve years.
Area of focus Financial reporting and judgement Action taken by management Action taken by the Committee and outcome
Talpa signed a four year deal to license The Voice of China in January 2016 and credit insurance was arranged.
The format revenue for all four years was recognised in full in 2016 in line with our policy and accounting standards.
In 2017 Talpa took back the licence for The Voice of China due to a breach of agreement by the customer resulting from nonpayment of outstanding invoices.
ITV is pursuing talent for the amounts due and has submitted a claim under its credit insurance policy for the amounts due from the customer.
While management is condent in the Groups position that the credit insurance policy remains effective IFRS only permits an asset relating to the credit insurance to be recognised when the receipt of monies is virtually certain.
The judgement focused on Whether the 30 million of unpaid receivables held on the balance sheet are recoverable Whether an asset should be recognised for the credit insurance Also see note 2.1 on page 124.
The following points were noted A review of key documentation between the insurers ITV or the customer had been performed by management Management had sought legal counsel and opinion As a result of the above actions management considered it appropriate that The outstanding receivables are fully impaired While management consider the credit insurance policy remains effective under IFRS no asset should be recognised at present Due to the timing difference between the impairment of the receivables in 2017 and the potential recognition of the credit insurance policy recovery in a later period this should be highlighted within the nancial statements as an exceptional item.
The Committee assessed managements proposed accounting treatment for the outstanding receivables and credit insurance considered managements report on the accounting treatment had direct conversations with the legal advisers and agreed with the assessment that The receivables should be fully provided against No asset should be recognised in relation to the credit insurance in 2017 The disclosure as proposed is appropriate KPMG also presented their view on the matter to the Committee noting consistent conclusions on the appropriate accounting treatment and disclosure.
76 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Area of focus Financial reporting and judgement Action taken by management Action taken by the Committee and outcome
The Group has announced its intention to redevelop its South Bank site and build a new London ofce.
The teams currently located in the South Bank site will be relocated to various sites on a temporary basis while the South Bank site is redeveloped.
Over the course of the project incremental costs both capital and income statement related will be incurred.
The judgement focused on the presentation of these incremental costs as exceptional which arise solely as a result of the project within the Annual Report and Accounts.
Management proposed that incremental costs incurred across the project over the medium term both capital and income statement related should be ringfenced and removed from the underlying results i. build of HQ.
The Committee assessed managements proposed treatment for the incremental costs discussed the proposed presentation with management and agreed that The new London ofce project is a signicant oneoff and not in the normal course of business It will require separate disclosure of the accounting implications within the nancial statements and in the Finance Review The Committee also agreed with management that all other costs that were expected to be incurred regardless of the property decision such as depreciation on studios or ofce t costs or service charges will continue to be recognised as an operating expense within the underlying results.
Accounting for Gurney litigation In 2016 due to evidence of alleged breaches of contract and other fraudulent issues the Group having taken legal advice initiated legal proceedings against the minority owners who continue to hold a 38.5% membership interest in Gurney Productions LLC Gurney.
These minority owners dispute the allegations and have counter claimed for damages of at least 150 million.
The action is ongoing.
Financial reporting and judgement involved The accounting for the ongoing operations of Gurney The measurement of liabilities held for settlement of a counterclaim if any and for the cost of ongoing legal proceedings Based on the current status of the business and taking into account the legal proceedings management proposed that for accounting purposes Gurney should be treated as if it had been wound down with no further results recognised in the accounts a provision recognised against the goodwill and against assets within Gurney An acquisitionrelated liability should continue to be maintained for potential ongoing contractual obligations No provision should be held for the counterclaim against ITV as the Directors believe this counterclaim is completely without merit and A provision for legal costs accounted as an exceptional cost should be held for ongoing legal proceedings The Committees actions included A review of the nature of the dispute and developments to date Discussions with ITVs general counsel and US legal advisers and A review of managements proposed accounting treatment including provisions held The Committee agreed with managements proposed accounting and presentation.
Audit and Risk Committee Report continued 77 Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information Audit and Risk Committee Report Other matters In addition to nancial reporting matters the following topics were reviewed Area of focus Issue Action taken by Committee Outcome Cyber security and simulation exercise Cyber security is an increasing risk as our business develops new revenue streams and direct to consumer propositions.
The Committee undertook a detailed review of the cyber security risks and strategy including ongoing actions taken by management around Embedding IT controls Educating our colleagues Detection and response Ownership across organisation and third parties The Committee also reviewed ndings from a cyber incident and phishing exercise conducted during the year.
Completed and planned mitigations were reviewed and assessed.
The Committee noted the progress that had been made and will continue to monitor and review mitigations.
Technology modernisation Legacy business systems continue to be modernised to reduce a number of key business risks.
The Committee reviewed the programme of work to modernise legacy business systems including Implementation of a cloud based nancial and payroll system in the US Development of a bespoke artiste payment system in the UK Progress in the replacement of our airtime sales system Completed and planned mitigations were reviewed and assessed and the Committee will continue to keep this under review.
Tax
The Criminal Finances Act 2017 introduced new Corporate Offences of Failure to Prevent the Facilitation of Tax Evasion.
The Committee monitored the actions taken by management to implement reasonable prevention procedures in line with published HMRC guidance.
Prevention procedures were reviewed and assessed and the Committee considered these to be adequate.
The Committee will continue to receive updates.
Employment status ITV Studios production The issue of employment and worker status in the modern economy has come under increasing scrutiny particularly in the UK where employment and tax law and practice are developing as a result.
Employment status can be especially complex in television production where freelancers are often used both behind and in front of camera.
The Committee received regular updates from management in order to assess whether ITV is following best practice in how it engages people and adapting to change where appropriate.
The Committee noted the progress and will continue to monitor and review this area.
78 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Area of focus Issue Action taken by Committee Outcome
Performance
Measures
During 2017 ITVs 2016 Annual Report and Accounts were selected within a sample of companies for the Financial Reporting Councils FRC thematic review of reporting relating to Alternative Performance Measures.
The FRC has asked that we point out that its review only covered the specic disclosures relating to the thematic review and provided no assurance that the report and accounts were correct in all material respects.
Matters discussed with the FRC focused on Why restructuring and reorganisation costs were determined to be nonrecurring How the company determined that acquisitionrelated expenses should be treated as operational exceptional costs The Committee discussed the FRC review points with management and agreed with managements recommendation to provide Further explanations of exceptional restructuring and reorganisation costs in future Annual Reports and Accounts and to cease referring to these costs as nonrecurring Disclosure noting that the acquisitionrelated costs are not considered to be part of the core operations of the business and hence require highlighting in the accounts rather than referring to them as being nonrecurring or oneoff in nature The FRC welcomed the planned changes and these have been reflected in the Annual Report and Accounts refer to page 34.
Treasury policy In 2016 after reviewing the annual Treasury report the Committee had requested further analysis not just on what foreign exchange FX exposures were being hedged but also on what was being left unhedged.
This analysis was prepared and discussed at the Tax and Treasury
A recommendation for some amendments to the treasury policy on FX risk managed was reviewed by the Committee as part of the 2017 annual treasury report.
The Committee agreed with the proposal to amend the treasury policy on FX risk management and recommended that the Board approve the revised policy.
Antibribery and corruption Following an internal audit review on the implementation of our antibribery and corruption policies actions to strengthen implementation of the Groups programme were recommended by Internal Audit.
The Committee reviewed the result of the internal audit the recommendations and managements response.
The Committee agreed to keep the agreed actions under review.
Management has put in place a crossbusiness steering group to help ensure that the agreed actions such as risk assessments and enhanced local language guidance and training are implemented consistently across the business.
Audit and Risk Committee Report continued Case study new approach to health and safety  Emmerdale project We have been working on a project with Emmerdale trialling a refreshed approach to considering the effectiveness of health and safety on production.
The project was in three stages  Discovery Collaborative Analysis and Improvement  and required all aspects of the production team to focus on the daytoday constraints and opportunities that they face identifying risks and potential mitigations.
A team nominated from the production is in place supported by the health and safety team to deliver improvements.
We have engaged with the HSE our insurers and unions on this new approach which supports risk management in a more efcient and effective way while ensuring local ownership of risks and accountability for the implementation of solutions.
Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information Audit and Risk Committee Report Leading Risk During the year we introduced a Leading Risk programme to support our leadership team in ITV Studios to consider risk effectively within its business area.
The programme was developed with a focus on behaviour rather than process controls and to help build a consistent language around risk.
We partnered with the London School of Economics LSE on a research project based on this programme which will provide us with a better understanding of risk decision making to help us enhance a positive risk management culture.
The programme uses case studies to provide effective group conversations about how risk management works in reality the impact of risks that are realised the impact of leadership behaviours on risk management and the importance of culture and voice to actively manage risk.
Building on this the programme seeks to provide an understanding of risk drivers and risks that are accepted in the pursuit of goals.
Output includes a risk appetite model that reflects the views of the leadership team which can be articulated throughout the business.
To date nearly 200 of our leaders in the UK and US have gone through the programme with further rollout during 2018 internationally.
Dr Soane LSE explains Risk is clearly a signicant consideration for ITV.
We are examining how risk managers think and feel about risk.
We are also assessing risk managers views on how their teams make decisions about risk and on the organisational climate.
For example do people feel empowered and enabled to speak up if they see something theyre worried about Do teams that have a strong shared understanding about decision processes.
Risk management and internal controls
Risk management
The Committee continued to consider the process for managing risk within the business and assisted the Board in relation to compliance with the Code.
Further information on our risk management processes and details of our principal risks is included in the Strategic Report on pages 50 to 57.
Following on from earlier reviews by the Committee on health and safety processes in the business we have developed some innovative programmes to develop our approach to risk moving away from a rules and process driven system to a cultural people driven solution which we believe encourages a focus on prevention rather than reaction to failure.
Further information is set out in the case studies below and on page 78.
In 2017 the Committee reviewed the management of pension risks in ITVs dened benet schemes focusing on how management and pension trustees were managing risks relating to longevity interest rates inflation rates and investment strategy.
The Committee also reviewed the General Data Protection Regulation readiness plan for the business.
This included detail of the governance model and the results of a detailed personal data audit.
The Committee reviewed the workstream activities and plans and will keep this under review in 2018.
Internal controls The Board has overall responsibility for the Groups systems of internal control and for regularly reviewing the effectiveness of those systems.
The Committee assists the Board in reviewing the systems of internal control.
The primary responsibility for the operation of these systems is delegated to management.
Such systems can only provide reasonable and not absolute assurance against material misstatement or loss.
Key control procedures are designed to manage rather than eliminate risk.
As part of our internal control process the Groups strategy is reviewed and approved by the Board.
The Group performs an annual strategy review and a rolling ve year nancial planning exercise which are reviewed and approved by the Board.
The ve year plan feeds into the annual budget cycle.
The Executive Directors review formal forecasts detailed budgets strategies and action plans and the Board approves the overall Group budget as part of its normal responsibilities.
The results of operating units are reported monthly to the Board along with an update of the Groups performance against strategic KPIs and cash.
Actual results are compared with budget and forecasts and key trends and variances are explained and analysed.
US have gone through the programme with further roll out during 2018 internationally.
Risk is clearly a signicant consideration for ITV.
We are examining how risk managers think and feel about risk.
80 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Assurance
The Committee satises itself that internal controls are operating throughout the year principally based on a programme of internal audit reviews reviews of the effectiveness of internal controls including fraud and antibribery reviews of balance sheet checklists certied by local management deep dive sessions with relevant management on the management of certain key risks and controls and through a suite of automated analytics that monitor nancial transactions in our systems.
In addition to the internal audit programme there are a number of exception reports that cover transaction processing.
For those subsidiaries not covered by exception reporting software a monthly selfassessment takes place which is subject to independent internal review.
Our auditors Internal auditor The Groups internal audit activity is outsourced to Deloitte which reports directly to the Committee.
The Committee continues to believe that outsourcing offers access to the wide range of skills and resources in the various geographies required and endorses its continuing use.
The Committee keeps under review the internal audit relationship with Deloitte and the procedures to ensure appropriate independence of the internal audit function is maintained.
The effectiveness of internal audit is assessed over the year using a number of measures that include but are not limited to An evaluation of each audit assignment completed using feedback from the part of the business that has been audited and A high level annual review that is completed by obtaining feedback from senior management in each division Prior to the start of the year the Committee considered and approved the internal audit plan which included audits across the Group as well as assurance over live projects.
During the year the Committee reviewed ndings from these internal audit reports the actions taken to implement the recommendations made in the reports and the status of progress against previously agreed actions.
All internal audit reports are available to the Committee.
External auditor The Groups external auditor is KPMG.
The table below summarises the process followed to manage the relationship and audit process.
Engagement Audit tendering and rotation Independence objectivity and fees
The Committee considers carefully the scope of planned work and the assessment of risk and materiality on which it is based.
In particular through the Committee Chairman the Committee participates in the negotiation of the audit fee to ensure that there is an appropriate balance between the scope of work and the cost of assurance.
The Committees aim is to support a robust and effective audit and strong reporting lines to the Committee.
The Committee agrees the terms of engagement audit and nonaudit fees and reviews progress and results throughout the year.
KPMG were appointed as auditor of ITV plc in December 2003 prior to the Company becoming the parent company of the ITV Group on 2 February 2004.
In 2012 we undertook a competitive tender and applying the BIS guidance on the EU Audit rules.
The next mandatory tender would be for the 2023 nancial year and the next mandatory rotation would be for the 2024 nancial year.
The Committee continues to monitor audit quality to ensure a robust and effective audit.
We comply with the provisions of the Statutory Audit Services for Large Companies Market Investigation Mandatory Use of Competitive Tender and Audit Processes and Audit Committee Responsibilities Order 2014.
The Committee seeks to ensure the objectivity and independence of our auditor through Focus on the assignment and rotation of key personnel The adequacy of audit resource Policies in relation to non audit work As a result of these strict guidelines the Committee believes that nonaudit services do not have a direct or material effect on the audited nancial statements.
A copy of our Auditor Independence policy is available on our website at site Fees paid to KPMG for 2017 are set out in note 2.1 on page 128.
We monitor relationships with other audit rms to ensure we have sufcient choice for any future appointment.
During the year the Committee considered the performance and audit fees of our auditor and the level of nonaudit work undertaken and recommended to the Board that a resolution for the reappointment of KPMG for a further year as the Companys auditor be proposed to shareholders at the AGM in May 2017.
The resolution was passed and KPMG was reappointed.
The Committee has recommended the reappointment of KPMG at the AGM on 10 May 2018.
Audit and Risk Committee Report continued 81 Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information Audit and Risk Committee Report External audit effectiveness and quality The Committee follows the review programme below to satisfy itself of external audit effectiveness and quality.
February May July November Audit scope and materiality Independence and objectivity Conrmation of work performed and other signicant risks
Audit plan and strategy
Fees and independence Audit Quality Review focus areas Auditor Independence policy reviewed every two years Audit fees  nal approval Audit quality is reviewed throughout the year and the Committee continues to use the Financial Reporting Councils FRC Audit Quality Practice Aid to structure its review of audit quality.
When making its assessment of audit quality the factors the Committee focused on included External audit quality reports The audit strategy for the year addressed thematic concerns that the FRC had highlighted.
Auditor interaction with management Reviewing the auditors understanding of business progress against the strategy and emerging industry themes as well as the auditors discussion with management on key corporate transactions.
Auditors own view of effectiveness Enquired with regards to Audit methodology and its effective application to ITV Robustness of challenges and ndings on areas that require management judgement Whether there had been an internal peer review of the ITV audit and what the ndings were and The experience of the senior members of the audit team In its assessment of audit quality the Committee also took into account The detailed audit strategy for the year including the coverage of emerging risks Group materiality and component materiality How the auditor communicated any key accounting judgements and conclusions and Feedback from management of the performance of the auditor There were no signicant ndings from the evaluation this year and the Committee considers the external audit to have been robust and effective.
82 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Dear Shareholder I am writing to update you on the work of the Committee during the year.
Included within the Remuneration Report is our Annual Report on Remuneration which will be subject to an advisory vote at our Annual General Meeting AGM on 10 May 2018.
From the Committees perspective 2017 was an extremely busy year.
As you are aware after seven years Adam Crozier stepped down from the Board.
In this context it was a priority for the Board and our shareholders that ITV continued to perform strongly over the period of transition and that Carolyn McCall our new Chief Executive inherited a business with positive momentum.
As described earlier in the Annual Report the business has continued to make signicant progress despite external challenges.
This has been achieved under the leadership of Ian Grifths in his expanded role as COO and CFO and Peter Bazalgette who stepped into the role of Executive Chairman.
The Committee made a number of key decisions during the year which were made in close consultation with both the Nomination Committee and the wider Board as a whole.
By the end of the year we are pleased to report that ITV had not only robustly navigated a challenging trading environment but we now also have in place a highly talented and experienced executive team for the future.
The changes described above inevitably required the Committee to consider a number of oneoff matters outside of the normal course of business.
During the year we have consulted extensively with our major shareholders and kept all our shareholders informed regarding key decisions all of which were fully disclosed to the market at the time.
Further information on the work of the Committee can also be found on page 85.
This included consideration of the remuneration framework for the wider employee group when considering remuneration for the Executive Directors and other senior executives and gender pay gap reporting.
In addition the Committee has reviewed the malus and clawback provisions in the rules of the bonus and share award plans to ensure they remain appropriate.
In this report The purpose of this report is to set out for shareholders the principles and policy we apply to remuneration for our Executive Directors and to update you on how we have applied these for the nancial year ended 31 December 2017.
The report also aims to demonstrate how our Remuneration Policy aligns to our strategy supports the retention of the Executive Directors and rewards them for strong performance.
Committee governance page 85 Remuneration Policy summary page 86 R e m u n e r a tio n P o l ic y application 2017 page 87 Remuneration Policy application 2018 page 91 Other disclosures page 92
Remuneration Report 83
Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information
Remuneration Report
2017 performance At the start of 2017 we expected a challenging year ahead for advertising with continued economic and political uncertainty impacting business condence.
Our internal forecast of a c.5% contraction in the advertising market over the year which set the context for the 2017 target setting has subsequently proved to be accurate.
Despite these challenges ITV has continued to perform strongly.
Real progress has been made against operational KPIs and tight control maintained over costs and cash.
The 2017 adjusted EBITA target was set at 785 million versus the 2016 adjusted EBITA outcome of 885 million.
This lower but still stretching 2017 target reflected the decline in the external advertising environment mentioned above.
In addition it should be noted that the 2016 prot outturn beneted from a format sale in a new geography which would not repeat in 2017.
Given these downward pressures the 2017 actual target being 100 million below the 2016 outturn was considered by the Board and the Committee to be stretching at the time the target was set.
However strong performance against a number of metrics ensured that adjusted EBITA for 2017 was 842 million which represented a signicant outperformance of expectations at the start of the year.
Linear viewing is up for the second year and continues to deliver the mass audiences and key demographics advertisers demand.
Video on Demand VOD viewing is up nearly 40% with The ITV Hub now having over 21 million registered users with good growth in online advertising.
ITV Studios delivered good organic revenue growth and we have a strong pipeline of programmes for 2018.
Overall and as discussed in the Strategic Report ITV continues to make signicant progress growing strengthening and rebalancing the business.
Performancerelated pay Performance measures for our Annual Bonus Awards Bonus and LongTerm Incentive Plan LTIP are closely aligned to our KPIs.
These are drawn from our strategy and cover all parts of the business.
Stretching bonus targets were set for 2017 taking into account the challenging external backdrop and the nonrecurring item in 2016 described above.
The Committee has considered 2017 performance and the subsequent remuneration outcomes in this context.
The Committee noted that the adjusted EBITA cost savings and cash conversion targets set at the start of the year were all exceeded.
Management has delivered exceptional performance in a very difcult trading environment.
In addition the operational performance of the business and performance against personal targets have been strong.
Over the past few years we have included a costsaving target in our Bonus awards to ensure that management continues to focus on streamlining the business.
Once again this target has been exceeded with a further 29 million of savings being delivered.
The Bonus payout level for 2017 is around 97% of maximum.
The 2017 allemployee bonus will be paid out in full reflecting the outstanding contribution of ITV employees in a critical year of transition.
Further information and details of the Bonus targets for 2017 are set out on page 88.
The performance period for awards made under the LTIP in 2015 ended on 31 December 2017.
Based on performance over the last three years a vesting outcome of 63% was achieved.
Full vesting was not achieved mainly due to outcomes relative to the stretching EPS and share of viewing SOV targets originally set.
In line with our phased approach to the introduction of holding periods 50% of the vested amount will become exercisable in March 2020.
Details are set out on page 89.
The business has continued to make signicant progress despite external challenges.
This has been achieved under the leadership of Ian Grifths and Peter Bazalgette.
84 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
As Adam Crozier was only in post as Chief Executive for six months of the year see below his total remuneration for 2017 is signicantly lower than last year.
Ian Grifths reported total remuneration for 2017 is 2.720 million as detailed on page 87.
However this 2017 total remuneration includes the interim arrangements pertaining to his expanded role for part of the year see below all of which were fully disclosed at the time of announcement in May 2017.
When considered on a more likeforlike basis Ians total remuneration for 2017 is similar to last years.
The Committee considers the total pay for the Executive Directors to be a fair reflection of both ITVs performance and their respective contribution over the period.
Board changes On 30 June 2017 Adam Crozier stepped down as Chief Executive and on departure his remuneration arrangements were determined in accordance with his contractual terms and the limits set out in the Remuneration Policy approved by shareholders at the 2017
All variable incentives continue to be performance based and prorated for time served.
In light of Adams departure Ian Grifths took on an expanded role in addition to his previous responsibilities until a new Chief Executive was appointed and had joined.
The Board agreed an interim package to reflect this expanded role.
Full details of the payments made in respect of these changes were disclosed at the time of announcement in May 2017 and are also set out in the Annual Report on Remuneration.
Carolyn McCall joined ITV as Chief Executive on 8 January 2018.
Her remuneration arrangements and buyout arrangements are consistent with the terms of the Remuneration Policy approved by shareholders at the AGM in May 2017.
Carolyns total remuneration opportunity is broadly in line with that of the previous Chief Executive and includes a cash allowance for income on retirement of 15% 25% for previous Chief
Details of Carolyns package were published at the time of announcement in July 2017 and are replicated on page 92.
Remuneration Policy implementation in 2018 The policy approved by shareholders in 2017 will continue to apply in 2018.
Details of how the Committee proposes to implement the policy in 2018 are set out on page 91.
Following Carolyns appointment the Company has commenced a strategic refresh which will set the priorities for the business over the medium to long term.
Following consultation with major shareholders the Committee has decided to defer the setting of performance metrics and targets for the 2018 LTIP awards until this refresh has been completed to ensure that the metrics and targets are fully aligned with the strategic plan.
Once the metrics and targets have been agreed the Committee expects to publish details on the Companys website and in the 2018 Remuneration Report.
While the metrics and targets are yet to be determined the Committee would expect to engage with major shareholders regarding any material changes to the current approach.
Shareholder views Over the course of the past year we consulted with major shareholders on a number of matters and we will seek to maintain this dialogue in future years.
We would like to take the opportunity to thank the investors and proxy voting agencies who took part in this process.
In this Remuneration Report we have sought to adopt a transparent approach and we would welcome feedback from our shareholders regarding the key decisions made.
Mary Harris Chair Remuneration Committee 28 February 2018 Strategic alignment of remuneration with KPIs for 2017 pages 36 to 39
Strategic targets
Cumulative adjusted EPS Financial KPI 50% F am i l y S O V Strategic KPI 20% Online pay and interactive growth 10% I n t e r n at io n a l p r o d u c t io n revenue 10% Total nonNAR growth Financial KPI 10% Annual Bonus
Performance weighting Adjusted ITV plc EBITA Financial KPI 60% I ndi v i d u a l ta r g e t s see page 89 25% Prot to cash conversion Financial KPI 10% C os t s a v i n gs 5%
Remuneration Report
Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information
Remuneration Report
Who is on the Committee Full details of attendance at Committee meetings can be found on the table on page 68 Annual review An annual review of the performance of the Committee was conducted for the year.
Our role Following each meeting the Committee communicates its main discussion points and ndings to the Board.
Regular discussion topics are set out below.
Meetings in 2017 The Committee is composed entirely of Nonexecutive Directors.
The current members are Mary Harris Chair Sir Peter Bazalgette Roger Faxon Anna Manz John Ormerod In addition to feedback from members of the Committee input was also sought from the Chief Executive COO and CFO Group HR Director and Deloitte the independent adviser to the
Overall the review concluded that the Committee is responding appropriately to its terms of reference and will continue to develop its role.
Priorities for this year will include a review of the terms of reference in light of the new UK Corporate Governance Code and the strategy refresh.
The Committees terms of reference can be accessed on our website.
In addition to Committee members the Chief Executive COO and CFO Group HR Director Director of Pensions and Reward and independent adviser Deloitte regularly attend meetings.
The main role of the Committee is to Review the ongoing appropriateness relevance and effectiveness of the Remuneration Policy including in relation to retention and development Propose to shareholders changes to the Remuneration Policy as appropriate Approve the implementation of remuneration arrangements for the Executive Directors Management Board and other senior executives together the Senior Executive Group taking into account arrangements for the wider employee group.
Details on employee remuneration can be found on page 100 Approve the design of the Companys annual bonus arrangements and longterm incentive plans including the performance targets that apply for the Senior Executive Group Determine the award levels for the Senior Executive Group based on performance against annual bonus targets and longterm incentive conditions
Financial performance update Indicative bonus outcomes and payout levels Indicative LTIP performance and vesting levels Pay review outcomes and changes to Senior Executive Group
Remuneration Report
Advisor independence
Bonus targets agreed for current year LTIP awards and targets agreed for current year
Remuneration Report
Compliance with Remuneration Policy Compliance with shareholding guidelines
Market update
September
Reward framework and current trends Consideration of remuneration in the wider employee group
Bonus payout forecasts Consider operation of current incentives
Bonus framework and targets Terms of reference review Review of remuneration consultants Gender pay gap Annual pay review 86 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Remuneration Policy The Companys Remuneration Policy was approved by shareholders at the AGM on 10 May 2017 for a three year period.
This Policy will continue to apply for 2018.
The Policy aims to balance the need to attract and retain highquality talent essential to the Companys success with the need to be cost effective and to reward exceptional performance.
The Policy balances these factors while taking into account prevailing best practice and fair outcomes for investors.
A signicant proportion of the package is tied to the achievement of stretching performance conditions that align remuneration with our strategy to deliver strong business performance and create shareholder value.
A summary of the Policy is below.
The full Policy can be found on our website siteinvestorsgovernance Key features How we implement policy Link to strategy Base salary and provision for an income in retirement Reflect skills responsibility and experience.
Competitive postretirement benets or cash allowance.
Reviewed annually with consideration given to personal and company performance pay levels in relevant market the wider employee pay review.
2018 salaries Carolyn McCall  900000 Ian Grifths  642213 2018 cash allowance for income in retirement Carolyn McCall  15% 25% for previous Chief Executive Ian Grifths  25% Supports recruitment and retention of Executive Directors of the calibre required to deliver the strategy.
Annual Bonus cash and Deferred Share Award Targets and measures set annually based on business plans at the start of each year with payout determined following the year end based on performance against objectives.
Not more than twothirds delivered in cash with the balance deferred into shares under the DSA normally for a period of three years.
Majority of the opportunity based on corporate and nancial measures the remainder on performance against individual andor strategic objectives.
Up to 20% of the maximum opportunity will be received for threshold performance.
Maximum opportunity will not exceed 200% of salary.
Current ongoing maximum Carolyn McCall  180% of salary Ian Grifths  165% of salary To incentivise achievement of key nancial measures and objectives to deliver the business strategy.
Compulsory deferral element provides alignment with shareholder experience and supports retention of executives.
LTIP
Performance measures closely linked to nancial and strategic priorities.
Performance period is not less than three years with awards to be held for an additional two year holding period after the end of the performance period.
Subject to malus and clawback.
The maximum award that may be granted in any nancial year is 350%.
2018 grant levels Carolyn McCall  265% of salary Ian Grifths  225% of salary To incentivise delivery of performance aligned to the business strategy over the longer term and the creation of shareholder value.
Remuneration Report
Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information
Annual Report on Remuneration
The sections of the Annual Report on Remuneration that have been audited by KPMG are pages 87 to 90 page 92 to 93 limited to Nonexecutive Directors and payments to past directors for loss of ofce sections and pages 94 to 95.
Remuneration Policy application in 2017 The following section provides details of how the current Remuneration Policy was implemented in 2017.
Executive Directors The table below sets out in a single gure the total remuneration for both Executive Directors for the nancial year.
Adam Crozier Ian Grifths Salary 47telTaxable benets Pension 11telBonus cash and shares 82telShare awards 623 1760 507 1076 Interim arrangements Total 2050 3632 2720 2188 Less interim arrangements Total excluding interim arrangements 2050 3632 2261 2188 Adam Crozier stepped down from the Board on 30 June 2017 and the amounts shown have been prorated for time served.
The amount shown for 2017 is the indicative value of the 2015 LTIP awards that were subject to performance conditions measured to 31 December 2017.
In the 2016 Annual Remuneration Report the amount shown was the indicative vesting value of the 2014 LTIP awards that were subject to performance conditions measured to 31 December 2016.
The gures shown in the table above for 2016 represent the subsequent value received on the vesting date of 30 May 2017 using the share price on that date 199.4 pence.
The 2017 remuneration for Ian Grifths includes a temporary salary supplement that consisted of 133k salary 33k pension and 293k bonus.
The aggregate emoluments for all Directors as required under Schedule 5 SI 2008410 is the total remuneration shown in the table above less share awards but including gains on exercise of options and amounts receivable under LTIPs plus the total emolument gures for Nonexecutive Directors shown on page 90.
Details of remuneration arrangements for Sir Peter Bazalgette are set out on page 90.
Further information in relation to each of the elements of remuneration for 2017 set out in the table above is detailed below.
An explanation for 2016 is set out in detail in our 2016 Annual Report and Accounts which can be found on our website.
Salary
Executive Directors did not receive a salary increase from 1 January 2017 as part of the normal salary review process.
Adam Croziers annual salary for the year was 941000.
During the year Ian Grifths was appointed to an expanded role as COO and CFO.
In order to reflect the increased operational responsibilities associated with the new role his salary was increased by 50000 to 625025 per annum with effect from 3 May 2017.
Following Adam Croziers decision to step down from the Board Ian Grifths was asked to lead the executive team on an interim basis and take on additional responsibilities until a new Chief Executive joined the business.
To reflect these additional responsibilities he received a temporary salary supplement of 200000 per annum.
In order to facilitate a suitable transition this supplement will remain payable until 7 April 2018.
Full disclosure of the above changes to salary were set out on the Companys website on 3 May 2017.
Peter Bazalgette took the role of Executive Chairman from 30 June 2017 to 8 January 2018.
He received no additional remuneration for this.
Annual Report on Remuneration 88 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Taxable benets The benets provided to the Executive Directors include the cost of private medical insurance and carrelated benets.
Bonus cash and shares Annual incentives are provided to Executive Directors through the bonus with onethird of any award usually deferred into shares under the Deferred Share Award Plan DSA.
The performance conditions that apply to the bonus are set on an individual basis and are linked to the Companys corporate nancial and strategic priorities.
This enables the Committee to reward both annual nancial performance delivered for shareholders and performance against specic nancial operational or strategic objectives set for each Executive Director.
Payments and deferrals in respect of the nancial year are set out below.
The maximum bonus opportunity of 180% of salary for Adam Crozier was prorated for the period he was employed up to 30 June 2017.
The maximum bonus opportunity for Ian Grifths was increased from 165% to 180% for the period he was in receipt of a temporary salary supplement.
Value delivered in shares under the DSA Value paid in cash Total value Adam Crozier 97.92% 276404 552808 829212 Ian Grifths 97.50% 423958 847916 1271874 Of the total bonus shown for Ian Grifths 978521 relates to his ongoing bonus arrangements while 293353 relates to the interim arrangements implemented on Adam Croziers departure from the Board.
The percentage of maximum bonus opportunity earned for 2016 was 40% for both Adam Crozier and Ian Grifths.
The majority of the bonus 75% was based upon the achievement of corporate and nancial targets with payout determined in accordance with preset target ranges subject only to the usual adjustments to exclude the impact of material inyear acquisitions and currency movements.
The corporate and nancial targets used for 2017 together with performance against those targets and the resulting level of payout are set out below.
Performance required Performance measure Strategic targets Weighting Threshold Target Maximum
Payout level % of maximum Adjusted ITV plc EBITA 60% 745m 785m 825m 842m 100% Prot to cash conversion 10% 81% 85% 89% 91% 100% Cost savings 5% 23m 25m 27m 29m 100% Up to 20% is payable for threshold and up to 60% for target performance.
At the start of 2017 we expected a challenging year ahead for advertising with continued economic and political uncertainty impacting business condence.
Our internal forecast of a c.5% contraction in the advertising market over the year which set the context for the 2017 target setting has subsequently proved to be accurate.
Despite these challenges ITV has continued to perform strongly.
Real progress has been made against operational KPIs and tight control maintained over costs and cash.
The 2017 adjusted EBITA target was set at 785 million versus the 2016 adjusted EBITA outcome of 885 million.
This lower but still stretching 2017 target reflected the decline in the external advertising environment mentioned above.
In addition it should be noted that the 2016 prot outturn beneted from a format sale in a new geography which would not repeat in 2017.
Given these downward pressures the 2017 actual target being 100 million below the 2016 outturn was considered by the Board and the Committee to be stretching at the time the target was set.
However strong performance against a number of metrics ensured that actual adjusted EBITA for 2017 was 842 million which represented a signicant outperformance of expectations at the start of the year.
Linear viewing is up for the second year and continues to deliver the mass audiences and key demographics advertisers demand.
Video on Demand VOD viewing is up nearly 40% with The ITV Hub now having over 21 million registered users with good growth in online advertising.
ITV Studios delivered good organic revenue growth and we have a strong pipeline of programmes for 2018.
The remainder of the bonus 25% was based upon the Committees assessment of the contribution each Executive Director made to the overall strategy through the delivery of specic targets.
The Committee applies suitable judgement when assessing performance in this regard.
Both Executive Directors had a number of common objectives aligned to our strategic priorities and delivered well against these objectives.
The factors taken into account are summarised overleaf.
Remuneration Report
Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information Individual performance factors Payout level % of maximum Adam Crozier  Leadership and support of development of a creative collaborative culture Facilitating a strong pipeline of programmes for 2018 Overseeing conditions leading to the rebalancing of revenue streams Consistent and sustained strong performance in these areas 91.67% prorated Ian Grifths  Effective leadership of MandA activity Supporting the leadership team to deliver international creative performance Development of the London property development plans Supporting the Executive Chairman in delivery of key strategic priorities and embracing an expanded executive portfolio following Adams departure from the Board 90% Share awards We are required to show share awards in the single gure table on page 87 according to the year in which the performance period for each performance condition ended.
The awards made in 2015 under the LTIP were subject to performance conditions measured to 31 December 2017.
63% of the total awards met performance conditions on 31 December 2017 and the indicative value of these awards is set out below.
Number of shares awarded Value at award date Number of shares due to lapse Number of shares due to vest Value at 31 December 2017 Adam Crozier 804436 2065500 424244 380192 622754 Ian Grifths 491722 1262250 181937 309785 507428 For Adam Crozier the number of shares that vest has been prorated for time served from the date of award to the vesting date in line with the rules of the LTIP.
50% of the shares that vest will become exercisable on 27 March 2018 and 50% will become exercisable after a two year holding period on 27 March 2020.
For Ian Grifths 50% of the shares that vest will become exercisable following a one year holding period on 27 March 2019 and the remaining 50% will become exercisable after a two year holding period on 27 March 2020.
For the purpose of the single gure table the share price used to value the shares at 31 December 2017 was the average share price for the nal quarter of 2017 163.8 pence.
The share price used to calculate the number of shares under award was 256.7 pence the average of the share price on each of 24 25 and 26 March 2015.
When considering performance outcomes the Committee looks beyond formulaic results to ensure the outcomes align with overall business performance.
For these awards the formulae were applied without adjustment.
Dividends accrue on vested shares during the holding period.
Details of the performance achieved for the 2015 LTIP awards are below.
A gateway condition of minimum cumulative adjusted EPS 45.7 pence was met before any portion of the award could vest.
Performance measure Strategic targets Weighting Threshold Maximum
Payout level % of maximum Cumulative adjusted EPS 50% 45.7p 52.2p 49.5p 66.77% Family SOV 20% 22.0% 22.44% 21.73% 0% Total nonNAR growth 10% 5% growth pa 10% growth pa 15.90% 100% International Production Revenue 10% 5% growth pa 15% growth pa 28.71% 100% Online Pay and Interactive Revenue 10% 5% growth pa 18% growth pa 17.47% 96.36% Vesting is on a straightline basis between the threshold and maximum values shown in the table above.
Annual Report on Remuneration 90 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Pension
The Executive Directors were not part of an ITV pension scheme but received a cash allowance in lieu of pension with a value of 25% of base salary.
The cash allowance does not form part of the base salary for the purpose of determining incentives.
Chairman and Nonexecutive Directors The table below sets out in a single gure the total remuneration for Nonexecutive Directors for the nancial year.
Fees Taxable benets
Notes
Peter Bazalgette Chairman Salman Amin 2 64  4  68 Margaret Ewing 3 12    12 Roger Faxon Mary Harris Anna Manz 7 74 63  1 74 63 Archie Norman 8  184    184 John Ormerod 90 90 The amounts disclosed in the table above relate to the reimbursement of taxable relevant travel and accommodation expenses for attending Board meetings and related business.
The value disclosed is inclusive of tax arising on the expense which is settled by the Company.
Salman Amin was appointed to the Board on 9 January 2017.
Margaret Ewing was appointed to the Board and the Audit and Risk Committee on 31 October 2017.
Roger Faxon was appointed to the Remuneration Committee on 1 May 2017.
Mary Harris succeeded Andy Haste as Chair of the Remuneration Committee on 10 May 2017.
Andy Haste retired from the Remuneration Committee on 10 May 2017.
Anna Manz was appointed to the Remuneration Committee on 1 May 2017.
Archie Norman retired from the Board on 12 May 2016.
LTIP awards made in 2017 On 11 May 2017 an award was made under the LTIP to Ian Grifths in the form of nilcost options subject to performance over the period to 31 December 2019.
Performance period ends Holding period Vesting date Release date 225 705730 1406306 31 December 2019 2 years 11 May 2020 11 May 2022 The Committee sets targets for the LTIP taking into account external forecasts internal budgets business priorities risks and uncertainties.
Targets are set to be appropriately stretching in this context with maximum performance set at a level that is considered to be the delivery of exceptional performance.
The award made in 2017 is subject to performance measures and targets as set out below.
The award will be subject to an initial cumulative adjusted EPS performance gateway equal to that required for threshold performance 56.3 pence before any portion of the award can vest.
Performance measure Strategic targets Weightings
20% vesting
100% vesting Cumulative adjusted EPS 50% 56.3p 64.2p Family SOV 20% 20.2% 21.6% Total nonNAR growth 10% 5% growth pa 10% growth pa International production revenue 10% 5% growth pa 15% growth pa Online Pay and Interactive revenue 10% 5% growth pa 18% growth pa Vesting between threshold and maximum is on a straightline basis.
Family SOV has an additional vesting step of 75% for performance of 21.36%.
When assessing performance against this target the Committee will also have regard to the health of the main ITV channel.
Remuneration Report
Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information Remuneration Policy in 2018 The following section provides details of how the Remuneration Policy will be implemented in 2018.
Salary
Salaries are paid in line with the Remuneration Policy.
On 1 January 2018 Ian Grifths received an increase of 2.75% in line with the wider employee group.
2018 Salary Carolyn McCall 900000 Ian Grifths 642213 Taxable benets and pension These are provided in line with the Remuneration Policy.
Both Carolyn McCall and Ian Grifths receive private medical cover carrelated benets and a cash allowance in lieu of participation in any ITV pension scheme.
Bonus cash and shares The targets for the annual bonus are generally set at the start of the nancial year.
The targets are based on assumed market conditions and take into account both the budget for the year as well as longerterm strategic priorities.
Awards made to Executive Directors through the bonus will be paid twothirds in cash and onethird deferred into shares under the DSA.
The performance metrics and weightings for 2018 bonuses will be similar to previous years.
The Board considers the actual targets for 2018 to be commercially sensitive at this time and we envisage including equivalent disclosures to those included for the 2017 bonus in next years report.
The Committee may adjust bonus targets or outcomes to reflect signicant oneoff events e. fairly.
The Committee may amend the bonus payout should any formulaic assessment of performance not reflect the overall business performance of the year.
Share awards The performance measures for LTIP awards are reviewed annually to ensure that they remain aligned with the Companys strategic priorities over the course of the three year performance period.
For 2018 Carolyn McCall will be granted an award over 265% of salary and Ian Grifths an award over 225% of salary.
Following Carolyns appointment as Chief Executive in January 2018 the Company is currently in the process of completing a strategic refresh.
The Committee has decided to defer the setting of performance measures for the 2018 awards until the strategic refresh has been completed.
This is to ensure that the targets are fully aligned with the future strategic plan.
Major shareholders were consulted regarding this approach and the feedback was supportive.
Once the targets for the 2018 awards have been set the Committee expects to disclose these to shareholders on the Companys website and in the Remuneration Report for 2018.
The Committee will engage appropriately with major shareholders regarding any material changes.
Malus and Clawback Malus and clawback provisions may be operated at the discretion of the Committee in respect of any cash and deferred share elements of the bonus and awards made under the LTIP.
Under malus unvested share awards including any LTIP shares subject to a postvesting holding period can be reduced down to zero if considered appropriate or be made subject to additional conditions.
Clawback allows for repayment of bonuses previously paid andor shares previously received following vesting.
Malusclawback can be operated up to four years following the start of the relevant bonus year for bonuses and up to six years from the relevant date of grant for LTIP awards.
The circumstances in which the operation of these provisions would be applied may be considered from time to time but currently include material misstatement of results gross misconduct or fraud.
The Committee has carried out a review of these arrangements and is happy that there is no need to instigate either malus or clawback for any vested or outstanding awards at this time.
Annual Report on Remuneration 92 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Nonexecutive Directors There was no increase to Nonexecutive Director fees from 1 January 2018 which are as set out below.
1 January 2018 1 January 2017 % Change Chairman 450000 450000 Board fee 65064 65064 Additional fees for Senior Independent Director 25000 25000 Audit and Risk Committee Chairman 20000 20000 Audit and Risk Committee member 5371 5371 Remuneration Committee Chairman 20000 20000 Remuneration Committee member 5371 5371 Sir Peter Bazalgette acted as Executive Chairman from June 2017 with no additional fees paid and resumed his nonexecutive role from 8 January 2018.
In addition to his fee Peter will receive private medical insurance and this will be disclosed in full in 2018.
Details of Committee memberships can be found on pages 62 and 63.
Carolyn McCall  buyout arrangements In line with the Remuneration Policy it was agreed that ITV would buy out certain bonus and share awards that Carolyn forfeited by leaving her previous employer easyJet plc and joining ITV.
Details of forfeited arrangements are set out in the easyJet plc Annual Report and Accounts for 201617.
In determining the buyout the Committee has taken into account relevant factors including performance conditions attaching to the forfeited awards the likelihood of the awards vesting and the form and timing of the awards.
The awards will be bought out on a comparable basis where possible particularly where the performance period has completed.
Part of the buyout will be dependent on the extent to which legacy incentives at her previous employer vest in due course.
All elements of the buyout package are subject to continued employment.
If Carolyn gives notice to leave the Company within 12 months of commencing employment all awards paid or that vested during this period will be repayable by her.
The buyout arrangements comprise the following Annual bonus  easyJet bonus award forfeited in respect of 201617 will be replaced with an award of equivalent value.
This will include a cash payment of 607287 and a deferred share award equivalent to 303643 which will vest after three years.
Legacy deferred bonus shares  shares relating to easyJet bonuses paid in prior years and not subject to additional performance conditions will be replaced with equivalent awards over ITV shares that will vest over the same time horizon as awards forfeited.
Longterm incentives  various longterm incentive awards that were forfeited on joining ITV will be replaced with equivalent ITV share awards.
The value of the buyout in respect of the 2014 and 2015 awards will be based on the nal vesting outcome for the corresponding easyJet awards.
To the extent that the 2015 award lapses no buyout will be made.
In respect of the 2016 award a replacement award will be granted in due course subject to ITV performance criteria.
Consistent with the approach taken in respect of the 2018 ITV LTIP award the exact performance criteria will be determined following the completion of the strategic refresh.
In all cases the awards will vest and be released over the same time horizons as awards forfeited which includes the continued application of relevant holding periods.
The share elements of the buyout will be formally granted during the course of 2018.
Full details regarding the buyouts denominated in shares will be set out in the relevant stock exchange announcement at the time of grant and shareholders will also be provided with additional detail in next years Remuneration Report.
Other Disclosures Payments to past Directors or for loss of ofce Adam Crozier stepped down as Chief Executive on 30 June 2017.
His 12 month notice period commenced on 3 May 2017 the date his decision was advised to the Board.
As announced on the Companys website on 3 May 2017 on cessation of employment and in line with his contractual arrangements he received a payment in lieu of his remaining notice period and in respect of accrued but untaken holiday totalling 1052866.
He continues to receive private healthcare a fuel card and life cover until 2 May 2018 when his notice period ends.
In addition Adam Crozier received an allowance for legal advice and outplacement services with a cap of 50000.
Remuneration Report
Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information The Committee agreed to treat share awards as follows DSA  for bonus already earned all outstanding awards were released in full on 30 June 2017.
LTIP  any unvested nilcost options vest on their normal vesting dates are subject to the same performance conditions as other participants and were prorated to 30 June 2017.
In respect of the 2014 award which had already vested the rst tranche was exercised on 30 May 2017 and the second tranche on 30 June 2017.
In respect of the 2015 award the award vests in March 2018 with the rst tranche exercisable in March 2018 and the second tranche in March 2020.
In respect of the 2016 award this will vest in March 2019 and become exercisable in March 2021.
In line with contractual arrangements a bonus payment will be made in March 2018 for the six months served as a director in 2017.
Onethird of this will be payable in shares in the normal way but the Committee has agreed that these will not be subject to a deferral period.
The value of these shares is included in the single gure table on page 87 with further details on page 88.
Chief Executive remuneration The table below provides a summary of the total remuneration received by the Chief Executive over the last nine years including details of the annual bonus payout and longterm incentive award vesting level in each year.
Total remuneration Bonus % of maximum
2017 Peter Bazalgette for the six month period served  Executive Chairman 225 2017 Adam Crozier for the six month period served 2050 97.9 63 2016 Adam Crozier 3Adam Crozier 3Adam Crozier 4Adam Crozier 8Adam Crozier 2Adam Crozier 2158 88 2010 Adam Crozier for the eight month period served 1350 95 2010 John Cresswell for the four month period served  interim Chief Executive 661 83 2009 Michael Grade  Executive Chairman 2583 94 The longterm incentive award vesting percentage relates to the proportion of the award that met performance conditions in the relevant nancial year.
Comparison of Chief Executive to wider employees The table below provides details of the percentage change in the base salary benets and bonus of the Chief Executive between 31 December 2016 and 31 December 2017 compared with the average percentage change for other employees.
Notes % change in base salary % change in benets % change in bonus payments Chief Executive 1 2  5.11 144.79 All employees 3 4 4.58 7.84 31.99 As Adam Crozier stepped down as Chief Executive during the year the values received by him up to 30 June 2017 have been annualised to enable a comparison.
Benets include the cost of medical insurance and carrelated benets.
As the majority of employees are based in the UK overseas employees have not been included.
The percentage change in benets is the average change for all employees excluding the Chief Executive with any of the same benets as the Chief Executive.
The Committee is mindful of pay practices across the Group and during the course of the year regular updates are provided regarding remuneration trends for the wider employee population.
The Committee considers pay in the wider group from a number of perspectives.
Overall the Committee is keen to ensure pay practices across the Senior Executive Group are fair reflect the nature of the role and align with performance.
Annual Report on Remuneration 94 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Directors share interests Shareholding guidelines The Committee continues to recognise the importance of Directors being shareholders so as to align their interests with other shareholders.
Shareholding guidelines are in place which encourage Executive Directors to build up a holding of ITV plc shares based on a percentage of base salary.
50% of the requirement must normally be obtained within three years of appointment and the remainder normally within ve years.
31 December Adam Crozier Ian Grifths The value of shares held by Adam Crozier is based on his holding at 30 June 2017 when he stepped down from the Board.
The share price used to value the shares on 30 June 2017 was 181.4 pence.
The value of shares held by Ian Grifths is based on his holding at 29 December 2017 using a share price of 163.8 pence.
Where the value of shares required to be held increases as a result of a salary increase or an increase in the relevant percentage the Executive Directors will have three years from such increase to achieve compliance.
The Committee may change the guidelines so long as they are not overall in the view of the Committee less onerous.
Nonexecutive Directors are required to build and then maintain a holding of 100% of their base fee over the six years from the date of appointment to the Board unless for some reason they are unable to retain their fees.
The current position against the guidelines for each Nonexecutive Director is set out in the table below.
Interests in shares The gures set out below represent shareholdings in the ordinary share capital of ITV plc benecially owned by Directors and their family interests at 31 December 2017.
Interests in shares Shareholding guidelines 2 January 31 December 31 December % of salarybase fees required under the shareholding guidelines % of salarybase fees held at 31 December Salman Amin Peter Bazalgette 249095 236070 197108 100 91 Margaret Ewing 6700 6700  100 17 Roger Faxon 28910 28910 21910 100 73 Ian Grifths 1254554 1254554 1254554 200 366 Mary Harris 19883 17870 12028 100 50 Andy Haste 141032 139200 125446 100 355 Anna Manz 32993 32993 31588 100 83 John Ormerod 175510 175510 168407 100 442 Salman Amin was appointed to the Board on 9 January 2017.
Margaret Ewing was appointed to the Board and Audit and Risk Committee on 31 October 2017.
Shares were acquired on 2 January 2018 under a trading plan using 25% of their fees after statutory deductions for the quarter to 31 December 2017.
The value of shares has been calculated using the share price on 29 December 2017 of 163.8 pence.
Remuneration Report
Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information Outstanding interests under share schemes The following tables provide details of Directors interests in outstanding share awards.
Notes
At
1 January
Vested in year
Lapsed in year
31 December Share price used for award pence Share price at date of vesting pence
Adam Crozier DSA 1 28 March 2017 2 5  107949 107949 107949   209.2 181.40 30 June 2017 29 March 2016 219406  219406 219406   241.0 181.40 30 June 2017 27 March 2015 197741  197741 197741   256.7 181.40 30 June 2017 28 March 2014 240534  240534 240534   194.5 209.88 28 March 2017
29 March 2016 878481    512447 366034 241.0 27 March 2015 3 804636    201 159 603477 256.7 30 May 2014 4 1 103543  441418 441418 110354  183.5 199.40 30 May 2017 441417 441417 110354  183.5 180.55 3 July 2017 Ian Grifths DSA 1 28 March 2017 2 5  60472    60472 209.2 29 March 2016 121628     121628 241.0 27 March 2015 112 186     112186 256.7 28 March 2014 122269  122269 122269   194.5 209.88 28 March 2017
11 May 2017 5  705730    705730 199.3 29 March 2016 536850     536850 241.0 27 March 2015 3 491722     491722 256.7 30 May 2014 4 674387  539510 269755 134877 269755 183.5 199.40 30 May 2017 There are no performance conditions attaching to the DSA.
DSA awards made in 2017 for 2016 performance are included in the single gure table on page 87.
LTIP performance conditions were met in 2017 63%.
For Ian Grifths 50% will become exercisable on 27 March 2019 the remainder on 27 March 2020.
For Adam Crozier the Committee has exercised its discretion so that 50% will become exercisable on 27 March 2018 and the remainder on 27 March 2020.
The indicative values at 31 December 2017 are included in the single gure table on page 87.
LTIP performance conditions were met in 2016 80% and the value is included in the single gure table on page 87.
50% became exercisable on 30 May 2017 with the remainder on 30 May 2018.
For Adam Crozier the Committee exercised its discretion so that the remainder subject to the one year holding period became exercisable on 3 July 2017.
The face value of awards granted in the nancial year to Ian Grifths under the LTIP was 1406306.
Adam Crozier did not receive an award.
The face values of awards granted in the nancial year under the DSA were 225828 and 126506 to Adam Crozier and Ian Grifths respectively.
Performance conditions that apply to the outstanding awards under the LTIP are set out in the table below.
Strategic target
Threshold vesting Threshold Maximum Threshold Maximum Threshold Maximum EPS Gateway 45.7p 54.6p 56.3p Cumulative adjusted EPS 50% 20% 45.7p 52.2p 54.6p 62.4p 56.3p 64.2p Family SOV 20% 20% 22% 22.44% 20.2% 21.6% 20.2% 21.6% Annual nonNAR growth 10% 20% 5% 10% 5% 10% 5% 10% International production revenue growth 10% 20% 5% 15% 5% 15% 5% 15% Online Pay and Interactive revenue growth 10% 20% 5% 18% 5% 18% 5% 18% Cumulative adjusted EPS years 2015 to 2017 Cumulative adjusted EPS years 2016 to 2018 Cumulative adjusted EPS years 2017 to 2019 Vesting between threshold and maximum 100% is on a straightline basis for all targets except SOV which vests at 75% with a straightline vesting between threshold and maximum.
Annual Report on Remuneration 96 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Executive Directors nonexecutive directorships With specic approval of the Board Executive Directors may accept external appointments as Nonexecutive Directors of other companies and retain any related fees paid to them.
During the year the Executive Directors retained fees for the directorships set out below.
Company
Adam Crozier Whitbread plc 15 Ian Grifths DS Smith plc 56 Fees shown for Adam Crozier are those paid up until 30 June 2017 when he stepped down from the Board of ITV plc.
Service contracts Executive Directors Executive Directors have rolling service contracts that provide for 12 months notice on either side.
There are no special provisions that apply in the event of a change of control.
Date of appointment Nature of contract Notice period from Company Notice period from Director Compensation for early termination Carolyn McCall 8 January 2018 Rolling 12 months 12 months None Ian Grifths 9 September 2008 Rolling 12 months 12 months None A payment in lieu of notice including base salary contractual benets and contractual provision for an income in retirement may be made if the Company terminates the employment of the Executive Director with immediate effect or without notice or termination is agreed by mutual consent.
With the exception of termination for cause or resignation Executive Directors will be eligible for a bonus award prorated to reflect the proportion of the nancial year for which they were employed and subject to performance achieved provided they have a minimum of three months service in the bonus year.
Nonexecutive Directors Each Nonexecutive Director including the Chairman has a contract of service with the Company.
Nonexecutive Directors will serve for an initial term of three years subject to election and then annual reelection by shareholders unless otherwise terminated earlier by and at the discretion of either party upon one months written notice 12 months for the current Chairman.
After the initial three year term reappointment is on an annual basis.
All Nonexecutive Directors are subject to election or reelection at the AGM in 2018.
Details of unexpired terms are set out in the table on page 68.
The Directors service contracts and letters of appointment are available for inspection at the Companys registered ofce.
Committee membership and advisers The Directors who were members of the Committee when matters relating to the Executive Directors remuneration for the year were considered are set out on page 85.
The Committee obtains advice from various sources in order to ensure it makes informed decisions.
The Executive Directors are invited to attend Committee meetings as appropriate.
No individual is involved in decisions relating to their own remuneration.
The Group HR Director is the main internal adviser and provides updates on remuneration employee relations and human resource issues.
FIT Remuneration Consultants acted as the independent adviser on remuneration policy and the external remuneration environment up until September 2017.
Total fees for advice provided to the Committee during the year amounted to 55598 exclusive of VAT and expenses.
Deloitte LLP took over as adviser from September 2017.
Total fees for advice provided to the Committee during the year amounts to 125450 exclusive of VAT and expenses.
The Committee has formally reviewed the work undertaken by both FIT and Deloitte and is satised that the advice they have received has been objective and independent.
Both FIT and Deloitte are members of the Remuneration Consultants Group and abide by its Code of Conduct.
Remuneration Report
Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information Spend on pay The table below shows pay for all employees compared with other key nancial indicators.
Change
Employee pay 449 419 7.2 Ordinary dividend 294 261 12.6 Special dividend 200 402 50.0 Employee headcount 6055 6121 1.1 Employee pay is the total remuneration paid to all employees across ITV on a fulltime equivalent basis.
More detail is set out on page 127.
Employee headcount is the monthly average number of employees across ITV on a fulltime equivalent basis.
More detail is set out on page 127.
There were no share buybacks during either year.
Historic performance The graph below shows the TSR performance of the Company against the FTSE 100 index over the nine year period to 31 December 2017.
TSR rebased to 100 at 1 January 2009 31122009 31122010 31122011 31122012 31122013 31122014 31122015 31122017 31122016 tel40tel800 ITV FTSE 100 Shareholder voting At the AGM held on 10 May 2017 votes cast by proxy and at the meeting in respect of the Executive Directors remuneration were as follows
Number of shares Voting for % Number of shares
Total votes cast
Annual Report on Remuneration 2827532129 94.72 157593427 5.28 2987579168 2453612 The Remuneration Policy was approved at the AGM for a three year period.
Votes cast by proxy and at the meeting were as follows
Number of shares Voting for % Number of shares
Total votes cast
Remuneration Policy 2945550900 98.75 37188567 1.25 2987579168 4839701 Annual Report on Remuneration 98 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
The Directors present their Annual Report and the audited consolidated and parent company nancial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 which they approved on 28 February 2018.
The Directors Report comprises this report and the entire Governance section including the Chairmans Governance Statement.
Articles of Association Unless expressly specied to the contrary the Articles of Association may only be amended by special resolution of the shareholders.
The Articles are available on our website. w w w . it v pl c .
Auditor
During the year the Audit and Risk Committee considered the performance and audit fees of the external auditor and the level of nonaudit work undertaken.
It recommended to the Board that a resolution for the reappointment of KPMG LLP for a further year as the Companys auditor be proposed to shareholders at the AGM on 10 May 2018.
Change of control No person holds securities in the Company carrying special rights with regard to control of the Company.
All of the Companys share schemes contain provisions relating to a change of control.
Outstanding awards and options would normally vest and become exercisable on a change of control subject to the satisfaction of any performance conditions and proration for time where appropriate.
Certain of the Groups bondsborrowing facilities have change of control clauses whereby the issuer can require ITV to repayredeem bonds in the event of a change of control.
The Company is not aware of any other signicant agreements to which it is party that take effect alter or terminate upon a change of control of the Company.
Directors
Appointments A table showing Directors who served in the year can be found on page 68.
Biographies for Directors currently in ofce can be found on pages 62 and 63 and on our website. w w w . i t v p lc .
Directors are appointed for an initial three year period and annually thereafter.
In accordance with the UK Corporate Governance Code each Director other than those due to step down post the meeting will retire and submit themselves for election or reelection at the AGM on 10 May 2018.
Detail on compensation for loss of ofce can be found in the Remuneration Report on page 92.
Conflicts of interest The Board has delegated the authorisation of any conflicts to the Nomination Committee and has adopted a Conflicts of Interest Policy.
The Board has considered in detail the current external appointments of the Directors that may give rise to a situational conflict and has authorised potential conflicts where appropriate.
This authorisation can be reviewed at any time but will always be subject to annual review.
The Board is condent that these procedures operate effectively.
Contracts of significance No Director had any interest in any contract with the Company or its subsidiary undertakings.
Powers The powers of the Directors are set out in the Articles of Association.
The Articles and a schedule of Matters Reserved for the Board can be found on our website. w w w . it v pl c .
Directors Report 99 Directors Report Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information
The Board has proposed a nal dividend for the year ended 31 December 2017.
Details of this and other dividends paid for the year are as follows 2017 2016 Interim dividend 2.52p 2.4p Final dividend 5.28p 4.8p Total ordinary dividend 7.80p 7.2p Special dividend  5.0p Total dividend payment 7.80p 12.2p The nal dividend for 2017 will be paid on 24 May 2018 to shareholders on the register on 13 April 2018.
The exdividend date is 12 April 2018.
Employees
Disability ITV has been certied a Disability Condent Employer by the Department for Work and Pensions.
The Company gives full and fair consideration to the employment of people with a disability or longterm health condition in accordance with the Equality Act 2010.
Our employment and recruitment policies are based on equal opportunities and nondiscrimination.
ITV works with a variety of diversity partners across its apprentice early careers and permanent and xedterm contract recruitment including Creative Access Mencap Remploy Scope and Vercida.
The Company provides tailored measures to ensure colleagues are fully supported and that reasonable adjustments are made.
We are committed to ensuring that all training career development and promotional opportunities are accessible and inclusive to all and colleagues with a disability have the same career opportunities for growth and progression.
ITVs commitment around the disability agenda extends beyond it legal obligations and partners with a variety of internal and external specialists to drive best practice.
Further information can be found on our Corporate Responsibility website. w w w . i t v p l c .
Diversity ITVs goal is to reflect modern society through our programmes channels workforce and services ensuring we are relevant and accessible to all.
Its integral to our business aims to reflect represent and appeal to the breadth of communities that characterise modern society.
Working in partnership with the production community we aim for our programmes to portray accurately the diverse makeup of modern society by the people onscreen and the editorial content.
The Company has a number of policies to support an inclusive workforce and culture for example the Code of Conduct Equal Opportunities Policy Flexible Working Policy and Transitioning at Work Policy.
We also have four network groups ITV Pride for LGBT employees The Womens Network ITV Balance for working parents grandparents and carers and ITV Embrace for BAME employees which are open to all.
ITV is also a founding member of the Social Mobility Business Partnership to promote social mobility in business especially in the legal and accountancy professions.
Further information can be found on our Corporate Responsibility website. w w w . i t v p l c .
Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Engagement It is critical for our ongoing success that we attract develop recognise and retain the very best talent across the whole of
To achieve this we continuously engage with our colleagues to ensure they understand our business priorities how they help to deliver business success and the opportunities available for them to thrive and develop.
We regularly survey our employees to hear their feedback.
The last survey was completed in 2016 and the overall completion rate was 80%.
The overall engagement index is 90%.
Throughout 2017 we have been taking action on the results and plan to conduct our next engagement survey in 2018.
This year we launched our rst onair employee roadshow which was broadcast globally to all our ITV sites.
All employees from around the world were able to watch live interviews with our Chairman and members of the Management Board.
Employees from the UK were also invited to attend in person and were able to ask questions directly.
Other employees were able to email their questions separately.
The roadshow received great feedback and we would look to do this again in future years.
To further promote employee engagement the Company has a network of Ambassadors who are nominated and elected by employees to represent each part of the business.
These Ambassadors share the views of the employees they represent enabling us to understand ways to make ITV a better place to work.
The Ambassadors also keep employees up to date with what is going on across the business.
Remuneration When the Company reviews pay it takes a number of factors into consideration including the need to stay competitive.
Our focus on cash and costs remains incredibly important for the future health of our business.
We need to balance our business and nancial commitments with our continuing investment in our programming and people.
The Company continues to be committed to ensuring employees earn at least the Living Wage or greater.
Where appropriate we have agreed additional increases.
On 1 January 2018 all eligible employees received a pay increase of 2.75% 2017 1.5% paid to eligible employees earning less than 100000.
In addition a bonus arrangement extends to all our employees providing a comprehensive incentive framework THAT rewards everybody when the Company is successful.
For 2017 the maximum bonus amount was increased from 1500 to 1750.
The allemployee bonus award for 2017 was paid in full at 1750 2016 1300.
The Company also operates a successful and popular allemployee Save As You Earn scheme that encourages voluntary investment in ITV shares and a package of voluntary benets which provides valuable cost savings for both employees and the Company.
Information about remuneration for the Directors is included in the Remuneration Report on page 82.
Succession planning training and development When planning succession within the Company consideration is given to emergency cover together with medium and longterm succession and this is reviewed annually by the Nomination Committee.
There is particular emphasis on growing the internal leadership pipeline through the launch of the following key programmes
Development
Programme
Next generation potential Management Board successors giving them an opportunity to develop their management potential and gain a greater understanding of the business.
Developing Future Leaders Programme Delegates selected from across the business identied as a result of the performance review process.
Content includes understanding what it means to be a leader at ITV how to manage performance effectively coaching skills and change management.
There is also a comprehensive portfolio of development courses and workshops in place for all employees that address common development needs.
International training for last year was limited.
The Company ran workshops in Germany and Hong Kong and this year workshops on line webinars will be put in place for our international employees.
An online training portal called My Academy will also be launched to the international markets.
Spend and investment on training in 2017 can be categorised as follows Leaders and Managers development spend was 150000 all employees development spend was 230000 and the high potential development programme spend was 90000.
The annual turnover for employees for 2017 was 10.46% UK only.
4.59 % was planned and 5.86% regrettable.
Directors Report continued 101 Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information
The Company pensions arrangements are overseen by the Pensions Steering Committee comprised of the COO and CFO Chairman Director of Group Finance Group HR Director Director of Treasury and Director of Reward and Pensions.
The Committee meets monthly and is supported by a range of specialist advisers.
The Company operates a number of pension arrangements which provide retirement and death benets for employees.
ITV Pension Scheme the Scheme The Scheme comprises three sections A B and C.
Section A includes a dened contribution DC section.
The dened benet DB sections have been closed since 2002 to new members and following a comprehensive consultation exercise were closed to future accrual with effect from 28 February 2017.
Contributions to the DC section also ended with effect from that date.
ITV Pension Scheme Limited a wholly owned subsidiary of ITV plc is the corporate trustee and manages the DB and DC assets which are held under trust separately from the Company.
Members of the trustee board are formally appointed as directors of ITV Pension Scheme
There are nine directors including the chairman  ve appointed by the Company and four nominated by the members.
The current chairmans tenure came to an end at the end of December and a replacement is currently being recruited.
There is also a vacancy for another Company appointed director.
The trustee board has four committees Investment Audit and Operations DC and Corporate
The Corporate Affairs Committee is convened as and when appropriate for dealing with any corporate activities that may arise.
The trustee board and each committee hold regular meetings throughout the year at which key issues and more routine business matters are dealt with.
A budget is agreed each year.
The trustee board has a risk register a conflicts of interest policy and a register of interests policy which are reviewed regularly.
It is the responsibility of the trustee to have in place appropriate training for its directors and effective committee structures.
The trustee directors receive regular training throughout the year and also have the support of various professional advisers.
The Group pensions department helps identify training opportunities.
Training is delivered both by attendance at external courses and with targeted training to support specic agenda items at the start of each trustee board meeting.
Where appropriate longer training sessions are organised.
Comprehensive records are kept of all training completed by each trustee director.
The trustee board completes regular assessments of its advisers.
The chairman conrms in an annual statement that the trustee meets its legal duties in relation to the DC section as required under the Pensions Regulators Code of Practice 13.
Full valuations are carried out every three years.
The latest completed actuarial valuation of all three sections of the main DB scheme was carried out as at 1 January 2014.
The trustee of the Scheme is undertaking actuarial valuations as at 1 January 2017 and the outcome is expected before the end of March 2018.
ITV Dened Contribution Plan the Plan The new trust based Plan was established to accept contributions from 1 March 2017 for exDB members and DC members who transferred from the ITV Pension Scheme.
In addition pure DC assets previously built up in the ITV Pension Scheme were transferred to the Plan during March 2017.
ITV DC Trustee Limited a wholly owned subsidiary of ITV plc is a corporate trustee and manages the DC assets which are held under trust separately from the Company.
Members of the trustee board are formally appointed as directors of ITV DC Trustee Limited.
There are ve directors including the chairman  three appointed by the Company and two nominated by the members.
There is currently a selection exercise taking place for the two membernominated vacancies.
It is the responsibility of the trustee to have in place appropriate training for its directors.
The governance framework for managing the Plan and developing the board is in line with that in place for the ITV Pension Scheme.
Work is in progress to enable the chair to be in a position to conrm in an annual statement that the trustee meets its legal duties in relation to the DC section as required under the Pensions Regulators Code of Practice 13.
Directors Report 102 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Ulster Television Pension and Assurance Scheme the Scheme The Scheme provides DB benets.
It closed to new members in 2002 but is still open to future accrual.
Following the UTV acquisition in 2016 responsibility for managing the Scheme has moved to the Group pensions department and it was decided to strengthen the governance of the Scheme by replacing the existing individual trustee structure with a corporate trustee  UTV Pension Scheme Limited a wholly owned subsidiary of ITV plc.
The trustee manages the DB assets which are held under trust separately from the Company.
Members of the trustee board are formally appointed as directors of UTV Pension Scheme Limited.
There are ve directors including the chairman  three appointed by the Company including a professional trustee as chairman and two nominated by the members.
It is the responsibility of the trustee to have in place appropriate training for its directors.
The governance framework for managing the Scheme and developing the board is being enhanced to be in line with that in place for the ITV Pension Scheme.
Full valuations are carried out every three years.
The latest completed actuarial valuation was carried out as at 1 July 2014.
The trustee of the Scheme is undertaking an actuarial valuation as at 1 July 2017 and the preliminary results were agreed in principle at the end of 2017 and the valuation is expected to be nalised before the end of March 2018.
The trustee board has adopted the Pensions Regulators integrated risk management framework  taking a holistic approach and looking at how risks around the employer covenant funding and investment strategy are all linked and interdependent.
ITV Autoenrolment Pension Plan the Plan Since 2013 employers within the Group have been required to enrol all eligible individuals into a pension scheme automatically.
This applies to all eligible individuals who are contracted to work for us regardless of their contract type or tax status i. it applies to workers and not simply employees.
Eligible individuals are enrolled into the ITV Autoenrolment Pension
The plan is currently provided using a master trust arrangement run by NOWPensions with an independent board of trustee directors.
This plan is currently under review.
Pension Scheme indemnities Qualifying pension scheme indemnity provisions as dened in Section 235 of the Companies Act 2006 were in force for the nancial year ended 31 December 2017 and remain in force for the benet of each of the directors of ITV Pension Scheme Limited ITV DC Trustee Limited and UTV Pension Scheme Limited.
These indemnity provisions cover to the extent permitted by law certain losses or liabilities incurred as a director or ofcer of ITV Pension Scheme Limited ITV DC Trustee Limited and UTV Pension Scheme Limited.
Greenhouse gas emissions ITV is required to report annually on the quantity of carbon dioxide equivalent emissions in tonnes emitted as a result of activities for which it is responsible.
All data for the nancial year ended 31 December 2017 is disclosed below for direct gas vehicle fuel fuel oils and refrigerants consumption and indirect electricity consumption emissions.
Indicator 2017 2016 Total gross CO e emissions 22321 tCO e 26984 tCO Scope 1 Direct emissions 6684 tCO e 7793 tCO Scope 2 Indirect emissions 15637 tCO e 19191 tCO Total Revenue 3657m 3527m Emissions per unitm revenue 6.1 tCO e 7.7 tCO Source Mitie Energy analysis of ITV data.
The emissions data covers our global operations for which we have operational control.
We use the GHG Protocol Corporate Accounting and Reporting Standard and the latest conversion factors from the Department for Business Energy and Industrial Strategy to calculate emissions in tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalents.
33% of our data set is based on estimated data.
Estimates are calculated from previous consumption trends and published benchmarks.
In 2017 the Companys greenhouse gas emissions reduced by 17% compared to the previous year.
As 90% of our greenhouse gas emissions are generated within our UK operations this is where we focus our efforts.
We continued to replace ageing infrastructure with more efcient plant optimise our building management software systems and replace lighting systems with more efcient LED technology.
The amount of diesel purchased for fleet vehicles also decreased which was due in part to the purchase of some Plugin Hybrid Electric Vehicles for our fleet.
Further information can be found on our Corporate Responsibility website. w w w . i t v p l c .
Directors Report continued 103 Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information Health and safety The health and safety of our employees contractors and those participating in our productions is always a high priority.
The signicant loss of human life as the result of a major incident on production has been identied as a principal risk to the organisation.
The Companys professional Health and Safety team continues to develop and rene our management system to ensure it meets the specic risk prole of the business and embeds the ownership of risk with business owners.
The key elements of our safety management system are Process Compass our online presence Education Expertise Monitoring and Assurance.
In 2017 we continued to build our education programme rolling out Leading Risk sessions with the leadership teams in ITV Studios UK and America supported by a research project being undertaken in collaboration with the London School of Economics to give us a greater understanding of risktaking beliefs and behaviours within our production business.
This is the rst step in aligning our training programme to the Studios Label model to ensure ownership of risk in appropriate areas.
See page 79 for more information.
We have developed and launched an online resource Compass to provide easily accessible production focused health and safety advice on the most common health and safety risks managed by our productions.
To enable us to review the effectiveness of our processes and overall approach to production safety we are using new methodology to engage with the business building our understanding of the effectiveness of safety management enabling us to continually improve and rene our approach.
We will build on this in 2018 across our business and will continue to underpin our health and safety management system with three key principles People are the solution Safety is about positive outcomes Safety is a moral responsibility Performance Indicators  UK 2017 2016 Staff Non Staff Total Staff Non Staff Total Lost time accidents reported under RIDDOR Specied injuries reported under RIDDOR Performance indicators  international Australia France Germany Talpa USA Finland Norway Sweden Denmark Italy Serious Injuries sustained at work by employees or people directly involved in our activities na Reporting of Injuries Diseases and Dangerous Occurrences Regulations 2013 Insurance and indemnities The Company maintains liability insurance for its Directors and ofcers that is renewed on an annual basis.
The Company has also entered into deeds of indemnity with its Directors and other senior executives.
A copy of the indemnity can be found on our website. w w w . it v pl c .
Directors Report 104 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Listing rule 9.8.4 disclosures There are no disclosures to be made other than that the trustee of the Employees Benet Trust EBT waived its rights to receive dividends on shares it holds which do not relate to restricted shares held under the ITV Deferred Share Award Plan.
Political contributions It is the Companys policy not to make cash contributions to any political party.
However within the normal activities of the Companys national and regional newsgathering operations there may be occasions when an activity might fall within the broader denition of political expenditure contained within the Companies Act 2006.
Shareholder authority for such expenditure was given at the 2017 AGM.
However during 2017 the Group made no payments falling within this denition 2016 nil.
Report and accounts disclosures Financial risk management The Directors have carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Company including in relation to its business model future performance solvency and liquidity.
Details of our risks and associated mitigations together with details of our approach to risk management are set out on pages 50 to 57.
Note 4.3 to the accounts on page 166 gives details of the Groups nancial risk management policies and related exposures.
This note is incorporated by reference and deemed to form part of this report.
Future developments Our strategy is set out in the Strategic Report.
Going concern The going concern statement is set out on page 120.
This note is incorporated by reference and deemed to form part of this report.
Subsequent events There are no post balance sheet events to report.
Research and development Relevant information is set out in the Strategic Report.
Share capital Issued At the date of this report there were 4025409194 ordinary shares of 10 pence each in issue all of which are fully paid up and quoted on the London Stock Exchange.
Purchase of own shares The Directors have the authority to purchase up to 402.5 million of the Companys ordinary shares.
The authority remains valid until the AGM in 2018 or 10 August 2018 if earlier.
Restrictions There are no restrictions on the transfer of ordinary shares in the capital of the Company other than those which may be imposed by law from time to time.
In accordance with the Disclosure Guidance and Transparency Rules DTRs Persons Discharging Managerial Responsibility are required to seek approval to deal in ITV shares.
The Company is not aware of any agreements between shareholders that may result in restrictions on the transfer of securities andor voting rights.
Rights The rights attaching to the Companys ordinary shares are set out in the Articles of Association.
Share schemes Details of employee share schemes are set out in note 4.7 on page 174.
The Company has an EBT funded by loans to acquire shares for the potential benet of employees.
Details of shares held by the EBT at 31 December 2017 are set out on page 176.
During the year shares have been released from the EBT in respect of share schemes for employees.
The trustee of the EBT has the power to exercise all voting rights in relation to any investment including ordinary shares held within the EBT.
Directors Report continued 105 Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information Substantial shareholders Information regarding interests in voting rights provided to the Company pursuant to the DTRs is published on a Regulatory Information Service and on the Companys website.
As at 28 February 2018 the information in the table below had been received in accordance with DTR5 from holders of notiable interests voting rights in the Companys issued share capital.
It should be noted that these holdings are likely to have changed since notied to the Company.
However notication of any change is not required until the next applicable threshold is crossed.
Nature of interest in shares % interest in nancial instruments Nature of interests in nancial instruments Total number of shares or interests in shares The Capital Group Companies Inc.
10.05% Indirect   404675342 Liberty Global Incorporated Limited  Indirect 9.90% Loaned shares 398515510 BlackRock Inc.
6.82% Indirect 0.05% 0.72% Securities lending Contract for difference 306303502 Amerprise Financial Inc and its group 5.08% Indirect 0.045% Equities swap 206179898 The Goldman Sachs Group 0.04% Indirect 0.82% 20.11% Securities Lending Swap cash Contract for difference cash over the counter option physical or cash The number of shares is based on announcements made by each relevant shareholder using the Companys issued share capital at that date.
Directors Report 106 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Directors Report continued The Directors are responsible for preparing the Annual Report and the Group and parent company nancial statements in accordance with applicable law and regulations.
Company law requires the Directors to prepare Group and parent company nancial statements for each nancial year.
Under that law they are required to prepare the Group nancial statements in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the EU and applicable law and have elected to prepare the parent company nancial statements in accordance with UK Accounting Standards including FRS 101 Reduced Disclosure Framework.
Under company law the Directors must not approve the nancial statements unless they are satised that they give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Group and parent company and of their prot or loss for that period.
In preparing each of the Group and parent company nancial statements the Directors are required To select suitable accounting policies and then apply them consistently To make judgements and estimates that are reasonable and prudent For the Group nancial statements to state whether they have been prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the EU For the parent company nancial statements state whether applicable UK Accounting Standards have been followed subject to any material departures disclosed and explained in the parent company nancial statements To prepare the nancial statements on the going concern basis unless it is inappropriate to presume that the Group and the parent company will continue in business.
The Directors are responsible for keeping adequate accounting records that are sufcient to show and explain the parent companys transactions and disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the nancial position of the parent company and enable them to ensure that its nancial statements comply with the Companies Act 2006.
They are responsible for such internal control as they determine is necessary to enable the preparation of the nancial statements that are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error.
They have general responsibility for taking such steps as are reasonably open to them to safeguard the assets of the Group and to prevent and detect fraud and other irregularities.
Under applicable law and regulations the Directors are also responsible for preparing a Strategic Report Directors Report Annual Remuneration Report and Corporate Governance Statement that comply with that law and those regulations.
The Directors are responsible for the maintenance and integrity of the corporate and nancial information included on the Companys website.
Legislation in the UK governing the preparation and dissemination of nancial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
By order of the Board Ian Grifths Chief Operating Ofcer and Group Finance Director 28 February 2018 ITV plc Registered Number The Directors consider that the Annual Report and Accounts taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Companys and the Groups position and performance business model and strategy.
Each of the Directors whose names and functions are listed on pages 62 and 63 conrm that to the best of their knowledge the Group accounts which have been prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the EU give a true and fair view of the assets liabilities nancial position and prot of the Group and the Directors Report includes a fair review of the development and performance of the business and the position of the Group together with a description of the principal risks and uncertainties that it faces.
In accordance with Section 418 of the Companies Act 2006 the Directors conrm that so far as they are each aware there is no relevant audit information of which the Companys auditor is unaware and each Director has taken all steps that they ought to have taken as a Director in order to make themselves aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that the Companys auditor is aware of that information.
The Board has conducted a review of the effectiveness of the Groups systems of internal controls for the year ended 31 December 2017.
In the opinion of the Board the Company has complied with the internal control requirements of the UK Corporate Governance Code throughout the year maintaining an ongoing process for identifying evaluating and minimising risk.
Financial Statements In this section The financial statements have been presented in a style that attempts to make them less complex and more relevant to shareholders.
We have grouped the note disclosures into five sections Basis of Preparation Results for the Year Operating Assets and Liabilities Capital Structure and Financing Costs and Other Notes.
Each section sets out the accounting policies applied in producing the relevant notes along with details of any key judgements and estimates used.
The purpose of this format is to provide readers with a clearer understanding of what drives financial performance of the Group.
The aim of the text in boxes is to provide commentary on each section or note in plain English.
Keeping it simple Notes to the financial statements provide information required by statute accounting standards or Listing Rules to explain a particular feature of the financial statements.
The notes that follow are a part of the financial statements and will also provide explan ations and additional disclosure to assist readers understanding and interpretation of the Annual Report and the financial statements.
Contents
Independent Auditors Report to the members of ITV plc only 108 Primary Statements 114 Consolidated Income Statement 114 Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income 115 Consolidated Statement of Financial Position 116 Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity 117 Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows 119 Section 1 Basis of Preparation 120 Section 2 Results for the Year 124 2.1 Profit before tax 124 2.2 Exceptional items 129 2.3 Taxation 131 2.4 Earnings per share 134 2.5 Discontinued operations 136 Section 3 Operating Assets and Liabilities 137 3.1 Working capital 137 3.2 Property plant and equipment 141 3.3 Intangible assets 143 3.4 Acquisitions 148 3.5 Investments 151 3.6 Provisions 152 3.7 Pensions 153 Section 4 Capital Structure and Financing Costs 162 4.1 Net debt 162 4.2 Borrowings and finance leases 164 4.3 Managing market risks derivative financial instruments 166 4.4 Net financing costs 170 4.5 Fair value hierarchy 171 4.6 Equity 173 4.7 Sharebased compensation 174 Section 5 Other Notes 176 5.1 Related party transactions 176 5.2 Contingent assets and liabilities 177 5.3 Subsidiaries exempt from audit 178 ITV plc Company Financial Statements 179 Notes to the ITV plc Company Financial Statements 181 Financial Statements Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information Financial Statements Independent Auditors Report to the members of ITV plc 108 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Our opinion is unmodified We have audited the financial statements of ITV plc the Company for the year ended 31 December 2017 which comprise the con solidated income statement consolidated statement of comprehensive income consolidated statement of financial position consolidated statement of changes in equity consolidated statement of cash flows company balance sheet company statement of changes in equity and the related notes which include the accounting policies.
In our opinion the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the Groups and of the parent companys affairs as at 31 December 2017 and of the Groups profit for the year then ended the Group financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as adopted by the European Union the parent company financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with UK accounting standards including FRS 101 Reduced Disclosure Framework and the financial statements have been prepared in accordance with th e requirements of the Companies Act 2006 and as regards the G roup financial statements Article 4 of the IAS Regulation.
Basis for opinion We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing UK ISAs UK and applicable law.
Our respon sibilities are described below.
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is a sufficient and appropriate basis for our opinion.
Our audit opinion is consistent with our report to the audit committee.
We were appointed as auditor by the Directors in December 2003 prior to the Company becoming the parent company of the now ITV Group on 2 February 2004.
The period of total uninterrupted engagement for the listed ITV Group is 14 financial years ended 31 December 2017.
We have fulfilled our ethical responsibilities under and we remain independent of the Group in accordance with UK ethical requirements including the FRC Ethical Standard as applied to listed public interest en tities.
No nonaudit services prohibited by that standard were provided.
Key audit matters our assessment of risks of material misstatement Key audit matters are those matters that in our professional judg ement were of most significance in the audit of the financia l statements and include the most significant assessed risks of material misstatement whether or not due to fraud identified by us including those which had the greatest effect on the overall audit strategy the allocation of resources in the audit and directing the efforts of the engagement team.
We summarise below the key audit matters in decreasing order of audit significance in arriving at our audit opinion above to gether with our key audit procedures to address those matters and as required for public interest entities our results from those procedures.
These matters were addressed and our results are based on procedures undertaken in the context of and solely for the purpose of our audit of the financial statements as a whole and in forming our opinion thereon and consequently are incidental to that opinion and we do not provi de a separate opinion on these matters.
Financial Statements 108 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 The risk Our response Net Advertising Revenue NAR 1591 million 2016 1672 million Risk vs 2016 Refer to page 75 Audit and Risk Committee report page 124 accounting policy and pages 125 and 126 financial disclosures Subjective estimate The majority of ITVs advertising revenue NAR is subject to regulation under Ofcoms Contract Rights Renewal system CRR.
CRR works by ensuring that the annual share of TV advertising that will be placed with ITV by each advertising agency can change in relation to the viewing figures for commercial television that it delivers.
The CRR system the pricing of the annual contractual arrangements with advertising agencies and the details of each advertising campaign together with the related processes and controls are complex and involve estimation.
In particular the complexity of the pricing mechanism means it is possible for a difference to arise between the price received by ITV for an advertising campaign and the value it delivered mainly as a result of the actual viewing figures differing from the expected level for the campaign.
Where the Group has overdelivered viewers this is referred to as a deal credit or a deal debt where delivery has fallen short.
Rather than the price paid for that campaign being adjusted at the end of the campaign these differences are noted for each agency and then taken into account when agreeing either future campaigns or the annual contract.
A net deal debt position with an agency is recorded in ITVs accounts as a liability.
Net deal credit positions are not recognised.
NAR is therefore considered a significant risk due to The number and complexity of contractual agreements with advertising agencies The complexity of the systems and processes of control used to record revenue and The level of estimation involved in determining any deal debt liability at the period end.
Our procedures included Control operation testing of controls assisted by our own IT specialists including those over segregation of duties input of annual deal terms with agencies input of individual campaigns terms and pricing comparison of those terms and pricing data against the related contracts with advertising agencies link to transmissionviewer data and the system generated calculation of deal debt for each campaign.
Assessing estimate challenging the year end deal debt positions based on comparison with customers correspondence and agreed terms of business.
Test of detail confirming that the transmissions occurred prior to invoices being raised and revenue recognised by agreeing the transmissions to the corresponding spots.
Assessing disclosures we also assessed the adequacy of the Groups disclosures in respect of the accounting policies on revenue recognition.
Our results From the evidence we obtained we found the resulting amount of recorded NAR and the estimated level of deal debt position liabilities to be acceptable 2016 acceptable.
Independent Auditors Report to the members of ITV plc Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information Financial Statements Independent Auditors Report to the members of ITV plc continued 110 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 The risk Our response Other revenue streams NonNAR revenue 2066 million 2016 1855 million Risk vs 2016 Refer to page 75 Audit and Risk Committee report page 124 accounting policy and pages 125 and 126 financial disclosures Complex contract accounting NonNAR revenue includes revenue from programme production and the sale of programme rights within the Studios segment transmission supply arrangements and the Online Pay and Interactive division within the Broadcast segment.
Recognition of revenue is driven by the specific terms of the related contracts and is considered to be a significant risk as the terms of the contracts are varied and can be complex with the result that accounting for the revenue generated in any given period can require individual consideration and judgement.
Due to the contractual nature of these revenue streams the focus of our work is on the risks associated with significant oneoff contracts.
Our procedures included Assessing principles we considered the Groups revenue recognition policies against the relevant accounting standards.
Test of detail on a sample basis we assessed revenue contracts entered into during the year and considered whether revenue had been recognised in accordance with the contractual terms in the correct accounting period given the requirements of the relevant accounting standard.
Assessing disclosures we also assessed the adequacy of the Groups disclosures in respect of the accounting policy on revenue recognition.
Our findings From the evidence we obtained we found the resulting amount of recorded NonNAR to be acceptable 2016 acceptable.
Gross defined benefit pension scheme obligations 3987 million 2016 4200 million Risk vs 2016 Refer to page 74 Audit and Risk Committee report page 153 a ccounting policy and pages 153 to 161 financial disclosures Subjective valuation Significant estimates are made in determining the key assumptions used in valuing the Groups postretirement defined benefit obligations.
When making these assumptions the Directors take independent actuarial advice relating to their appropriateness.
In addition the Group has a longevity swap the valuation of which is complex being dependent mortality and longevity experience.
The valuation of the gross defined benefit obligations and longevity swap are considered a significant risk given the quantum of the gross pension obligation the impact of the longevity swap on the net obligation position and that a small change in assumptions can have a material financial impact on the Group.
Our procedures included Benchmarking assumptions challenging the key financial assumptions applied in determining the Groups gross pension obligations being the discount rate inflation rate and mortalitylife expectancy with the support of our own actuarial specialists.
This included a comparison of these key assumptions against externally derived data.
Assessing application assessing methodology applied to the longevity swap valuation and challenging underlying mortality assumptions against externally derived data with the support of our own actuarial specialists.
Assessing disclosures considering the adequacy of the Groups disclosures in respect of the sensitivity of the gross defined benefit obligations to these assumptions.
Our findings The results of our testing were satisfactory and we considered the valuation of the gross pension obligations and the longevity swap to be acceptable 2016 acceptable.
Recoverability of parent companys investment in subsidiaries 2191 million 2016 1861 million Risk vs 2016 Refer to page 181 accounting policy and pages 183 financial disclosures Low risk high value The carrying amount of the parent companys investments in subsidiaries represents 34% 2016 29% of the parent companys total assets.
Their recoverability is not at a high risk of significant misstatement or subject to significant judgement.
However due to their materiality in the context of the parent company financial statements this is considered to be the area that had the greatest effect on our overall parent company audit.
Our procedures included Test of detail comparing the carrying amount of 100% of the investments balance 2016 100% with the relevant subsidiaries draft balance sheet to identify whether their net assets being an approximation of their minimum recoverable amount were in excess of their carrying amount and assessing whether those subsidiaries have historically been profitmaking.
Our results We found the Groups assessment of the recoverability of the investment in subsidiaries to be acceptable 2016 acceptable.
Financial Statements 110 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Our application of materiality and an overview of the scope of our audit Materiality for the Group financial statements as a whole was set at 28 million 2016 35 million determined with reference to a benchmark of normalised Group profit before tax of 568 million 2016 6 23 million which excludes the prepaid employmentlinked remuneration charge the exceptional bad debt provision in relation to the co ntract receivables and the nonrecurring element of the property project costs disclosed in note 2.2 of which materiality represents 5% 2016 5.5%.
Materiality for the parent company financial statements as a whole was set as 27 million 2016 34 million determined with r eference to the benchmark of the Companys total assets of which it represents 0.4% 2016 0.5%.
We agreed to report to the Audit Committee any corrected or uncorrected identified misstatements exceeding 1.4 million 2016 1.7 million in addition to other identified misstatements that warranted reporting on qualitative grounds.
Scoping and coverage The Groups principal operations are in the United Kingdom.
The Group audit team performed the audit of the core UK operations comprising Broadcast and Online the UK Studios Global Entertai nment and the central functions as if they were a single aggr egated set of financial information using materiality of 20 million 2016 25 million.
Talpa Media B.
Netherlands  was subject to an audit for Group reporting purposes.
The Group audit team instructed the component auditor as to the significant areas to be covered including the relevant risks de scribed above and the determination of the information to be re ported back.
Specified audit procedures were performed by other component auditors as instructed by the Group audit team on two entities i n the US included in our scope based on the relative size of their oper ations.
The Group audit team set the materiality of 5 million 2 016 5 million for both the audit of the component and the specified audit procedures.
The Group audit team performed procedures on the items excluded from normalised Group profit before tax.
The Group audit team held several telephone conference meetings with the component audit teams to assess the audit risk and strategy.
The
Group audit team also visited the component in the Netherlands.
At this visit and in these meetings the findings reported to t he Group audit team were discussed in more detail and any further work required by the Group audit team was then performed by the component a uditor.
Together the above audit and these specified audit procedures covered 88% 2016 90% of Group revenue 95% 2016 89% of Gro up profit before taxation and 92% 2016 90% of total Group assets.
We have nothing to report on going concern We are required to report to you if we have anything material to add or draw attention to in relation to the Directors statement in note 1 on page 120 to the fina ncial statements on the use of the going concern basis of accounting with no material uncertainties that may cast significant doubt o ver the Group and Companys use of that basis for a period of at least twelve months from the date of approval of the financial stateme nts or the related statement under the Listing Rules set out on page 106 is materially inconsistent with our audit knowledge.
We have nothing to report in these respects.
Independent Auditors Report to the members of ITV plc Prot before tax Group audited 94% Specied riskbased audit procedures 1% Out of scope 5%
Group audited 81% Specied riskbased audit procedures 7% Out of scope 12% Total assets Group audited 90% Specied riskbased audit procedures 2% Out of scope 8% Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information Financial Statements Independent Auditors Report to the members of ITV plc continued 112 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 We have nothing to report on the other information in the Annual Report The Directors are responsible for the other information presented in the Annual Report together with the financial statements.
Our opinion on the financial statements does not cover the other information and accordingly we do not express an audit opinion or excep t as explicitly stated below any form of assurance conclusion thereon.
Our responsibility is to read the other information and in doing so consider whether based on our financial statements audit work the information therein is materially misstated or inconsistent with the financial statements or our audit knowledge.
Based solely on that work we have not identified material misstatements in the other information.
Strategic Report and Directors Report Based solely on our work on the other information we have not identified material misstatements in the Strategic Report and the Directors Report in our opinion the information given in those reports for the financial year is consistent with the financial statements and in our opinion those reports have been prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 2006.
Directors Remuneration Report
In our opinion the part of the Directors Remuneration Report to be audited has been properly prepared in accordance with the C ompanies Act 2006.
Disclosures of principal risks and longerterm viability Based on the knowledge we acquired during our financial statements audit we have nothing material to add or draw attention to in relation to the Directors confirmation within the Viability Statement on pa ges 58 and 59 that they have carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Group including those that would threaten its business model future performance solvency and liquidity the risks and uncertainties on pages 52 to 57 disclosures descri bing these risks and explaining how they are being managed and mitigated and the Directors explanation in the Viability Statement of how they have assessed the prospects of the Group over what period th ey have done so and why they considered that period to be appropriate and their statement as to whether they have a reasonable expecta tion that the Group will be able to continue in operation and meet it s liabilities as they fall due over the period of their assessment including any related disclosures drawing attention to any necessary qualifications or assumptions.
Under the Listing Rules we are required to review the Viability Statement.
We have nothing to report in this respect.
Corporate governance disclosures We are required to report to you if we have identified material inconsistencies between the knowledg e we acquired during our financial statements audit and the Dir ectors statement that they consider that the Annual Report and financial statements taken as a whole is fair balanced and understanda ble and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess th e Groups position and performance business model and strategy or the section of the Annual Report describing the work of the Audit Committee does not appropriately address matters communicated by us to the Audit Committee.
We are required to report to you if the Corporate Governance St atement does not properly disclose a departure from the eleven p rovisions of the UK Corporate Governance Code specified by the Listing Rules for our review.
We have nothing to report in these respects.
We have nothing to report on the other matters on which we are required to report by exception Under the Companies Act 2006 we are required to report to you if in our opinion adequate accounting records have not been kept by the parent comp any or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or the parent company financial statements and the part of the Dire ctors Remuneration Report to be audited are not in agreement w ith the accounting records and returns or certain disclosures of Directors remuneration specified by law are not made or we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit.
We have nothing to report in these respects.
Financial Statements 112 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Respective responsibilities Directors responsibilities As explained more fully in their statement set out on page 106 the Directors are responsible for the preparation of the finan cial statements including being satisfied that they give a true and fair view such internal control as they determine is necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error assessing the Group and parent co mpanys ability to continue as a going concern disclosing as applicab le matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless they either intend to liquidate the Group or the parent company or to cease operations or have no realistic alternative but to do so.
Auditors responsibilities Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a whole are free from material miss tatement whether due to fraud or other irregularities see below or error and to issue our opinion in an auditors report.
Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance but does not guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with ISAs UK will always detect a material m isstatement when it exists.
Misstatements can arise from fraud other irregularities or error and are considered material if individually or in aggregate they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic de cisions of users taken on the basis of the financial statements.
A fuller description of our responsibilities is provided on the FRCs website at www. rc. iteauditorsresponsibilities.
Irregularities  ability to detect We identified areas of laws and regulations that could reasonably be expected to have a material effect on the financial statem ents from our sector experience through discussion with the Directors and other management as required by auditing standards.
We had regard to laws and regulations in areas that directly affect the financial statements including financial reporting inc luding related company legislation and taxation legislation.
We considered the extent of compliance with those laws and regulations as part of our procedures on the related financial statements items.
In addition we considered the impact of laws and regulations in the specific areas of broadcasting regulations recognising the nature of the Groups activities.
With the exception of any known or possible noncompliance and as required by auditing standards our work in respect of these was limited to enquiry of the Directors and other management and inspection of regulatory and legal correspondence.
We co nsidered the effect of any known or possible noncompliance in these areas as part of our procedures on the related financial statements items.
We communicated identified laws and regulations throughout our team and remained alert to any indications of noncompliance thr oughout the audit.
As with any audit there remained a higher risk of nondetectio n of irregularities as these may involve collusion forgery intentional omissions misrepresentations or the override of internal controls.
The purpose of our audit work and to whom we owe our responsibilities This report is made solely to the Companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 20 06.
Our audit work has been undertaken so that we might state to the Companys members those matters we are required to state to them in an a uditors report and for no other purpose.
To the fullest extent permitted by law we do not accept or assume responsibility to anyone ot her than the Company and the Companys members as a body for our audit work for this report or for the opinions we have formed.
Paul Sawdon Senior Statutory Auditor for and on behalf of KPMG LLP Statutory Auditor Chartered Accountants 15 Canada Square
E14 5GL 28 February 2018 Independent Auditors Report to the members of ITV plc Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information Financial Statements Consolidated Income Statement 114 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 For the year ended 31 December Note Revenue 2.1 3132 3064 Operating costs 2577 2460 Operating profit Presented as Earnings before interest tax and amortisation EBITA before exceptional items 2.1 810 857 Operating exceptional items 2.2 153 164 Amortisation and impairment 3.3 102 89 Operating profit Financing income 4.4 4 2 Financing costs 4.4 54 53 Net financing costs 4.4 50 51 Share of losses of joint ventures and associated undertakings 3.5 4 Loss on sale of noncurrent assets exceptional items 2.2 1 Profit before tax Taxation 2.3 87 100 Profit from continuing operations Loss after tax for the period from discontinued operation 2.5  1 Profit for the year Profit attributable to Owners of the Company Noncontrolling interests 4.6.6 4 4 Profit for the year Earnings per share Basic earnings per share Diluted earnings per share 2.4 10.2p 11.1p Earnings per share from continuing operations Basic earnings per share 2.4 10.2p 11.2p Diluted earnings per share 2.4 10.2p 11.1p Financial Statements 114 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income For the year ended 31 December Note Profit for the year Other comprehensive income Items that are or may be reclassified to profit or loss Lossgain on revaluation of availableforsale financial assets 4.6.4 1 1 Net loss on cash flow hedges 4.6.3 3 2 Exchange lossgain on translation of foreign operations net of hedging 4.6.3 32 46 Items that will never be reclassified to profit or loss Remeasurement gainslosses on defined benefit pension schemes 3.7 172 248 Income tax chargecredit on items that will never be reclassified 2.3 39 40 Other comprehensive incomeloss for the year net of income tax Total comprehensive income for the year Total comprehensive income attributable to Owners of the Company Noncontrolling interests 4.6.6 4 4 Total comprehensive income for the year Primary Statements Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information Financial Statements Consolidated Statement of Financial Position 116 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 As at 31 December Note Noncurrent assets Property plant and equipment 3.2 256 244 Intangible assets 3.3 1645 1624 Investments in joint ventures associates and equity investments 3.5 74 76 Derivative financial instruments 4.3 10 1 Distribution rights 3.1.2 19 31 Defined benefit pension surplus 3.7 16 Other pension asset 3.7 38 39 Deferred tax asset 2.3 31 17 2089 2032 Current assets Programme rights and other inventory 3.1.1 570 406 Trade and other receivables due within one year 3.1.3 514 526 Trade and other receivables due after more than one year 3.1.3 27 39 Trade and other receivables Current tax receivable Derivative financial instruments 4.3 6 8 Cash and cash equivalents 4.1 126 561 1262 1551 Current liabilities Borrowings 4.2 76 165 Derivative financial instruments 4.3 2 3 Trade and other payables due within one year 3.1.4 1029 960 Trade payables due after more than one year 3.1.5 68 57 Trade and other payables 1097 1017 Current tax liabilities Provisions 3.6 16 19 1277 1280 Net current liabilitiesassets Noncurrent liabilities Borrowings 4.2 982 1035 Derivative financial instruments 4.3 1 9 Defined benefit pension deficit 3.7 137 367 Deferred tax liabilities 2.3 111 70 Other payables 3.1.5 106 63 Provisions 3.6 7 4 1344 1548 Net assets Attributable to equity shareholders of the parent company Share capital 4.6.1 403 403 Share premium 4.6.1 174 174 Merger and other reserves 4.6.2 199 221 Translation reserve 4.6.3 41 79 Availableforsale reserve 4.6.4 6 7 Retained earnings 4.6.5 138 162 Total equity attributable to equity shareholders of the parent company Noncontrolling interests Total equity The accounts were approved by the Board of Directors on 28 February 2018 and were signed on its behalf by Ian Griffiths Chief Operating Officer and Group Finance Director Financial Statements 116 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity Attributable to equity shareholders of the parent company
Share capital
Merger and other reserves
Available forsale reserve
Total
Non controlling interests
Balance at 1 January tel221 79 7 162 722 33 755 Total comprehensive incomeloss for the year Profit for the year Other comprehensive incomeloss Revaluation of availableforsale financial assets Net loss on cash flow hedges Exchange differences on translation of foreign operations net of hedging Remeasurement gain on defined benefit pension schemes 3.7      172 172  172 Income tax charge on other comprehensive income 2.3      39 39  39 Total other comprehensive lossincome Total comprehensive lossincome for the year 35 1 Transactions with owners recorded directly in equity Contributions by and distributions to owners Equity dividends Movements due to sharebased compensation 4.7      12 12  12 Purchase of own shares via employees benefit trust 4.7      36 36  36 Total transactions with owners Changes in noncontrolling interests Balance at 31 December 2017 4. a Movements reported in merger and other reserves include a put option for the acquisition of noncontrolling interests.
Primary Statements Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information Financial Statements Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity continued 118 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Attributable to equity shareholders of the parent company
Share capital
Merger and other reserves
Available forsale reserve
Total
Non controlling interests
Balance at 1 January tel114 33 1147 Total comprehensive incomeloss for the year Profit for the year Other comprehensive incomeloss Revaluation of availableforsale financial assets Net loss on cash flow hedges Exchange differences on translation of foreign operations net of hedging Remeasurement loss on defined benefit pension schemes 3.7      248 248  248 Income tax charge on other comprehensive income 2.3      40 40  40 Total other comprehensive incomeloss Total comprehensive incomeloss for the year Transactions with owners recorded directly in equity Contributions by and distributions to owners Equity dividends Movements due to sharebased compensation 4.7      10 10  10 Tax on items taken directly to equity 2.3      4 4  4 Purchase of own shares via employees benefit trust 4.7      20 20  20 Total transactions with owners Balance at 31 December 2016 4.
Financial Statements 118 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows For the year ended 31 December Note m m m Cash flows from operating activities Cash generated from operations before exceptional items 2.1 Cash flow relating to operating exceptional items Operating exceptional items 2.2 153 Increase in exceptional payables Decrease in exceptional prepayments and other receivables Cash outflow from exceptional items Operating cash flow from discontinued operation 2.5 Cash generated from operations Defined benefit pension deficit funding Interest received Interest paid on bank and other loans Net taxation paid Net cash inflow from operating activities Cash flows from investing activities Acquisition of subsidiary undertaking net of cash acquired 3.4 35 Acquisition of property plant and equipment Acquisition of intangible assets Acquisition of investments Loans granted to associates and joint ventures Net proceeds from sale of assets held for sale 2.5 Net cash outflow from investing activities Cash flows from financing activities Bank and other loans  amounts repaid Bank and other loans  amounts raised Capital element of finance lease payments Equity dividends paid Dividends paid to minority interest Purchase of own shares via employees benefit trust Net cash outflow from financing activities Net decreaseincrease in cash and cash equivalents Cash and cash equivalents at 1 January 4.1 Reclassification of gilts to other pension assets 3.7 Effects of exchange rate changes and fair value movements Cash and cash equivalents at 31 December 4.1 Primary Statements Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information Financial Statements Notes to the Financial Statements Section 1 Basis of Preparation 120 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 In this section This section sets out the Groups accounting policies that relate to the financial statements as a whole.
Where an accounting policy is specific to one note the policy is described in the note to which it relates.
This section also shows new EU endorsed accounting standards amendments and interpretations and whether they are effective in 2017 or later years.
We explain how these changes are expected to impact the financial position and performance of the Group.
The financial statements consolidate those of ITV plc the Company and its subsidiaries together referred to as the Group and the Groups interests in associates and jointly controlled entities.
The Company is domiciled in the United Kingdom.
As required by European Union law IAS Regulation EC 16062002 the Groups financial statements have been prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as adopted by the EU IFRS and approved by the Directors.
The financial statements are principally prepared on the basis of historical cost.
Where other bases are applied these are identified in the relevant accounting policy.
The parent company financial statements have been prepared in accordance with Financial Reporting Standard 101 Reduced Disclosure Framework FRS 101.
Going concern At 31 December 2017 the Group was in a financial net debt position with a positive gross cash balance.
Even though the Group is in a net current liability position its strong balance sheet and continued generation of significant free cash flows enables the Group to meet its obligations and has enabled further investment.
As a part of the going concern test the Group reviews forecasts of the television advertising market to determine the impact on ITVs liquidity position.
The Groups forecasts and projections taking account of reasonably possible changes in trading performance show that the Group will be able to operate within the level of its current available funding.
The Group also continues to focus on development of the nonadvertising business and evaluates the impact of further investment against the cash headroom of the business.
After making enquiries the Directors have a reasonable expectation that the Group has adequate resources to continue in operation for at least 12 months from the date of this report.
Accordingly the Group continues to adopt the going concern basis in preparing its consolidated financial statements.
Subsidiaries joint ventures associates and availableforsale investments Subsidiaries are entities that are directly or indirectly controlled by the Group.
Control exists where the Group has the power to govern the financial and operating policies of th e entity in order to obtain benefits from its activities.
In assessing control potential voting rights that are currently exercisable or convertible are taken into account.
A joint venture is a joint arrangement in which the Group holds an interest under a contractual arrangement where the Group and one or more other parties undertake an econom ic activity that is subject to joint control.
The Group accounts for its interests in joint ventures using the equity method.
Under the equity method the investment in the entity is stated as one line item at cost plus the investors share of retained postacquisition profits and other changes in net assets.
An associate is an entity other than a subsidiary or joint venture over which the Group has significant influence.
Significant influence is the power to participate in but not control or jointly control the financial and operating decisions of an entity.
These investments are also accounted for using the equity method.
Investments where the Group concludes it does not have significant influence are deemed availableforsale.
These investments are held at fair value unless the investment is a startup business in which case it is valued at cost and assessed for impairment.
Financial Statements 120 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Currentnoncurrent distinction Current assets include assets held primarily for trading purposes cash and cash equivalents and assets expected to be realised in or intended for sale or use in the course of the Groups operating cycle.
All other assets are classified as noncurrent assets.
Current liabilities include liabilities held primarily for trading purposes liabilities expected to be settled in the course of the Groups operating cycle and those liabilities due within one year from the reporting date.
All other liabilities are classified as noncurrent liabilities.
Classification of financial instruments The financial assets and liabilities of the Group are classified into the following financial statement captions in the statement of financial position in accordance with IAS 39 Financial Instruments Loans and receivables  separately disclosed as cash and cash equivalents and trade and other receivables Availableforsale financial assets  measured at fair value through other comprehensive income Financial assetsliabilities at fair value through profit or lo ss  separately disclosed as derivative financial instruments in assetsliabilities and included in other payables contingent consideration and Financial liabilities measured at amortised cost  separate ly disclosed as borrowings and trade and other payables.
Judgement is required when determining the appropriate classification of the Groups financial instruments.
Details on the accounting policies for measurement of the above instruments are set out in the relevant note.
Where unconditional rights to set off financial instruments exist the Group presents the relevant instruments net in the statement of financial position.
Recognition and derecognition of financial assets and liabilities The Group recognises a financial asset or liability when it becomes a party to the contract.
Financial instruments are no longer recognised in the statement of financial po sition when the contractual cash flows expire or when the Group no longer retains control of substantially all the risks and rewards under the instrument.
Cash and cash equivalents Cash and cash equivalents comprise cash balances call deposits with a maturity of less than or equal to three months from the date of acquisition and cash held to meet certai n finance lease commitments.
The carrying value of cash and cash equivalents is considered to approximate fair value.
Foreign currencies The primary economic environment in which the Group operates is the UK and therefore the consolidated financial statements are presented in pounds sterling .
Where Group companies based in the UK transact in foreign currencies these transactions are translated into pounds sterling at the exchange rate on the transaction date.
Foreign currency monetary assets and liabilities are translated into pounds sterling at the year end exchange rate.
Wher e there is a movement in the exchange rate between the date of the transaction and the year end a foreign exchange gain or loss is recognised in the income statement.
Hedge accounting is implemented on certain foreign currency firm commitments for which the effective portion of any foreign exchange gains or losses is recognised in other comprehensive income note 4.3.
Where a forward currency contract is used to manage fore ign exchange risk and hedge accounting is not applied any impact of movements in currency for both the forward currency contracts and the assets and liabilities is taken to the income statement.
Nonmonetary assets and liabilities measured at historical cost are translated into pounds sterling at the exchange rate on the date of the transaction.
The assets and liabilities of Group companies outside of the UK are translated into pounds sterling at the year end exchange rate.
The revenue and expenses of these companies are translated into pounds sterling at the average monthly exchange rate during the year.
Where differences arise between these rates they are recognised in the translation reserve within other comprehensive income.
Section 1 Basis of Preparation Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information Financial Statements Notes to the Financial Statements Section 1 Basis of Preparation continued 122 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Exchange differences arising on the translation of the Groups interests in joint ventures an d associates are recognised in the translation reserve within other comprehensive income.
On disposal of a foreign subsidiary an interest in a joint venture or an associate the related translation reserve is released to the income statement as part of the gain or loss on disposal.
Accounting judgements and estimates The preparation of financial statements requires management to exercise judgement in applying the Groups accounting policies.
It also requires the use of estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets liabilities income and expenses.
Actual results may differ from these estimates.
Estimates and underlying assumptions are reviewed on an ongoing basis with revisions recognised in the period in which the estimates are revised and in any future periods affected.
The areas involving a higher degree of estimation judgement or complexity are set out below and in more detail in the related notes Revenue recognition note 2.1 Business combinations note 3.3 and note 3.4 In addition to the above the areas involving the most sensitive estimates and assumptions that are significant to the financial statements are set out below and in more detail in the related notes Defined benefit pension note 3.7 Taxation note 2.3 New or amended EU endorsed accounting standards The table below represents new or amended EU endorsed ac counting standards relevant to the Groups results that are effective in 2017 Accounting Standard Requirement Amendments to IAS 7 Statement of Cash Flows on Disclosure Initiative The amendments introduce an additional disclosure that will enable users of the financial statements to evaluate changes in liabilities arising from financing activities.
Amendments to IAS 12 Income Taxes on recognition of deferred tax assets for unrealised losses The amendments clarify how to account for deferred tax assets related to debt instruments measured at fair value.
Annual Improvements to IFRS 2014  2016 cycle Amendments to a number of IFRSs one of which is effective in 2017 this amendment clarified the scope of IFRS 12 specifically the disclosure requirements for interests in subsidiaries associates or joint ventures that are classified as heldforsale.
Based on the Directors analysis the amendments outlined above do not have a material impact on the Groups financial position or performance for the year ended 31 December 2017.
EU endorsed accounting standards effective in future periods The Directors considered the impact on the Group of other new and revised accounting standards interpretations or amendments that are currently endorsed but not yet effe ctive.
IFRS 15 and IFRS 9 are both effective for the period beginning 1 January 2018 and while the Directors do not expect these standards to have a significant impact on the Groups results they highlight the conclusions from the impact assessment below.
IFRS 16 is effective for the period beginning 1 January 2019.
The Directors have detailed the status of the impact assessment below.
Financial Statements 122 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers is effective 1 January 2018.
IFRS 15 requires the Group to identify distinct promises in contracts with customers that qualify as performance obligations.
The consideration receivable from customers must then be allocated between the performance obligations identified.
An assessment of the impact on all of the Groups material revenue streams has been completed.
The impact on the Groups revenues and results is not material for either the Gr oup or for the individual divisions Broadcasting and Online and ITV Studios.
The changes to the current accounting policies on adoption of IFRS 15 require the Group to reclassify various costs which are now deemed to be attributable to revenue within the income statement.
The impact on the results for the year ending 2017 which is not considered material to the Group either individually or collectively will be Income statement account Impact NAR revenue Reduction of 11 million Other commercial income Reduction of 1 million Online pay and interactive revenue Increase of 10 million Operating costs Reduction of 2 million There is no impact on either profit or adjusted EBITA for the year for the Group or for an individual division.
The Directors adopted IFRS 15 on 1 January 2018 on a fully retrospective basis and will present within the 2018 financial statements a restatement of the comparative periods.
IFRS 9 Financial Instruments is also effective 1 January 2018.
IFRS 9 introduces new models for classification of financial assets and accounting for credit losses.
Hedging rules have been amended to allow hedge accounting to be applied to more risks.
The analysis of the impact focused on the following items Classification and measurement of financial assets and liabilities Trade receivables impairment and Recognition of hedging instruments and on the type of hedging relationships.
No material impacts were identified compared with the existing accounting treatment.
IFRS 16 Leases is effective 1 January 2019.
IFRS 16 will change lease accounting for lessees under operating leases.
Such agreements will require recognition of an asset repr esenting the right to use the leased item and a liability representing future lease payments.
Lease costs such as property rent will be recognised in the form of depreciation and interest rather than as an operating cost.
The detailed assessment of impact on the Groups performance is ongoing with the current focus on the completeness of the lease data.
During the early impact assessment the Group has reviewed the current accounting for existing key agreements including satellite transponder and playout agreements and concluded that those do not meet lease definition under the regulations of IFRS 16 and therefore should continue to be classified as service agreements as presented within these financial statements.
The adoption is likely to have a material impact on the presentation of the Groups assets and liabilities mainly due to property leases.
Due to the quantity of leases under review the Group has not substantially completed the assessment of lease contracts under the new accounting standard.
Therefore a quantification of the impact on the Groups results cannot currently be estimated.
Section 1 Basis of Preparation Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information Financial Statements Notes to the Financial Statements Section 2 Results for the Year 124 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 In this section This section focuses on the results and performance of the Group.
On the following pages you will find disclosures explaining the Groups results for the year segmental information exceptional items taxation and earnings per share.
2.1 Profit before tax
This section analyses the Groups profit before tax by reference to the activities performed by the Group and an analysis of key operating costs.
Adjusted earnings before interest tax and amortisation EBITA is the Groups key profit indicator.
This reflects the way the business is managed and how the Directors assess the performance of the Group.
This section therefore also shows each divisions contribution to total revenue and adjusted EBITA.
Accounting policies Revenue recognition Revenue is stated exclusive of VAT and equivalent sales taxes and comprises the sale of products and services to third parties.
Judgement is required when determining the appropriate timing and amount of revenue that can be recognised specifically around whether there is a firm contract and whether the service has been provided and if so whether there is a fixed or reasonably determinable pr ice that is reasonably certain to be collected.
Complexity in advertising revenue recognition is driven by intricate automated and manual processes involved in measuring the value delivered to the customer.
Revenue is recognised when the Group has transferred both the significant risks and rewards of ownership and control and the amount of revenue can be measured reliably.
Revenue recognition criteria for the Groups key classes of revenue are as follows Applicable segment Class of revenue Recognition criteria Broadcast and Online Advertising NAR on transmission Video on Demand VOD as audience targets are met Sponsorship across the period of transmission of the sponsored programme or series Pay over the term of the contract or per subscriber or download Participation Interactive and Brand Extensions as the service is provided or the event occurs Studios Programme production on delivery of episode and acceptance by the customer Programme distribution rights when the contract is signed and content is available for exploitation Format and licences at the point in time when the licence is transferred and the customer is able to use and benefit from the licence or over the licence period if continued involvement of the Group is required Digital archive on delivery of content oneoff or over the contract period in a manner that reflects the flow of content delivered topup Financial Statements 124 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 The results for the year aggregate these classes of revenue into four significant categories % of total % of total
Broadcast and Online 1591 44% 1672 47%
Broadcast and Online 484 ITV Studios Productions 1307 ITV Studios Distribution 275 Total NonNAR 2066 56% 1855 53% Total revenue from continuing operations 3657 100% 3527 100% Segmental information Operating segments which have not been aggregated are de termined in a manner that is consistent with how the business is managed and reported to the Board of Directors.
The Board is regarded as the chief operating decisionmaker.
The Board considers the business primarily from an operatin g activity perspective.
The reportable segments for the years ended 31 December 2017 and 31 December 2016 are th erefore Broadcast and Online and ITV Studios the results of which are outlined in the following tables
ITV Studios
Total segment revenue 2075 1582 Intersegment revenue 2 523 Revenue from external customers 2073 1059 Adjusted EBITA 599 243
ITV Studios
Total segment revenue 2143 1395 3538 Intersegment revenue  463 Revenue from external customers including discontinued operations 2143 932 3075 Less Discontinued operations note 2.5 11  11 Revenue from external customers 2132 932 3064 Adjusted EBITA including discontinued operations 636 243 879 Less Operating loss from discontinued operations note 2.5 6  6 Adjusted EBITA 642 243 885 Revenue of 397 million 2016 320 million was generated in the US during the year the US represented 330 million 2016 346 million of noncurrent assets at year end.
Adjusted EBITA is before exceptional items and includes the benefit of production tax credits.
It is shown after the elimina tion of intersegment revenue and costs.
This measure represents the continuing operations.
The Groups principal operations are in the United Kingdom.
Revenue from external customers in the United Kingdom is 2272 million 2016 2370 million and revenue from external customers in other countries is 860 million 2016 694 million.
The Operating and Performance Review provides further detail on ITVs international revenues.
Intersegment revenue which is earned on arms length terms is mainly generated from the supply of ITV Studios programmes to Broadcast and Online for transmission primarily on the ITV network.
This revenue stream is a measure that forms part of the Groups strategic priority of building a strong international content business as producing and retaining rights to the shows broadcast on the ITV network benefits the Group further from subsequent international content and format sales.
In preparing the segmental information centrally managed costs have been allocated between reportable segments on a methodology driven principally by revenue headcount and building occupancy of each segment.
This is consistent with the basis of reporting to the Board of Directors.
Section 2 Results for the Year Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information Financial Statements Notes to the Financial Statements Section 2 Results for the Year continued 126 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 There is one media buying agency 2016 one acting on behalf of a number of advertisers that represent the Groups major customers.
This agency is the only customer that individually represents over 10% of the Groups revenue.
Revenue of approximately 561 million 2016 552 million was derived from this customer.
This revenue is attributable to the Broadcast and Online segment.
Broadcast and Online The Group operates the largest commercial family of chan nels in the UK and delivers content through multiple platforms.
In addition to linear television broadcast the Group delivers its content on the ITV Hub catch up services on pay platforms and through direct content deals.
Content commissioned and scheduled by this segment is funded primarily by television advertising where revenue is generated from the sale of audiences for advertising airtime and sponsorship.
Other sources of revenue are from online advertising HD digital channels on pay platforms e.
Sky and Virgin SDN revenue which generates licence sales for DTT Multiplex A and participation revenue which includes interactive sales from competitions and the ITV Choice subscription service in other countries.
ITV Studios ITV Studios is the Groups international content business creating and producing programmes and formats that return and travel namely drama entertainment and factual entertainment.
ITV Studios UK is the largest commercial producer in the UK and produces programming for the Groups own channels accounting for 66% of ITV main channel spend on commissioned programming 2016 63%.
Programming is also sold to other UK broadcasters such as the BBC Channel 4 and Sky.
ITV America is the leading unscripted independent producer of content in the US and is growing its scripted presence by increasing investment in highprofile dramas.
ITV Studios also operates in six other international locations being Australia Germany France Italy the Netherlands primarily Talpa and the Nordics where content is produced for local broadcasters.
This content is either locally created IP or formats that have been created elsewhere by ITV primarily in the UK and the Netherlands.
Global Entertainment and Talpa Global ITVs distribution businesses license ITVs finished programmes and formats and thirdparty content internationally.
Within this business we also finance productions both on and off ITV to acquire global distribution rights.
Adjusted EBITA The Directors assess the performance of the reportable segments based on a measure of adjusted EBITA.
The Directors use this measurement basis as it excludes the effect of transactions that could distort the understanding of the Groups performance for the year and comparability between periods.
See the Operating and Performance Review on pages 34 to 35 for the detailed explanation of the Groups use of adjusted performance measures.
A reconciliation from adjusted EBITA to profit before tax is provided as follows Adjusted EBITA 842 885 Production tax credits 32 28 EBITA before exceptional items from continuing operations 810 857 Operating exceptional items 153 164 Amortisation and impairment 102 89 Net financing costs 50 51 Share of losses of joint ventures and associated undertakings 4 Loss on sale of noncurrent assets exceptional items 1 Profit before tax from continuing operations 500 553 Financial Statements 126 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Cash generated from operations A reconciliation from profit before tax to cash generated from operations before exceptional items is as follows Cash flows from operating activities Profit before tax 500 553 Loss on sale of noncurrent assets exceptional items 1 Share of losses of joint ventures and associated undertakings 4 Net financing costs 50 51 Operating exceptional items 153 164 Depreciation of property plant and equipment 30 31 Amortisation and impairment 102 89 Sharebased compensation and pension service costs 13 10 Increase in programme rights and other inventory and distribution rights 94 35 Decreaseincrease in receivables 13 56 Increase in payables 23 63 Movement in working capital 58 28 Cash generated from operations before exceptional items 795 870 Operating costs Staff costs Staff costs before exceptional items can be analysed as follows Wages and salaries 358 336 Social security and other costs 55 46 Sharebased compensation see note 4.7 12 10 Pension costs 24 27 Total staff costs 449 419 Less staff costs allocated to productions 166 147 FTEE staff costs nonproduction 283 272 Exceptional staff costs are disclosed separately in note 2.2.
The number of fulltime equivalent employees FTEE excluding shortterm contractors and freelancers who are predominantly allocated to the cost of productions calcul ated on a weighted average basis during the year was 2017 2016 Broadcast and Online 2053 2087 ITV Studios 4002 4034 6055 6121 The decrease in fulltime equivalent employees is primarily driven by redundancies in the organic business as a result of restructuring offset by the weighted average impact of acquisitions completed in 2017.
Details of Directors emoluments share options pension entitlements and longterm incentive scheme interests are set out in the Remuneration Report.
Listed Directors gains on share options for 2017 are set out in the ITV plc Company financial statements.
Depreciation
Depreciation in the year was 30 million 2016 31 million of which 11 million 2016 13 million relates to Broadcast and Online and 19 million 2016 18 million to ITV Studios.
A further 11 million of accelerated depreciation relating to assets made redundant as a result of the property project has been recorded as an exceptional item in 2017.
See notes 2.2 and 3.3 for further details.
Section 2 Results for the Year Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information Financial Statements Notes to the Financial Statements Section 2 Results for the Year continued 128 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Operating leases The total undiscounted future minimum lease payments under noncancellable operating leases are due for payment as follows
Other
Total
Within one year 28 3 31 Later than one year and not later than five years 89 4 93 Later than five years 19  Represented
Other
Total
Within one year 19  19 Later than one year and not later than five years 59  59 Later than five years 17  17 The Group holds transmission supply agreements that require the use of transponder assets for a period of up to ten years wit h payments increasing over time limited by specific RPI caps.
The Group has assessed the contracts under the new accounting standard IFRS 16 and consequ ently has reassessed the transponder assets under the current accounting standard IAS 1 7.
As a result the Group has represented the transmission supply agreements as service agreements as opposed to operating leases.
The impact of this is to remove the transponder assets from the operating lease disc losures in this note and disclose them instead as a commitment within note 3.1.
There is no impact on the income statement financial position or cash f low of the Group for this presentational change.
The Groups operating leases relate to offices studio properties and other assets such as cars and office equipment.
Property leases run for terms ranging from five to 20 years depending on the expected operational use of the site.
Leases may include break clauses or options to renew optio ns to renew are not included in the commitments table.
Lease payments are generally subject to market review every five years to reflect market rentals but because of the uncertainty over the amount of any future changes such changes have not been reflected in the table above.
None of the lease agreements include contingent rentals.
The total operating lease expenditure recognised during the year was 21 million 2016 19 million and total sublease payments received were 1 million 2016 1 million.
Audit fees The Group engages KPMG LLP KPMG on assignments additional to its statutory audit duties where its expertise and experience with the Group are important and are in li ne with Groups policy on auditor independence.
Fees paid to KPMG and its associates during the year are set out below For the audit of the Groups annual accounts 0.6 0.6 For the audit of subsidiaries of the Group 0.6 0.6 Auditrelated assurance services 0.2 0.2 Total audit and auditrelated assurance services 1.4 1.4 Taxation advisory services  0.2 Other assurance services  0.1 Total nonaudit services  0.3 Total fees paid to KPMG 1.4 1.7 There were no fees payable in 2017 or 2016 to KPMG and associates for the auditing of accounts of any associate or pension scheme of the Group internal audit services se rvices relating to corporate finance transactions entered into or proposed to be entered into by or on behalf of the Group or any of its associates.
Fees paid to KPMG for audit and other services to the Comp any are not disclosed in its individual accounts as the Group accounts are required to disclose such fees on a consolidated basis.
Financial Statements 128 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Keeping it simple Exceptional items are excluded from managements assessment of profit because by their size or nature they could distort the Groups underlying quality of earnings.
They are typically gains or losses arising from events that are not considered part of the core operations of the business e. professional fees on acquisitions.
These items are excluded to reflect performance in a consistent manner and are in line with how the business is managed and measured on a daytoday basis.
Accounting policies Exceptional items as described above are highlighted on the face of the income statement.
See the Operating and Performance Review on pages 34 to 35 for the detailed explanation of the Groups use of adjusted performance measures.
Subsequent revisions of estimates for items initially recognised as exceptional are recorded as exceptional items in the year that the revision is made.
Gains or losses on di sposal of noncore assets are also considered exceptional due to their nature and impact on the Groups underlying quality of earnings.
Exceptional items Operating and nonoperating exceptional items are analysed as follows Chargecredit Ref.
Operating exceptional items Acquisitionrelated expenses A 96 131 Restructuring and property project costs B 30 14 Insured trade receivable provision C 27 Pension curtailment cost D  19 Total operating exceptional items Nonoperating exceptional items Loss on sale of noncurrent assets Total nonoperating exceptional items Total exceptional items before tax Tax on exceptional items Total exceptional items net of tax A  Acquisitionrelated expenses Acquisitionrelated expenses of 96 million includes 86 million 2016 110 million relating to performancebased employmentlinked costs to former owners mainly in relation to Talpa Media.
The remaining 10 million 2016 21 million is primarily comprised of integration costs and professional fees mainly financial due diligence and legal costs.
See note 3.4 for further details on acquisitions.
B  Restructuring and property project costs In 2017 the Directors made the decision to redevelop the Groups headquarters at The London Television Centre for which the Group owns the freehold.
This requires relo cating staff and studios for 4 to 5 years to alternative accommodation before moving back into a new freehold building.
Therefore the Group has taken rented office and studios space in the interim while the new headquarters are constructed.
During the course of the construction the Group will ring fence all incremental costs in relation to the redevelopment.
Move costs dual rates and rent will be treated as exceptional costs in the financial statements as they relate to the oneoff property project that runs over several years but the Group will no longer incur them after the return to The London Television Centre.
In 2017 the Group incurred 24 million of costs being Dual running costs of 7 million while the properties were vacant during refurbishment 11 million of accelerated depreciation relating to assets made redundant as a result of the property project 3 million of dilapidation provisions relating to these new property leases and Other incremental oneoff project costs of 3 million.
As a result of the review of the Groups London property n eeds the Directors have decided to close The London Studios business incurring 6 million of redundancy costs in 2017.
Section 2 Results for the Year Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information Financial Statements Notes to the Financial Statements Section 2 Results for the Year continued 130 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 In 2016 14 million of costs were incurred as a result of a oneoff project stemming from the Groupwide commitment to reduce the overhead cost base by 25 million.
This cost was primarily comprised of redundancies across the Broadcasting ITV Studios and Shared Services divisions as well as professional support to successfully plan and implement the project.
C  Insured trade receivable provision The insured trade receivable provision of 27 million relates to the unpaid portion of revenue from the fouryear licence deal for The Voice of China with Talent Television and Film Co.
Ltd Talent the revenue for which was fully recognised in 2016 in accordance with accounting standards as th e Group had no further obligations under the terms of the agreement.
Following a breach of the agreement by Talent as they had not fulfilled their payment obligations the Group have taken back the licence for The Voice of China.
The Group is pu rsuing Talent vigorously for the 30 million still due under the agreement.
Further the Group has credit insurance in place and a claim has been submitted.
Whilst the Directors continue to pursue the amounts due and believe there is ultimately no material financial impact the Group will need to reflect a provision against this unpaid amount in its 2017 results.
Whilst th e Directors are confident in recovering the amount due the accounting standards set very specific requirements for the recognition of contingent assets which is how the recovery of the amount due will be accounted for.
As discussions with the insurers and the claim against Talent are in progress at this early stage of pursuing recovery the Group is not ab le to demonstrate sufficient certainty for accounting purposes to be able to recognise a cash receivable at the year end.
Accordingly The Group has made a provision amounting to 27 million 30 million net of 3 million insurance excess against the Talent receivable reco rded in the accounts in the year ended 31 December 2017.
The cash received in the future will also be treated as an exceptional item.
D  Pension curtailment cost In 2016 following a member consultation the Group decided to close the ITV Pension Scheme to future benefit accrual resulting in a oneoff noncash curtailment cost of 19 million.
Financial Statements 130 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Keeping it simple This section sets out the Groups tax accounting policies the current and deferred tax charges or credits in the year which together make up the total tax charge or credit in the income statement a reconciliation of profit before tax to the tax charge for the period and the movements in deferred tax assets and liabilities.
Accounting policies The tax charge for the period is recognised in the inco me statement the statement of comprehensive income and directly in equity according to the accounting treatment of the related transactions.
The tax charge comprises both current and deferred tax.
The calculation of the Groups tax charge involves a degree of estimation and judgement in respect of certain items whose tax treatment cannot be full y determined until a resolution has been reached by the relevant tax authority.
Current tax Current tax is the expected tax payable or receivable on th e taxable income or loss for the year and any adjustment in respect of previous years.
The Group recognises liabilities for anticipated tax issues based on estimates of the additional taxes that are likely to become due which require judgement.
Amounts are accrued based on managements interpretation of specific tax law and the likelihood of settlement.
Where the final tax ou tcome of these matters is different from the amounts that were initially recorded such differences will impact the current tax and deferred tax provisions in the period in which such determination is made.
Deferred tax Deferred tax arises due to certain temporary differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and those for taxation purposes.
The following temporary differences are not provided for The initial recognition of goodwill The initial recognition of assets or liabilities that affect neither accounting nor taxable profit other than in a business combination and Differences relating to investments in subsidiaries to the extent that they will probably not reverse in the foreseeable future.
The amount of deferred tax provided is based on the expect ed manner of realisation or settlement of the carrying amount of assets and liabilities.
Deferred tax is calculated using tax rates that are enacted or substantively enacted at the balance sheet date.
A deferred tax asset is recognised only to the extent that it is probable that sufficient taxable profit will be available to utilise the temporary difference.
Recognition of deferred tax assets therefore involves judgement regarding the timing and level of future taxable income.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are disclosed net to the extent that they relate to taxes levied by the same authority and the Group has the right of setoff.
Section 2 Results for the Year Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information Financial Statements Notes to the Financial Statements Section 2 Results for the Year continued 132 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Taxation  Income statement The total taxation charge in the income statement is analysed as follows Current tax Current tax charge on profit before exceptional items 110 134 Current tax credit on exceptional items 8 11 Adjustments to prior periods 2 10 Deferred tax Origination and reversal of temporary differences 13 18 Deferred tax credit on exceptional items 4 4 Impact of change in the statutory tax rate 6 1 Adjustments to prior periods 6 10 Total taxation charge in the income statement 87 100 In order to understand how in the income statement a tax charge of 87 million 2016 100 million arises on a profit before tax of 500 million 2016 553 million the taxation charge that would arise at the standard rate of UK corporation tax is reconciled to the actual tax charge as follows Profit before tax 500 553 Notional taxation charge at UK corporation tax rate of 19.25% 2016 20% on profit before tax 96 111 Nontaxable incomenondeductible expenses 35 25 Prior year adjustments 4 Other taxes  1 Previously unrecognised deferred tax asset 11 Current year losses not recognised 4 2 Impact of overseas tax rates 7 10 Impact of changes in tax rates 6 1 Production tax credits 32 28 Total taxation charge in the income statement 87 100 Nondeductible expenses are expenses that are not expected to be allowable for tax purposes.
Similarly nontaxable income is income that is not expected to be taxable.
Adjustments to prior periods primarily arise where an outcom e is obtained on certain tax matters which differs from expectations held when the related provision was made.
Where the outcome is more favourable than the provision made the difference is released lowering the current year tax charge.
Where the outcome is less favourable than our provision an additional charge to current year tax will occur.
The current tax charge includes a 2 million charge relating to prior years and the deferred tax credit in cludes a 6 million credit relating to prior years.
Previously unrecognised deferred tax assets are in relation to deferred tax assets arising on consolidation in relation to intangible assets which are now being brought on to the balance sheet in the current period.
Current year losses not recognised primarily relate to a capital loss arising on the writedown of an investment as it is uncertain whether this loss can be utilised in future periods.
The impact of overseas tax rates reflects the fact that some of our profits are earned in territories other than the UK and taxed at rates different from the UK corporation tax ra te.
This year losses arising in higher taxed jurisdictions which we recognise through deferred tax give rise to a reconciling benefit.
The UK corporation tax rate fell from 20% to 19% from 1 Ap ril 2017 and has been enacted to fall further to 17% from 1 April 2020.
These rates were enacted at the previous balance sheet date and the carrying value of UK temporary differences were adjusted accordingly.
To the extent that temporary differences have unwound in the current year this has given rise to a credit of 6 million 2016 charge of 5 million of which 2 million is recognised as a credit in the income statement and 4 million as a credit in other comprehensive income.
In addition as a result of the recent enactment of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act in the US the Grou p has recognised a tax charge of 9 million through the Financial Statements 132 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 income statement resulting from the revaluation of our US deferred tax assets to reflect the reduction in the US federal corporate tax rate to 21% from 1 January 2018.
Changes to enacted rates in other countries have given rise to a further credit of 1 million reported in the income stat ement.
The total impact of changes in tax rates is therefore a charge of 6 million in the income statement and a credit of 4 million in other comprehensive income.
The production tax credits included within the reconciliation above are UK HighEnd Television HETV tax credits and Childrens Television tax credits which are part of a group of incentives provided to support the creative industries and also Italian production tax credits.
The ability to access thes e tax credits is fundamental when assessing the viability of investment decisions in the production of highend drama and childrens programmes.
Under IFRS these production tax credits are reported within the total taxation charge in the income statement.
However ITV considers them to be a contribution to production costs and therefore working capital in nature and excludes them from its adjusted tax charge including them instead within Adjusted EBITA.
The effective tax rate is 17.4% 2016 18.1% and is the tax charge on the face of the income statement expressed as a percentage of the profit before tax.
In the years ended 31 December 2017 and 31 December 2016 the effective tax rate is comparable to the standard rate of UK corporation tax of 19.25% in 2017 and 20% in 2016.
As explained in the Finance Review the Group uses an adjusted tax rate to show how tax impacts total adjusted earnings in a way that is more aligned with the Groups cash tax position.
This year the current year movement on origination and reversal of temporary differences excluding exceptional items is a credit of 13 million compared with a credit of 18 million in 2016.
Taxation  Other comprehensive income and equity As analysed in the table below a deferred tax charge of 39 million on actuarial movements on pensions has been recognised in other comprehensive income 2016 40 million credit.
A deferred tax charge of 1 million has been recognised in equity in respect of sharebased payments 2016 6 million.
A current tax credit of 1 million has also been recognised in equity in relation to sharebased payments 2016 2 million.
Taxation  Statement of financial position The table below outlines the deferred tax assetsliabilities that are recognised in the statement of financial position together with their movements in the year
1 January
Recognised in the income statement Recognised in OCI and equity
Foreign exchange
31 December Tangible assets  3 3 Intangible assets 94  22  6 2 80 Programme rights 1 Pension scheme deficits 34  13 39   18 Tax losses 30  6   3 21 Sharebased compensation 4   1   5 Other temporary differences 20 2 17  4 2
1 January
Recognised in the income statement Recognised in OCI and equity
Foreign exchange
31 December Intangible assets 101 14 15  10 12 94 Programme rights 1      1 Pension scheme deficits 1 1 8 40   34 Tax losses 4  23   3 30 Sharebased compensation 11 5 4 6   4 Other temporary differences 5 10 13   2 20 At 31 December 2017 total deferred tax assets are 23 million 2016 65 million and total deferred tax liabilities are 103 million 2016 118 million.
After netting off balances within countries there is a deferred tax liability of 111 million and a deferred tax asset of 31 million 2016 deferred tax liability of 70 million and deferred tax asset of 17 million recognised in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
Section 2 Results for the Year Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information Financial Statements Notes to the Financial Statements Section 2 Results for the Year continued 134 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 The deferred tax balances relate to Property plant and equipment temporary differences arising on assets qualifying for tax depreciation Temporary differences on intangible assets including those arising on business combinations Programme rights  temporary differences on intercompany profits on stock Pension scheme deficit temporary differences on the IAS 19 pension deficit Temporary differences arising from the timing of the use of tax losses Sharebased compensation temporary differences on share schemes and Other temporary differences on provisions and other items.
The deferred tax balance associated with the pension deficit reflects the current tax benefit obtained in the current year following the employer contributions of 80 million to the Groups defined benefit pension scheme.
The adjustment in other comprehensive income to the deferred tax balance primarily relates to the actuarial gain recognised in the period.
A deferred tax asset of 377 million 2016 377 million in respect of capital losses of 2217 million 2016 2215 million has not been recognised due to uncertainties as to whether capital gains will arise in the appropriate form and relevant territories against which such losses could be utilised.
For the same reasons deferred tax assets of 13 million 2016 19 million in respect of overseas losses that time expire between 2018 and 2026 have not been recognised.
In line with our accounting policy on cu rrent tax provisions are held on the balance sheet within current tax liabilities in respect of uncertain tax positions where management believ e that it is probable that future payments of tax will be required.
At the balance sheet date these tax provisions were not material for the Group.
Earnings per share
Earnings per share EPS is the amount of posttax profit attributable to each share.
In 2016 we presented EPS for the continuing business and the discontinued operation UTV Ireland Limited see note 2.5 for further details.
Basic EPS is calculated on the Group profit for the year attributable to equity shareholders of 409 million 2016 448 million divided by 4006 million 2016 4010 million being the weighted average number of shares in issue during the year which excludes EBT shares held in trust see note 4.7.
Diluted EPS reflects any commitments made by the Group to issue shares in the future and so it includes the impact of share options.
Adjusted EPS is presented in order to show the business performance of the Group in a consistent manner and reflect how the business is managed and measured on a daytoday basis.
Adjusted EPS reflects the impact of operating and nonoperating exceptional items on Basic EPS.
Other items excluded from Adjusted EPS are amortisation and impairment of intangible assets acquired through business combinations net financing cost adjustments and the tax adjustments relating to these items.
Each of these adjustments is explained in detail in the section below.
The calculation of Basic EPS and Adjusted EPS together with the diluted impact on each is set out below Basic earnings per share Profit for the year attributable to equity shareholders of ITV plc 409 448 Less Loss for the year from discontinued operations  1 Profit for the year attributable to equity shareholders of ITV plc from continuing operations Weighted average number of ordinary shares in issue  million 4006 4010 Basic earnings per ordinary share and from continuing operations 10.2p 11.2p Basic loss per ordinary share from discontinued operations Financial Statements 134 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Diluted earnings per share Profit for the year attributable to equity shareholders of ITV plc from continuing operations Weighted average number of ordinary shares in issue  million 4006 4010 Dilution due to share options 11 19 Total weighted average number of ordinary shares in issue  million 4017 4029 Diluted earnings per ordinary share and from continuing operations 10.2p 11.1p Diluted loss per ordinary share from discontinued operations Adjusted earnings per share
Profit for the year attributable to equity shareholders of ITV plc Exceptional items net of tax A 142 149 Less Loss after tax for the period from discontinued operations Profit for the year before exceptional items from continuing operations Amortisation and impairment of acquired intangible assets B 78 66 Adjustments to net financing costs C 13 19 Adjusted profit from continuing operations Total weighted average number of ordinary shares in issue  million 4006 4010 Adjusted earnings per ordinary share and from continuing operations Adjusted loss per ordinary share from discontinued operations Diluted adjusted earnings per share Adjusted profit from continuing operations 642 683 Weighted average number of ordinary shares in issue  million 4006 4010 Dilution due to share options 11 19 Total weighted average number of ordinary shares in issue  million 4017 4029 Diluted adjusted earnings per ordinary share and from continuing operations 16.0p 17.0p Diluted adjusted loss per ordinary share from discontinued operations Details of the adjustments to earnings are as follows
Exceptional items net of tax 142 million 2016 149 million calculated as total of exceptional items of 154 million 2016 164 million see note 2.2 for the detailed composition net of related tax credit of 12 million 2016 15 million.
B.
Amortisation and impairment of acquired inta ngible assets of 78 million 2016 66 million  calculated as total of amortisation and impairment of assets acquired through business combinations and investments of 102 million 2016 89 million excluding amortisation of software licences and development of 5 million 2016 12 million net of related tax credit of 19 million 2016 11 million.
C.
Adjustments to net financing costs 13 million 2016 19 million.
Net financing costs of 50 million 2016 51 million are adjusted for marktomarket movements on derivative instruments foreign exchange and imputed pension interest charges of 33 million 2016 26 million net of related tax credit of 4 million 2016 6 million.
Section 2 Results for the Year Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information Financial Statements Notes to the Financial Statements Section 2 Results for the Year continued 136 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Keeping it simple A discontinued operation is a distinct component of the business that has been or is in the process of being disposed of.
Accounting standards dictate that the loss from discontinued operations is recognised outside of the Groups operating results.
The Groups 2017 results were all derived from continuing operations.
During 2016 management agreed to sell UTV Ireland Limited to Virgin Media for 10 million.
The sale completed on 30 November 2016 and the assets and liabilities classified as a disposal group heldforsale have been disposed of.
Results of discontinued operations Revenue  11 Expenses  17 Operating loss  6
Loss after tax  6 Gain on sale of discontinued operations  5 Tax on gain on sale of discontinued operations Loss for the period  1 Earnings per share Basic loss per share Diluted loss per share Cash flows from used in discontinued operations Net cash used in operating activities  6 Net cash from investing activities  10 Net cash flow for the period  4 Financial Statements 136 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes to the Financial Statements Section 3 Operating Assets and Liabilities In this section This section shows the assets used to generate the Groups trading performance and the liabilities incurred as a result.
On the following pages there are notes covering working capital noncurrent assets and liabilities acquisitions and disposals provisions and pensions.
Liabilities relating to the Groups financing activities are addressed in section 4.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are shown in note 2.3.
Working capital
Working capital represents the assets and liabilities the Group generates through its trading activity.
The Group therefore defines working capital as distribution rights programme rights and production costs trade and other receivables and trade and other payables.
Careful management of working capital ensures that the Group can meet its trading and financing obligations within its ordinary operating cycle.
Working capital is a driver of the profit to cash conversion ratio a key performance indicator for the Group.
The Groups target profit to cash ratio on a rolling three year basis is at least 90%.
For those subsidiaries acquired during the year working capital at the date of acquisition is excluded from the profit to cash calculation so that only subsequent working capital movements in the period controlled by ITV are reflected in this metric.
In the following section you will find further information regarding working capital management and analysis of the elements of working capital.
3.1.1 Programme rights other inventory and commitments Accounting policies Rights are recognised when the Group controls the respective rights and the risks and rewards associated with them.
Programme rights and production costs not yet utilised are included in the statement of financial position at the lower of cost and net realisable value.
In assessing net realisable value for programmes in production judgement is required when considering the contracted sales price and estimated costs to complete.
Broadcast programme rights Acquired programme rights which include films and sports rights are purchased for the primary purpose of broadcasting on the ITV family of channels including VOD and SVOD platforms.
These are recognised within current assets as payments are made or when the rights are ready for broadcast.
The Group generally expenses these rights through operating costs over a number of tr ansmissions reflecting the pattern and value in which the right is consumed.
Commissions which primarily comprise programmes purchased based on editorial specification and over which the Group has some control are recognised in current assets as payments are made and are generally expensed to operating costs in full on first transmission.
Where a commission is repeated on any platform incremental costs associated with the broadcast are included in operating costs.
The net realisable value assessment for acquired and commissioned rights is based on estimated airtime value with consideration given to whether the number of transmissions purchased can be efficiently played out over the licence period.
The Broadcast programme rights and other inventory at the year end are shown in the table below Acquired programme rights 179 157 Commissions 86 69 Sports rights Section 3 Operating Assets and Liabilities Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information Financial Statements Notes to the Financial Statements Section 3 Operating Assets and Liabilities continued 138 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Broadcast programme and transmission commitments Transmission commitments are the contracted future payments under transmission supply agreements that require the use of transponder assets for a period of up to ten years with payments increasing over time limited by specific RPI caps.
These have been represented as a commitment in 2017 see operating leases section in note 2.1 for details.
Programming commitments are transactions entered into in the ordinary course of business with programme suppliers sports organisations and film distributors in respect of rights to broadcast on the ITV network.
Commitments in respect of these transactions which are not reflected in the statement of financial position are due for payment as follows
Programme
Total
Within one year Later than one year and not more than five years More than five years 211 1433
Programme
Represented
Total
Within one year Later than one year and not more than five years More than five years 9tel1355 1604 Studios production costs Production inventory comprises the costs incurred by ITV Studios in producing a programme where the programme is part way through the production process and not yet availa ble for delivery to a broadcaster.
Inventory is recognised within current assets at the value of the production cost incurred and is expensed in operating costs on delivery of episodes.
Also included here are dramas where production costs are partly funded by the commissioning network licence fee and tax credits if available.
The remaining deficit is funded by the Group and is recovered by future distribution sales.
Once the production is complete the deficit is classified as a distribution right.
The Studios programme rights and other inventory at the year end are shown in the table below Production costs 247 153 3.1.2 Distribution rights Accounting policies Distribution rights are programme rights the Group buys from producers to derive future revenue principally through licensing to other broadcasters.
These are classified as noncu rrent assets as these rights are used to derive longterm economic benefit for the Group.
Distribution rights are recognised initially at cost and charged through operating costs in the income statement over a period not exceeding five years reflecting the valu e and pattern in which the right is consumed.
Judgement is required when estimating future patterns of consumption.
Advances paid for the acquisition of distribution rights are disclosed as distribution rights as soon as they are co ntracted.
These advances are not expensed until the programme is available for distribution.
Up to that point they are assessed annually for impairment through the reassessment of the future sales expected to be earned from that title.
The net book value of distribution rights at the year end is as follows Distribution rights 19 31 During the year 35 million was charged to the income statement 2016 38 million.
Financial Statements 138 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 3.1.3 Trade and other receivables Accounting policies Trade receivables are recognised initially at the value of the invoice sent to the customer and subsequently at the amounts considered recoverable amortised cost.
Where payments are not due for more than one year they are shown in the financial statements at their net present va lue to reflect the economic cost of delayed payment.
The Group provides goods and services to substantially all its customers on credit terms.
Estimates are used in determining the level of receivables that will not in the opinion of the Directors be collected.
These estimates include such factors as historical experience the current state of the UK and overseas economies and industry specific factors.
A provision for impairment of trade receivables is established when there is sufficient evidence that the Group will not be able to collect all amounts due.
The carrying value of trade receivables is considered to approximate fair value.
Trade and other receivables can be analysed as follows Due within one year Trade receivables 311 315 Other receivables 51 39 Prepaid employmentlinked consideration  21 Prepayments and accrued income 15telDue after more than one year Trade receivables 19 12 Accrued income and other receivables Total trade and other receivables 541 565 In 2016 prepaid employmentlinked consideration of 21 million related to the acquisition of Talpa Media in 2015.
This represented the portion of the initial consideration of 150 million that was recoverable from the seller in the event he left within the initial two years following acquisition.
This amount was amortised over the two years to 31 March 2017 and recognised as exceptional expense see note 2.2.
330 million 2016 327 million of total trade receivables stated net of provisions for impairment are aged as follows.
Current 275 299 Up to 30 days overdue 28 19 Between 30 and 90 days overdue 16 6 Over 90 days overdue Movements in the Groups provision for impairment of trade receivables and accrued income can be shown as follows At 1 January 4 5 Charged during the year  insured trade receivable provision note 2.2 30 Charged during the year  other receivables 5 3 Unused amounts reversed 4 4 At 31 December 35 4 Of the provision total 4 million relates to balances overdue by more than 90 days 2016 3 million and less than 1 million relates to current balances 2016 1 million.
30 million of the provision relates to the overdue Talent receivable which is impairing 14 million of trade receivables and 16 million of accrued income.
The provision for these insured receivables net of insurance excess has been recognised as an exceptional expense see note 2.2.
Section 3 Operating Assets and Liabilities Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information Financial Statements Notes to the Financial Statements Section 3 Operating Assets and Liabilities continued 140 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 3.1.4 Trade and other payables due within one year Accounting policies Trade payables are recognised at the value of the invoice re ceived from a supplier.
The carrying value of current and noncurrent trade payables is considered to approximate fair value.
Trade and other payables due within one year can be analysed as follows Trade payables 63 71 VAT and social security 67 61 Other payables 234 186 Acquisitionrelated liabilities  employmentlinked contingent consideration 34 72 Acquisitionrelated liabilities  payable to sellers under put options agreed on acquisition 42 33 Accruals 371 332 Deferred income 218 205 1029 960 3.1.5 Trade and other payables due after more than one year Trade and other payables due after more than one year can be analysed as follows Trade payables 68 57 Other payables 21 10 Acquisitionrelated liabilities  employmentlinked contingent consideration 54 38 Acquisitionrelated liabilities  payable to sellers under put options agreed on acquisition Trade payables primarily relate to film creditors for which payment is due after more than one year.
3.1.6 Working capital management Cash and working capital management continues to be a key focus.
During the year the cash outflow from working capital was 58 million 2016 outflow of 28 million derived as follows Increase in programme rights and other inventory and distribution rights 94 35 Decreaseincrease in receivables 13 56 Increase in payables 23 63 Working capital outflow 58 28 The working capital outflow for the year excludes the impact of balances acquired on the acquisition of subsidiaries during the year see note 3.4.
Financial Statements 140 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Keeping it simple The following section shows the physical assets used by the Group to operate the business generating revenues and profits.
These assets include office buildings and studios as well as equipment used in broadcast transmission programme production and support activities.
The cost of these assets is the amount initially paid for them.
A depreciation expense is charged to the income statement to reflect annual wear and tear and the reduced value of the asset over time.
Depreciation is calculated by estimating the number of years the Group expects the asset to be used useful economic life.
If there has been a technological change or decline in business performance the Directors review the value of the assets to ensure they have not fallen below their depreciated value.
If an assets value falls below its depreciated value an additional impairment charge is made against profit.
This section also explains the accounting policies followed by ITV and the specific estimates made in arriving at the net book value of these assets.
Accounting policies Property plant and equipment Property plant and equipment are stated at cost less accumulated depreciation and impairment losses.
Certain items of property plant and equipment that were revalued to fair valu e prior to 1 January 2004 the date of transition to IFRS are measured on the basis of deemed cost being the revalued amount less depreciation up to the date of transition.
Leases
Finance leases are those that transfer substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership to the lessee.
Determining whether a lease is a finance lease requires judgement as to whether substantially all of the risks and benefits of ownership have been transferred to the Group.
Estimates used by management in making this assessment include the useful economic life of assets the fair valu e of the asset and the discount rate applied to the total payments required under the lease.
Assets held under such leases are included within property plant and equipment and depreciated on a straightline basis over their estimated useful lives.
Outstanding finance lease obligations which comprise the principal plus accrued interest are included within borrowings.
The finance element of the agreements is charged to the income statement over the term of the lease on an effective interest basis.
All other leases are operating leases the rentals on which are charged to the income statement on a straightline basis over the lease term see note 2.1 for further details of operating lease commitments.
Depreciation
Depreciation is provided to write off the cost of property plant and equipment less estimated residual value on a straightline basis over their estimated useful lives.
The annual depreciation charge is sensitive to the estimated useful life of each asset and the expected residual value at the end of its life.
The major categories of property plant and equipment are depreciated as follows Asset class Depreciation policy Freehold land not depreciated Freehold buildings up to 60 years Leasehold improvements shorter of residual lease term or estimated useful life Vehicles equipment and fittings  3 to 20 years Equipment includes studio production and technology assets.
Assets under construction are not depreciated until the point at which the asset comes into use by the Group.
Section 3 Operating Assets and Liabilities Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information Financial Statements Notes to the Financial Statements Section 3 Operating Assets and Liabilities continued 142 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Impairment of assets Property plant and equipment that is subject to depreciation is reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may no t be recoverable.
Indicators of impairment may include changes in technology and business performance.
Property plant and equipment Property plant and equipment can be analysed as follows Freehold land and buildings Improvements to leasehold land and buildings Vehicles equipment and fittings
Long
Short
Owned
Finance leases
At 1 January Additions   2 Acquisitions 3 Foreign exchange
Disposals and retirements At 31 December Additions  6 Acquisitions 7 Foreign exchange Disposals and retirements  2 At 31 December
At 1 January Charge for the year Foreign exchange
Disposals and retirements At 31 December Charge for the year 8 2 Foreign exchange Disposals and retirements  2 At 31 December Net book value At 31 December At 31 December Included within property plant and equipment are assets in th e course of construction of 41 million 2016 19 million 16 million of which relates to the London property project refer to note 2.2 for further details.
Included within the depreciation charge for the year of 41 million is 11 million of accelerated depreciation relating to assets made redundant as a result of the property project.
This accelerated depreciation has been recorded as an exceptional item in 2017.
Refer to note 2.2 for further details.
In 2013 the Group acquired the freehold for the London Television Centre for 58 million although the Directors view is that the fair value of the property would be significantly higher than the carrying value.
Capital commitments There are 15 million of capital commitments at 31 December 2017 2016 4 million.
Financial Statements 142 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Keeping it simple The following section shows the nonphysical assets used by the Group to generate revenue and profits.
These assets include formats and brands customer contracts and relationships contractual arrangements licences software development film libraries and goodwill.
The cost of these assets is the amount that the Group has paid or where there has been a business combination the fair value of the specific intangible assets that could be sold separately or which arise from legal rights.
In the case of goodwill its cost is the amount the Group has paid in acquiring a business over and above the fair value of the individual assets and liabilities acquired.
The value of goodwill is the intangible value that comes from for example a uniquely strong market position and the outstanding productivity of its employees.
The value of intangible assets with the exception of goodwill reduces over the number of years the Group expects to use the asset the useful economic life via an annual amortisation charge to the income statement.
Where there has been a technological change or decline in business performance the Directors review the value of assets including goodwill to ensure they have not fallen below their amortised value.
Should an assets value fall below its amortised value an additional impairment charge is made against profit.
This section explains the accounting policies applied and the specific judgements and estimates made by the Directors in arriving at the net book value of these assets.
Accounting policies
Goodwill represents the future economic benefits that arise from assets that are not capable of being individually identified and separately recognised.
The goodwill recognised by the Group has all arisen as a result of business combinations.
Goodwill is stated at its recoverable amount being cost less any accumulated impairment losses and is allocated to the business to which it relates.
Due to changes in accounting standards goodwill has been calculated using three different methods depending on the date the relevant business was purchased.
Method 1 All business combinations that have occurred since 1 January 2009 were accounted for using the acquisition method.
Under this method goodwill is measured as the fair value of the consideration transferred including the recognition of any part of the business not yet owned noncontrolling interests less the fair value of the identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed all measured at the acquisition date.
Any contingent consideration expected to be transferred in the future will be recognised at fair valu e at the acquisition date and recognised within other payables.
Contingent consideration classified as an asset or liability that is a financial instrument is measured at fair value with changes in fair value recognised in the income statement.
The determination of fair value is based on discounted cash flows.
The key assumptions take into consideration the probability of meeting each performance target and the discount rate.
Where less than 100% of a subsidiary is acquired and ca ll and put options are granted over the remaining interest a noncontrolling interest is initially recognised in equity at fair value which is established based on the value of the put option.
A call option is recognised as a derivative financial instrument carried at fair value.
The put option is recognised as a liability within other payables carried at the present value of the put option exercise price and a corresponding charge is included in merger and other reserves.
Any su bsequent remeasurement of the put option liability is recognised within finance income or cost.
Subsequent adjustments to the fair value of net assets acquired can only be made within 12 months of the acquisition date and only if fair values were determined provisionally at an earlier reporting date.
These adjustments are accounted for from the date of acquisition.
Acquisitions of noncontrolling interests are accounted for as transactions with owners and therefore no goodwill is recognised as a result of such transactions.
Transaction costs incurred in connection with those business combinations such as legal fees due diligence fees and other professional fees are expensed as incurred.
The Directors consider these costs to reflect the cost of acquisition and to form a part of the capital transaction and highlight them separately as exceptional items.
Section 3 Operating Assets and Liabilities Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information Financial Statements Notes to the Financial Statements Section 3 Operating Assets and Liabilities continued 144 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Method 2 All business combinations that o ccurred between 1 January 2004 and 31 December 2008 were accounted for using the purchase method in accordance with IFRS 3 B usiness Combinations .
Goodwill on those combinations represents the difference between the cost of the acquisition and the fair value of the identifiable net assets acquired and did not include the value of the noncontrolling interest.
Transaction costs incurred in connection with those business combinations such as legal fees due diligence fees and other professional fees were included in the cost of acquisition.
Method 3 For business combinations prior to 1 January 2004 goodwill is included at its deemed cost which represents the amount recorded under UK GAAP at that time less accumulated amortisation up to 31 December 2003.
The classification and accounting treatment of business combinations occurring prior to 1 January 2004 the date of transition to IFRS has not been reconsidered as permitted under IFRS 1.
Other intangible assets Intangible assets other than goodwill are th ose that are distinct and can be sold sepa rately or which arise from legal rights.
The main intangible assets the Group has valued are formats brands licences contractual arrangements customer contracts and relationships and libraries.
Within ITV there are two types of other intangible assets th ose assets directly purchased by the Group for daytoday operational purposes such as software licences and development and intangible assets identified as part of an acquisition of a business.
Intangible assets acquired directly by the Group are stated at cost less accumulated amortisation.
Those separately identified intangible assets acquired as part of an acquisition or business combination are shown at fair value at the date of acquisition less accumulated amortisation.
Each class of intangible assets valuation method on initial recognition amortisation method and estimated useful life is set out in the table below Class of intangible asset Amortisation method Estimated useful life Valuation method Brands Straightline 8 to 14 years Applying a royalty rate to the expected future revenue over the life of the brand.
Formats Straightline up to 8 years Expected future cash flows from those assets existing at the date of acquisition are estimated.
If applicable a contributory charge is deducted for the use of other assets needed to exploit the cash flow.
The net cash flow is then discounted back to present value.
Customer contracts Straightline or reducing balance as appropriate up to 6 years
Straightline 5 to 10 years
Straightline up to 10 years depending on the contract terms Expected future cash flows from those contracts existing at the date of acquisition are estimated.
If applicable a contributory charge is deducted for the use of other assets needed to exploit the cash flow.
The net cash flow is then discounted back to present value.
Licences Straightline 11 to 29 years depending on term of licence Startup basis of expected future cash flows existing at the date of acquisition.
If applicable a contributory charge is deducted for the use of other assets needed to exploit the cash flow.
The net cash flow is then discounted back to present value.
PSB licences are valued as a startup business with only the licence in place.
Libraries and other Sum of digits or straightline as appropriate up to 20 years Initially at cost and subsequently at cost less accumulated amortisation.
Software licences and development Straightline 1 to 5 years Initially at cost and subsequently at cost less accumulated amortisation.
Financial Statements 144 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Determining the fair value of intangible assets arising on acquisition requires judgement.
The Directors make estimates regarding the timing and amount of future cash flows derive d from exploiting the assets being acquired.
The Directors then estimate an appropriate discount rate to apply to the forecast cash flows.
Such estimates are based on current budgets and forecasts extrapolated for an appropriate period taking into account growth rates operating costs and the expected useful lives of assets.
Judgements are also made regarding whether and for how long licences will be renewed this drives our amortisation policy for those assets.
The Directors estimate the appropriate discount rate using pretax rates that reflect current market assessments of the time value of money and the risks specific to the assets or businesses being acquired.
Amortisation
Amortisation is charged to the income statement over the estimated useful lives of intangible assets unless such lives are judged to be indefinite.
Indefinite life assets such as goodwill are not amortised but are tested for impairment at each year end.
Impairment
Goodwill is not subject to amortisation and is tested annually for impairment and when circumstances indicate that the carrying value may be impaired.
Other intangible assets are subject to amortisation and are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the amount carried in the statemen t of financial position is less than its recoverable amount.
Determining whether the carrying amount of intangible assets has any indication of impairment requires judgement.
Any impairment is recognised in the income statement.
An impairment test is performed by assessing the recoverable amount of each asset or for goodwill the cash generating unit CGUor group of CGUs related to the goodwill.
Total assets which include goodwill are grouped at the lowest levels for which there are separately identifiable cash flows.
The recoverable amount is the higher of an assets fair value less costs to sell and value in use.
The value in use is based on the present value of the future cash flows expected to arise from the asset.
In testing for impairment estimates are used in deriving cash flows and the discount rates.
Such estimates reflect current market assessments of the risks specific to the a sset and the time value of money.
The estimation process is complex due to the inherent risks and uncertainties associated with longterm forecasting.
If different estimates of the projected future cash flows or a different selection of an appropriate discount rate or longterm growth rate were made these changes could materially alter the projected valu e of the cash flows of the asset and as a consequence materially different amounts would be reported in the financial statements.
Impairment losses in respect of goodwill cannot be reversed.
In respect of assets other than goodwill an impairment loss is reversed if there has been a change in the estimates used to determine the recoverable amount.
An impairment loss is reversed only to the extent that the assets carryi ng amount does not exceed the carrying amount that would have been determined net of depreciation or amortisation if no impairment loss had been recognised.
Section 3 Operating Assets and Liabilities Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information Financial Statements Notes to the Financial Statements Section 3 Operating Assets and Liabilities continued 146 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Intangible assets Intangible assets can be analysed as follows
Formats and brands
Contractual arrangements
Libraries and other
Total
Cost
At 1 January 2016 3 4970
Acquisitions 44 3   55   102 Foreign exchange  4  112 At 31 December 2016 3835 535 420 1tel5197 Additions       23 23 Acquisitions 85  21     106 Foreign exchange 21 9 4   2  18 Disposals retirements and impairment 10  1    5 16 At 31 December 2017 3889 544 436 1tel5292 Amortisation and impairment At 1 January 2016 2 3470 Charge for the year Foreign exchange At 31 December 2016 2 3573 Charge for the year Foreign exchange  3 4   1  2 Disposals retirements and impairment   1    5 6 At 31 December 2017 2 3647 Net book value At 31 December 2017 1235 241 37  70 19 43 1645 At 31 December 2016 1 1624 Gurney Productions LLC has been treated as if it would have been wound down with no furt her results to be recognised in the accounts.
A provision of 13 million has been recognised against onerous contracts and various assets and liabilities relating to Gurney Productions LLC which includes 3 million writeoff of goodwill.
The net effect of these provisions and the derecognition of noncontrolling interest is less than 1 million see note 4.6.6.
Goodwill impairment tests The carrying amount of goodwill for each CGU is represented as follows Broadcast and Online 386 386 SDN 76 76 ITV Studios 773 719 1235 1181 3 million of goodwill was written off in the ITV Studios CGU in relation to Gurney Productions LLC.
There has been no impairment charge for any CGU during the year 2016 nil.
When assessing impairment the recoverable amount of each CGU is based on value in use calculations.
These calculations require the use of estimates specifically pretax cash flow projections longterm growth rates and a pretax market discount rate.
Cash flow projections are based on the Groups current five year plan.
Beyond the five year plan these projections are extrapolated using an estimated nominal longterm growth rate of 1.5% 2016 2%.
The growth rate used is consistent with the longterm average growth rates for both the industry and the countries in which the CGUs are located and is appropriate because these are longterm businesses.
The discount rate has been revised for each CGU to reflect the latest market assumptions for the riskfree rate the equity risk premium and the net cost of debt.
There is current ly no reasonably possible change in discount rate that would reduce the headroom in any CGU to zero.
Financial Statements 146 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Broadcast and Online The goodwill in this CGU arose as a result of the acquisition of broadcasting businesses since 1999 the largest of which was the merger of Carlton and Granada in 2004 to form ITV plc which was treated as an acquisition of Carlton for accounting purposes.
Broadcast and Online goodwill also incl udes the goodwill arising on acquisition of UTV Limited in February 2016.
The main assumptions on which the forecast cash flow projections for this CGU are based include the performance and share of the television advertising market share of commercial impacts programme and other costs and the pretax market discount rate.
The key assumption in assessing the recoverable amount of Broadcast and Online goodwill is the size of the television advertising market.
In forming its assumptions about the television advertising market the Group has used a combination of longterm trends industry forecasts and inhouse estimates which place greater emphasis on recent experience.
No impairment was identified.
Also as part of the impairment review a sensitivity of up to 10% of growth was applied to 2018 and 8% to 2019 with no subsequent recovery with no impairment identified.
The Directors believe that currently no reasonably possible change in these assumptions would reduce the headroom in this CGU to zero.
An impairment charge of 2309 million was recognised in the Broadcast and Online CGU in 2008 as a result of the downturn in the shortterm outlook for the advertising market.
The current year impairment review set out above results in significant headroom in excess of the 2008 impairment amount.
Even though the advertising market has substantially improved since then and the impaired assets are still owned and operated by the Group due to accounting rules the impairment cannot be reversed.
A pretax market discount rate of 9.5% 2016 10.4% has been used in discounting the projected cash flows.
SDN
Goodwill was recognised when the Group acquired SDN the licence operator for DTT Multiplex A in 2005.
It represented the wider strategic benefits of the acquisition specific to the Group principally the enhanced ability to promote Freeview as a platform business relationships wi th the channels which are on Multiplex A and additional capacity available from 2010.
The main assumptions on which the forecast cash flows are based are income to be earned from renewals of medium term contracts the market price of available multiplex video streams and the pretax market discount rate.
These assumptions have been determined by using a combination of current contract terms recent market transactions and inhouse estimates of video stream availability and pricing.
No impairment was identified.
As part of the impairment review sensitivity was applied to the main assumptions with no impairment identified 2018 10% growth 2019 0% growth.
The Directors believe that currently no reasonably possible change in the cash flow and availability assumptions would reduce the headroom in this CGU to zero.
A pretax market discount rate of 11.4% 2016 11.7% has been used in discounting the projected cash flows.
ITV Studios The goodwill for ITV Studios has arisen as a result of the acquisition of production businesses since 1999.
Significant balances were created from the acquisition by Granada of United News and Medias production businesses in 2000 and the merger of Granada and Carlton in 2004 to form ITV plc.
ITV Studios goodwill also includes the goodwill arising from recent acquisitions since 2012 with the largest acquisitions being Leftfield in 2014 followed by Talpa in 2015.
The key assumptions on which the forecast cash flows for the whole CGU were based include revenue including international revenue and the ITV Studios share of ITV output growth in commissions and hours produced margins and the pretax market discount rate.
These assumptions have been determined by using a combination of extrapolation of historical trends within the business industry estimates and inhouse estimates of growth rates in all markets.
No impairment was identified.
As part of the impairment review sensitivity was applied to the main assumptions with no impairment identified 2018 10% growth 2019 0% growth.
The Directors believe that currently no reasonably possible change in the cash flow assumptions would reduce the headroom in this CGU to zero.
A pretax market discount rate of 10.8% 2016 11.6% has been used in discounting the projected cash flows.
Following the acquisitions made by ITV Studios in 2017 th e Directors considered how assets and resources are shared across the ITV Studios division and the level of integration within the management structure for the purposes of reporting and strategic decisionmaking.
They concluded that a single ITV Studios CGU continues to remain appropriate.
Section 3 Operating Assets and Liabilities Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information Financial Statements Notes to the Financial Statements Section 3 Operating Assets and Liabilities continued 148 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Keeping it simple The following section outlines what the Group has acquired in the year.
Most of the deals are structured so that a large part of the payment made to the sellers consideration is determined based on future performance.
This is done so that the Group can both align incentives for growth while reducing risk so that total consideration reflects actual performance not expected.
IFRS accounting standards require some of this consideration to be included in the purchase price used in determining goodwill contingent consideration.
Examples of contingent consideration include topup payments and recoupable performance adjustments.
Any remaining consideration is required to be recognised as a liability or expense outside of acquisition accounting put option liabilities and employment linked contingent payments known as earnout payments.
The Group considers the income statement impact of all consideration to be capital in nature and so excludes it from adjusted profit.
Therefore for each acquisition below the distinction between the types of consideration has been explained in detail.
Acquisitions
During the year the Group made payments totalling 54 million for five acquisitions.
All acquisitions have been included in the results of the ITV Studios operating segment.
The businesses fit with the strategy of strengthening the Groups existing position as a producer for major television networks in the UK Europe US and OTT platforms.
Tetra Media Studios SAS On 28 February 2017 the Group purchased 65.04% of the share capital of Tetra Media Studios SAS a French television production group which specialises in drama including flagship crime series Profilage now in its seventh series and political crime thriller Les Hommes de lOmbre.
Tomorrow ITV Studios LLC On 1 April 2017 the Group gained control of Tomorrow ITV Studios LLC due to the conversion of its 75% preference share capital into 75% ordinary share capital.
The company produced Aquarius a US period crime series which aired on NBC and is producing Snowpiercer an action scifi drama series expected to be released in the US in 2018.
World Productions Limited On 30 April 2017 the Group purchased 92% of the share capital of World Productions Limited a company which specialises in producing drama series with titles including Line of Duty an awardwinning British police crime drama and Born to Kill a British thriller television miniseries.
Elk Production AB On 21 June 2017 the Group acquired 96% of the share capital of Elk Production AB.
Elk is one of the leading independent production companies in Sweden.
Key titles produced by the company include Ninja Warrior an obstacle course competition series Dessertmstarna a dessert cooking competition and awardwinning TV series Wahlgrens and Parneviks.
Cattleya S.
On 11 October 2017 the Group purchased 51% of the share capital of Cattleya Srl an Italian scripted production company behind international hit TV dramas Gomorrah Romanzo Criminale and Suburra Netflixs first Italian original TV series.
Acquisition accounting Put and call options have been granted over the noncontroll ing interest of all five acquisitions exercisable over the next two to seven years.
The total maximum consider ation for the acquisitions is capped at 418 million undiscounted.
All future payments are dependent on future performance of the business and linked to ongoing employment.
Goodwill totalling 85 million arising on these acquisitions is not expected to be deductible for tax purposes and represents the value placed on the opportunity to grow the content produced by the Group.
Financial Statements 148 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Acquisitions in 2016 In 2016 the Group completed the acquisition of UTV Limited which has been included in the results of the Broadcast and Online operating segment.
The business fits with the strategy of strengthening the Groups freetoair business and enables it to run a more efficient network.
The following section provides a summary of the acquisition.
UTV Limited On 29 February 2016 the Group acquired a 100% controllin g interest in UTV Limited which together with its 100% subsidiary UTV Ireland Limited owned the television assets of UTV Media plc for cash consideration of 100 million.
UTV is the marketleading commercial broadcaster in Northern Ireland broadcasting ITV content alongside highquality local programming.
The strategic rationale for the acquisition was to purchase the Northern Irish Channel 3 licence.
Before ITVs acquisition UTV Limited launched a new dedicated channel for the Republic of Ireland in 2015 via its subsidiary UTV Ireland Limited.
Management concluded that the best prospect of delivering a strong and sustainable Irish broadcaster was to bring UTV Ireland under common ownership with TV3.
ITV therefore sold the company to Virgin Media owner of TV3 on 30 November 2016 for consideration of 10 million.
Acquisition accounting Intangibles being the value placed on brands and licences of 58 million were identified and goodwill was valued at 44 million.
Goodwill represents the value placed on the opportunity to diversify and grow the business by the Group.
The goodwill arising on acquisition is not expected to be deductible for tax purposes.
Other fair value adjustments have been made to the opening balance sheet though none of them are individually significant.
Section 3 Operating Assets and Liabilities Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information Financial Statements Notes to the Financial Statements Section 3 Operating Assets and Liabilities continued 150 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Effect of acquisition The acquisitions noted above had the following impact on the Group assets and liabilities
Total
Consideration transferred Initial consideration net of cash acquired Note A 35 97 Total consideration 35 97 Fair value of previously held preference shares Note B 29 Fair value of net assets acquired Property plant and equipment Intangible assets 21 58 Deferred tax liabilities 8 11 Deferred tax assets 6 Inventory 60 Trade and other receivables 49 5 Trade and other payables 100 7 Borrowings 35 Net assets held for sale  4 Fair value of net assets 4 53 Noncontrolling interest measured at fair value Note C 25 Goodwill 85 44 Other information Present value of the expected liability on put options 23 Present value of the expected earnout payment at acquisition 11 Contributions to the Groups performance From date of acquisition
EBITA before exceptionals  8 Proforma  January to December Revenue 131 33 EBITA before exceptionals  9 Provisional values as the acquisition accounting is finalised in the 12 month period following acquisition.
Note A Consideration for all acquisitions is net of cash acqu ired and estimated debt and working capital settlements.
Cash acq uired during the period is 19 million 2016 3 million.
Note B The acquisition of Tomorrow Studios was effected by the right to convert of the Groups noncontrolling preference shar es into a controlling stake of ordinary shares.
On change of control the IFRS accounting standards require the Group to fair value the previously held preference shares and include within the calculation of goodwill.
Note C Noncontrolling interest arises where the Group acquires less than 100% of the equity interest in a business but obtai ns control.
Financial Statements 150 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Keeping it simple The Group holds noncontrolling interests in a number of different entities.
Accounting for these investments and the Groups share of any profits and losses depends on the level of control or influence the Group is granted via its interest.
The three principal types of nonconsolidated investments are joint arrangements joint ventures or joint operations associates and availableforsale investments.
A joint arrangement is an investment where the Group has joint control with one or more third parties.
An associate is an entity over which the Group has significant influence i. power to participate in the investees financial and operating decisions.
Any other investment is an availableforsale investment.
Accounting policies For joint ventures and associates the Group applies equity accounting.
Under this method it recognises the investment in the entity at cost and subsequently adjusts this for its share of profits or losses which are recognised in the income statement within nonoperating items and included in adjusted profit.
Where the Group has invested in associates by acquiring preference shares or convertible debt instruments the share of profit recognised is usually nil as no equity interest exists.
Availableforsale investments are held at fair value unless the investment is a startup business in which case it is valued at cost and assessed for impairment.
The carrying amount of each category of our investments is represented as follows Joint ventures 2 4 Associates 68 60 Availableforsale investments The carrying amount of associates has increased in the year due to investments made in Blumhouse and Circle of Confusion two independent studios focusing on original premium scripted and unscripted programming.
This was offset by the acquisition of a controlling stake in ITV To morrow Studios in which the Group previously held an investment see note 3.4.
Further smaller investments have been made in line with Groups strategy to grow the international content business.
Please refer to page 188 for the list of principal investments held at 31 December 2017.
Section 3 Operating Assets and Liabilities Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information Financial Statements Notes to the Financial Statements Section 3 Operating Assets and Liabilities continued 152 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Keeping it simple A provision is recognised by the Group where an obligation exists relating to events in the past and it is probable that cash will be paid to settle it.
A provision is made where the Group is not certain how much cash will be required to settle a liability so an estimate is required.
The main estimates relate to the cost of holding properties that are no longer in use by the Group the likelihood of settling legal claims and contracts the Group has entered into that are now unprofitable.
Accounting policies A provision is recognised in the statement of financial po sition when the Group has a present legal or constructive obligation arising from past events it is probable cash will be paid to settle it and the amount can be estimated reliably.
Provisions are determined by discounting the expected future cash flows by a rate that reflects current market assessments of the time value of money and the risks specific to the liability.
The unwinding of the discount is recognised as a financing cost in the income statem ent.
The value of the provision is determined based on assumptions and estimates in relation to the amount and timing of actual cash flows which are dependent on future events.
Provisions
The movements in provisions during the year are as follows
Property provisions Legal and Other provisions
At 1 January 2017  2 21 23 Additions 3 3  6 Utilised   5 5 Released  1  1 At 31 December Provisions of 16 million are classified as current liabilities 2016 19 million.
Unwind of the discount is nil in 2017 and 2016.
Contract provisions comprise onerous commitments on playout and related services that are not expected to be utilised over the remaining contract period.
Property provisions primarily relate to expected dilapidation costs at temporary rental properties.
Legal and Other provisions totalling 16 million 2016 21 million primarily relate to potential liabilities that may arise as a result of Boxclever having been placed into administrative receivership most of which relate to pension arrangements.
In 2011 the Determinations Panel of the Pensions Regulator determined that Financial Support Directions should be issued against certain Group companies which would require the Group to put in place financial support for the Boxclever Scheme.
The Group is challengin g this in the Upper Tribunal.
The timing of the Upper Tribunals decision is not yet clear.
The Directors having taken advice believe that they have a strong case.
There are significant points of legal principle at issue and consequently any potential liability may take a significant period to resolve.
The Directors continue to believe that the provision held is appropriate.
The utilisation of provisions during the year was due to settlement of various other legal matters.
Financial Statements 152 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Keeping it simple In this note we explain the accounting policies governing the Groups pension schemes followed by analysis of the components of the net defined benefit pension deficit including assumptions made and where the related movements have been recognised in the financial statements.
In addition we have placed text boxes to explain some of the technical terms used in the disclosure.
What are the Groups pension schemes There are two types of pension schemes.
A Defined Contribution scheme that is open to ITV employees and a number of Defined Benefit schemes that have been closed to new members since 2006 and closed to future accrual in 2017.
In 2016 on acquisition of UTV Limited the Group took over the UTV Defined Benefit Scheme which remains open to future accrual.
What is a Defined Contribution scheme The Defined Contribution scheme is where the Group makes fixed payments into a separate fund on behalf of those employees participating in saving for their retirement.
ITV has no further obligation to the participating employee and the risks and rewards associated with this type of scheme are assumed by the members rather than the Group.
Although the Trustee of the scheme makes available a range of investment options it is the members responsibility to make investment decisions relating to their retirement benefits.
What is a Defined Benefit scheme In a Defined Benefit scheme members receive payments during retirement the value of which is dependent on factors such as salary and length of service.
The Group makes contributions to the scheme a separate trusteeadministered fund that is not consolidated in these financial statements but is reflected on the defined benefit pension deficit line on the consolidated statement of financial position.
It is the responsibility of the Trustee to manage and invest the assets of the Scheme and its funding position.
The Trustee appointed according to the terms of the schemes documentation is required to act in the best interest of the members and is responsible for managing and investing the assets of the scheme and its funding position.
The Group has a Pension Steering Committee which liaises with the Trustee and has oversight of the management of the pension schemes and underlying risks.
In the event of poor returns the Group may need to address this through a combination of increased levels of contribution or by making adjustments to the scheme.
Schemes can be funded where regular cash contributions are made by the employer into a fund which is invested or unfunded where no regular money or assets are required to be put aside to cover future payments but in some cases security is required.
The accounting defined benefit pension deficit IAS 19 is different from the actuarial valuation deficit as they are calculated on the basis of different assumptions such as discount rate.
The accounting defined benefit pension deficit IAS 19 figure is calculated as at the balance sheet date and the actuarial deficit was calculated for the last triennial valuation as of 1 January 2014 with the 1 January 2017 valuation expected to be agreed in early 2018.
Accounting policies Defined contribution scheme Obligations under the Groups defined contribution schemes are recognised as an operating cost in the income statement as incurred.
For 2017 total contributions expensed were 18 million 2016 16 million.
Section 3 Operating Assets and Liabilities Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information Financial Statements Notes to the Financial Statements Section 3 Operating Assets and Liabilities continued 154 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Defined benefit scheme The Groups obligation in respect of the Defined Benefit Scheme the Scheme is calculated by estimating the amount of future retirement benefit that eligible employees members have earned during their services.
That benefit payable in the future is discounted to todays value and then the fair value of scheme assets is deducted to measure the defined benefit pension position.
The liabilities of the Scheme are measured by discounting th e best estimate of future cash flows to be paid using the projected unit method.
These calculations are complex and are performed by a qualified actuary.
There are many judgements and estimates necessary to calculate the Groups estimated liabilities the main assumptions are set out later in this section.
Movements in assumptions during the year are called actuarial gains and losses and these are recognised in the period in which they arise through the statement of comprehensive income.
The latest triennial valuation of the ITV Pension Scheme was undertaken as at 1 January 2014 by an independent actuary appointed by the Trustee of the Scheme and agreed in early 2016.
The next triennial valuation will be as at 1 January 2017 and is expected to be agreed during H1 2018.
This will drive subsequent contribution rates.
An unfunded scheme in relation to four former Granada executives is accounted for under IAS 19 and the Group is responsible for meeting the pension obligations as they fall due.
The unfunded scheme has additional security compared with the ITV main scheme in the form of a charge over gilts held by the Group.
Therefore the 38 million securitised gilts have been classified as other pension assets to reflect the Groups net pension deficit.
In December 2016 following a member consultation the Group decided to close the ITV Pension Scheme to future benefit accrual with effect from 28 February 2017.
Members benefits are no longer subject to a capped pensionable salary the benefits are now linked to statutory revaluation until retirement.
This decision gave rise to a oneoff noncash 19 million curtailment charge recognised in 2016.
On 29 February 2016 the Group acquired 100% of the assets and liabilities of UTV Limited including responsibility for a defined benefit pension scheme.
Due to the size of the scheme within this note the Directors present the results and position of the UTV Scheme combined with the existing ITV Schemes.
The next triennial valuation will be as at 30 June 2017 and is expected to be agreed during H1 2018.
Unless otherwise stated references to the Schemes within this note refer to the ITV Pension Scheme the unfunded scheme and the UTV Scheme combined.
The sponsoring company of the ITV Pension Scheme is ITV Services Limited the unfunded scheme is Granada Group Limited and the UTV Scheme is sponsored by UTV Limited.
The defined benefit pension deficit Net pension deficit of 83 million at 31 December 2017 2016 328 million is stated after including the unfunded scheme security asset of 38 million 2016 39 million.
The totals recognised in the current and previous years are Total defined benefit scheme obligations 3987 4200 Total defined benefit scheme assets 3866 3833 Defined benefit pension deficit IAS 19 121 367 Presented as Defined benefit pension surplus  16 Defined benefit pension deficit 137 367 Defined benefit pension deficit IAS 19 121 367 Other pension asset 38 39 Net pension deficit 83 328 The defined benefit pension surplus relates solely to the UTV Scheme.
The defined benefit scheme assets in the UTV Scheme were 130 million as at 31 December 2017 2016 117 million and the defined benefit scheme obligations were 114 million 2016 117 million.
The remaining sections provide further detail of the value of the Schemes assets and liabilities how these are accounted for and the impact on the financial statements.
Financial Statements 154 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Defined benefit scheme obligations
What causes movements in the defined benefit pension obligations The areas that impact the defined benefit obligation the pension scheme liabilities position at the year end are as follows Current service cost  the cost to the Group of the future benefits earned by members that relates to the members service in the current year.
This is charged to operating costs in the income statement.
Past service cost  is a change in present value of the benefits built up by the members in the prior periods can be positive or negative resulting from changes to the existing plan as a result of an agreement between ITV and employees or as a result of significant reduction by ITV in the number of employees covered by the plan curtailment.
Interest cost  the pension obligations payable in the future are discounted to the present value at year end.
A discount factor is used to determine the current value today of the future cost.
The interest cost is the unwinding of one years movement in the present value of the obligation.
It is broadly determined by multiplying the discount rate at the beginning of the period by the updated present value of the obligation during the period.
The discount rate is a key assumption explained later in this section.
This interest cost is recognised through net financing costs in the income statement see note 4.4.
Actuarial gains or losses  there are broadly two causes of actuarial movements experience adjustments which arise when comparing assumptions made when estimating the liabilities and what has actually occurred and adjustments resulting from changes in actuarial assumptions e. change in mortality.
Key assumptions are explained in detail later in this section.
Actuarial gains or losses are recognised through other comprehensive income.
Benefits paid  any cash benefits paid out by the Scheme will reduce the obligation.
Oneoff events  for example the acquisition of UTV Limited set out above.
The movement in the present value of the Groups defined benefit obligation is analysed below Defined benefit obligation at 1 January 4200 3446 Current service cost 2 7 Curtailment charge Interest cost 107 131 Actuarial gainloss 121 664 UTV acquisition  98 Benefits paid 201 165 Defined benefit obligation at 31 December 3987 4200 Of the above total defined benefit obligation at 31 December 2017 58 million relates to unfunded schemes 2016 51 million including the scheme in relation to the four former Granada executives.
Section 3 Operating Assets and Liabilities Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information Financial Statements Notes to the Financial Statements Section 3 Operating Assets and Liabilities continued 156 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Assumptions used to estimate the Scheme obligations
What are the main assumptions used to estimate the Scheme obligations The main assumptions are An estimate of increases in pension payments The life expectancy of members The effect of inflation on all these factors The discount rate used to estimate the present day fair value of these obligations Future salary levels for the UTV Scheme and Future pensionable salary levels for the UTV Scheme.
How do we determine the appropriate assumptions The Group takes independent actuarial advice relating to the appropriateness of the assumptions used.
IFRS requires that we estimate a discount rate by reference to highquality fixed income investments in the UK that match the estimated term of the pension obligations.
The inflation assumption has been set by looking at the difference between the yields on fixed and indexlinked Government bonds.
The inflation assumption is used as a basis for the remaining financial assumptions except where caps have been implemented.
The discount rate has therefore been obtained using the yields available on AA rated corporate bonds which match projected cash flows.
The Groups estimate of the weighted average term of the liabilities is 15 years 2016 17 years.
The principal assumptions used in the Schemes valuations at the year end were Discount rate for Past service liabilities 2.50% 2.60% Future service liabilities 2.50% 2.70% Inflation assumption for Past service liabilities 3.15% 3.25% Future service liabilities 3.15% 3.20% Rate of pensionable salary increases UTV Pension Scheme 3.65% 3.75% Rate of increase in pension payment LPI 5% pension increases 2.95% 3.15% Rate of increase to deferred pensions CPI 2.15% 2.25% Limited Price Index.
The table below reflects published mortality investigation data in conjunction with the results of investigations into the mortality experience of Scheme members.
The assumed life expectations on retirement aretel 2016 Retiring today at age Males 27.1 22.5 27.1 22.4 Retiring in 20 years at age Males 28.7 23.9 28.8 23.9 The net pension deficit is sensitive to changes in assu mptions.
Those are disclosed further in this section.
Financial Statements 156 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Total defined benefit scheme assets
The Scheme holds assets across a number of different classes which are managed by the Trustee who consults with the Group on changes to its investment policy.
What are the pension Scheme assets At 31 December 2017 the Schemes assets were invested in a diversified portfolio that consisted primarily of equity and debt securities.
The tables below set out the major categories of assets.
Financial instruments are in place in order to provide protection against changes in market factors interest rates and inflation which could act to increase the net pension deficit.
One such instrument is the longevity swap which the Scheme transacted in 2011 to obtain protection against the effect of increases in the life expectation of the majority of pensioner members at that date.
Under the swap the Trustee agreed to make predetermined payments in return for payments to meet the specified pension obligations as they fall due irrespective of how long the members and their dependants live.
The difference in the present values of these two streams of payments is reflected in the Scheme assets.
The swap had a nil valuation at inception and using marketbased assumptions is subsequently adjusted for changes in the market life expectancy and market discount rates in line with its fair value.
How do we measure the pension Scheme assets Defined benefit scheme assets are measured at their fair value and can change due to the following Interest income on scheme assets  this is determined by multiplying the fair value of the Scheme assets by the discount rate both taken as of the beginning of the year.
This is recognised through net financing costs in the income statement Return on assets arise from differences between the actual return and interest income on Scheme assets and are recognised through other comprehensive income Employers contributions are paid into the Scheme to be managed and invested and Benefits and administrative expenses paid out by the Schemes will lower the fair value of the Schemes assets.
The movement in the fair value of the defined benefit schemes assets is analysed below Fair value of Scheme assets at 1 January 3833 3270 Interest income on Scheme assets 98 126 Return on assets excluding interest income 51 416 Employer contributions 90 93 UTV acquisition  98 Benefits paid 201 165 Administrative expenses paid 5 5 Fair value of Scheme assets at 31 December 3866 3833 The actual return on the Schemes assets being the sum of the interest income on Scheme assets and return on Scheme assets for the year ended 31 December 2017 was 149 million 2016 542 million.
Section 3 Operating Assets and Liabilities Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information Financial Statements Notes to the Financial Statements Section 3 Operating Assets and Liabilities continued 158 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 How are the Schemes assets invested At 31 December 2017 the Schemes assets were invested in a diversified portfolio that consisted primarily of equity and debt securities.
The Trustee is responsible for deciding the investment strategy for the schemes assets although changes in investment policies require consultation with the Group.
The assets are invested in different classes to hedge against unfavourable movements in the funding obligation.
When selecting the mix of assets to hold and considering their related risks and returns the Trustee will weigh up the variability of returns against the target longterm rate of return on the overall portfolio.
The fair value of the Schemes assets is shown in the following table by major category Market value Market value Liability hedging assets Fixed interest gilts 633 Indexlinked interest gilts 1456 Interest rate and inflation hedging derivatives swaps and repos 279 2368 61% 2083 54% Other bonds 865 22% 784 20% Return seeking investments Quoted equities 260 Infrastructure 88 Property 109 Hedge fundsalternatives 193 650 17% 1012 27% Other investments Cash and cash equivalents 240 Insurance policies 41 Longevity swap fair value 298 17  46 1% Total Scheme assets 3866 100% 3833 100% Included in the above are overseas assets of 978 million 2016 1304 million comprised of quoted equities of 244 million 2016 565 million and bonds of 734 million 2016 739 million.
The Trustee entered a longevity swap in 2011 which provides cash flow certainty by hedging the risk of increasing life expectancy over the next 70 years for 11700 of current pensioners at inception covering 1.7 billion of the pension obligation.
The fair value of the longevity swap equals the discounted value of the projected net cash flows resulting from the contract and has reduced in value in 2017 main ly due to a decrease in gilts yields over the year.
Financial Statements 158 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Defined pension deficit sensitivities
Which assumptions have the biggest impact on the Scheme It is important to note that comparatively small changes in the assumptions used may have a significant effect on the consolidated income statement and statement of financial position.
This sensitivity to change is analysed below to demonstrate how small changes in assumptions can have a large impact on the estimation of the defined benefit pension deficit.
The Trustee manages the investment mortality and inflation risks to ensure the pension obligations are met as they fall due.
The investment strategy is aimed at the valuation obligation rather than IAS 19 defined pension deficit value.
As such the effectiveness of the risk hedging strategies on a valuation basis will not be the same as on an accounting basis.
Those hedging strategies have significant impact on the movement in the net pension deficit as assumptions change offsetting the impacts on the obligation disclosed below.
In practice changes in one assumption may be accompanied by offsetting changes in another assumption although this is not always the case.
Changes in the assumptions may occur at the same time as changes in the market value of Scheme assets which may or may not offset the changes in assumptions.
Changes in assumptions have a different level of impact as the value of the net pension deficit fluctuates because the relationship between them is not linear.
The analysis below considers the impact of a single change in principal assumptions on the defined benefit obligation while keeping the other assumptions unchanged and does not take into account any risk hedging strategies Assumption Change in assumption Impact on defined benefit obligation Discount rate Increase by 0.1% Decrease by 60 million Decrease by 0.1% Increase by 60 million Rate of inflation Retail Price Index Increase by 0.1% Increase by 15 million Decrease by 0.1% Decrease by 25 million Rate of inflation Consumer Price Index Increase by 0.1% Increase by 10 million Decrease by 0.1% Decrease by 10 million Life expectations Increase by one year Increase by 110 million The sensitivity analysis has been determined by extrapolating the impact on the defined benefit obligation at the year end with changes in key assu mptions that might reasonably occur.
While the Schemes risk hedging strategy is aimed at a valu ation basis the Directors estimate that on an accounting basis it would significantly reduce the above impact on the defined benefit obligation.
In particular an increase in assumption of life expectations by one year would benefit from an estimated increase of the value of the longevity swap by 100 million reducing the net impact on the defined pension deficit to 10 million.
Further the ITV Pension Scheme invests in UK Government bonds and interest rate and inflation swap contracts and therefore movements in the defined benefit obligation ar e typically offset to an extent by asset movements.
Section 3 Operating Assets and Liabilities Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information Financial Statements Notes to the Financial Statements Section 3 Operating Assets and Liabilities continued 160 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
What was the impact of movements on the Schemes assets and liabilities The sections above describe how the Scheme obligations and assets are comprised and measured.
The following section sets out the impact of various movements and expenses on the Scheme on the Groups financial statements.
Amounts recognised through the income statement Amounts recognised through the income statement are as follows Amount charged to operating costs Current service cost 2 7 Scheme administration expenses 5 5 Amount charged to net financing costs Net interest on defined benefit obligation 9 5 Amount charged to exceptional costs Curtailment cost  19 Total charged in the consolidated income statement 16 36 Amounts recognised through the consolidated statement of comprehensive income The amounts recognised through the consolidated statement of comprehensive incomecost are Remeasurement gainslosses Return on scheme assets excluding interest income 51 416 Actuarial gainslosses on liabilities arising from change in experience adjustments 138 31 financial assumptions 12 868 demographic assumptions 29 173 Total recognised in the consolidated statement of comprehensive income 172 248 The 121 million actuarial gain on the Schemes liabilities was principally due to an experience gain of 138 million based on the use of updated membership data underlying the Trustees triennial valuation as at 1 January 2017.
The trueup of the membership data has resulted in a decrease in the liabilities.
The 51 million gain on the Schemes assets primarily results from increases in the market values of returnseeking investments which has led to assets outperforming expectations.
Financial Statements 160 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Addressing the defined benefit pension deficit
The Group works closely with the Trustee to agree appropriate levels of funding for the Scheme.
This involves agreeing a Schedule of Contributions at each triennial valuation which specifies the contribution rates for the employer and where relevant scheme members and the date these contributions are due.
A recovery plan setting out the steps that will be taken to address a funding shortfall is also agreed.
In the event that the Groups defined benefit scheme is in a net liability position the Directors must take steps to manage the size of the deficit.
Apart from the funding agreements mentioned above this could involve pledging additional assets to the Scheme as was the case in the SDN and London Television Centre pension funding partnerships.
The levels of ongoing contributions to the Scheme are base d on the current service costs as assessed by the Scheme Trustee and the expected future cash flows of the Scheme .
Normal employer contributions in 2018 for UTV Scheme current service and administration expenses are expected to be in the region of 5 million 2017 6 million and deficit funding contributions for the main ITV scheme in 2018 are expected to be 66 million 2017 66 million assuming current contribution rates continue as agreed with the Trustee.
The Group has two assetbacked pension funding agreements with the Trustee and makes annual payments of 11 million for 12 years from 2011 and 2.5 million increasing by 5% per annum until 2038.
In 2018 a payment of 14 million is expected as a result of those agreements.
IFRIC 14 clarifies how the asset ceiling rules should be applie d if the Schemes are expected to be in surplus for example as a result of deficit funding agreements.
The Group has determined that it has an unconditional right to a refund of any surplus assets if the Schemes are run off until the last member dies.
On this basis IFRIC 14 rules do not cause any change in the pension deficit accounting or disclosures.
Section 3 Operating Assets and Liabilities Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information Financial Statements Notes to the Financial Statements Section 4 Capital Structure and Financing Costs 162 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 In this section This section outlines how the Group manages its capital structure and related financing costs including its balance sheet liquidity and access to capital markets.
The Directors determine the appropriate capital structure of ITV specifically how much is raised from shareholders equity and how much is borrowed from financial institutions debt in order to finance the Gr oups activities both now and in the future.
Maintaining capital discipline and balance sheet efficiency remains important to the
Any potential courses of action will take into account the Groups liquidity needs flexibility to invest in the business pension deficit initiatives and impact on credit ratings.
The Directors consider the Groups capital structure and dividend policy at least twice a year ahead of announcing results and do so in the context of its ability to continue as a going concern to execute the strategy and to invest in opportunities to grow the business and enhance shareholder value.
A Tax and Treasury committee acting under delegated authority from the Board approves certain financial transactions and monitors compliance with the Groups tax and treasury policies.
Net debt
Net cashdebt is the Groups key measure used to evaluate total cash resources net of the current outstanding debt.
Adjusted net debt is also monitored by the Group and more closely reflects how credit agencies see the Groups gearing.
To arrive at the adjusted net debt amount we add our total undiscounted expected contingent payments on acquisitions our net pension deficit and our undiscounted operating lease commitments.
A full analysis and discussion of adjusted net debt is included in the Operating and Performance Review.
The tables below analyse movements in the components of net cash during the year 1 January Net cash flow
Currency and noncash movements 31 December Cash equivalents 12 7   5 Total cash and cash equivalents 561 445 19 9 126 Loans and facilities due within one year 161 115 26 4 76 Finance leases due within one year 4 4 Loans and facilities due after one year 1035 100 9 38 982 Total debt 1200 219 35 42 1058 Currency component of swaps held against euro denominated bonds 2   18 20 Balances as at acquisition date.
Financial Statements 162 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 1 January Net cash flow
Reclassifications
Currency and noncash movements 31 December Cash equivalents 56 6  39 1 12 Total cash and cash equivalents 294 295 3 39 8 561 Loans and facilities due within one year 5 5   161 161 Finance leases due within one year 6 6   4 4 Loans and facilities due after one year 598 525   88 1035 Finance leases due after one year 4    4 Total debt 613 514   73 1200 Currency component of swaps held against euro denominated bonds     2 2 Balances as at acquisition date.
Cash and cash equivalents Included within cash equivalents is nil 2016 4 million the use of which is restricted to meeting finance lease commitments under programme sale and leasebacks see note 4.2.
Loans and facilities due within one year At various periods during the year the Group drew down on the Revolving Credit Facility RCF to meet shortterm funding requirements.
At 31 December 2017 the Group had drawings of 60 million under the RCF 2016 nil.
The maximum draw down of the RCF during the year was 390 million 2016 500 million.
The Group also had an unsecured 161 million Eurobond that matured in January 2017 and had a coupon of 6.125%.
Loans and loan notes due after one year In 2016 the Group had a 100 million bilateral loan facility which was repaid in full in June 2017.
The Group has issued the following Eurobonds A sevenyear 600 million Eurobond at a fixed coupon of 2.125% which matures in September 2022 and A sevenyear 500 million Eurobond at a fixed coupon of 2.0% which will mature in December 2023.
The bond issued in December 2016 has been swapped back to ster ling using a crosscurrency interest swap.
The resulting fixed rate payable is c.
3.5%.
Section 4 Capital Structure and Financing Costs Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information Financial Statements Notes to the Financial Statements Section 4 Capital Structure and Financing Costs continued 164 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Keeping it simple The Group borrows money from financial institutions in the form of bonds bank facilities and other financial instruments.
The interest payable on these instruments is shown in the net financing costs note in note 4.4.
There are Boardapproved policies in place to manage the Groups financial risks.
Macroeconomic market risks which impact currency transactions and interest rates are discussed in note 4.3.
Credit and liquidity risks are discussed below.
Credit risk the risk of financial loss to the Group if a customer or counterparty fails to meet its contractual obligations and Liquidity risk the risk that the Group will no t be able to meet its financial obligations as they fall due.
The Group is required to disclose the fair value of its debt instruments.
The fair value is the amount the Group would pay a third party to transfer the liability.
It is sourced in the capital markets.
This estimation of fair value is consistent with instruments valued under level 1 in note 4.5.
Accounting policies
Borrowings are recognised initially at fair value less directly attributable transaction costs with subsequent measurement at amortised cost using the effective interest rate method.
Under the amortised cost method the difference between the amount initially recognised and the redemption value is recorded in the income statement over the period of the borrowing on an effective interest rate basis.
Finance leases Historically ITV has entered into sale and leaseback agreements in relation to certain programme titles.
Related outstanding sale and leaseback obligations which comprise the principal and accrued interest are included within borrowings.
The financerelated element of the agreement is charged to the income statement over the term of the lease on an effective interest basis.
Sale and le aseback obligations are secured against an equivalent cash balance held within cash and cash equivalents.
Managing credit and liquidity risk Credit risk The Groups maximum exposure to credit risk is represented by the carrying amount of derivative financial assets see note 4.3 trade receivables see note 3.1.3 and cash and cash equivalents see note 4.1.
Trade and other receivables The Groups exposure to credit risk is influenced mainly by the individual characteristics of each customer.
The majority of trade receivables relate to airtime sales contracts with advertising agencies and advertisers.
Credit insurance has been taken out against these companies to minimise the impact on the Group in the event of a possible default.
The
Group also reviews other significant receivables and will seek to take out credit insurance on an individual basis where appropriate.
In 2016 the Group signed a 100 million nonrecourse receivables purchase agreement.
As at 31 December 2017 10 million was available under the agreement 2016 65 million.
The receivables in relation to the invoices sold were derecognised and the Group collects cash on behalf of the counterparty as payments fall due.
Cash
The Group operates investment guidelines with respect to surplus cash that emphasise preservation of capital.
The guidelines set out procedures and limits on counterparty risk and maturity profile of cash placed.
Counterparty limits for cash deposits are largely based upon longterm ratings published by the major credit rating agencies.
Deposits longer than 12 months require the approval of the Board.
Financial Statements 164 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
ITV is rated as investment grade by Moodys and SandP.
ITVs credit ratings the cost of credit default swap hedging and the absolute level of interest rates are key determinants in the cost of new borrowings for ITV.
Liquidity risk The Groups financing policy is to fund itself for the medi um to longterm by using debt instruments with a range of maturities and to ensure access to appropriate shortterm borrowing facilities with a minimum of 250 million of undrawn facilities available at all times.
Longterm funding comes from the UK and European capital markets while any short to mediumterm debt requirements are provided through bank credit facilities totalling 930 million see below.
Management monitors rolling forecasts of the Groups liquidity reserve comprising undrawn bank facilities and cash and cash equivalents on the basis of expected cash flows.
This monitoring includes financial ratios to assess any possible future impact on credit ratings and headroom and takes into account the accessibility of cash and cash equivalents.
The Group has a 630 million Revolving Credit Facility with a group of relationship banks.
This facility which was amended and extended in December 2016 matures in 2022 and is committed with leverage and interest cover financial covenants.
In addition the Group has 300 million of financial covenant free financing which runs to 2021.
Fair value versus book value The tables below provide fair value information for the Groups borrowings Book value Fair value
Loans due within one year 630 million Revolving Credit Facility Various 60 Other shortterm loans Various 16 161 million Eurobond Jan 2017  161 Loans due in more than one year Bilateral loan facility Jun 2018  100 600 million Eurobond Sept tel560 529 500 million Eurobond Dec tel461 431 Other longterm loans Various 9 1058 1196 1106 1222 Finance leases At 31 December 2017 the Group had no finance lease liabilities 2016 4 million due in one year or less.
Section 4 Capital Structure and Financing Costs Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information Financial Statements Notes to the Financial Statements Section 4 Capital Structure and Financing Costs continued 166 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Keeping it simple What is a derivative A derivative is a type of financial instrument typically used to manage risk.
A derivatives value changes over time in response to underlying variables such as exchange rates or interest rates and is entered into for a fixed period.
A hedge is where a derivative is used to manage exposure in an underlying variable.
The Group is exposed to certain market risks.
In accordance with Boardapproved policies which are set out in this note the Group manages these risks by using derivative financial instruments to hedge the underlying exposures.
Why do we need them The key market risks facing the Group are Currency risk arising from i.
Translation risk that is the risk in the period of adverse currency fluctuations in the translation of foreign currency profits assets and liabilities balance sheet risk and nonfunctional currency monetary assets and liabilities income statement risk and ii.
Transaction risk that is the risk that currency fluctuations will have a negative effect on the value of the Groups nonfunctional currency trading cash flows.
A nonfunctional currency transaction is a transaction in any currency other than the reporting currency of the subsidiary.
Interest rate risk to the Group arises from significant changes in interest rates on borrowings issued at or swapped to floating rates.
How do we use them The Group mainly employs three types of derivative financial instruments when managing its currency and interest rate risk Foreign exchange swap contracts are derivative instruments used to hedge income statement translation risk arising from shortterm intercompany loans denominated in a foreign currency Forward foreign exchange contracts are derivative instruments used to hedge transaction risk so they enable the sale or purchase of foreign currency at a known fixed rate on an agreed future date and Crosscurrency interest rate swaps are derivative instruments used to exchange the principal and interest coupons in a debt instrument from one currency to another.
Analysis of the derivatives used by the Group to hedge its exposure and the various methods used to calculate their respective fair values are detailed in this section.
Accounting policies Derivative financial instruments are initially recognised at fair value and are subsequently remeasured at fair value with the movement recorded in the income statement except where derivatives qualify for cash flow hedge accounting.
In this case the effective portion of a cash flow hedge is recognised in other comprehensive income and presented in the hedging reserve within equity.
The cumulative gain or loss is later reclassified to the income statement in the same period as the relevant hedged transact ion is realised.
Derivatives with positive fair values are recorded as assets and negative fair values as liabilities.
Financial Statements 166 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Determining fair value The fair value of forward foreign exchange contracts is determined by using the difference between the contract exchange rate and the quoted forward exchange rate at the reporting date.
The fair value of interest rate swaps is the estimated amount that the Group would receive or pay to terminate the swap at the reporting date taking into account current interest rates and our current creditworthiness as well as that of our swap counterparties.
Thirdparty valuations are used to fair value the Groups inte rest rate derivatives.
The valuation techniques use inputs such as interest rate yield curves and currency pricesyields volatilities of underlying instruments and correlations between inputs.
How do we manage our currency and interest rate risk Currency risk As the Group expands its international operations the performance of the business becomes increasingly sensitive to movements in foreign exchange rates primarily with respect to the US dollar and the euro.
The Groups foreign exchange policy is to use forward foreign exchange contracts to hedge material nonfunctional currency denominated costs or revenue for up to five years forward.
The Group ensures that its net exposure to foreign currency denominated cash balances is kept to a minimal level by using foreign currency swaps to exchange balances back into sterling or by buying or selling foreign currencies at spot rates when necessary.
The Group also utilises foreign exchange swaps and crosscurrency interest rate swaps both to manage foreign currency cash flow timing differences and to hedge foreign currency denominated monetary items.
The Groups net investments in overseas subsidiaries may be hedged where the currency exposure is considered to be material.
The Group designated a portion of its euro borrowings into a net investment hedge against its euro denominated assets following the acquisition of Talpa Media.
The following table highlights the Groups sensitivity to translation risk resulting from a 10% strengtheningweakening in sterling against the US dollar and euro assuming all other variables are held constant 2017  post tax profit 2017  equity 2016  post tax profit 2016  equity US dollar 1 million 23 million 3 million 32 million Euro 3 million 17 million 10 million 11 million The Groups sensitivity to translation risk for revenue and adjusted EBITA is disclosed in the Finance Review on page 47.
The key difference between the foreign currency sensitivity for adjusted EBITA and profit after tax is the impact on the US dollar and euro denominated exceptional costs including acquisitionrelated costs acquired intangible amortisation and net financing cost.
Interest rate risk The Groups interest rate policy is to allow fixed rate gross debt to vary between 20% and 100% of total gross debt to accommodate floating rate borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility.
At 31 December 2017 the Groups fixed rate debt represented 92% of total gross debt 2016 92%.
Consequently a 1% movement in interest rates on floating rate debt would impact the 2017 posttax profit for the year by less than 1 million 2016 2 million.
For financial assets and liabilities classified at fair value through profit or loss the movements in the year relating to changes in fair value and interest are not separated.
Section 4 Capital Structure and Financing Costs Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information Financial Statements Notes to the Financial Statements Section 4 Capital Structure and Financing Costs continued 168 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 What is the value of our derivative financial instruments The following table shows the fair value of derivative financial instruments analysed by type of contract.
Interest rate swap fair values exclude accrued interest.
At 31 December 2017
Liabilities
Current
Foreign exchange forward contracts and swaps  cash flow hedges 4 1 Foreign exchange forward contracts and swaps  fair value through profit or loss 2 1
Crosscurrency interest swaps  cash flow hedges 10 Foreign exchange forward contracts and swaps  cash flow hedges  1 At 31 December 2016
Liabilities
Current
Foreign exchange forward contracts and swaps  cash flow hedges 6 1 Foreign exchange forward contracts and swaps  fair value through profit or loss 2 2
Crosscurrency interest swaps  cash flow hedges  6 Foreign exchange forward contracts and swaps  cash flow hedges 1 3 Cash flow hedges The Group applies hedge accounting for certain foreign curr ency firm commitments and highly probably cash flows where the underlying cash flows are payable within the next seven years.
In order to fix the sterling cash outflows associated with the commitments and interest payments  which are mainly denominated in AUD or euros  the Group has taken out forward foreign exchange contracts and crosscurrency interest rate swaps for the same foreign currency amount and maturity date as the expected foreign currency outflow.
The amount recognised in other comprehensive income during the period all relates to the effective portion of the revaluation loss associated with these contracts.
There was less than 1 million 2016 1 million ineffectiveness taken to the income statement and 20 million cumulative gain 2016 5 million gain recycled to the income statement in the year.
On issuing the 2023 Eurobond the Group entered into a portfolio of crosscurrency interest rate swaps which swapped the euro principal and fixed rate coupons into sterling.
As a result the Group makes sterling interest payments at a fixed rate.
Net investment hedges The Group uses euro denominated debt to partially hedge against the change in the sterling value of its euro denominated net assets due to movements in foreign exchange rates.
The fair value of debt in a net investment hedge was 177 million 2016 168 million.
A foreign exchange loss of 6 million 2016 21 million relating to the net investment hedges has been netted off within exchange differences on translation of foreign operations as presented on the consolidated statement of comprehensive income.
Financial Statements 168 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Undiscounted financial liabilities
The Group is required to disclose the expected timings of cash outflows for each of its financial liabilities including derivatives.
The amounts disclosed in the table are the contractual undiscounted cash flows including interest so will not always reconcile with the amounts disclosed on the statement of financial position.
At 31 December 2017
Total contractual cash flows Less than 1 year
1 and 2 years
2 and 5 years
5 years Nonderivative financial liabilities Borrowings 1058 1171 Trade and other payables 1021 1021 Other payables  noncurrent 21 21 Other payables  commitments on acquisitions 161 292  78 19 190 5 Derivative financial instruments Foreign exchange forward contracts and swaps cash flow hedges
Outflow 2 204 Crosscurrency swaps  cash flow hedges Inflow Outflow  513 Foreign exchange forward contracts and swaps fair value through profit or loss
Outflow 1 135 2248 2458 At 31 December 2016
Total contractual cash flows Less than 1 year
1 and 2 years
2 and 5 years
5 years Nonderivative financial liabilities Borrowings 1196 1338 Trade and other payables 912 912 Other payables  noncurrent 11 11 Other payables  commitments on acquisitions 158 328  122 56 150 Derivative financial instruments Foreign exchange forward contracts and swaps cash flow hedges
Outflow 4 210 Crosscurrency swaps  cash flow hedges
Outflow 6 542 Foreign exchange forward contracts and swaps fair value through profit or loss
Outflow 263 263 Interest rate swaps  fair value through profit or loss Inflow  13 Outflow  6 2280 2624 Undiscounted expected future payments depending on performance of acquisitions the total maximum consideration is discussed in the Finance Review.
Section 4 Capital Structure and Financing Costs Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information Financial Statements Notes to the Financial Statements Section 4 Capital Structure and Financing Costs continued 170 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Net financing costs
This section details the interest income generated on the Groups cash and other financial assets and the interest expense incurred on borrowings and other financial liabilities.
In reporting adjusted profit the Group adjusts net financing costs to exclude unrealised marktomarket movements on interest rate and foreign exchange derivatives gainslosses on bond buybacks net pension interest interest and fair value movements in acquisitionrelated liabilities and other financing costs.
Our rationale for adjustments made to financing costs is set out in the Finance Review.
Accounting policies Net financing costs comprise interest income on funds invested gainslosses on the disposal of financial instruments changes in the fair value of financial instruments interest expense on borrowings and finance leases unwinding of the discount on provisions unwinding of the discount on liabilities to noncontrolling interest foreign exchange gainslosses and imputed interest on pension assets and liabilities.
Interest income and expense is recognised as it accrues in profit or loss using the effective interest method.
Net financing costs Net financing costs can be analysed as follows Financing income Interest income Financing costs Interest expense on financial liabilities measured at amortised cost 30 25 Net pension interest see note 3.7 9 5 Change in fair value of instruments classified at fair value through profit or loss  1 Foreign exchange loss 3 8 Other finance expense 12 14 Net financing costs 50 51 Interest on financial liabilities relates to the inte rest incurred on the Groups borrowings in the year.
Other finance expense includes the amortisation of facility commitment and upfront fees as well as movements in the estimated value of acquisitionrelated contingent liabilities which contributed to most of the 2017 expense.
This is where estimates of the future performance against stretch targets is reassessed resulting in adjustments to the related put option liabilities.
Financial Statements 170 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Fair value hierarchy
The financial instruments included on the ITV statement of financial position are measured at either fair value or amortised cost.
The measurement of this fair value can in some cases be subjective and can depend on the inputs used in the calculations.
ITV generally uses external valuations using market inputs or market values e. external share prices.
The different valuation methods are called hierarchies and are described below.
Level 1 Fair values are measured using quoted prices unadjusted in active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
Level 2 Fair values are measured using inputs other than quoted prices included within Level 1 that are observable for the asset or liability either directly or indirectly.
Interest rate swaps and options are accounted for at their fair value based upon termination prices.
Forward foreign exchange contracts are accounted for at the difference between the contract exchange rate and the quoted forward exchange rate at the reporting date.
Level 3 Fair values are measured using inputs for the asset or liability that are not based on observable market data.
The tables below set out the financial instruments included on the ITV statement of financial position at fair value.
Fair value 31 December Level 1 31 December Level 2 31 December Level 3 31 December Assets measured at fair value Availableforsale financial instruments Other pension assets  gilts see note 3.7 38 38 Availableforsale investments see note 3.5 4   4 Financial assets at fair value through profit or loss Foreign exchange forward contracts and swaps 2  2 Financial assets at fair value through reserves Cash flow hedges 14  14 Fair value 31 December Level 1 31 December Level 2 31 December Level 3 31 December Liabilities measured at fair value Financial liabilities at fair value through profit or loss Foreign exchange forward contracts and swaps 1  1 Acquisitionrelated liabilities  payable to sellers under put options agreed on acquisition 73   73 Financial liabilities at fair value through reserves Cash flow hedges 2  2 Section 4 Capital Structure and Financing Costs Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information Financial Statements Notes to the Financial Statements Section 4 Capital Structure and Financing Costs continued 172 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Fair value 31 December Level 1 31 December Level 2 31 December Level 3 31 December Assets measured at fair value Availableforsale financial instruments Other pension assets  gilts see note 3.7 39 39 Availableforsale investments see note 3.5 12   12 Financial assets at fair value through profit or loss Foreign exchange forward contracts and swaps 2  2 Financial assets at fair value through reserves Cash flow hedges 7  7 Fair value 31 December Level 1 31 December Level 2 31 December Level 3 31 December Liabilities measured at fair value Financial liabilities at fair value through profit or loss Contingent consideration 1   1 Foreign exchange forward contracts and swaps 3  3 Acquisitionrelated liabilities  payable to sellers under put options agreed on acquisition 48   48 Financial liabilities at fair value through reserves Cash flow hedges 9  9 Refer to note 4.3 for how we value interest rate swaps an d forward foreign currency contracts.
The availableforsale investments are valued at cost and assessed for impairment.
Acquisitionrelated liabilities are valued based on the forecast performance of each acquisition and where there has been a change in expectations the Group adjusts the value of future commitments.
Financial Statements 172 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Keeping it simple This section explains material movements recorded in shareholders equity presented in the Consolidated Statement in Changes in Equity that are not explained elsewhere in the financial statements.
Accounting policies Availableforsale reserve Availableforsale assets are stated at fair value with any gain or loss recognised directly in the availableforsale reserve in equity unless the loss is a permanent impairment when it is then recorded in the income statement.
Dividends
Dividends are recognised through equity on the earlier of thei r approval by the Companys shareholders or their payment.
4.6.1 Share capital and share premium The Groups share capital at 31 December 2017 of 403 million 2016 403 million and share premium of 174 million 2016 174 million is the same as that of ITV plc.
Details of this are given in the ITV plc Company financial statements section of this Annual Report.
4.6.2 Merger and other reserves Merger and other reserves at 31 December include the following reserves Merger reserves Capital reserves 112 112 Capital redemption reserves 36 36 Revaluation reserves 2 2 Put option liabilities arising on acquisition of subsidiaries 49 27 Total 199 221 4.6.3 Translation reserve The translation reserve comprises All foreign exchange differences arising on the translation of the accounts of and investments in foreign operations and The gains or losses on the portion of cash flow hedg es that have been deemed effective see note 4.3.
4.6.4 Availableforsale reserve The availableforsale reserve comprises all movements arising on the revaluation of gilts accounted for as available forsale financial instruments see note 3.7.
4.6.5 Retained earnings The retained earnings reserve comprises profit for the year attributable to owners of the Company of 409 million 2016 448 million and other items recognised directly through equity as presented in the consolidated statement of changes in equity.
Other items include the credit for the Groups sharebased compensation schemes and the charge for the purchase of ITV shares via the ITV Employees Benefit Trust which are described in note 4.7.
The distributable reserves of ITV plc are disclosed in note viii to the ITV plc Company financial statements.
See details on distributable reserves on page 186.
The Directors of ITV plc propose a final dividend of 5.28p pe r share which equates to a full year dividend of 7.8p per share.
In 2017 494 million of dividend payments were made 2016 663 million.
4.6.6 Noncontrolling interests Noncontrolling interest NCI represents the share of nonwholly owned subsidiaries net assets that are not directly attributable to the shareholders of the ITV Group.
The movement for the year comprises The share of profits attributable to NCI of 4 million 2016 4 million The distributions made to NCI of 4 million 2016 4 million The share of net assets attributable to NCI relating to subsidiaries acquired or disposed of in the year of 25 million 2016 nil and A 13 million writedown of the NCI held in Gurney Productions LLC as a result of the treatment of the subsidiary as if it would have been wound down.
See note 3.3 for further information.
Section 4 Capital Structure and Financing Costs Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information Financial Statements Notes to the Financial Statements Section 4 Capital Structure and Financing Costs continued 174 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Keeping it simple The Group utilises share award schemes as part of its employee remuneration packages and therefore operates a number of sharebased compensation schemes namely the Deferred Share Award DSA Performance Share Plan PSP Long Term Incentive Plan LTIP and Save As You Earn SAYE schemes.
The sharebased compensation is not pensionable.
A transaction will be classed as sharebased compensation where the Group receives services from employees and pays for these in shares or similar equity instruments.
If the Group incurs a liability linked to the price or value of the Groups shares this will also fall under a sharebased transaction.
A description of each type of sharebased payment arrangement that existed at any time during the period is set out in the Annual Remuneration Report.
Accounting policies For each of the Groups sharebased compensation schemes the fair value of the equity instrument granted is measured at grant date and spread over the vesting period via a charge to the income statement with a corresponding increase in equity.
The fair value of the share options and awards is measured using either market price at grant date or for the SAYE scheme a BlackScholes model taking into account the terms and conditions of the individual scheme.
Vesting conditions are limited to service conditions and performance conditions.
For performancebased schemes the relevant Group performance measures are projected to the end of the performance period in order to determine the number of options expected to vest.
The estimate is then used to determine the option fair value discounted to present value.
The Group revises its estimates of the nu mber of options that are expected to vest including an estimate of forfeitures at each reporting date.
The impact of the revision to original estimates if any is recognised in the income statement with a corresponding adjustment to equity.
Exercises of share options granted to employees can be satisfied by market purchase or issue of new shares.
No new shares may be issued to satisfy exercises under the terms of the DSA.
During the year all exercises were satisfied by using shares purchased in the market and held in the ITV Employees Benefit Trust.
Sharebased compensation charges totalled 12 million in 2017 2016 10 million.
Financial Statements 174 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Share options outstanding The table below summarises the movements in the number of share options outstanding for the Group and their weighted average exercise price
Weighted average exercise price pence
Weighted average exercise price pence Outstanding at 1 January 36533 67.86 40167 55.63 Granted during the year  nil priced 7996 144.10 7351 Granted during the year  other 7911 8002 167.62 Forfeited during the year 5614 121.37 255 151.17 Exercised during the year 9883 44.87 12293 28.81 Expired during the year 788 6439 109.25 Outstanding at 31 December 36155 69.17 36533 67.86 Exercisable at 31 December 2808 The average share price during 2017 was 185.15 pence 2016 209.91 pence.
Of the options still outstanding the range of exercise prices and weighted average remaining contractual life of these options can be analysed as follows Range of exercise prices pence
Number of options
Weighted average exercise price pence
Weighted average remaining contractual life years
20417 1.65  21531 1.89
DSA LTIP and PSP options are valued directly by reference to the share price at date of grant.
The options granted in the year for the SAYE scheme an HMRC approved SAYE scheme are valued using the BlackScholes model using the assumptions below Scheme name Date of grant Share price at grant pence Exercise price pence
Expected life years Gross dividend yield %
Fair value pence Section 4 Capital Structure and Financing Costs Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information Financial Statements Notes to the Financial Statements Section 5 Other Notes 176 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Employees Benefit Trust The Group has investments in its own shares as a result of shares purchased by the ITV Employees Benefit Trust EBT.
Transactions with the Groupsponsored EBT are included in these financial statements and primarily consist of the EBTs purchases of shares in ITV plc which are accounted for as a reduction to retained earnings.
The table below shows the number of ITV plc shares held in the EBT at 31 December 2017 and the purchasesreleases from the EBT made in the year to satisfy awards under the Groups share schemes Scheme Shares held at Number of shares releasedpurchased Nominal value 1 January 2017 14410124 1438557 LTIP releases DSA releases PSP releases SAYE releases Shares purchased 31 December 2017 26989521 2698952 The total number of shares held by the EBT at 31 December 2017 represents 0.67% 2016 0.36% of ITVs issued share capital.
The market value of own shares held at 31 December 2017 is 45 million 2016 30 million.
The shares will be held in the EBT until such time as they may be transferred to participants of the various Group share schemes.
Rights to dividends have been waived by the EBT in respect of shares held that do not relate to restricted shares under the DSA.
In accordance with the Trust Deed the Trustees of the EBT have the power to exercise all voting rights in relation to any investment including shares held within that trust.
Related party transactions
The related parties identified by the Directors include joint ventures associated undertakings fixed asset investments and key management personnel.
To enable users of our financial statements to form a view about the effects of related party relationships on the Group we disclose the Groups transactions with those related parties during the year and any associated year end trading balances.
Transactions with joint ventures and associated undertakings Transactions with joint ventures and associated undertakings during the year were Sales to joint ventures 15 8 Sales to associated undertakings 10 10 Purchases from joint ventures 28 26 Purchases from associated undertakings 70 70 The transactions with joint ventures primarily relate to sales and purchases of digital multiplex services with Digital 3and4 Limited and distribution revenue from BritBox LLC.
Sales to associated undertakings include airtime sales to DT V Services Limited.
Purchases from associated undertakings primarily relate to the purchase of news services from ITN Limited.
All transactions with associated undertakings and joint ventures arise in the normal course of business on an arms length basis.
None of the balances are secured.
The amounts owed by and to these related parties at the year end were Amounts owed by joint ventures 6 Amounts owed by associated undertakings 6 57 Amounts owed to joint ventures Amounts owed to associated undertakings 4 Financial Statements 176 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Amounts owed by joint ventures primarily relate to trading with BritBox LLC.
Balances owed by associated under takings largely relate to loan notes and trading balances with Monumental TV Limited.
Balances owed to associated undertakings primarily relate to trading with ITN Limited.
Amounts paid to the Groups retirement benefit plans are set out in note 3.7.
Transactions with key management personnel Key management consists of ITV plc Executive and Nonexecutive Directors and the ITV Management Board.
Key management personnel compensation is as follows Shortterm employee benefits 10 8 Sharebased compensation .2
Keeping it simple A contingent asset or liability is a liability that is not sufficiently certain to qualify for recognition as an asset or provision where uncertainty may exist regarding the outcome of future events.
Contingent assets In 2017 Talpa Media took back the licence for The Voice of China due a breach of the agreement by the customer Talent for not fulfilling their payment obligations.
The Group is pursuing Talent vigorously for the 30 million still due under the agreement.
Further the Group has credit insurance in place and a claim has been submitted.
Whilst the Directors are confident of recovering the amount due accounting standards set very specific requirements for the recognition of contingent assets which is how the recovery of the amount due has been accounted for.
As discussions with the insurers and the claim against Talent are still in progress at this early stage of pursuing recovery the Group is not able to demonstrate sufficient certainty to be able to recognise a cash receivable at the year end.
See note 2.2 for further details.
Contingent liabilities The Group has initiated legal proceedings against the minority owners of Gurney Productions LLC for alleged breaches of contracts and their fiduciary duties as well as selfdeali ng and fraudulent concealment.
The minority owners dispute the allegations and they have counterclaimed for damages of at least 150 million.
The action is ongoing and having taken legal advice the Directors believe this counterclaim is completely without merit.
There are contingent liabilities in respect of certain litiga tion and guarantees broadcasting issues and in respect of warranties given in connection with certain disposals of businesses.
None of these items are expected to have a material effect on the Groups results or financial position.
Section 5 Other Notes Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information Financial Statements Notes to the Financial Statements Section 5 Other Notes continued 178 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Keeping it simple Certain subsidiaries of the Group can take an exemption from having an audit.
Strict criteria must be met for this exemption to be taken and it must be agreed by the Directors of that subsidiary entity.
Listed below are subsidiaries controlled and consolidated by the Group where the Directors have taken the exemption from having an audit of its financial statements.
This exemption is taken in accordance with Companies Act s479A.
Company number Company name Company number Company name Back Productions Limited  BGSS Limited Big Talk Bliss Limited  Big Talk Cold Feet Limited Big Talk Diana Limited  Big Talk Guilty Limited Big Talk Living the Dream Limited  Big Talk NEWCO 1 Limited Big Talk NEWCO 2 Limited  Big Talk NEWCO 3 Limited Big Talk NEWCO 4 Limited  Broad Street Films Limited Campania Limited  Carbon Media Limited Carlton Content Holdings Limited  Carlton Film Distributors Limited Carlton Finance Limited  Carlton Food Network Limited Carlton Programmes Development Limited  Carlton Screen Advertising Holdings Limited Carltoncotel Carltonco Forty Investments Carltonco NinetySix  Castlefield Properties Limited Channel Television Holdings Limited  Cosgrove Hall Films Limited DTV Limited  Granada Film Limited Granada Group Limited  Granada Limited Granada Media Limited  Granada Screen  Limited Granada Television Overseas Limited  ITV HC Limited ITV Bancroft Limited  ITV Beowulf Limited ITV Breathless Limited  ITV Cilla Limited ITV Cradle Limited  ITV CS Limited ITV Dark Heart Limited  ITV Enterprises Limited ITV HG Limited  ITV Holdings Limited ITV Home Fires Limited  ITV Investments Limited ITV JandH Limited  ITV Jericho Limited ITV JR Limited  ITV Leila Limited ITV Lewis Limited  ITV Little Boy Blue Limited ITV Loch Ness Limited  ITV Lucan Limited ITV Moorside Limited  ITV Mr Selfridge Limited ITV Play Limited  ITV Properties Developments Limited ITV Shetland Limited  ITV Spirit Limited ITV Studios NEWCOtel ITV Studios NEWCOtel ITV TandB Limited  ITV Tennison Limited ITV Text Santa Limited  ITV The Bay Limited ITV Thunderbirds Limited  ITV Top Class Limited ITV Trauma Limited  ITV Tut Limited ITV Vera Limited  Juice Music UK Limited Link Electronics Limited  Mammoth Screen ABC Limited Mammoth Screen City Limited  Mammoth Screen END5 Limited Mammoth Screen END6 Limited  Mammoth Screen NC Limited Mammoth Screen DESIRE Limited  Mammoth Screen NOK Limited Mammoth Screen NW Limited  Mammoth Screen OBI Limited Mammoth Screen POL2 Limited  Mammoth Screen POL3 Limited Mammoth Screen POL4 Limited  Mammoth Screen POL5 Limited Mammoth Screen QV Limited  Mammoth Screen VF Limited Mammoth Screen VIC3 Limited  Mammoth Screen WFTP Limited Mammoth Screen WOF Limited  Mammoth Screen WOTW Limited Morning TV Limited  SOM ITV Limited VOD Member ITV A Limited  VOD Member ITV B Limited WP BodyGuard Limited  WP NEWCO 1 Limited WP NEWCO 2 Limited  WP NEWCO 3 Limited WP NEWCO 4 Limited Financial Statements 178 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITV plc Company Financial Statements Company Balance Sheet As at 31 December Note Noncurrent assets Investments in subsidiary undertakings iii Derivative financial instruments vi Deferred tax asset Current assets Amounts owed by subsidiary undertakings iv 4230 Derivative financial instruments vi 7 Other receivables Cash and cash equivalents Current liabilities Borrowings v 60 Amounts owed to subsidiary undertakings iv 3237 Accruals and deferred income Current tax liabilities Derivative financial instruments vi 7 Net current assets 945 1484 Total assets less current liabilities 3148 3351 Noncurrent liabilities Borrowings v 973 Derivative financial instruments vi 1 Net assets 2174 2307 Capital and reserves Share capital vii Share premium viii Other reserves viii Retained earnings viii Total equity 2174 2307 The accounts were approved by the Board of Directors on 28 February 2018 and were signed on its behalf by Ian Griffiths
ITV plc Company Financial Statements Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information Financial Statements ITV plc Company Financial Statements continued 180 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Company Statement of Changes in Equity
Share capital
Other
Retained earnings
Balance at 1 January tel28 1702 2307 Total comprehensive income for the year
Net loss on cash flow hedges Total comprehensive income for the year Transactions with owners recorded directly in equity Contributions by and distributions to owners Equity dividends Movements due to sharebased compensation Total transactions with owners Balance at 31 December 2017 viiviii 403 174 26 1571 2174
Share
Capital
Share
Premium
Other
Reserves
Retained
Earnings
Total
Balance at 1 January tel36 880 1493 Total comprehensive income for the year
1475 1475 Net loss on cash flow hedges Total comprehensive income for the year 8 1475 1467 Transactions with owners recorded directly in equity Contributions by and distributions to owners Equity dividends Movements due to sharebased compensation Total transactions with owners Balance at 31 December 2016 viiviii 403 174 28 1702 2307 Financial Statements 180 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes to the ITV plc Company Financial Statements Note i
In this section This section sets out the notes to the ITV plc Company only financial statements.
Those statements form the basis of the dividend decisions made by the Directors as explained in detail in note viii below.
These financial statements were prepared in accordance with Financial Reporting Standard 101 Reduced Disclosure Framework.
Basis of preparation The Company is a qualifying entity as it is a member of the ITV plc Group where ITV plc the ultimate parent prepares publicly available consolidated financial statements.
Exemptions applied The Company is taking advantage of the following disclosure exemptions under FRS 101 Presentation of a Statement of Cash Flows Disclosure of key management personnel compensation Disclosure of related party transactions between whollyowned subsidiaries and parents within a group Disclosures required under IFRS 2 Share Based Payments in respect of group settled share based payments Disclosures required by IFRS 7 Financial Instrument Disclosure Certain disclosures required under IFRS 13 Fair Value Measurement and Disclosure of information in relation to new standards not yet applied.
As permitted by section 408 3 of the Companies Act 2006  a separate income statement dealing with the results of the parent company has not been presented.
Subsidiaries
Subsidiaries are entities that are directly or indirectly controlled by the Company.
Control exists where the Company has the power to govern the financial and operating policies of the entity so as to obtain benefits from its activities.
The investment in the Companys subsidiaries is recorded at cost.
Foreign currency transactions Transactions in foreign currencies are translated into sterling at the rate of exchange ruling at the date of the transaction.
Foreign currency monetary assets and liabilities at the balance sheet date are translated into sterling at the rate of exchange ruling at that date.
Foreign exchange differences arising on translation are recognised in the profit and loss account.
Nonmonetary assets and liabilities measured at historical cost are translated into sterling at the rate of exchange on the date of the transaction.
Borrowings
Borrowings are recognised initially at fair value including directly attributable transaction costs with subsequent measurement at amortised cost using the effective interest rate method.
The difference between initial fair value and the redemption value is recorded in the profit and loss account over the period of the liability on an effective interest basis.
Derivatives and other financial instruments The Company uses a limited number of derivative financial inst ruments to hedge its exposure to fluctuations in interest and other foreign exchange rates.
The Company does not hold or issue derivative instruments for speculative purposes.
Derivative financial instruments are initially recognised at fair value and are subsequently remeasured at fair value with the movement recorded in the profit and loss account wi thin net financing costs except where derivatives qualify for cash flow hedge accounting.
In this case the effective portion of cash flow hedge is recognised in retained profits within equity.
The cumulative gain or loss is later reclassifi ed to the profit and loss account in the same period as the relevant hedged transaction is realised.
Derivatives with positive fair values are recorded as assets and negative fair values as liabilities.
The fair value of foreign currency forward contracts is determined by using the difference between the contract exchange rate and the quoted forward exchange rate at the balance sheet date.
Notes to the ITV plc Company Financial Statements Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information Financial Statements Notes to the ITV plc Company Financial Statements continued 182 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 The fair value of interest rate swaps is the estimated am ount that the Company would receive or pay to terminate the swap at the balance sheet date taking into account current interest rates and the current creditworthiness of swap counterparties.
Thirdparty valuations are used to fair value the Companys derivatives.
The valuation techniques use inputs such as interest rate yield curves and currency pricesyields volatilities of underlying instruments and correlations between inputs.
For financial assets and liabilities classified at fair value through profit or loss the fair value change and interes t incomeexpense are not separated.
Current tax Current tax is the expected tax payable or receivable on the taxable income or loss for the year and any adjustment in respect of previous years.
The Company recognises liabilities for anticipated tax issues based on estimates of the additional taxes that are likely to become due which require judgement.
Amounts are accrued based on managements interpretation of specific tax law and the likelihood of settlement.
Where the final tax ou tcome of these matters is different from the amounts that were initially recorded such differences will impact the current tax and deferred tax provisions in the period in which such determination is made.
Deferred tax The tax charge for the period is recognised in the income statement or directly in equity according to the accounting treatment of the related transaction.
Deferred tax arises due to certain temporary differences between the carrying amount of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and those for taxation purposes.
The amount of deferred tax provided is based on the expected manner of realisation or settlement of the carrying amount of assets and liabilities.
A deferred tax asset is recognised only to the extent that it is probable that suffi cient taxable profit will be available to utilise the temporary difference.
Recognition of deferred tax assets therefore involves judgement regarding timing and level of future taxable income.
Sharebased compensation The Company utilises share award schemes as part of its employee remuneration packages and therefore operates a number of sharebased compensation schemes namely the Deferred Share Award DSA Performance Share Plan PSP Long Term Incentive Plan LTIP and Save As You Earn SAYE schemes.
A transaction will be classed as sharebased compensation where the Company receives services from employees and pays for these in shares or similar equity instruments.
If the Company incurs a liability based on the price or value of the shares this will also fall under a sharebased transa ction.
The Company recognises the retained earnings impact of the sharebased compensation for the Group as awards are settled in ITV plc shares.
The cost of providing those awards is recharged to subsidiaries that receive the service from employees.
The fair value of the equity instrument granted is measured at grant date and spread over the vesting period via a charge to the income statement with a corresponding incr ease in equity.
The fair value of the share options and awards is measured using either market price at grant date or for the SAYE scheme a BlackScholes model taking into account the terms and conditions of the individual scheme.
Vesting conditions are limited to service conditions and performance conditions.
For performancebased schemes the relevant performance measures are projected to the end of the performance period in order to determine the number of options expected to vest.
The estimate is then used to determine the option fair value discounted to present value.
The Company revises its estimates of the nu mber of options that are expected to vest including an estimate of forfeitures at each reporting date.
The impact of the revision to original estimates if any is recognised in the income statement with a corresponding adjustment to equity.
Exercises of share options granted to employees can be satisfied by market purchase or issue of new shares.
No new shares may be issued to satisfy exercises under the terms of the DSA.
During the year all exercises were satisfied by using shares purchased in the market and held in the ITV Employees Benefit Trust.
The Trust is accounted for as a separate entity and therefore is only accounted for in the consolidated financial statements.
Dividends
Dividends are recognised through equity on the earlier of their approval by the Companys shareholders or their payment.
Financial Statements 182 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Two 2016 two Directors of ITV plc were employees of the Company during the year one of whom remains employed at the year end.
The costs relating to these Dire ctors are disclosed in the Remuneration Report.
Sharebased payments The weighted average share price of share options exercised during the year was 44.87p 2016 55.33p.
The options outstanding at the year end have an exercise price in the range of nil to 206.83p 2016 nil to 206.83p and a weighted average contractual life of two years 2016 one year for all the schemes in place for the Group.
Note ii
The principal subsidiary undertakings are listed on page 188.
The carrying value at 31 December 2017 was 2191 million 2016 1861 million.
In 2017 the Company increased investment in subsidiaries by 330 million mainly due to subscribing to preference shares in a newly formed subsidiary in Ireland North America Studio Investments Designated Activity Company.
Note iii
The Company operates an intragroup cash pool policy with certain 100% owned UK subsidiaries.
The pool applies to bank accounts where there is an unconditional right of set off and involves the daily closing cash position for participating subsidiaries whether positive or negative being cleared to nil via daily bank transfers tofrom ITV plc.
These daily transactions create a corresponding intercompany creditor or debtor which can result in significant movements in amounts owed to and from subsidiary undertakings in the Company balance sheet.
Note iv
Note v
Keeping it simple The Directors manage the Groups capital structure as disclosed in section 4 to the consolidated financial statements.
Borrowings cash and derivative financial instruments are mainly held by ITV plc and disclosed in these Company financial statements.
Loans and facilities due within one year At various periods during the year the Group drew down on the Revolving Credit Facility RCF to meet shortterm funding requirements.
At 31 December 2017 the Group had drawings of 60 million under the RCF 2016 nil.
The maximum draw down of the RCF during the year was 390 million 2016 500 million.
The Group also had an unsecured 161 million Eurobond that matured in January 2017 and had a coupon of 6.125%.
Loans and loan notes due after one year The Group had a 100 million bilateral loan faci lity which was repaid in full in June 2017.
The Group has issued the following Eurobonds A sevenyear 600 million Eurobond at a fixed coupon of 2.125% which matures in September 2022 and A sevenyear 500 million Eurobond at a fixed coupon of 2.0% which will mature in December 2023.
The bond issued in December 2016 has been swapped back to sterling using a cross currency interest swap.
The resulting fixed rate payable is c.
3.5%.
Notes to the ITV plc Company Financial Statements Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information Financial Statements Notes to the ITV plc Company Financial Statements continued 184 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 What is the value of our derivative financial instruments
Liabilities
Current
Foreign exchange forward contracts and swaps  cash flow hedges 5 5 Foreign exchange forward contracts and swaps  fair value through profit or loss 2 2
Crosscurrency interest swaps  cash flow hedges 10 Foreign exchange forward contracts and swaps  cash flow hedges 1 1 Note vi
Assets
Liabilities
Current
Foreign exchange forward contracts and swaps  cash flow hedges 7 7 Foreign exchange forward contracts and swaps  fair value through profit or loss 3 3
Crosscurrency interest swaps  cash flow hedges  6 Foreign exchange forward contracts and swaps  cash flow hedges 4 3 The Company mainly employs three types of derivative financial instruments when managing its currency and interest rate risk Foreign exchange swap contracts are derivative instruments used to hedge income statement translation risk arising from shortterm intercompany loans denominated in a foreign currency Forward foreign exchange contracts are derivative instruments used to hedge transaction risk so they enable the sale or purchase of foreign currency at a kn own fixed rate on an agreed future date and Crosscurrency interest rate swaps are derivative instruments used to exchange the principal and interest coupons in a debt instrument from one currency to another.
Cash flow hedges The Group applies hedge accounting for certain foreign curr ency firm commitments and highly probably cash flows where the underlying cash flows are payable within the next tw o to seven years.
In order to fix the sterling cash inflows and outflows associated with the commitments and intere st payments  which are mainly denominated in AUD or euros  the Group has taken out forward foreign exchange contracts and crosscurrency interest swaps for the same foreign currency amount and maturity date as the expected foreign currency outflow.
The amount recognised in other comprehensive income during the period all relates to the effective portion of the revaluation loss associated with these contracts.
There was no 2016 less than 1 million ineffectiveness taken to the income statement and 17 million cumulative gain 2016 2 million recycled to the income statement in the year.
Crosscurrency interest rate swaps On issuing the 2023 Eurobond the Group entered into a portfoli o of crosscurrency interest rate swaps which swapped the euro principal and fixed rate coupons into sterling.
As a result  the Group makes sterling interest payments at a fixed rate.
Financial Statements 184 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Undiscounted financial liabilities The Company is required to disclose the expected timings of cash outflows for each of its derivative financial liabilities.
The amounts disclosed in the table are the contractual undiscounted cash flows including interest so will not always reconcile with the amounts disclosed on the statement of financial position.
At 31 December 2017
Total contractual cash flows Less than 1 year
1 and 2 years
2 and 5 years Over 5 years Noncurrent and current Foreign exchange forward contracts and swaps  cash flow hedges
Outflow 6 204 146 58 Crosscurrency swaps  cash flow hedges Inflow Outflow  513 15 15 44 439 Foreign exchange forward contracts and swaps  fair value through profit or loss
Outflow 2 118 106 7 5 At 31 December 2016
Total contractual cash flows Less than 1 year
1 and 2 years
2 and 5 years Over 5 years Noncurrent and current Foreign exchange forward contracts and swaps  cash flow hedges Inflow 1tel Crosscurrency swaps  cash flow hedges
Foreign exchange forward contracts and swaps  fair value through profit or loss
Interest rate swaps  fair value through profit or loss Inflow  13 13 Outflow  6 6 Notes to the ITV plc Company Financial Statements Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information Financial Statements Notes to the ITV plc Company Financial Statements continued 186 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Note vii Share capital
2017 and 2016 Allotted issued and fully paid 2017 and 2016 Authorised ordinary shares of 10 pence each 8000000000 800 Allotted issued and fully paid ordinary shares of 10 pence each 4025409194
The Companys ordinary shares give shareholders equal rights to vote receive dividends and to the repayment of capital.
Note viii Equity and dividends
ITV plc is a nontrading investment holding company and derives its profits from dividends paid by subsidiary companies.
The Directors consider the Groups capital structure and dividend policy at least twice a year ahead of announcing results and do so in the context of its ability to continue as a going concern to execute the strategy and to invest in opportunities to grow the business and enhance shareholder value.
The dividend policy is influenced by a number of the principal risks as identified on pages 50 to 57 that could have a negative impact on the performance of the Group.
In determining the level of dividend in any year the Directors follow the dividend policy and also consider a number of other factors that influence the proposed dividend including The level of retained distributable reserves in ITV plc the Company Availability of cash resources as disclosed in note 4.1 to the consolidated financial statements and Future cash commitments and investment plans in line with Groups strategic plan.
Equity
The retained earnings reserve includes profit after tax for the year of 351 million 2016 1475 million which includes dividends of 426 million from subsidiaries in 2017 2016 1 500 million.
Other reserves of 26 million 2016 28 million relate to share buybacks in prior periods and foreig n currency translation net of cash flow hedging.
Dividends
The Directors of the Company propose a final dividend of 5.28p per share which equates to a full year dividend of 7.8p per share.
Distributable reserves The distributable reserves of ITV plc approximate to the balance of the retained earnings reserve of 1571 million 2016 1702 million as at 31 December 2017.
Note ix
Keeping it simple A contingent liability is a liability that is not sufficiently certain to qualify for recognition as a provision where uncertainty may exist regarding the outcome of future events.
Under a Group registration the Company is jointly and severally liable for VAT at 31 December 2017 of 45 million 31 December 2016 47 million.
The Company has guaranteed certain finance and operating lease obligations of subsidiary undertakings.
Financial Statements 186 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 There are contingent liabilities in respect of certain litiga tion and guarantees broadcasting issues and in respect of warranties given in connection with certain disposals of businesses.
None of these items are expected to have a material effect on the Companys results or financial position.
Where the Company enters into financial guarantee contracts to guarantee the indebtedness of other companies within its Group the Company considers these to be insurance arrangements and accounts for them as such.
In this respect the Company treats the guarantee contract as a cont ingent liability until such time as it becomes probable that the Company will be required to make a payment under the guarantee.
There are no capital commitments at 31 December 2017 2016 none.
Note x Capital and other commitments Note xi Related party transactions
The related parties identified by the Directors include solely key management as ITV plc is a holding company with no commercial activity.
To enable the users of the financial statements to form a view about the effects of related party relationships on the Company we disclose the Companys transactions with those during the year.
Transactions with key management personnel Key management consists of ITV plc Executive Directors.
Key management personnel compensation on an accounting basis is as follows Shortterm employee benefits 4 3 Sharebased compensation  2 Total emoluments and gains on share options received by key management personnel in the year were Emoluments 2 3 Gains on exercise of share options 1 2 Gains on release of restricted share awards Notes to the ITV plc Company Financial Statements Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information 188 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial Statements Subsidiary undertakings and investments Principal subsidiary undertakings The principal subsidiary undertakings of the Company at 28 February 2018 all of which are wholly owned directly or indirectly and incorporated and registered where stated.
Company Name Country Principal Business Activity % Holding Carlton Communications Limited 1ad UK Holding company 100 ITV Broadcasting Limited 1a UK Broadcast of television programmes 100 ITV Consumer Limited 1a UK Development of platforms broadband transactional and mobile services 100 ITV Digital Channels Limited 1a UK Operation of digital television channels 100 ITV Global Entertainment Limited 1a UK Rights ownership and distribution of television programmes and lms 100 ITV Network Limited 1i UK Scheduling and commissioning of television programmes 100 ITV Rights Limited 1a UK Rights ownership 100 ITV Services Limited 1ae UK Provision of services for other companies within the Group 100 ITV Studios Limited 1a UK Production of television programmes 100 ITV2 Limited 1a UK Operation of digital television channels 100 SDN Limited 1a UK Operation of Freeview Multiplex A 100 Talpa Media B.
52a Netherlands Production of television programmes 100 ITV America Inc.
63j USA Production of television programmes 100 ITV Global Entertainment Inc.
63j USA Rights ownership and distribution of television programmes and lms 100 Southbank Studios Inc.
63j USA Production of television programmes 100 Subsidiary undertakings Company Name Country % Holding 12 Yard North Productions Limited 1a UK 100 12 Yard Limited 1a UK 100 12 Yard Productions Investments Limited 1a UK 100 12 Yard Productions Limited 1a UK 100
Limited 1a UK 100 Back Productions Limited 7a UK 100 BGSS Limited 1a UK 100 Big Talk Bliss Limited 1a UK 100 Big Talk Cold Feet Limited 1a UK 100 Big Talk Diana Limited 1a UK 100 Big Talk Investments Limited 1a UK 100 Big Talk JL Limited 1a UK 100 Big Talk Living the Dream Limited 1a UK 100 Big Talk NEWCO 1 Limited 1a UK 100 Big Talk NEWCO 2 Limited 1a UK 100 Big Talk NEWCO 3 Limited 1a UK 100 Big Talk NEWCO 4 Limited 1a UK 100 Big Talk Pictures Limited 1a UK 100 Big Talk Productions Limited 1a UK 100 Broad Street Films Limited 1a UK 100 Campania Limited 1af UK 100 Carbon Media Limited 1a UK 100 Carlton Active Limited 1a UK 100 Carlton Cinema Limited 1a UK 100 Carlton Content Holdings Limited 1a UK 100 Carlton Entertainment 1a UK 100 Carlton Film Distributors Limited 1a UK 100 Carlton Films Limited 1a UK 100 Carlton Finance Limited 1a UK 100 Carlton Food Network Limited 1a UK 100 Carlton Productions Limited 1a UK 100 Company Name Country % Holding Carlton Programmes Development Limited 1a UK 100 Carlton Screen Advertising Holdings Limited 1a UK 100 Carltonco 103 1a UK 100 Carltonco 99 Limited 1a UK 100 Carltonco EightyOne Limited 1ab UK 100 Carltonco Fifty Limited 1ak UK 100 Carltonco Forty Investments 1a UK 100 Carltonco FortyFive Limited 1a UK 100 Carltonco NinetySix 1af UK 100 Carltonco Seventeen Limited 1a UK 100 Castleeld Properties Limited 1a UK 100 Cats on the Roof Media Limited 1a UK 100 Central Television Limited 1a UK 100 Channel Television Holdings Limited 1a UK 100 Cosgrove Hall Films Limited 1a UK 100 Denipurna Limited 1a UK 100 DTV Limited 1a UK 100 Electronic Rentals Group 1a UK 100 EQ Pictures Limited 1a UK 100 GIL Limited 1a UK 100 Granada AV Solutions Limited 1a UK 100 Granada Film 1a UK 100 Granada Film Productions Limited 1a UK 100 Granada Group Limited 1a UK 100 Granada Limited 1a UK 100 Granada Media Limited 1al UK 100 Granada Productions Limited 1a UK 100 Granada Properties 1a UK 100 Granada Screen  Limited 1a UK 100 Granada Television International 1a UK 100 Granada Television Limited 1a UK 100 Notes to the ITV plc Company Financial Statements continued 189 Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information List of subsidiaries Company Name Country % Holding ITV Tennison Limited 1a UK 100 ITV Text Santa Limited 1a UK 100 ITV The Bay Limited 1a UK 100 ITV Thunderbirds Limited 1a UK 100 ITV Top Class Limited 1a UK 100 ITV Trauma Limited 1a UK 100 ITV Tut Limited 1a UK 100 ITV Ventures Limited 1a UK 100 ITV Wales and West Group Limited 1a UK 100 ITV Wales and West Limited 1a UK 100 ITV3 Limited 1a UK 100 ITV4 Limited 1a UK 100 ITV Vera Limited 1a UK 100 Juice Music UK Limited 1a UK 100 London News Network 1a UK 100 London Weekend Television Limited 1a UK 100 LWT Holdings Limited 1ac UK 100 LWT Productions Limited 1a UK 100 Mammoth Screen ABC Limited 1a UK 100 Mammoth Screen AR Limited 1a UK 100 Mammoth Screen ATTWN Limited 1a UK 100 Mammoth Screen Bouquet Limited 1a UK 100 Mammoth Screen BW Limited 26a UK 100 Mammoth Screen City Limited 1a UK 100 Mammoth Screen End Ltd 1a UK 100 Mammoth Screen End2 Limited 1a UK 100 Mammoth Screen End5 Limited 1a UK 100 Mammoth Screen End6 Limited 1a UK 100 Mammoth Screen Falcon Limited 1a UK 100 Mammoth Screen Fearless Limited 1a UK 100 Mammoth Screen Ltd 1a UK 100 Mammoth Screen Monroe Limited 1a UK 100 Mammoth Screen NC Limited 1a UK 100 Mammoth Screen NE Limited 1a UK 100 Mammoth Screen NEWCO 6 Limited 1a UK 100 Mammoth Screen NI Limited 35a UK 100 Mammoth Screen NOK Limited 1a UK 100 Mammoth Screen NW Limited 1a UK 100 Mammoth Screen OBI Limited 1a UK 100 Mammoth Screen PE Limited 1a UK 100 Mammoth Screen Pol2 Limited 1a UK 100 Mammoth Screen Pol3 Limited 1a UK 100 Mammoth Screen Pol4 Limited 1a UK 100 Mammoth Screen Pol5 Limited 1a UK 100 Mammoth Screen Poldark Limited 1a UK 100 Mammoth Screen QV Limited 1a UK 100 Mammoth Screen RM Limited 1a UK 100 Mammoth Screen VF Ltd 1a UK 100 Mammoth Screen Vic3 Limited 1a UK 100 Mammoth Screen WFTP Limited 1a UK 100 Mammoth Screen WH Limited 1a UK 100 Mammoth Screen WOF Limited 1a UK 100 Mammoth Screen WOTW Limited 1a UK 100 Millbank Studios 1a UK 100 Morning TV Limited 1a UK 100 Moving Picture Company Films Limited 1a UK 100 Company Name Country % Holding Granada Television Overseas Limited 1a UK 100 Granada Television Productions Limited 1a UK 100 Granada UK Rental and Retail Limited 1ae UK 100 Interactive Telephony Limited 1a UK 100 International Television Enterprises London Limited 1ad UK 100 ITC Distribution 1a UK 100 ITC Entertainment Group Limited 1a UK 100 ITC Entertainment Holdings Limited 1a UK 100 ITV HC Limited 1a UK 100 ITV Scotland Limited 30a UK 100 ITV Bancroft Limited 1a UK 100 ITV Beowulf Limited 1a UK 100 ITV Border Limited 1a UK 100 ITV Breakfast Broadcasting Limited 1a UK 100 ITV Breakfast Limited 1a UK 100 ITV Breathless Limited 1a UK 100 ITV Central Limited 1a UK 100 ITV Channels Limited 1a UK 100 ITV Cilla Limited 1a UK 100 ITV Cradle Limited 1a UK 100 ITV CS Limited 1a UK 100 ITV Dark Heart Limited 1a UK 100 ITV DC Trustee Limited 1a UK 100 ITV Digital Holdings Limited 1a UK 100 ITV Enterprises Limited 1a UK 100 ITV Global Content Limited 1a UK 100 ITV HG Limited 1a UK 100 ITV Holdings Limited 1a UK 100 ITV Home Fires Limited 1a UK 100 ITV International Channels Asia Limited 1a UK 100 ITV Investments Limited 1a UK 100 ITV JandH Limited 1a UK 100 ITV Jericho Limited 1a UK 100 ITV JR Limited 1a UK 100 ITV Leila Limited 1a UK 100 ITV Lewis Limited 1a UK 1 00 ITV Little Boy Blue Limited 1a UK 100 ITV Loch Ness Limited 1a UK 100 ITV LTVC Scotland Limited 30a UK 100 ITV Lucan Limited 1a UK 100 ITV Meridian Limited 1a UK 100 ITV Moorside Limited 1a UK 100 ITV Mr Selfridge Limited 1a UK 100 ITV News Channel Limited 1ak UK 100 ITV Pension Scheme Limited 1ab UK 100 ITV Play Limited 1a UK 100 ITV Productions Limited 1a UK 100 ITV Properties Developments Limited 1a UK 100 ITV Shetland Limited 1a UK 100 ITV Spirit Limited 1a UK 100 ITV Sport Channel Limited 1a UK 100 ITV Studios Israel Limited 1a UK 100 ITV Studios Newco 11 Limited 1a UK 100 ITV Studios Newco 12 Limited 1a UK 100 ITV Supplementary Pension Scheme Limited 1a UK 100 ITV TandB Limited 1a UK 100 190 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial Statements Company Name Country % Holding ITV Global Entertainment Hong Kong Limited 49a Hong Kong 100 Talpa China Limited 48a Hong Kong 100 UTV Pension Scheme Limited 100 a Ireland 100 Channel Television Limited 32a Jersey 100 ITV London Properties Limited 33a Jersey 100 ITV Properties Jersey Limited 33a Jersey 100 Global Music and Talent Agency B.
90a Netherlands 100 ITV Europe Holdings B.
55a Netherlands 100 ITV Enterprises B.
55a Netherlands 100 ITV Finance Europe B.
55a Netherlands 100 MasMedia B.
56a Netherlands 100 Stitchting Derdengelden TV Producties 52a Netherlands 100 Talpa Content B.
52a Netherlands 100 Talpa Fictie B.
53a Netherlands 100 Talpa Germany Holding B.
90a Netherlands 100 Talpa Global B.
90a Netherlands 100 Talpa NonSpot B.
52a Netherlands 100 Talpa Producties B.
52a Netherlands 100 Utopia B.
57a Netherlands 100 Vorst Media B.
99a Netherlands 100 Wardour Street Films B.
59a Netherlands 100 ITV Studios Norway AS 73a Norway 100 ITV Studios Nordic AB 74a Sweden 100 ITV Studios Scandinavia Holdings AB 74a Sweden 100 Talpa Asia Pte.
Ltd.
93a Singapore 100 ITV Studios Germany GmbH Kln Zweigniederlassung Zrich 75m Switzerland 100 12 Yard Holdings Inc.
68j USA 100 Anglia Television Inc.
68j USA 100 Astrum Productions LLC 68j USA 100 ITV Blumhouse Holding Inc 63j USA 100 Cardinal Productions of Ohio Inc.
63j USA 100 Carlton Media Company Inc.
63j USA 100 Chad Alan Productions LLC 63j USA 100 Critical Productions Inc 63j USA 100 Double Down Films LLC 63h USA 100 Electric Farm Entertainment Holdings Inc.
63j USA 100 Fourth State Productions Inc 108 j USA 100 Granada Cracker US Productions 68j USA 100 Granada Television International Inc.
63j USA 100 Gritty Productions LLC 63h USA 100 Hamdon Entertainment Inc.
63j USA 100 ITC Distribution LLC 63j USA 100 ITC Entertainment Group Inc 63j USA 100 ITC Films LLC 63j USA 100 ITC Productions LLC 63j USA 100 ITV Believe Holding Inc.
63j USA 100 ITV Diga Holding Inc 63j USA 100 ITV Entertainment Services Inc.
63j USA 100 ITV Gritty Holding Inc.
63j USA 100 ITV Gurney Holding Inc.
63j USA 100 ITV HN Holding Inc.
63j USA 100 ITV International Corporation 63j USA 100 ITV Lefteld Holding Inc.
63j USA 100 ITV New Form Holding Inc.
63j USA 100 ITV Popco Holding Inc.
63j USA 100 Notes to the ITV plc Company Financial Statements continued Company Name Country % Holding New Providence Productions Limited 1a UK 100 Pickwick Packaging Limited 1a UK 100 Sightseers Film Limited 1a UK 100 SOM ITV Limited 1a UK 100 So Television Developments Limited 1a UK 100 So Television Limited 1a UK 100 Talpa Media UK Ltd 1a UK 100 Television Music Limited 1a UK 100 The CITV Channel Limited 1a UK 100 The Garden Productions Film Limited 1a UK 100 The Garden Productions Limited 1a UK 100 The London Studios Limited 1a UK 100 Unforgotten 3 Ltd 4a UK 100 UTV Limited 34a UK 100 VOD Member ITVA Limited 1a UK 100 VOD Member ITVB Limited 1a UK 100 WP NEWCO 1 Limited 1a UK 100 WP NEWCO 2 Limited 1a UK 100 WP NEWCO 3 Limited 1a UK 100 WP NEWCO 4 Limited 1a UK 100 World of Sport Wrestling Limited 1a UK 100 World Productions Limited 1a UK 100 WP Bodyguard Limited 1a UK 100 Westcountry Television Limited 1a UK 100 Yorkshire Television Limited 1a UK 100 YorkshireTyne Tees Television Enterprises Limited 1a UK 100 YorkshireTyne Tees Productions Limited 1a UK 100 Zebedee Productions Limited 1a UK 100 Artist Services Cable Pty Ltd 36a Australia 100 Artist Services Investments Pty Limited 36a Australia 100 Artist Services Productions Pty Ltd 36a Australia 100 Granada Media International Australia Pty Ltd 36a Australia 100 Granada Media Investments Australia Pty Ltd 36a Australia 100 Granada Productions Pty Ltd 36a Australia 100 ITV Global Entertainment Pty Limited 36a Australia 100 ITV Services Pty Ltd 36a Australia 100 ITV Studios Australia Pty Limited 36a Australia 100 Totally Full Frontal Productions Pty Limited 36a Australia 100 Granada December Eight Limited 38a Cayman Islands 100 Granada December Nine Limited 38a Cayman Islands 100 ITV Holdings Cayman Limited 39a Cayman Islands 100 Talpa Chile SpA 94a Chile 100 ITV Studios Denmark Holdings Aps a Denmark 100 United Productions ApS 42a Denmark 100 ITV Studios Finland Oy 43a Finland 100 Beaubourg Audiovisuel 50a France 100 ITV Studios France Holdings SAS 95a France 100 ITV Studios France SAS 95a France 100 Phara Prod International a France 100 Tetra Media Studio SAS a France 100 ITV Studios Germany GmbH 46a Germany 100 ITV Studios Germany Holdings GmbH 46a Germany 100 Talpa Germany Fiction GmbH 96a Germany 100 Talpa Germany Gmbh and Co KG 47a Germany 100 Talpa Germany Verwaltungs GmbH 47a Germany 100 Elecrent Insurance Limited 31a Guernsey 100 191 Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information List of subsidiaries Company Name Country % Holding Malacara Limited 2a UK 36.75 Harlequin Agency Limited 5a UK 37.5 Pink Rose Bud Limited 2a UK 37.5 Mainstreet Pictures Limited 4a UK 38.25 Unforgotten2 Limited 4 a UK 38.25 Independent Television News Limited 20a UK 40 Cloth Cat Animation Limited 5a UK 41.25 Cloth Cat LBB Limited 5a UK 41.25 Thud Media Limited 5 a UK 41.25 OSF Wales Limited 5a UK 46.27 Oxford Scientic Films Limited 5a UK 46.27 Box Clever Technology Limited 8a UK 50 Bone Kickers Limited 1a UK 50 British FilmMakers Limited 1a UK 50 Crook Productions Limited 1a UK 50 Digital 3 and 4 Limited 16a UK 50 Freesat UK Limited 18a UK 50 Gameface Productions Limited 1a UK 50 Noho Film and Television Limited 28a UK 50 Standard Music Limited 29a UK 50 Cirkus Limited 13a UK 51 Possessed Limited 1a UK 51 Bait Studio Limited 5a UK 55 Second Act Productions Limited 1a UK 74.07 Age Before Beauty Limited 4a UK 75 Aim Films Limited 3a UK 75 Boom Cymru TV Ltd 5a UK 75 Boom Pictures Limited 1a UK 75 Cynhyrchiadau Boomerang Cyf 2a UK 75 Double Double Limited 1a UK 75 Gorilla TV Group Limited 5a UK 75 Gorilla TV Limited 5a UK 75 Indus Films Limited 2a UK 75 ITV TFG Holdings Limited 1a UK 75 Him Productions Limited 4a UK 75 TwoFour Broadcast Limited 3a UK 75 Twofour Group Holdings Limited 1a UK 75 TwoFour Group Limited 3a UK 75 3sixtymedia Limited 1a UK 80 GC Films Pty Limited 36a Australia 49 Think Factory Productions Canada Ltd 77j Canada 65 LTP Productions Inc.
63h Canada 75 Apple Tree Productions ApS a Denmark 25 Talpa Nordic ApS 41a Denmark 51 15.15 Productions 59a France 49 100% Distribution a France 50 Beaubourg Fiction 50a France 50 Beaubourg Audiovisuel 50a France 50 Gedesel a France 50 Funny Corp a France 51 Macondo Productions Audiovisueles a France 51 MD 60 a France 60 Tangaro a France 65 Tetra Media Fiction a France 78 Shoot Again Productions a France 95 Imago TV Film und Fernsehproduktion GmbH 45a Germany 80 Company Name Country % Holding ITV Southpoint Holding Inc 63j USA 100 ITV Studios America Inc.
63j USA 100 ITV Studios Inc.
68j USA 100 ITV SVOD Holding Inc.
63j USA 100 ITV Thinkfactory Holding Inc.
63j USA 100 ITV Tomorrow Holding Inc.
63j USA 100 ITV US Holdings Inc.
63j USA 100 JB Entertainment Holding Company Inc.
63j USA 100 Kirkstall Road Enterprises Inc.
63j USA 100 Krewed Inc 63j USA 100 Lefteld Entertainment LLC 63h USA 100 Lefteld Pictures of NY Holdings LLC 63j USA 100 Lefteld Pictures of NY LLC 63j USA 100 Lefteld Ventures LLC 63j USA 100 LWT Enterprises Inc.
63j USA 100 Moving Pictures Services Inc.
63h USA 100 Oaklawn Pacic Properties LLC 65h USA 100 Over the Pond Productions Inc.
63j USA 100 Post 460 Inc 63j USA 100 Quay Street Enterprises Inc.
63j USA 100 Red Orange Productions LLC 68j USA 100 Sirens Media LLC 63h USA 100 Sirens Project 1203 LLC 63h USA 100 Sirens Project 1223 LLC 63h USA 100 Sirens Project 1226 LLC 63h USA 100 Sirens Project 1227 LLC 63h USA 100 Sirens Project 1301 LLC 63h USA 100 Sirens Project 1303 LLC 63h USA 100 Sirens Project 1309 LLC 63h USA 100 Sirens Project 1316 LLC 63h USA 100 Sirens Project 1326 LLC 63h USA 100 Sirens Project 1408 LLC 63h USA 100 Sirens Project 1410 LLC 63h USA 100 Sirens Television Development LLC 63h USA 100 So Television US Inc.
68j USA 100 Solowe Productions Inc 63j USA 100 Southsquare Productions Inc.
63j USA 100 Talpa Media USA Inc.
68j USA 100 Talpa North America Inc.
63j USA 100 Trailer Park Productions Inc 63j USA 100 Upper Ground Enterprises Inc.
63j USA 100 Work Shop of NY LLC 63h USA 100 Zinna Productions j USA 100 Joint ventures and Investments Company Name Country % Holding Absolutely Rights Limited 6a UK 20 DTV Services Limited 17a UK 20 That Mitchell and Webb Company Limited 7a UK 20 Route 24 Limited 24a UK 24.9 Monumental Television Limited 76a UK 24.92 Clearcast Limited 14a UK 25 Koska Limited a UK 25 Cirkus International Limited 13a UK 28 Thinkbox TV Limited 23a UK 28.58 192 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial Statements Company Name Country % Holding Film Productions Rentals LLC 68h USA 65 Hateld and McCoy Productions LLC 63h USA 65 Highball Music Group LLC 63h USA 65 LG Films LLC 63h USA 65 Marriage Boot Camp Reality Stars LLC 63h USA 65 MDQuartet LLC 63h USA 65 Roasters LLC 63h USA 65 Signal Post Facilities LLC 63h USA 65 Sound and Stage Studios LLC 63h USA 65 Texas Rangers LLC 63h USA 65 Thinkfactory Group LLC 63h USA 65 Thinkfactory Media LLC 84h USA 65 Web Legal LLC 63h USA 65 Westside Film Partners LLC 63h USA 65 East Olive Productions LLC 68h USA 75 Twofour America LLC 68h USA 75 Loud Television LLC 63h USA 75 Next Steps Productions LLC 63h USA 75 Tomorrow ITV Studios LLC 63k USA 75 Outpost Entertainment LLC 63h USA 80 Memberships Partnerships and Companies Limited by Guarantee Company Name Country % Holding ITV LTVC Scottish Limited Partnership 30h UK 100 ITV Scottish Limited Partnership 30h UK 100 Digital Production Partnership Limited 1i UK 50 Producers Rights Agency Limited 25i UK 50 DTT Multiplex Operators Limited 17i UK 25 Digital UK Limited 17i UK 25 ITV Netherlands Cooperatief W.
55h Netherlands 100 Notes to the ITV plc Company Financial Statements continued Company Name Country % Holding The Lab Television 2013 Limited Partnership 78a Israel 50 Cattleya Srl a Italy 51 Radio Cattleya Srl a Italy 51 Talpa Italia Srl 79a Italy 50 Think Cattleya Srl a Italy 25.5 Rangers Productions SRL 80a Mexico 65 Identity Mansion B.
92a Netherlands 25 Pomper and Linders B.
98a Netherlands 20 ITV Studios Sweden AB 74a Sweden 96 Maximum Media Production FZLLC 81a UAE 90 Talpa Arabia Holding Ltd 81a UAE 90 Talpa Middle East FZLLC 81a UAE 90 Talpa Middle East Lebanon S.
81a UAE 90 Electric Farm Entertainment LLC 63h USA 10 Britbox LLC 89h USA 40.5 Blumhouse TV Holdings LLC 63h USA 45 Circle of Confusion Television Studios LLC 63h USA 49 South Circle Productions LLC 63a USA 49 BB Rights LLC 63h USA 50 JaffeBraunstein Entertainment LLC 67h USA 51 Eight Bells Productions LLC 63h USA 60 High Noon East LLC 69h USA 60 High Noon Group LLC 69h USA 60 High Noon Productions LLC 69h USA 60 High Noon West LLC 69h USA 60 Feeding Time Productions LLC 86h USA 61.5 FT Productions LLC 63h USA 61.5 Gurney Productions LLC 68h USA 61.5 Hollywood Camera and Lighting LLC 68h USA 61.5 RICMA LLC 68h USA 61.5 Yukon RAFT Productions LLC 88h USA 61.5 Crew Ready Everywhere LLC 63h USA 65 DGK 5 LLC 63h USA 65 193 Strategic Report Governance Financial Statements Additional information List of subsidiaries 61 1633 Bayshore Highway Suite 320 Burlingame CA 94010 USA 62 3867 Plaza Tower 1st Floor Baton Rouge Los Angeles CA 70816 USA The Corporation Trust Company Corporate Trust Center 1209 Orange Street Wilmington Newcastle DE 19801 USA Corporation Service Company 2711 Centreville Road Suite 400 Wilmington Newcastle DE 19808 USA The Corporation Trust Company 311 South Division Street Carston City NV 89703 USA United Corporate Services Inc.
874 Walker Road Suite C Dover Kent DE 19904 USA 67 321 Southern Beverly Drive Suite M Beverly Hills CA 90212 USA CT Corporation System 818 West Seventh Street Suite 930 Los Angeles CA 90017 USA 69 The Hodson Law Firm 1129 East 17th Avenue Denver CO 80014 USA CT Corporation System 111 Eighth Avenue 13th Floor New York NY 10011 USA 71 21 Holborn Viaduct London EC1A 2DY United Kingdom 72 120 West 3rd Avenue 201 Vancouver BC VSY 1EG Canada 73 Starvhusgaten 2A Bergen 5014 Norway 74 Soder Malarstrand 65 11825 Stockholm Sweden 75 Scharenmoosstrasse 105 8052 Zurich Switzerland 76 9 St.
Peters Street London N1 8JD United Kingdom Bucchil Goldstein LLP 662 King Street West Suite 304 Toronto ON M5V 1M7 Canada 78 23 Habarzel Street Tel Aviv 69710 Israel 79 Via Enrico Tazzoli 6 Rome Italy Gonzales Carillo SC Abogados Montes Urales no 632 Piso 3 Lomas de Chapaltpec DF 11000 Mexico 81 Building 2 Dubai Media City Dubai UAE 82 3035 South Parker Road Suite 500 Denver CO 80014 USA eResident Acent Inc.
12121 Wilshire Boulevard 1201 Los Angeles CA 90025 USA 84 1640 South Sepulveda Boulevard Suite 300 Los Angeles CA 90025 USA CT Corporation System 306 Main Street Suite 512 Frankfort KY 40601 USA CT Corporation System 3867 Plaza Tower Drive East Baton Rouge Parish Baton Rouge LA 70816 USA 87 24955 Pacic Coast Highway Suite C302 Malibu CA 90265 USA Incorp Services Inc 101 E.
9th Avenue Suite 12B Anchorage AK995013651 USA 89 1120 Avenue of Americas 5th Floor New York NY10036 USA 90 Family de Mollaan 1 1217 ZB Hilversum Netherlands 91 15000 Ventura Blvd Suite 202 Sherman Oaks CA 91403 USA 92 Westersingel 108 3015 LD Rotterdam Netherlands 93 198A Telok Ayer Street Singapore  Singapore calle Cerro El Plomo 5855 ocina 1605 comuna de Las Condes Region Metropolitana Chile 95 38 Quai du Point du Jour 92100 BoulogneBillancourt France 96 Gethiner Strasse 5 10785 Berlin Germany 97 AugustBebel Strasse 58 15711 Konigs Wusterhausen Germany 98 Keizersgracht 149a 1015CL Amsterdam Netherlands 99 Hollandse Kade 34 1391JM Abcoude Netherlands 100 Ormeau Road Belfast Northern Ireland BT7 1EB United Kingdom 101 Aumento Advokatrma Ny Osteragde 34 1101 Kobenhavn Denmark 102 101 avenue Victor Huge  BolognesurMer France 103 Piazzale Valerio Massimo 7 00162 Roma Italy 104 DLA Piper Denmark Radhuspladsen 4 1550 Kobenhavn V Denmark 105 60 Rue Marcel Dassault 92100 BoulogneBillancourt France Jessop House Jessop Avenue Cheltenham Gloucestershire GL50 3WG United Kingdom 107 4 Rue de Commaille 75007 Paris France 108 CT Corporation System 289 S.
Culver Street Lawrenceville GA 300464805 USA Address key The London Television Centre Upper Ground London SE1 9LT United Kingdom 2 218 Penarth Road Cardiff CF11 8NN United Kingdom 3 Twofour Studios Estover Plymouth Devon PL6 7RG United Kingdom Kingsbourne House 229231 High Holborn London WC1V 7DA United Kingdom 5 Gloworks Porth Teigr Way Cardiff Wales CF10 4GA United Kingdom 18 The Glasshouse Studios Fryern Court Road Fordingbridge Hampshire SP6 1NG United Kingdom 7 26 Nassau Street London W1W 7AQ United Kingdom 8 5 New Street Square London EC4A 3TW United Kingdom 9 20 Cathedral Road Cardiff CF11 9LJ United Kingdom 10 9 Manseld Street London W1M 9FH United Kingdom 11 20 Orange Street 3rd Floor London WC2H 7EF United Kingdom 12 21 Hatton Gardens Room 9 London EC1N 9BA United Kingdom 13 The Met Building 22 Percy Street London W1T 2BU United Kingdom 14 4 Roger Street 2nd Floor London WC1X 2JX United Kingdom co Creative Skillset 13 Grosvenor Place Fifth floor Suite 5B London SW1X 7HJ United Kingdom 16 124 Horseferry Road London SW1P 2TX United Kingdom 17 27 Mortimer Street London W1T 3JF United Kingdom 18 2324 Newman Street London W1T 1PJ United Kingdom Unit 8 Acorn Production Centre RO 105 Blundell Street London N7 9BN United Kingdom 20 200 Grays Inn Road London WC1X 8HF United Kingdom Clay Barn Ipsley Court Berrington Close Redditch Worcestershire B98 0TD United Kingdom 10 Lower Thames Street Third Floor London EC3R 6YT United Kingdom 23 Manning House 22 Carlisle Place London SW1P 1JA United Kingdom York House Empire Way Wembley Middlesex HA9 0FQ United Kingdom Fitzrovia House 3rd Floor 153157 Cleveland Street London W1T 6QW United Kingdom Round Foundry Media Centre Foundry Street Leeds LS11 5QP United Kingdom 27 co Archery Pictures 3 Archery Close London W2 2BE United Kingdom 28 59 Charlotte Street Third Floor London W1T 4PE United Kingdom Roundhouse 212 Regents Park Road London NW1 8AW United Kingdom Quartermile One 15 Lauriston Place Edinburgh Scotland EH3 9EP United Kingdom
Box 308 St.
Peter Port House Union Street St.
Peter Port GY1 3TA Guernsey Le Capelain House Castle Quay St.
Helier JE2 3EH Jersey 33 Ogier House The Esplanade St.
Helier JE4 9WG Jersey 34 Ormeau Road Belfast Northern Ireland BT7 1EB United Kingdom 5 Cromac Avenue The Gasworks Belfast Northern Ireland BT7 2JA United Kingdom Level 5 Building 61 Fox Studios Australia 38 Driver Avenue Moore Park NSW 2021 Australia co Addisons Level 12 60 Carrington Street Sydney NSW 2000 Australia Appleby Corporate Services Cayman Limited Clifton House 75 Fort Street P.
Box 190 GT Georgetown Grand Cayman KY11108 Cayman Islands co Appleby Trust Cayman Limited Clifton House 75 Fort Street
Box 1350 Georgetown Grand Cayman KY11108 Cayman Islands Ugland House P.
Box 309 South Church Street Georgetown Grand Cayman Cayman Islands 41 Mosedalvej 14 2500 Valby Copenhagen Denmark 42 Finsensvej 6E 2000 Frederiksberg Denmark 43 Elimaenkatu 9 A Helsinki 00510 Finland 44 23 Rue Montorgueil 75001 Paris France 45 Keplerstrasse 46 10589 Berlin Germany 46 Agrippastrae 8793 50676 Kln Germany 47 Jenfelder Allee 80 22039 Hamburg Germany 11F Unit B Winbase Centre 208 Queens Road Central Sheung Wan Hong Kong Rooms 517520 5th Floor Sun Hung Kai Centre 30 Harbour Road Wan Chai Hong Kong 50 57 Rue SaintAugustin 75002 Paris France 51 Mayor Street Upper Dublin  DUBLIN 1 Ireland 52 Familie de Mollaan 1 1217 ZB Hilversum Netherlands 53 Haarlemmer Houttuinen 21 1013 GL Amsterdam Netherlands 54 Heemraadssingel 180 3021 DL Rotterdam Netherlands 55 Hoogoorddreef 15 1101 BA Amsterdam Netherlands 56 Noorderweg 8 1221 AA Hilversum Netherlands 57 Zevenend 45 1251 RL Laren North Holland Netherlands 58 Voorstraat 61 4797 BE Willemstad Netherlands 59 10 Rue Maitre Jacques 92100 Boulogne Billancourt France 60 121 West Lexington Drive Suite 401 Glendale CA 91203 USA Interest key a Ordinary b Deferred c Special deferred d Redeemable preference e Cumulative preference f Cumulative redeemable preference g Convertible preference h MembershipPartnership i Guarantee j Common k preference l Part preference m Branch Direct subsidiary 194 ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Additional Information
Advertiser funded platform  platforms that include advertising as part of the user experience e.
Broadcasters Audience Research Board BARB  organisation owned by broadcasters and advertisers providing data on linear and online television viewing statistics by UK households Catch up viewing  nonlive viewing of recently broadcast television programmes either via a recording device often called a PVR or DTR such as Sky or through a Video on Demand service such as the ITV Hub BBC iPlayer All 4 or My5 Channel 3 licences  the 15 regional licences and one national licence awarded to transmit Channel 3 across the UK.
All are owned by ITV with the exception of two of the regional licences which are owned by STV Contract Rights Renewal CRR  the remedy agreed by Carlton and Granada in 2003 as a precondition of the merger which governs the way in which ITV airtime is sold by ITV to its advertising customers FreetoAir FTA television  viewing of television through devices not requiring a subscription such as the Freeview or Freesat services High Denition HD  channels or services broadcast in substantially higher resolution than standard providing improved picture quality Impact or Commercial Impact  one Commercial Impact is dened as one viewer watching one 30second television commercial ITV Family  the ITV family of channels which includes ITV ITV2 ITV3 ITV4 ITVBe ITV Encore CITV ITV Breakfast CITV Breakfast and all associated 1 and HD equivalents.
Linear television  television service where the viewer has to watch a scheduled TV programme at the particular time its offered and on the particular channel its presented on Longform video requests  measured across all platforms based on data from comScore Digital Analytix Crocus Virgin BT iTunes Netflix Amazon Video and Sky and include simulcast in November 2017 we moved from comScore Digital Analytix to Crocus an inhouse analytics system.
A longform video is a programme that has been broadcast on television and is available to watch online and on demand in its entirety Longform online viewing consumption total number of hours ITV VOD content is viewed on ad funded platforms such as on mobile tablet and PC based on data from ComScore Digital Analytix and Crocus Media sales commission  commission earned by ITV plc on sales of airtime on behalf of the nonconsolidated licensees Net Advertising Revenue NAR  the amount of money received by a broadcaster as payment for television spot advertising net of any commission paid to agencies Total Schedule CostsTotal Network Programme Budget NPB  the budget spent on programming broadcast on the ITV family of channels including spend on regional programming and ITV Breakfast Nonconsolidated licensees  the two regional channel 3 licences which ITV does not own.
These licences are owned by STV and revenues received from these licences for ITV programming content are referred to as minority revenues NonNAR revenue  includes all ITV revenue both internal and external except net advertising revenue NAR.
This includes intersegment revenue from the sale of ITV Studios shows to the ITV network Ofcom  communications regulator in the UK who regulate the TV radio and video ondemand sectors xedline telecoms phones mobiles and postal services plus the airwaves over which wireless devices operate Overthetop OTT  delivery of audio video and other media over the internet this includes content from providers such as Netflix Amazon and Hulu and also our own on demand service the ITV Hub SDN  multiplex operator owned by ITV which operates one of the eight national multiplex licences in the UK on Freeview Share of Broadcast SOB  ITVs share of UK television advertising revenue NAR a measure of market share Share of Commercial Impacts SOCI the term used to dene the share of total UK television commercial impacts delivered by one channel or group of channels.
This measure excludes viewing of BBC channels as they do not generate commercial impacts.
Unless stated otherwise SOCI gures cited throughout this report are based on BARB data and are based on the universe of Adults 16 Share of Viewing SOV  the share of the total viewing audience during a dened period gained by a programme or channel.
This measure includes viewing of BBC channels.
Unless stated otherwise SOV gures cited throughout this report are based on BARB data and are based on the universe of individuals Simulcast  streaming live TV channels via a broadcasters on demand service at the same time as broadcast on linear TV Spot advertising  linear television advertising occupying a short break during or between programmes Subscription Video on Demand SVOD a paid for service where subscribers have access to a wide range of content whenever they request it Video on Demand VOD  the ability to deliver video content to a customers television set computer or device when the customer requests it YouView  a joint venture with the BBC Channel 4 Channel 5 BT TalkTalk and Arqiva to operate and promote a hybrid television platform combining Freeview channels with catch up and on demand services Printed in the UK by Pureprint using vegetable inks and their and Pureprint environmental printing technology.
Pureprint is a CarbonNeutral company.
Both manufacturing mill and the printer are registered to the Environmental Management System ISO14001 and are Forest Stewardship
FSC chainofcustody certified.
Designed and produced by ITV plc The London Television Centre Upper Ground
SE1 9LT site
