Annual
Report and
James Fisher and Sons plc Fisher House PO Box 4
Cumbria
LA14 1HR T 0telF 0telemail This Report has been printed in the UK.
Our printers are environmental management system ISO 14001accredited and Forest Stewardship Council FSC chain of custody certified.
This paper is environmentally friendly ECF elemental chlorinefree and wood free with a high content of selected preconsumer recycled material.
The mill is fully FSCcertified.
The paper is also completely biodegradable and recyclable.
If you have finished reading this Report and no longer wish to retain it please pass it on to other interested readers return it to James Fisher and Sons plc or dispose of it in your recycled paper waste.
Thank you.
This Annual Report is available at site James Fisher and Sons plc Annual Report 2017 www .
Designed and produced by Perivan 3 JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017
This Annual Report has been prepared for the members of the Company only.
The Company its Directors employees and agents do not accept or assume responsibility to any other person in connection with this document and any such responsibility or liability is expressly disclaimed.
This Annual Report contains certain forwardlooking statements that are subject to future events including amongst other matters the economic and business circumstances occurring from time to time in the countries and markets in which the Group operates and the availability of financing to the Group.
As such the forwardlooking statements involve risk and uncertainty.
Accordingly whilst it is believed the expectations reected in these statements are reasonable at the date of publication of this Annual Report they may be affected by a wide range of matters which could cause actual results to differ materially from those anticipated.
The forwardlooking statements will not be updated during the year.
Nothing in this Annual Report should be construed as a profit forecast.
Highlights
Chairmans statement
Chief Executives review 4 Business model
Sector review
Financial review
Key performance indicators Principal risks and uncertainties Corporate responsibility Board of Directors Corporate governance report Audit Committee report Nominations Committee report 38 Directors remuneration report Directors report Independent auditors report Consolidated income statement Consolidated statement of other comprehensive income Consolidated and Company statement of financial position Consolidated and Company cash ow statement Consolidated statement of changes in equity Company statement of changes in equity Notes to the financial statements Subsidiaries and associated undertakings Group financial record 110 Notice of Annual General Meeting Investor information James Fisher and Sons plc is a leading service provider to all sectors of the global marine industry and a specialist supplier of engineering services to the energy industry.
We employ 2700 people across 18 countries.
Our companies and services have a focus on marine related activities which operate in potentially demanding environments where specialist skills are rewarded.
Through innovation and acquisition we have developed marketleading businesses through our four divisions Marine Support Specialist Technical Offshore Oil and Tankships.
Governance Financial statements Strategic report JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 1 JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT
2017 2016 % change Revenue 505.4m 466.0m 9% Underlying operating profit 55.8m 50.8m 10% Underlying profit before tax 50.3m 45.8m 10% Underlying diluted earnings per share 81.4p 76.3p 7% Total dividend per share 28.70p 26.15p 10% Statutory profit before tax 49.0m 44.9m 9% Statutory diluted earnings per share 79.5p 78.7p 1% excludes separately disclosed items.
Revenue up 9% and exceeded 500m for the first time Underlying operating profit up 10% Increases in Marine Support Specialist Technical and Tankships Marine Support ahead 17% Underlying profit before tax 10% higher at 50.3m Dividends increased for 23rd consecutive year up 10% to 28.70p per share.
Notes
James Fisher and Sons plc uses alternative performance measures APMs as key financial indicators to assess the underlying performance of the business.
APMs are used by management as they are considered to better reflect business performance and provide useful additional information.
APMs include underlying operating profit underlying profit before tax underlying diluted earnings per share underlying return on capital employed and cash conversion.
An explanation of APMs is set out in note 2 on page 69.
JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017
Chairmans statement
This is the last year that I shall be writing this statement as Chairman and therefore I am particularly pleased to be able to report that James Fisher and Sons plc James Fisher had another good year in 2017 producing an underlying profit before tax of 50.3m an increase of 10% over the prior year.
This reflected the strength of the Groups business model with its broad spread of activities across the marine sector its strong international presence and its ability to innovate and grow new businesses.
Three of our four divisions improved their results with Marine Support leading the way with a 17% improvement in profits generated by new markets in Brazil the Middle East and offshore renewables.
Specialist Technical delivered another strong performance making good progress with the delivery of its project pipeline and the Indian submarine rescue contract in particular.
Tankships continued its run of profit increases generated by high vessel utilisation levels and careful attention to costs.
Offshore Oil managed a result only marginally below the prior year demand began to firm in some sectors towards year end while the division was also successful in opening new opportunities in the Middle East Asia and in subsea decommissioning.
Group revenue for the year grew by 9% to 505.4m 2016 466.0m.
An increase in the Groups underlying effective tax rate to 17.2% 2016 15.4% held back the increase in underlying diluted earnings per share to 7% at 81.4 pence per share.
Statutory diluted earnings per share were 79.5 pence 2016 78.7 pence.
With a number of major projects underway careful attention has been paid to managing cash flow this year in the face of the expected increase in working capital.
This buildup squeezed our cash conversion rate to 56% in 2017 and despite this the yearend balance sheet gearing remained at a conservative 47% 2016 41% with the ratio of net debt excluding bonds to underlying earnings before interest tax depreciation and amortisation at 1.6 times 2016 1.4 times.
The underlying strength of the Groups performance and the positive outlook for the year ahead has led the Board to propose an increase in the final dividend to 19.3 pence 2016 17.6 pence per share making a total for the year of 28.7 pence per share an increase of 10% compared with 2016.
Strategic overview Over the last ten years with the exception of 2015 James Fisher has increased its profit and dividends every year normally by more than 10% this despite external events such as the financial crisis of 20078 the fall in oil prices in 2014 and most recently Brexit.
Key to this performance has been the Groups ability to innovate and to build new businesses.
The rapid growth of our shiptoship STS transfer business from 2007 the development of a marketleading position in submarine rescue and hyperbaric engineering since 2012 and more recently the growth of a completely new activity in offshore renewables have enabled the Group to absorb these external shocks and continue to grow.
This growth in turn has built an ever wider international presence so that the Group is not dependent on any one geographical market.
With a stable management team in place and a continued commitment to a decentralised management structure which keeps decisionmaking close to our customers and markets this track record of change and innovation is set to continue.
All four of our divisions are well placed for the future.
Marine Support is benefiting from the opening of new markets for STS such as in Brazil from the development of its subsea project businesses and from its expanding presence in offshore renewables.
Specialist Technical has marketleading positions in both its hyperbaric and submarine rescue niches and in its reactor decommissioning business in the nuclear sector.
While this division will always be project driven and therefore lumpier in terms of turnover and working capital it has an attractive pipeline of mediumterm prospects.
Tankships continues to perform well in a relatively stable market this position will be underpinned by the introduction of more modern tonnage on some routes.
Offshore
Oil is now positioned for recovery our businesses and management teams have done well both in terms of reducing their Charles Rice Chairman James Fisher had another good year in 2017 producing an underlying profit before tax of 50.3m an increase of 10% over the prior year.
JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT costs and in opening new markets for their services in the Middle East Africa and Asia.
The strength of our balance sheet enables us to invest in development projects alongside a full capital investment programme.
With the focus mainly on organic growth we nevertheless remain alert for acquisition opportunities to help speed the development of our businesses.
The purchase of Rotos 360 Limited in March 2017 for an initial consideration of 1.5m and EDS HV Group Limited in December 2017 for 9.0m have further extended our range of marketleading services to the offshore renewables sector.
The Board After fourteen years on the Board and nearly six as Chairman I announced in January that I will stand down at the conclusion of this years Annual General Meeting AGM.
It has been a privilege to have been part of James Fisher during an exciting period in the history of the
The Groups success is generated by the hard work and dedication of staff and management throughout the Group and it has been a great pleasure to meet and work with so many of them during my time with James Fisher.
The Board has chosen Malcolm Paul to become Chairman at the conclusion of the
Malcolm has extensive experience in managing decentralised and international companies similar to James Fisher and has been an Independent NonExecutive Director since 2011.
He has a deep knowledge of the Company having chaired the Audit and Remuneration Committees as well as being the Senior Independent NonExecutive Director.
He will bring the right balance of continuity and change to this role going forward.
Effective 1 February I was also pleased to announce that Justin Atkinson had agreed to join the Board as an Independent NonExecutive Director.
He will succeed Malcolm as chairman of the Audit
Justin was until recently the CEO of the Keller Group plc a FTSE 250 business in the international construction sector.
He will bring experience of successfully managing a group on a similar growth path to James Fisher.
With the development of James Fisher in recent years and the increasing spread of its international operations the Board has been giving careful thought as to when it would be appropriate to strengthen the central executive team.
In January 2017 Fergus Graham joined the Group having worked previously at De La Rue plc and other international companies in both operations and crossborder business development.
He has played a senior role in our Marine Support division during the past year.
The Board has now agreed to appoint Fergus as an Executive Director with effect from 1 March 2018.
He will take responsibility for all of the Marine Support division which generated 47% of the Groups turnover in 2017.
This will free up more time for Nick Henry as CEO to lead the Groups further development.
Staff
The continued growth and success of the Group owes everything to the dedication of our staff who now work in many different countries across the globe.
Some have to work in very challenging environments and all have to show a high level of professionalism worthy of the confidence our customers place in us.
On behalf of the Board and from me especially in my final year I would like to thank all our employees for their hard work and commitment shown to the James Fisher Group.
Outlook
Our Marine Support division has commenced the year with good prospects in its offshore renewables and marine project activities as well as firm demand in the STS transfer business.
Specialist
Technical continues to work through its strong order book and has a good pipeline of active prospects.
The timing of the award of these new projects will determine whether this division is able to deliver a further step up in profits in 2018.
Tankships continues to operate well in a stable market.
Sentiment amongst our Offshore Oil divisions customers has turned more positive in recent weeks and while it is still too early to assess any general trend this has begun to be reflected in orders received for repair and maintenance work in particular.
We therefore have a positive view of the year ahead and are confident of the Groups potential to provide further growth and value for our shareholders in the future.
Charles Rice 26 February 2018 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT Charles Rice Chairman COBRA  JFDs new diver breathing system JFD has successfully completed its first deepwater commercial dive project with its new diver breathing system COBRA Compact Bailout Rebreathing Apparatus a sophisticated system that was designed and developed to provide divers with an emergency supply of breathing gas in the event of a primary failure.
The
COBRA system provides divers with 20 minutes of air at a depth of 270 metres or 45 minutes of emergency life support at a depth of 120 metres.
This is compared to current alternative systems which can only provide 3 minutes of air at 270 metres and 7 minutes at 120 metres.
The extended operation time significantly improves the likelihood of a successful rescue in the event of an emergency.
JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017
Chief Executives review
Nick Henry Chief Executive Officer
Group strategy The Groups strategy is to grow its business organically by leveraging its existing marine skill base in specialist expertise to a global market supplemented by selective bolt on acquisitions which broaden the Groups range of services products or geographical coverage.
Our strategic aim is to deliver longterm growth in earnings per share and consistently to increase shareholder value.
Our
Whilst the Group prioritises organic growth our strategy is to supplement it with valueenhancing acquisitions which fit into our existing divisions.
James
Fisher seeks to acquire businesses that have a niche product or service offering with growth potential a track record of profitability cash generation and strong management.
Business model The Groups businesses provide a range of marine services to large corporations and government bodies through its four divisions Marine Support Specialist Technical Offshore Oil and Tankships.
James Fishers businesses are entrepreneuriallyled with a decentralised management structure which encourages managers to be responsible for making timely decisions in response to changes in the market and in the competitive environment.
Many of the Groups businesses operate in specialist niches and hold marketleading positions in their particular sector.
Their growth is focused on the less mature markets around the world with 50% 2016 51% of the Groups revenue derived from customers in the Middle East Africa and Asia Pacific regions.
Key Performance Indicators KPIs are used to measure the success of the business model.
These include revenue growth operating margin the ratio of underlying operating profit to revenue return on capital employed and cash conversion.
This year revenue growth was 9% and the underlying operating margin increased to 11.0% 2016 10.9%.
The Group s posttax return on capital employed was 12.2% 2016 13.0% and the reduction was due to the working capital requirement in relation to the contract to build two submarine rescue vessels for the Indian Navy.
The Group s cash conversion which measures the proportion of underlying operating profit that is turned into operating cash was 56% 2016 103% after adjustment for the investment in working capital for the submarine rescue project which is expected to reverse in 2018 when the vessels are scheduled for delivery.
Strategic progress The Groups corporate objectives are to deliver longterm growth in underlying earnings per share and to deliver progressive dividend growth.
In 2017 underlying earnings per share grew by 7% and the compound rate of growth over the last ten years in underlying earnings per share is 10%.
Dividends have increased in each of the last 23 years and the compound rate of dividend growth over the last ten years is 10%.
Over the last few years the Group has made a number of acquisitions of marine service businesses which have been integrated into James Fisher Marine Services JFMS to form a substantial offshore and subsea operator for the renewables industry.
JFMS provides a wide range of services to the offshore wind and tidal sector to support both the construction and maintenance of this fastgrowing industry.
During
2017 this range of services was further enhanced through the acquisition of Rotos 360 Limited Rotos 360 a leading provider of blade repair services and EDS HV Group Limited EDS the leading provider of high voltage cable connections and cable repair services.
In March 2017 Rotos 360 was acquired for an initial 1.5m in cash with a further potential 5.0m based on future profitability.
The company repairs offshore wind farm rotor blades through innovative use of suspended work platforms and ultra violet resin curing techniques which reduce operational downtime.
In December 2017 EDS was acquired for an initial 9.0m with a potential further 5.6m based on profit targets over the next two years.
EDS operates JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT HMS Queen Elizabeth Our Tankships business James Fisher Everard JFE supported the initial sea trials of the first of a new class of aircraft carrier the HMS Queen Elizabeth by providing refuelling services in July and August 2017.
The Ministry of Defence determined that the most suitable port providing the level of security required for its largestever warship was the Port of Cromarty Firth at Invergordon.
Refuelling by road tanker would have been impractical as it would have required 120 lorries for each fuel stop.
JFE swiftly relocated two tanker vessels the M.
Sarnia Cherie and the M.
Sarnia Liberty from the south coast of England to
Loaded with cargoes of F76 fuel from the oil fuel depot in Gosport Hampshire each vessel was weighed down at the stern due to the small steeply shelving mooring berth at Invergordon and the need to counter the angle.
Sister company Fendercare provided two 250 metrelengths of 4 hose with associated connectors to maximise the rate of fuel transfer.
Observing strict windows of time when the HMS Queen Elizabeth was available for refuelling JFE completed two separate fuelling operations safely and efficiently whilst working to a tight and demanding deadline.
This allowed the HMS Queen Elizabeth to fulfil its sea trials and return to its home port of Portsmouth for the commissioning ceremony.
Nick Henry Chief Executive Officer
JFMS first significant integrated marine services contract to support the construction of the Galloper wind farm located 27km off the coast of Suffolk UK continued to progress well and the contract worth in excess of 30m is scheduled to complete in 2018.
In November 2017 the Group announced the award of a package of services to support the construction of the East Anglia One wind farm which is worth 3.1m confirming its position as the leading integrated marine service provider to the offshore renewables sector.
Our Marine Support business Fendercare is the world leader in shiptoship transfers from a network of over 50 bases around the world with a 20year track record of conducting safe and efficient operations.
In 2017 it commenced operations in the Santos basin off the coast of Brazil for two oil majors.
This is a new market with significant potential for further growth.
JFD our Specialist Technical business and the worlds leading producer and operator of untethered submarine rescue systems made good progress on the final engineering assembly and testing of two submarine rescue vessels which are scheduled to be delivered to the Indian Navy in 2018.
When the vessels sea trials are completed JFD will commence a 25year contract to operate the service in India.
Our strategy in this niche area continues to be to grow longterm service contracts having supplied submarine rescue vessels of our design.
JFD also operates submarine rescue services for NATO the Singapore Navy and the Royal Australian Navy.
The business also progressed with two saturation diving systems for a Chinese salvage customer.
JFD is a market leader in saturation diving and other diving equipment and the installation of its specialist diving systems leads to future demand for its products and for refurbishments or life extension to existing assets.
The Groups Tankships division continued its progress and increased earnings before interest tax depreciation by 6% to 15.8m 2016 14.9m.
Its earnings and strong cash flow are utilised in the organic and acquisitive growth of the other three divisions.
Tankships further progressed its fleet renewal programme by agreeing terms to lease and sell the Milford Fisher and replace it with a more modern second hand 4kT vessel during the first quarter of 2018.
In Offshore Oil after a slow start to the year the market improvement seen JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 Chief Executives review continued in the early summer months failed to continue into the autumn.
This meant that the market remained flat for the year and the backlog of maintenance work remains to be addressed.
The Groups competitive position in our various geographic markets remains strong and hence Offshore Oil is wellpositioned for the upturn in market activity as and when this occurs.
Divisional performance Marine Support 2017 2016 Underlying operating profit m 24.5 21.0 Underlying operating margin 10.4% 10.3% Return on capital employed 15.5% 13.9% Marine Support revenue was 16% higher in 2017 at 236.3m 2016 After adjusting for the beneficial impact of currency rates the increase was 14%.
Underlying operating profit increased by 17% to 24.5m due to strong performance at Fendercare which initiated shiptoship STS transfer services in Brazil good growth from Subtech in Africa and the Middle East and further progress in the renewables sector.
STS transfer services commenced in Brazil in January 2017 for two oil majors and built up to become a significant operation by the end of the year.
This offset a slightly softer market in the Asia Pacific and West African regions but drove overall STS revenue growth of 16% in the year.
Our fendering and marine products business also produced double digit revenue growth and increased its profitability.
Revenue at Subtech which is headquartered in Durban South Africa increased by over 50% having established a presence in the Middle East and having landed significant subsea projects in Ghana Nigeria and Saudi Arabia to provide diving and cable laying services.
JFMS successfully continued to provide its wide range of integrated marine services to the Galloper wind farm construction project.
Rotos 360 has completed over 70 wind turbine blade repairs on ten wind farms since it was acquired in March 2017.
At the Lynn and Inner Dowsing offshore wind farm it completed a full turnkey repair project to repair 27 turbines in a contract worth Specialist Technical 2017 2016 Underlying operating profit m 21.1 19.9 Underlying operating margin 13.6% 13.1% Return on capital employed 19.7% 27.8% Revenue was 3% ahead of 2016 and underlying operating profit 6% ahead at 21.1m 2016 19.9m.
The market for UK nuclear decommissioning which represents around one third of the division continued to be challenging and resulted in marginally lower revenue but this was offset by our specialist diving and submarine rescue business JFD which increased sales by 6%.
JFD made good progress in the design assembly and testing of two submarine rescue vessels which are due for delivery to the Indian Navy during 2018.
The first vessel was substantially complete at the end of 2017 and has subsequently achieved acceptance testing at our Inchinnan site near Glasgow UK.
Delivery is scheduled for March 2018 and the second vessel is due to be delivered in November 2018.
JFD Australia supplied a Transfer Under Pressure unit and a hyperbaric equipment suite in support of the contract to manage submarine rescue operations for the Royal Australian Navy.
The annual exercise to practice and prove established rescue procedures which took place off the coast of West Australia was successfully completed in November.
On 19 February 2018 the Group acquired Cowan Manufacturing Pty Limited a business based in New South Wales Australia which designs and manufactures portable hyperbaric chambers primarily for the Royal Australian Navy and the wider international defence market.
JFD also took part in a major international submarine rescue exercise Dynamic Monarch 2017 which demonstrated the capabilities of the JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT NATO partner nations France Norway and UK submarine rescue system and provided training.
Dynamic Monarch which took place in Turkey is one of the largest international submarine rescue exercises which occurs every three years and is designed to test international forces interoperability and ability to respond to submarines that have become disabled anywhere in the world.
James Fisher Nuclear JFN our nuclear decommissioning business achieved the design scheme completion milestone on the Winfrith core reactor decommissioning contract which commenced in 2016.
Onsite
In March the first drone survey within Sellafields high security chemical separation area was completed removing the need for scaffolding or special access vehicles saving both time and money.
However the business faced a slower market for new projects in its main UK markets.
Offshore Oil 2017 2016 Underlying operating profit m 3.8 4.2 Underlying operating margin 6.7% 7.6% Return on capital employed 3.2% 3.5% As reported at the half year Offshore Oil had a slow start to the year but business improved in the summer months.
However this improvement was not maintained into the autumn.
Revenue was 2% higher at 56.4m but after adjusting for the impact of exchange rates sales were 1% lower.
In the second half of 2017 revenue at constant currency was 4% higher than the 2016 comparator.
Underlying operating profit was 0.4m lower in 2017 at 3.8m 2016 4.2m but more than two times greater than the first half of the year.
Our Norwegian business Scan Tech AS successfully completed the lifting package project for the Johan Sverdrup field which has contributed around 5.0m of revenue to date.
RMSpumptools our artificial lift company had a steadily improving order book over the year and a strong finish to 2017.
Tankships 2017 2016 Underlying operating profit m 8.8 8.2 Underlying operating margin 15.4% 14.8% Return on capital employed 34.2% 31.9% Tankships continued its recent track record of profitability and strong cash generation.
On similar revenue underlying operating profit was 7% ahead of 2016 at 8.8m 2016 8.2m and cash generation was once again very strong.
The business which distributes clean petroleum products around the northern European coastline maintained high vessel utilisation and tight control of costs and continued its excellent track record of carrying out its operations to high standards of health and safety.
In July and August two of its vessels supported the sea trials of HMS Queen Elizabeth the UK Navys largest aircraft carrier by providing refuelling services in Invergordon Scotland.
The business responded quickly and pragmatically by deploying two vessels from the south coast of the UK to support its customer.
Maputo project Mozambique Subtech the Groups Durban headquartered marine service company completed a major quay offset project in the Port of Maputo in Mozambique.
The project which enabled other infrastructure projects at the port involved the installation and commissioning of the new fender support structures and new fender spacing systems within a 19 day shutdown period of the existing quay.
The quay was extended and deepened to enable it to accommodate a fullyladen Panamex vessel.
The first such vessel was successfully berthed three days after the quay was reopened in July 2017.
JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 Our businesses are linked together by a set of common marine service skills.
The Group provides solutions to customers through the provision of specialist equipment supported by the detailed knowledge of our people who are industry experts in their specific operations.
The equipment is often designed and assembled by our people who then operate it and provide throughlife support to our customers.
Whilst our expertise originates in the UK the Group provides these solutions and support internationally and focuses on servicing less mature markets.
Addressing such customer demands for quality and improvement requires the continuous development of innovative products to maintain market leadership in our areas of service.
The Group has a decentralised management structure and encourages managers to be responsible for making timely decisions in the best interests of their businesses but with the backup and resources of a larger group.
Our businesses have strong experienced management teams that are rewarded according to the success of their businesses.
An entrepreneurial culture means that decisions are made quickly and in response to changes in the market and the competitive environment.
Organic growth from our existing businesses supported by selective acquisitions is central to the growth of the Group.
Acquisitions broaden our product range and service portfolio deepen our management pool and potentially extend our geographical coverage for our large multinational customers.
James
Fisher has acquired a number of ownermanaged companies with specific expertise often with strong market positions.
The Groups global reach has facilitated the extension of the scope of the operations of these companies to an international market.
Subsequent strong organic growth has been achieved through investment in people working capital and equipment.
Business model Our business model comprises high quality niche businesses which offer a range of marine services predominantly to large multinational customers and governments globally.
High quality marine services Entrepreneurial culture Buy and build 9 JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT James Fisher has a range of entrepreneuriallyled businesses which are market leaders in their specific operational niche.
Our businesses operate in demanding environments where strong marine service and specialist engineering skills are valued and rewarded.
We seek to provide solutions to our customers in the less mature and fastgrowing markets where they value trusted and quality suppliers.
Our niche operations are integrated into a wider service offering to a diverse range of end markets.
Our focus on operational excellence requires that our businesses are cashgenerative have operating margins in excess of 10% and provide returns on capital employed in excess of 15%.
Bolton acquisitions broaden the range of products and services that we provide.
Our acquisition strategy has focused on niche businesses with a strong entrepreneurial culture which fit well with our operating style and growth strategy.
As a cashgenerative Group with a strong balance sheet businesses are usually acquired using existing cash or borrowing resources.
The businesses acquired have a good track record and typically need additional resources for their next growth phase.
Where an acquisition bolts on to existing businesses we seek to optimise shared back office functions purchasing opportunities and crossselling within the Group.
Strategy
The Groups strategy is to grow its business organically by leveraging its existing marine skill base in areas of specialist expertise to a global market.
This is supported by selective acquisitions to broaden the product and service range or geographical coverage.
JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 Sector review Marine Support Market drivers Fendercare is the leading provider of pneumatic floating fenders and other mooring equipment to the global marine industry.
It services commercial shipbuilding ship refurbishment defence port developments and the oil and gas markets for project applications.
Fendercare is also the leading provider of shiptoship services for the transfer of crude or refined oil liquefied natural gas or bulk cargoes.
The demand for these services is driven by the volume of oil trading between oil majors and independent traders and also by production where local port infrastructure is unable to accommodate large tankers.
JF Marine Services delivers an integrated service offering that utilises the wide range of marine skills across the Group to provide added value to its customers.
Demand for its services is driven by the operation and maintenance activities in the marine oil and gas renewables and communication sectors.
This includes the specialist provision of ROV systems and diving personnel for underwater surveys inspections construction and diver support.
JF Testing Services is the leading provider of strain gauges to the marine industry which are used in a range of applications such as mooring systems on ships and in ports as well as being used to monitor the structural integrity of infrastructure in the construction and transport sectors.
The sectors serviced encompass new shipbuilding ship refurbishment and life extension port developments and projects for the oil and gas market.
It is also a leading provider of specialist testing and monitoring services to the construction and maintenance sectors and designs and manufactures testing and monitoring equipment supporting customers worldwide.
The market drivers for JF Testing Services are new projects in the marine oil and gas infrastructure and renewables sectors where our niche offering and innovative products and services provide a competitive advantage.
JF Subsea Excavation specialises in providing massflow excavation tools and services to cover or uncover subsea pipelines or cables.
Demand for its services is driven by global cable and pipeline projects primarily in the oil and gas renewables and communication sectors.
Subtech provides a range of marine services to the Middle Eastern and Africa region.
Demand for its services is driven by port construction diving and marine projects.
Operations End markets Locations
Marine products and services shiptoship transfers offshore terminal services Marine oil and gas renewables and defence UK Singapore Australia UAE Brazil Nigeria Ghana JF Marine Services Integrated marine services including remotely operated vehicle ROV systems and diving services Marine oil and gas renewables tidal power and communications UK France JF Testing Services Products and services that measure and monitor structural stress instrumentation and materials testing Marine oil and gas renewables civil and construction UK UAE Singapore
JF Subsea Excavation Massflow excavation services Oil and gas and renewables UK Mexico Singapore
Marine and diving services Oil and gas marine and construction South Africa Mozambique UAE Namibia Underlying operating profit m Revenue m Return on capital employed %tel 171.3tel 18.3tel Our principal businesses
Our Marine Support businesses provide products services and solutions to the global marine industry.
Our services are supplied to a range of end market sectors including marine oil and gas ports construction and renewables.
JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT Specialist Technical Market drivers JFD is the worlds leading supplier of saturation diving systems and related diving equipment.
Its end markets are oil and gas and defence.
Saturation diving systems are both fixed and portable.
Fixed systems are usually built into dive support vessels DSVs.
JFD provides the equipment and the follow on consumables support and maintenance to the DSV operator.
The construction and replacement of DSVs drives new build saturation diving systems which in turn drives ancillary service and product spend.
JFDs defence market is based on service repair and ongoing calibration requirements and on projects requiring specialist diving equipment.
JFD is also a leading provider of submarine rescue services.
It encompasses the ability to design deliver and operate submarine rescue vehicles.
It has longterm service contracts with navies providing a very niche area of capability.
The driver is the tendering of defence projects for provision of the equipment which can then lead to longerterm service contracts to operate the service.
We currently provide submarine rescue services to the UK Singaporean and Australian navies.
The business also provides swimmer delivery vessels to the special operations markets.
James Fisher Nuclear JFN provides engineered products and services to the nuclear industry both in the operation of nuclear power plants and decommissioning.
Its products and services operate in hazardous environments.
The business provides instrumentation nondestructive testing calibration and digital radiography to the nuclear aerospace and process industries.
The market drivers for JFN are the demand for its products services and lifetime support from the UK decommissioning industry radiological calibration requirements and projects within the aerospace process and defence industries.
Sector
Our Specialist Technical businesses supply diving equipment and services submarine rescue vessels and throughlife rescue services and engineering solutions to the international defence market and UK nuclear decommissioning market.
The submarine rescue market is a small niche with a national navy either having its own capability or relying on other countries.
Other subsea services provided to the defence sector include diving equipment and special operation swimmer delivery vessels.
The Group also supplies saturation diving systems which are installed onto dive support vessels and support deep subsea diving activities.
James Fisher Nuclear provides engineered solutions which operate in hazardous environments in the nuclear industry.
Underlying operating profit m Revenue m Return on capital employed %tel Our principal businesses Operations End markets Locations
Design supply and servicing of diving and subsea equipment submarine rescue and special operations services Defence commercial and defence diving hyperbaric and submarine rescue UK Australia Singapore Sweden JF Nuclear Engineered solutions in remote handling nondestructive testing and calibration services Nuclear decommissioning UKtel 81.9tel JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 Offshore Oil Market drivers ScanTech AS is Norways leading provider of ATEX ATmosphres EXplosives products and support services to the energy sector.
Its products and services are supplied to the Norwegian oil and gas market and are used for platform maintenance well testing or specific projects.
Equipment is designed and certified to the NORSOK standard.
The driver for the business is the operation and maintenance spend on offshore rigs in the Norwegian sector.
Scantech Offshore is a leading provider of air compressors steam generators heat suppression equipment and qualified personnel for the well testing market worldwide.
It rents equipment to large multinational oil service companies along with qualified personnel to operate the equipment.
The driver for the business is the operation and maintenance spend on offshore rigs around the world.
RMSpumptools is a world leader in artificial lift specialist completion technology and innovative accessory tools for electrical submersible pumps.
RMSpumptools supplies products to the global downhole oil and gas market which improve the productivity of wells utilising electrical submersible pumps.
Fisher Offshore provides winches hoists cutting tools marine cranes and subsea hydraulic equipment to the oil and gas and marine sectors.
Its market driver is maintenance inspection and repair demand and subsea projects.
Operations End markets Locations ScanTech AS Design and engineering of specialist equipment platform maintenance and modification well testing support and subsea operations Oil and gas Norway Scantech Offshore Provides products and services to well testing companies Oil and gas UK UAE Brazil Australia Malaysia
Artificial lift specialist completion technology and innovative accessory tools for electrical submersible pumps Oil and gas UK UAE Fisher Offshore Provides range of lifting equipment and services to the marine offshore and subsea industries Oil and gas UK Malaysia Underlying operating profit m Revenue m Return on capital employed %tel Our principal businesses
The Offshore Oil division supplies a range of services and equipment to the global oil and gas industry.
This includes the design and engineering of specialist equipment platform maintenance and modification well testing support subsea operations and maintenance services.
James Fisher is also established as a world leader in artificial lift specialist completion technology and innovative accessory tools for electrical submersible pumps.
4.2tel 19.7tel JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT
Market drivers James Fisher Everard JFE distributes clean petroleum products under contracts with oil majors from refineries and terminals to storage facilities around the European coast and to islands.
It operates a fleet of doublehulled product tankers with capacity ranging from 3000mt to 13000mt.
The business driver is the level of consumption of clean products petrol diesel and kerosene in the UK Ireland and northern Europe.
JFE has undertaken 36620 voyages since the year 2000 carrying in excess of 78.5 million tonnes of petroleum products.
This has been achieved whilst maintaining an excellent safety record.
Shipping clean petroleum products dramatically reduces our customers carbon footprint compared to other modes of transportation.
Shippings CO2 emissions are half that produced by road freight and just one full ship keeps more than 150 trucks off the roads.
The division operates Cattedown Wharves a port in Plymouth which provides berthing and marine services to the oil majors which own tank farms in Plymouth.
It also handles dry cargoes such as animal feed being imported into the South West and clay being exported from the region.
The primary driver for the business is the level of consumption of clean oil products within the South West region of the UK.
Sector
Our Tankships division operates a fleet of product tankers which trade along the UK and northern European coastline carrying petrol diesel and kerosene.
The division performs over 1000 voyages each year carrying fuel from refineries and terminals to major coastal storage facilities.
The division also operates a port in Plymouth UK.
Underlying operating profit m Revenue m Return on capital employed %tel 61.3tel 3.2tel Our principal businesses Operations End markets Locations JF Everard Delivery of clean petroleum products around the European coastline Distribution of clean petroleum products UK Cattedown Wharves Port operations Wet and dry product distribution UK 14 JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017
Financial review
Stuart Kilpatrick Group Finance Director 2017 results The Group delivered another year of growth with underlying profit before tax increasing by 10% to 50.3m 2016 45.8m.
Strong growth in Marine Support helped by uplifts at Specialist Technical and Tankships more than offset a 0.4m reduction in underlying operating profit in Offshore Oil.
Revenue
Underlying operating profit Underlying operating margin %teltel Specialist Technical 155.7 151.8 21.1 19.9 13.6 13.1 Offshore Oil 56.4 55.1 3.8 4.2 6.7 7.6 Common Costs   2.4 2.5 excludes separately disclosed items Revenue increased by 9% due to strong growth in Marine Support and more modest uplifts in each of the other three divisions.
Adjusting for currency fluctuations revenue growth was 7%.
Underlying operating profit was 10% higher and consequently underlying operating margins increased to 11.0% 2016 10.9%.
The Groups posttax return on capital employed was 12.2% 2016 13.0%.
Cash conversion the measure of how much operating profit is converted into cash was lower at 56% 2016 103% as 24.4m of working capital was required for the submarine rescue project for the Indian
Subject to ontime delivery and payment this will reverse in 2018 and excluding the working capital investment on this project cash conversion would have been 99% which demonstrates good conversion of profit into cash from the rest of the business.
As previously signalled trading was strongly second half weighted in 2017 and 62% of underlying operating profit arose in the latter half of 2017.
This was across all divisions but most marked in Offshore Oil and Marine Support.
Offshore Oil had a slow start to the year but its second half underlying operating profit was two and a half times greater than the first half and around 30% stronger than prior year comparator.
Marine Supports underlying operating profit was nearly 70% stronger in the second half due to the timing of renewables projects subsea projects in the Middle East and Africa and growing shiptoship transfers in Brazil.
The Group s main currency exposure is in respect of US Dollar cash inflows.
To reduce the risk of earnings volatility the Group mitigates the risk of exchange rate changes by entering into forward contracts to hedge approximately half of estimated US Dollar inflows.
In 2017 the average GBPUSD rate was 11.30 2016 11.36.
This 4% weakening of Sterling added 8.0m to revenue in the year and net of the effect of forward contracts 1.2m to underlying operating profit.
Marine Support increased underlying operating profit for the year by 17% due to the strong second half referred to above.
Specialist Technical improved underlying operating margins to 13.6% 2016 13.1% with the assembly of two submarine rescue vessels for the Indian Navy on track.
Offshore Oil delivered a similar performance to last year despite a weaker first half and Tankships continued its recent track record of double digit underlying operating margins combined with strong cash generation.
JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT Underlying profit before tax UK rate of 19.25% 2016 20.0% 9.7 Adjusted for the effects of recurring items Effect of overseas tax rates 0.8 0.4 Tonnage tax relief on vessel activities 1.0 1.0 Other recurring items 0.1 0.2 Adjusted for the effects of nonrecurring items Over provisions in prior years 0.7 2.7 Losses not recognised  other 0.2 1.7 UK deferred tax rate reduction  0.7 Stuart Kilpatrick Group Finance Director Finance charges Net finance charges were 0.5m higher at 5.5m 2016 5.0m as the Group incurred 0.5m in relation to the interest element on forward contracts.
In addition higher borrowings increased finance charges by 0.4m which was offset by a lower cost of borrowing by 0.1m and a reduction of 0.3m in notional interest on pension schemes.
Interest cover the ratio of underlying operating profit to the net finance charges excluding pension related charges was 12.8 times 2016 14.1 times.
Taxation
The tax charge for the year of 8.7m 2016 7.1m on underlying profit before tax of 50.3m 2016 45.8m represents an underlying effective tax rate ETR of 17.2% 2016 15.4%.
The
Group ETR is impacted by recurring items such as the geographical mix of profits tonnage tax relief on the profits of its tanker operations and expenses disallowed for tax.
The Group operates in 21 countries so its ETR is a blend of national tax rates applied to locally generated profits.
Nonrecurring items include adjustments to tax calculations in previous years where the outturn has been or will be lower.
The Groups tax policy which has been approved by the Board is available on the website www. amesfisher. ite.
Whilst the Group has a duty to shareholders to seek to minimise its tax burden its tax policy is to do so in a manner which is consistent with its commercial objectives and which meets its legal obligations and its code of ethics.
We aim to manage our tax affairs in a responsible and transparent manner and with regard for the intention of the legislation rather than just the wording itself.
Our tax objectives are to comply with all applicable tax laws and regulations including the timely submission of all tax returns and tax payments and to undertake all dealings with local tax authorities in a professional and timely manner.
The Group operates in a complex global environment and continues to monitor the OECDs Base Erosion Profit Shifting initiatives as part of its tax risk management.
We seek to comply with local transfer pricing legislation in each relevant jurisdiction and involve external tax advisers where appropriate to identify any changes to pricing policies and related documentation.
The Group paid 8.0m 2016 6.9m of corporation tax in cash across all of its jurisdictions with around 39% paid to the UK tax authorities.
A further 26.0m was paid in the UK for payroll taxes 2016 28.2m.
Profit before taxation earnings per share and dividends Underlying profit before taxation was 10% higher at 50.3m 2016 45.8m and statutory profit before taxation was 49.0m 2016 44.9m.
Underlying diluted earnings per share increased by 7% to 81.4p per share 2016 76.3p.
Statutory diluted earnings per share were 79.5p per share 2016 78.7p due to a separately disclosed JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 Financial review continued Rotos 360 Rotos 360 which was acquired in March 2017 has developed a unique cured blade repair method which cures 25 times faster than an epoxy resin.
Combined with its specialist suspended access platforms Rotos 360 provides significantly reduced downtime and costs in the repair of wind turbine blades which move at speeds of up to 200mph when perfectly aerodynamic.
During 2017 Rotos 360 carried out a complex blade repair campaign at the Lynn and Dowsing wind farms.
Repairs to twentyseven turbines were carried out within a 90 day period and in accordance with rigorous standards.
0.6m in the previous year.
The Board is recommending a 10% increase to the total dividend for the year to 28.70p per share 2016 26.15p.
A final dividend of 19.30p per share 2016 17.60p will be paid on 11 May 2018 to shareholders on the register on 6 April 2018 subject to approval at the
Underlying dividend cover based on the ratio of underlying earnings per share divided by the dividend per share was 2.8 times 2016 2.9 times.
Separately disclosed items The Directors consider that the alternative performance measures described in note 2 assist an understanding of the underlying trading performance of the businesses.
These measures exclude separately disclosed items which comprise gains or losses on the sale of businesses asset impairments and acquisition related charges or income.
The net separately disclosed charge increased to 0.9m in 2017 2016 Amortisation of intangible assets which arises when businesses are acquired increased to 2.0m due to the full year impact of the businesses acquired in 2016.
Contingent consideration releases are based on latest estimates of obligations in relation to targets originally agreed within a sale and purchase agreement.
A credit of 1.7m 2016 3.3m related to two prior period acquisitions.
Cash flow and borrowings As previously reported the contract to design assemble and deliver two submarine rescue vessels to the Indian Navy required significant working capital funding during the build phase from May 2016 through to delivery of the first vessel in March 2018.
At 31 December 2017 31.2m 2016 6.8m of working capital had cumulatively been drawn down to fund this project and subject to delivery and payment on time is expected to reverse by the end of 2018.
Working capital over the last four half year period ends excluding the submarine rescue project for India has consistently been around 17% of sales.
Free cash flow which is the net cash generated before cash spend on business acquisitions and dividends was an outflow of 7.7m 2016 inflow of 25.0m reflecting the working capital referred to above.
Net capital expenditure in the year was 24.7m 2016 14.8m with 15.7m invested in Marine Support on dive systems and equipment to support project wins in the Middle East and Africa and a replacement tugboat in the Asia Pacific region.
Net borrowings increased in the year by 26.8m to 132.5m 2016 105.7m due to working capital funding on the submarine rescue project of 24.4m 2016 6.8m businesses acquired of 5.2m 2016 24.6m and dividends paid of 13.9m 2016 12.3m.
At
31 December 2017 the ratio of net JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT borrowings to underlying earnings before interest tax depreciation and amortisation Ebitda was 1.6 times 2016 1.4 times and the Group had 71.8m 2016 49.7m of undrawn committed banking facilities.
The ratio of net borrowings including bonds and guarantees to Ebitda was 2.2 times 2016 1.9 times.
Net gearing the ratio of net debt to equity was 47% 2016 41%.
Acquisitions
During the year the Group acquired Rotos 360 Limited for an initial consideration of 1.5m with potentially up to a further 5.0m of future consideration based on a profit target for the year ending 31 December 2019.
EDS HV Group Limited was acquired in December 2017 for an initial consideration of 9.0m with potentially up to a further 5.6m of future consideration based on profit targets for the two years ending 30 September 2019.
Both businesses add to the Groups Marine Support divisions capability for the renewables sector.
In February 2018 the Group acquired the entire issued share capital of Cowan Manufacturing Pty Limited for consideration of AUD2.6m 1.5m in cash.
Pensions
The Group operates a range of defined contribution schemes for current employees and contributed 3.7m 2016 3.8m into those schemes in the year.
The Group has an obligation of 19.8m 2016 26.8m for its own closed defined benefit scheme and for two industrywide defined benefit schemes.
This decreased due to contributions of 4.6m and remeasurement gains of 3.2m due to changes in inflation and mortality assumptions and improved asset performance.
IFRS 15 IFRS 15 Revenue from contracts with customers which is effective from 1 January 2018 identifies performance obligations in contracts with customers and recognises revenue as these performance obligations are satisfied.
The Groups results announcement for the six months ending 30 June 2018 will be the first to be prepared under IFRS 15.
James Fisher has undertaken a detailed review of all material contracts with customers and different types of revenue streams to determine the impact of IFRS 15 on the opening balance sheet at 1 January 2017 and for the year ended 31 December 2017.
The estimated impact on retained earnings at 1 January 2017 is a reduction of around 5m and on the results reported in 2017 is a reduction of revenue by around 6m and profit before taxation by 0.7m1.5m.
JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017
Underlying operating profit m Underlying operating profit is after adjusting for separately disclosed items and is the underlying operating profit from operations before interest.
The Group has increased underlying profit by a compound rate of 10.0% over the last ten years.
Operating margin % Operating margin is the ratio of underlying profit to revenue.
The Groups operating margin in 2017 was 11.0% 2016 10.9%.
Underlying profit before tax m Underlying profit before taxation is after interest and before separately disclosed items and related taxes.
Underlying profit before taxation increased by 10% in 2017 2016 11%.
Return on operating capital employed % Return on operating capital employed is defined as underlying operating profit divided by average operating capital employed.
Operating capital employed comprises tangible fixed assets intangible fixed assets operating debtors net of creditors less provisions.
The Groups posttax return on operating capital employed note 2 was 12.2% in 2017 2016 13.0%.
Cash conversion % Cash conversion is defined as the ratio of operating cash flow to underlying operating profit.
Operating cash flow is defined as underlying operating profit adding back depreciation and amortisation and adjusting for net movements in working capital pension payments and for the cash profits of associates.
The Groups cash conversion was 56% in 2017 2016 103%.
Gearing % Gearing is defined as the ratio of net borrowings to net assets.
The gearing of the Group at 31 December 2017 was 47% 2016 41%.
2017 55.8 46.6tel 2017 11.0 11.3tel 2017 50.3 41.4tel 2017 12.2 16.9tel teltel tel 2013 19 JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT Principal risks and uncertainties The Groups risk management framework The Board is ultimately responsible for the management of risk in the
Our internal control and risk management framework is regularly monitored and reviewed by the Board and the Audit Committee and comprises a series of policies processes procedures and organisational structures which are designed to ensure that the level of risk to which the Group is exposed is consistent with the Boards risk appetite and the Companys strategic objectives.
The Board determines the Group s policies on risk appetite for risk and levels of risk tolerance and specifically approves risk management policies and plans significant insurance andor legal claims andor settlements acquisitions disposals and capital expenditures and the Group budget forecast and three year plan.
The Board has put in place a documented organisational structure with strictly defined limits of authority from the Board to operating units that have been communicated throughout the businesses and are well understood by the Executive Directors functional and business leaders who have delegated authority and specific responsibility for ensuring compliance with and implementing policies at corporate divisional and business unit level.
Group functions and operating units are each required to operate within this control environment and in accordance with the established policies and procedures covering areas including ethics anti bribery and corruption conflicts treasury employment slavery and human trafficking whistleblowing data protection health and safety and environment.
The Groups trading companies are supported by Group functions for finance treasury taxation internal audit insurance legal and company secretarial human resources and payroll and information systems the functional heads report to a nominated Executive
The Board retains an oversight role receives regular reports on key issues and has a schedule of matters specifically reserved to it for decision designed to ensure that it maintains full and effective control over appropriate strategic investment financial organisational and compliance issues.
This schedule is subject to review by the Board on an annual basis.
The Board also operates a Group Risk Committee GRC which meets quarterly and is chaired by Nick Henry with representation from functional heads including finance human resources legal and company secretarial information services insurance and internal audit.
The main responsibilities of the GRC are to identify and monitor operational risks and ensure that those risks are being actively managed throughout the Group to support the Groups Internal Control and Risk Management strategy and policy and to review reports on Key Risks and Risk Maps prepared by trading companies in order to monitor and report on the types of risk within the Group and report on how effectively risk management is performedmonitored within each business unittrading company.
The minutes of the GRC are reported to the Board.
Risk management systems The key features of the Groups risk management systems are as follows Each trading business is required to maintain an up to date risk register which is reviewed at each quarterly business board meeting identifies key risks and assesses the likelihood and impact of each risk before and after mitigation measures are taken.
On an annual basis the risk registers are submitted for analysis to the Group General Counsel and internal audit.
This analysis is considered by the Board when determining the Groups principal risks and the areas of internal audit focus for the forthcoming period.
The trading company managing directors complete a risk management review questionnaire on an annual basis which is a selfassessment of operational controls and compliance with Group policies applicable laws and regulations relating to their business.
This enables business managers to identify risks and focus on mitigating strategies.
The reviews are submitted to the Group General Counsel and internal audit for analysis and reporting to the Board.
Business reporting and performance reviews The Group operates an annual budgeting process and produces quarterly forecasts which are reviewed and approved by the Board.
Monthly results are compared with budget and prior year and individual business JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 reviews are conducted quarterly which include a review of financial results.
The businesses also compile a three year strategic plan.
The Executive Directors hold quarterly board meetings with each business unit to discuss strategy financial results and forecasts business needs and the management of risks facing the business.
Identifying and monitoring material risks Material risks are identified and monitored as follows A risk evaluation process commences in the operating companies with an annual exercise to identify the significant operational and financial risks facing the business.
This is supported by a selfassessment internal control review questionnaire completed by each operating company and submitted to internal audit.
This process is robust and challenging ensures that risks are identified and that management has adequate internal control systems in place to report any weaknesses that require management attention.
The results of the analysis are utilised to determine future areas of internal audit focus.
A risk score is determined for each risk based on the likelihood of the identified risk arising and the potential impact on the business of an adverse outcome.
The risk score before and after mitigation is reviewed at business and Group level.
The risk assessments are summarised and presented to the Board which evaluates the principal risks of the Group by reference to the strategy and operating business environment.
Principal risks and uncertainties The most significant risks which the Board considers may affect our business based on the risk evaluation process described above are listed below.
On the basis that the Board considers that the Groups principal risks have not materially changed the categories of risks listed below are similar to last year.
The Groups decentralised business model and geographical spread helps to mitigate the impact of each principal risk.
The Board has considered the potential effect of the UKs exit from the European Union throughout the year.
It considers that Brexit is unlikely to have a material impact on the Group as its business interests and customer base in the EU are not significant.
The Board will continue to track and consider the implications of Brexit and its potential impact as the terms of the UKs exit both during and after transition become clearer.
Risk description and potential impact Management and mitigation Changes in risk profile 2017  2018 Project delivery The failure to meet customer expectations on project delivery could have potentially significant adverse financial and reputational consequences and could potentially result in claims and litigation.
Projects and contracts are subject to ongoing review at levels and frequencies appropriate to performance and potential risks.
Our businesses employ industry experts to help ensure effective project delivery and performance.
This together with established processes and procedures reporting systems management oversight customer feedback and staff training and development is designed to mitigate the risk to successful project delivery.
An increase in size and volume of contracts increases project delivery risk but this is in proportion with the growth of the
Contractual risk As the Group continues to grow wins larger contracts and operates in more geographies sometimes with local partners the Company is potentially exposed to increased risks such as late payment or cost overruns.
The Group utilises professional expertise to minimise risk in contract negotiation with customers and partners.
All major tenders contracts and joint ventures are referred to the Board for approval and limits of authority are designed to ensure that contracts are reviewed and approved at appropriate levels prior to commitment.
In addition the project delivery and performance function referred to above provides assurance on delivery.
Marginally higher.
Recruitment and retention of key staff James Fisher has strong and experienced management teams in its operational businesses and depends on the skills experience and competence of all of its people to drive the business forward in established and new markets.
The Groups success in delivering its strategic objectives depends on recruiting and retaining the right people in all areas of our business and planning succession in key leadership positions.
The failure to attract retain and develop personnel of the requisite calibre could have an adverse impact on the business.
Our strategy to attract and retain talent includes graduate recruitment identifying and developing future leaders regular appraisals formal and informal training plans succession planning and appropriate remuneration incentives including the extension of share schemes to key individuals.
We aim to develop talent from within.
Succession and talent development is regularly discussed at Board and trading company level.
There are several management development programmes in place for individuals who have been identified as potential senior managers.
These programmes are defined to help develop and grow the capabilities and behaviours required of senior managers so that we have potential successors for key business roles.
These strategies are designed to retain and motivate individuals and to ensure their commitment to the success of the business.
Staff turnover at senior levels within the Group remains low.
No change.
PRINCIPAL RISKS AND UNCERTAINTIES CONTINUED 21 JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT Risk description and potential impact Management and mitigation Changes in risk profile 2017  2018 Health safety and environment The Groups success is dependent on conducting its business safely and in accordance with all applicable regulatory requirements.
Our businesses are reliant on ensuring that a good reputation is maintained with their customers.
An adverse operational incident or failure to maintain appropriate levels of service delivery would potentially damage the Groups reputation leading to financial and commercial consequences.
The Group places a particular emphasis on operational excellence including the health safety and security of its operations and the quality of services provided.
These key areas are continually monitored and reported to the Board.
We have policies and processes to safely and compliantly manage our operations to protect our employees and others to react appropriately to operational incidents and to deal quickly and effectively with any safety or service failings.
No change.
Financial risk The Group is exposed to a variety of financial risks which could adversely affect the financial performance of the Company.
The risks include interest rate foreign exchange and credit risk.
An increase in interest rates or change in exchange rates or credit restriction would have a financial impact.
The Group maintains relationships with a small key group of banks and reviews its funding mix and requirements at each Board meeting.
The
Board discusses macroeconomic issues and their potential impact on each of these risks.
The Group enters into bilateral facilities to spread its maturity profile and aims to maximise the term of its revolving credit facilities.
The Groups centralised finance function oversees all key strategic finance matters and is responsible for treasury tax foreign exchange and funding requirements.
This includes the daytoday management of the Groups liquidity interest rate and foreign exchange rate risks.
Forward currency contracts and interest rate swaps are entered into to mitigate the risks of adverse currency or interest rate movements.
The Group also seeks to secure payment in hard currency to mitigate exchange rate risk.
2016 was a period of high volatility in this area.
2017 was less volatile.
Energy markets The Group has significant operations across the energy sector and serves a broad range of oil and gas nuclear and renewables customers.
A marked change in circumstances in individual market sectors energy prices or change in government regulation or policy may lead to reduced activity which can affect demand for the Groups products and services and impact financial performance.
The Group has exposure across the energy sector and to a broad range of end markets and differing geographies.
This together with the maintenance of close relationships with key customers and suppliers helps to mitigate the potential impact of market risks in the energy sector.
Specifically with regard to the oil and gas sector the Group has limited exposure to the exploration phase and seeks longerterm contracts for inspection repair and maintenance work.
The strategic risks are reducing in proportion to the wider diversity of businesses within the
Operating in emerging markets The Group has increasing activities in overseas emerging markets and key growth economies which are often undertaken in association with local joint venture partners.
This together with legislative restrictions embargoes sanctions and exchange controls has the potential for increasing the Groups financial and governance risk exposure.
Any significant failure to comply with laws or regulations could lead to liabilities and penalties.
Risk and internal control of overseas joint ventures is a key area of managements focus.
As businesses develop we monitor and review the structure of and reporting lines for our overseas operations and the relations with third parties to ensure an appropriate form of command and control is maintained dependent on the particular operating environment and the nature and size of the business.
The Group allocates additional resource to areas of higher risk and has enhanced its internal audit reviews for overseas businesses which are supported by external audit companies where appropriate.
Processes are in place that are designed to ensure that all businesses operate in accordance with legislative restrictions embargoes sanctions and exchange controls and the Groups policies and applicable laws.
No change.
Cyber security Attempts to cause harm to the Group and its businesses via digital channels could lead to theft fraud interruption to business and damage to our reputation.
The Groups IT systems are defended through the use of software protection and processes which are regularly reviewed and tested.
These defences include gateways firewalls and threat detectors.
IT security information and updates are reviewed on a regular basis.
Group IT systems were subjected to penetration tests and vulnerability scans during 2017 which were satisfactory.
Accounting and banking controls are regularly appraised to ensure they are appropriate up to date and comply with recommended practice.
There have been no major security breaches or fraud in 2017 and the risk is unchanged.
JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 Corporate responsibility
The Board remains committed to high standards of corporate governance and to ensuring consistent application across the Group of its values of honesty integrity and fairness which in the Companys view are the key elements for building a sustainable and profitable business.
Corporate responsibility remains central to the delivery of our business strategy.
This report will explain how we applied the principles of good governance throughout the year in key areas and outlines the processes and controls we use to manage the Groups approach to health and safety environmental matters our employees business ethics and social responsibilities.
Our Board of Directors sets the strategic and financial objectives for the Group and in doing so requires and seeks to ensure that the Group maintains high ethical standards of behaviour throughout its businesses.
For the purposes of sections 414CA and CB of the Companies Act 2006 this report shall constitute the Groups non financial information statement.
Health and safety The Group recognises its responsibilities in relation to the health safety and welfare of its employees contractors and visitors to the Groups premises as well as all those who come into contact with the Group in its diverse activities.
The Board considered and reapproved the Groups existing health safety and environment policy in January 2018 as a declaration of our intent and commitment.
We continue to strive towards our ultimate aim of having no accidents or injuries and we have a proactive safety culture across the Group which promotes compliance and ensures continuous improvement.
We have a strong focus on employee training regulatory compliance and accident reduction all of which are monitored and reported across the
Accountability remains with local management who are bestplaced to ensure that their businesses comply with local laws and regulations and specific needs on a daytoday basis.
This is overseen by Nick Henry the Chief Executive Officer who has overall responsibility for health and safety.
The review of health and safety performance is high on the agenda at each Board and business board meetings and remains a top priority for the Group.
The Group Health and Safety Committee GHSC chaired by Nick Henry meets on a quarterly basis to discuss all health and safety issues including incidents mitigating actions and training requirements.
The GHSC ensures that recordable safety incidents are reported to the Board and that each Group operating company is maintaining high standards of health and safety in its business.
Through the GHSC the Group shares best practice and lessons learnt following any health and safety incidents including near misses to mitigate the risk of recurrence.
The Groups principal operating companies maintain internationally recognised occupational health and safety management systems accredited to OHSAS 18001 and management systems which are accredited to the international quality standard ISO 19001.
The Group has adopted the Reporting of Injuries Diseases and Dangerous Occurrences Regulations 2013 RIDDOR in the reporting of reportable incidents.
A reportable incident under RIDDOR is a workrelated injury which results in a persons incapacitation for more than seven days.
The number of reportable incidents across the Group in 2017 was 5 2016 5.
The Group also records lost time accidents LTAs to monitor performance and trends.
An LTA is an incident which causes a worker to be incapacitated for three or more consecutive days not including the day of incident.
In 2017 the Group incurred 5 LTAs 2016 6.
The Group monitors its overall RIDDOR reportable frequency rate defined as the number of RIDDOR reportable incidents per one hundred thousand hours of work.
In 2017 the Groups RIDDOR reportable frequency rate was 0.1 2016 0.1.
JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT Environmental matters The Group recognises its responsibility to protect the environment for the benefit of all and is committed to operating its businesses to ensure that the environmental impact of its activities its consumption of raw materials and its production of waste is minimised.
The
Group is committed to working within the appropriate regulatory frameworks to minimise the impacts of its operations on the environment.
Nearly all of our principal operating companies are ISO 14001 compliant.
This internationally recognised environmental management system enables a systematic approach to handling environmental issues.
Energy consumption was measured across the Group by recording data on the combustion of fuel and the use of electricity at its facilities.
The Groups total greenhouse gas emissions GHG are set out below.
Emissions total in thousands of metric tons 2017 2016 CO2 equivalent from electricity consumption in facilities CO2 from combustion of fuel at facilities and road vehicles CO2 from combustion of fuel in vessels Total emissions CO2 88.6 89.8 Emissions from the combustion of bunkers which fuel the tankers in the Tankships division amounted to 95% of the Groups total emissions 2016 93%.
The benefit of sea transportation is that one 4000 metric ton vessel can carry 150 times the volume of fuel carried by a single road tanker which significantly reduces congestion and emissions to air.
Emissions from fuel combustion in vessels was similar to 2016 despite one fewer vessel in the Tankships division.
This was due to the growth in shipto ship transfer services in Brazil which commenced in January 2017.
The Groups carbon intensity ratio calculated against the Groups revenue remained flat at 0.02% 2016 0.02%.
Our Tankships division operates a Ship Energy Efficiency Management Plan to regulate shipping energy efficiency and to control its marine GHG emissions.
One objective under the Groups health safety and environment policy is to ensure that the impact of our activities and our production of waste is minimised as such waste management and recycling of materials is encouraged across the Group and in an effort to reduce our carbon emissions from travelling to and from meetings the use of video conferencing is widely used throughout the Group.
Employee related matters
The Chief Executive Officer is
Resources.
The Group is committed to complying with all applicable laws governing employment practices and to the prevention of discrimination on the basis of any unlawful criteria.
Employment arrangements are intended to be fair equitable and consistent with the skills and abilities of the employees and the needs of the business.
The Group is committed to developing its employees and ensuring that investment in learning and development is in line with the business strategy and goals.
We recognise that the success of our business depends on our talented workforce.
Employees throughout the Group are encouraged to participate in training and development programmes and to obtain professional qualifications relevant to their roles.
In order to develop this further the Group has broadened its management development and graduate recruitment programmes which focus on recruiting talented graduates and developing skills and experience to produce potential future managers.
The
Company also has a dedicated learning and development team who deliver in house training to employees throughout the Group on a wide variety of personal development and compliancerelated topics much of which is tailored to each business to give the employees targeted bespoke training which will advance their development.
The Group believes that effective learning and development will help to attract and retain high quality people support them in reaching their potential and build the capabilities necessary to succeed which in turn rewards the Group by securing the dedication and motivation of those employees.
Keeping our people inspired remains one of our highest priorities and so we focus on creating an environment where performance is rewarded people are respected for their contributions diversity and inclusion is encouraged and where integrity is upheld in all aspects of our work.
The Group remains committed to providing equal opportunities free from discrimination and to developing and retaining talent to maximise business growth and performance.
The Company also recognises the need to provide flexible working practices to support the needs of employees to maintain a successful worklife balance.
In support of this the Company operates a flexible working policy.
Under this policy the Company states that it will where possible try and accommodate an employees needs.
During 2017 49 requests for flexible working were made and 100% were accepted by the
Developing and maintaining employee engagement with the Company is important.
The Group communicates with its employees on matters of concern to them as employees and on the financial and economic factors affecting the performance of the Company.
This is done principally through management briefings and newsletters the Companys website the Groups intranet resource and by the distribution of preliminary and interim announcements and press JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 releases.
Copies of the Annual Report and Accounts are also made available to the operating businesses and this communication process enables employees to gain an understanding of the Groups objectives and performance and how they have contributed to those results.
Where decisions are being made which are likely to affect employees interests such employees or their representatives are consulted so that their views can be taken into account.
We operate in a competitive marketplace and the Board recognises the importance of rewarding employees appropriately for the value they bring to the business.
It aims to offer rewards that attract and retain key talent.
The Group also encourages its employees to share in its successes through share ownership.
As at 31 December 2017 284 employees were participants in the James Fisher Sharesave Scheme which gives them the opportunity to purchase shares at the end of a three or five year saving plan 2016 293.
Equal opportunities and diversity The Group values the diverse backgrounds of all its people and strives to create a culture of honesty openness and accountability.
It is Group policy to treat all job applicants and employees fairly.
The Group has made the commitment that no employee or potential employee shall receive more or less favourable treatment or consideration on the grounds of race colour ethnic origin nationality national origin religion or belief gender age disability sexual orientation marital status or any other similarly protected status.
We aim to ensure that people from any background or of any gender identity have equal access to employment training and career progression opportunities.
We strive to select individuals on merit and do not consider that targets or quotas are appropriate.
The Board recognises that having a diverse workforce allows the Group to meet better the differing requirements of our global customer base.
Our
The Groups diversity policy is reviewed annually and approved by the Board and is available on the Companys website.
The objectives of the Groups diversity policy are to ensure that the Group benefits from a diverse workforce and has a working environment where all employees are encouraged to realise their full potential and where there is an open atmosphere of trust honesty and respect.
The policy applies to all Group employees and to all staff contractors consultants and any other individual working for at or on behalf of the
One diversity policy initiative is to provide training and mentoring for women at all stages of their career to support their development as leaders.
In the last two years 63 women passed through this leadership programme.
Gender diversity 2017 2016 Male Female Male Female Main Board
Senior
Managers
Employees 2081 564 2152 560 The Group will report on gender pay in accordance with the requirements of the Equality Act 2010 Gender Pay Gap Information Regulations 2017 by 4 April 2018.
The Board has been considering the preliminary results of the Group analysis and whether any action might be required.
All of our employees are treated with respect and dignity.
Harassment of any kind is not tolerated.
In addition to complying with legislative requirements the Group strives to ensure that disabled employees are treated fairly and that their training career development and promotion needs are met.
If an employee were to become disabled during the course of their employment the Group would provide support wherever practicable whether through retraining or redeployment so that they continue to be employed wherever practicable in the same job or if this were not practicable every effort would be made to find suitable alternative employment.
Respect for human rights James Fisher is committed to supporting and respecting human rights in the workplace and in the communities in which it operates across its international business.
We have implemented work practices and policies throughout the Group which are designed to ensure that respect for human rights is integrated into the systems and culture of our businesses.
We do not tolerate the use of child or forced labour within our business and take all steps possible to ensure that our suppliers and customers also uphold internationally recognised human rights.
The Group has a formal slavery and human trafficking statement which is available on the Groups website and which outlines steps taken by the Group to ensure that there is transparency in the Group and throughout our supply chains.
As part of this policy statement the Group encourages any concerns relating to modern slavery to be raised using the procedure set out in the whistleblowing policy.
There is an ongoing process of risk assessment with the effectiveness of this statement and the Groups other policies and procedures being regularly monitored and reviewed by the Audit Committee to ensure that they align with our Group strategy.
During 2017 no whistleblowing reports were brought to the attention of the Audit Committee.
CORPORATE RESPONSIBILITY CONTINUED 25 JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT Business ethics antibribery and corruption matters As a Group we aim to act responsibly and ethically in all of our business dealings.
Through our ethics policy we aim to instill the highest standards of business behaviour across the Group and we focus on embedding a culture of ethical compliance so that all of our people understand the standards of ethical business practice that are expected of them.
As well as protecting the reputation of the Group and safeguarding the investment of our shareholders the business ethics policy aims to protect the interests of every employee by ensuring legal and regulatory compliance in all jurisdictions where the Group operates as well as promoting responsible behaviour across the Group.
The Group has an established anti bribery and corruption policy and has introduced a compliance programme which has the support of the Board and senior management within the
The programme includes communication of the statement and policy training risk assessment monitoring and review processes.
Employees assessed to be at risk are required to complete the training and to selfcertify that they understand and agree to be bound by its provisions.
By the end of 2017 over 1000 employees had undertaken this training.
The Group does not permit bribery nor illegal or corrupt business practices and our whistleblowing procedure allows employees to raise any malpractice concerns they may have in an appropriate forum without fear of recourse.
Ongoing compliance is monitored by local compliance officers who are required to report to their local boards and to the Group Compliance Officer on at least a biannual basis.
The compliance officers are responsible for ensuring that risk assessments training and awareness are carried out where appropriate and are kept up to date.
They are also required to monitor record and report agency arrangements with third parties to ensure that all our business dealings are appropriate and within our ethical framework.
Customers
Our customers are extremely important to us.
The Group aims to provide superior customer service through value added solutions combined with high quality products.
First class customer service and innovation are critical to our success.
We appreciate that every customer has different needs and expectations and we have developed longlasting relationships with customers and suppliers over many years to help customers find the solutions they need.
We have followed a customerled strategy with regards to expansion into international markets and we are proud to be a trusted partner of many major corporations government agencies and other customers around the world.
We understand that a continued commitment to our existing and future customers is fundamental to our success and so we strive to work hard to understand our customers needs and to continue delivering customer satisfaction.
Suppliers
Our businesses have developed their own longterm relationships with suppliers based upon best practice legal requirements and Group policies and procedures.
Group companies promote human rights social responsibility trade compliance and anticorruption within their own supplier base and key suppliers are vetted to ensure that they adhere to all relevant laws our policies and codes of conduct and where appropriate operate within internationally recognised quality health and safety and management systems.
Our community matters Whilst the Group has no formal policy on supporting the community it continues to encourage its businesses to support local communities within their operational areas.
During 2017 the Group was involved in the provision and installation of two manual boreholes which will provide fresh drinking water to two rural communities based in the Mpohor district of the western region of Ghana.
The Group has also set up an educational bursary in South Africa for prospective new mariners in a bid to help promising female students complete the necessary studies for a career in the maritime industry.
During the year our employees have given their time and money to a wide range of charitable giving and fund raising activities.
Charitable causes supported in 2017 included Macmillan Make a Wish Foundation Meningitis Research Charity Ty Gobaith Hope House childrens hospice RNLI NeST Nephrotic Syndrome Trust the Alzheimers Society Breast Cancer Now CLAN Cancer Support.
The Sir John Fisher Foundation SJFF is a charitable trust which was established in 1979 by Sir John and Lady Fisher and supports causes throughout the UK with special regard to those based in and working for the benefit of people living in BarrowinFurness and the surrounding area.
The Trustees of SJFF hold a significant shareholding in the Company and support charitable causes in relation to maritime medical and disability education music arts and community projects.
In 2017 SJFF made grants or commitments to charitable causes of 2.0m 2016 2.3m.
In accordance with the requirements under sections 414CA and CB of the Companies Act 2006 information in relation to the following matters can be found on the pages specified below Matters Page number Environmental matters 23 Employees 2324 Social matters 25 Respect for human rights 24 Anticorruption and antibribery 25 26 JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 Board of Directors Charles Rice Chairman of the Board and Nominations Committee Appointment Charles was appointed to the Board in April 2004 and became NonExecutive Chairman on 1 August 2012.
Skills and experience Charles has wide experience in commercial shipping having held a number of commercial and operational roles with Overseas Containers Limited.
During the 1990s he was responsible for the development of PandOs Trans European logistics and services division and was appointed as a main board Director of The Peninsular and Oriental Steam Navigation Company PandO in 2001.
External appointments Charles is currently Chairman of the Transport Research Foundation.
Nick Henry
Chief Executive Officer
Appointment Nick joined the Group in February 2003 and was appointed Chief Executive Officer in December 2004.
Skills and experience Nick worked for 20 years for PandO Containers and PandO Ports of which 10 years were in senior management positions based in Singapore Hong Kong Australia Netherlands and the Indian
Nicks experience encompasses a wide range of commercial and operational roles including fleet management and information technology.
External appointments Member of the Supervisory Board of the UK Chamber of Shipping NonExecutive Director of Britannias Gold Limited.
Stuart Kilpatrick Group Finance Director Appointment Stuart joined the Group in July 2010 and was appointed to the Board as Group Finance Director in December 2010.
Skills and experience Stuart is a member of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of England and Wales and qualified with BDO Binder Hamlyn.
Stuart was formerly Group Finance Director of Empresaria Group plc and he previously held senior finance roles with Vodafone Group plc Charles Baynes plc and Elementis Group plc.
External appointments Trustee of the Groups Shore Staff Pension Scheme.
Chairman Executive Directors 27 JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT Michael Salter NonExecutive Director Appointment Michael was appointed to the Board in August 2013.
Skills and experience Michael was formerly Chief Operating Officer at Abbot Group plc and earlier in his career CEO of Smedvig Limited and General Manager of Bawden Drilling UK Ltd.
External appointments NonExecutive Director of SAR Gruppen AS.
Aedamar Comiskey NonExecutive Director Appointment Aedamar was appointed to the Board in November 2014.
Skills and experience Aedamar has been a partner at Linklaters LLP since 2001 and is a member of the firms International Board.
Aedamar specialises in international and domestic mergers and acquisitions joint ventures and fundraisings and is very involved in expanding Linklaters business in Latin America.
Before joining Linklaters Aedamar worked for two years as a consultant with Accenture in Dublin Chicago and Belfast.
External appointments None.
Malcolm Paul Senior NonExecutive Director and Chairman of the Audit and Remuneration
Appointment Malcolm was appointed to the Board in February 2011.
Skills and experience Malcolm is a fellow of the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales and was a founder and former Finance Director of WSP Group plc between 1987 and 2009.
Prior to that Malcolm was a principal at the corporate finance boutique Financial Decisions and an equity partner at Longcrofts Chartered Accountants.
External appointments Chairman of Anthesis Consulting Group a private equity backed global sustainability consultancy.
David Moorhouse CBE NonExecutive Director Appointment David was appointed to the Board in August 2013.
Skills and experience David was formerly Executive Chairman of Lloyds Register and earlier in his career CEO of John Brown plc a director of Trafalgar House plc and Executive Vice President of Kvaerner where he had particular responsibility for their engineering and process businesses.
External appointments Chairman of Braemer Shipping plc NonExecutive Director of OAO Sovcomflot Life member of the UKs Foundation for Science and Technology.
Justin Atkinson NonExecutive Director Appointed Justin was appointed to the Board in February 2018.
Skills and experience Justin was formerly Chief Executive Officer of Keller Group plc between April 2004 and May 2015 having previously held the position of Group Finance Director and Chief Operating Officer.
Justin trained and qualified as an accountant and spent the early part of his career with Reuters plc.
External appointments Senior Independent NonExecutive Director of Kier Group plc Senior Independent Director and Chair of the Audit Committee of Forterra plc NonExecutive Director and Chair of the Audit Committee of Sirius Real Estate Ltd and a member of the Audit Committee of the National Trust.
NonExecutive Directors Audit Committee  Remuneration Committee  Nominations Committee 28 JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 Corporate governance report Introduction from the Chairman I am pleased to present the 2017 Corporate governance report on behalf of the Board.
The Board remains committed to high standards of corporate governance and to ensure that values and behaviours are consistent across the Group.
This report together with the Audit Committee Nominations Committee and Directors remuneration reports are intended to give shareholders a clear and meaningful explanation of how the Board and its Committees discharge their corporate governance responsibilities and how the principles of good governance as set out in the Financial Reporting Councils UK Corporate Governance Code April 2016 the Code which is the version of the Code which applies to the Company for 2017 have been applied throughout the Group.
A copy of the Code can be found at the Financial Reporting Councils FRC website httpswww. rc.
In addition to the Code the Annual Report and Accounts have been drawn up and presented in accordance with the Companies Act 2006 the Large and Mediumsized Companies and Groups Accounts and Reports Regulations 2008 as amended by the Companies Act 2006 Strategic Report and Directors Report Regulations 2013 and the Financial Conduct Authoritys Listing Rules.
The liabilities of the Directors in connection with this report are subject to the limitations and restrictions provided by such law.
I would encourage all shareholders to attend our AGM on 3 May 2018 as it provides an excellent opportunity to meet the Executive and NonExecutive Directors.
Charles Rice
26 February 2018 Statement of compliance The Board confirms that without exception the Company complied with all relevant provisions of the Code throughout the year ended 31 December 2017.
The following disclosures provide a detailed description of how the Company has complied with the principles set out in the Code in the 2017 financial year.
A.
Leadership
A.1 Role of the Board The Board has a schedule of matters it reserves for its own decisionmaking such as decisions relating to strategy and management structure and capital financial reporting and controls internal controls capital expenditure approval of material contracts communication with shareholders Board membership and appointments corporate governance matters approval of Group policies and approval of the Group and Company financial statements.
The schedule is reviewed annually and approved by the
JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT The Board Chaired by Charles Rice Meets regularly with six scheduled meetings during the year.
The Board is responsible for providing effective leadership to the Company.
It does this by setting strategic priorities and overseeing their delivery in a way that enables sustainable longterm growth while maintaining a balanced approach to risk within a framework of effective controls.
Executive Committee Consisting of the Chairman and the Executive
Meets at least monthly.
Empowered under written terms of reference to take actions relating to the affairs of the Company in the normal course of business and of a routine nature subject to such limits as the Board in its discretion determines.
SubCommittees
The Board also appoints from time to time subcommittees consisting of at least two Directors in order to finalise and approve those matters that have been approved in principle by the Board.
Group Risk Committee Chaired by Nick Henry Meets on a quarterly basis.
Identifies and monitors operational risks throughout the Group supports the internal control and risk management strategy and policy.
Corporate Functions Daytoday business delivery.
Executive Directors and heads of corporate functions meet at the Risk Committee on a quarterly basis.
Group Health and Safety Committee Chaired by Nick Henry Meets on a quarterly basis.
Discusses all health and safety issues including incidents mitigating actions and training requirements and reports recordable safety incidents to the Board.
Operating Divisions Daytoday business delivery.
Executive Directors meet on at least a quarterly basis with managing directors of principal businesses.
Nominations Committee Chaired by Charles Rice Meets a minimum of three times a year.
Reviews the structure size and composition of the Board including skills knowledge diversity and experience and recommends changes succession planning for Directors and senior executives and identifies and nominates for approval to the Board candidates to fill vacancies when they arise.
The Nominations Committee report on pages 38 to 39 describes in detail the Committee s role and activities.
Audit Committee Chaired by Malcolm Paul Meets a minimum of three times a year.
Assists the Board in its oversight and monitoring of financial reporting reviews the Groups internal financial controls and systems for risk management and internal controls monitors the Companys whistleblowing policies and assesses independence and objectivity of the external auditor.
The Audit Committee report on pages 34 to 37 describes in detail the Committee s role and activities.
Remuneration Committee Chaired by Malcolm Paul Meets a minimum of three times a year.
Agrees with the Board the remuneration policy for Executive Directors and other senior executives reviews the appropriateness and relevance of the Group s remuneration policy and ensures that the provisions of the Code relating to remuneration are fulfilled.
The Directors remuneration report on pages 40 to 53 describes the work of the Committee including the Chairman s overview.
JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 The Directors attendance records at Board and Committee meetings held during the year are shown in the table below Attendance at Board and Committee meetings Board
Committee
Remuneration
Committee
Nominations
Committee
Number of meetings Charles Rice 6 NA NA 3 Nick Henry 6 NA NA NA Stuart Kilpatrick 6 NA NA NA Malcolm Paul Aedamar Comiskey David Moorhouse Michael Salter Board and Committees operation of the Board All Directors participate in discussing strategy performance and financial and risk management of the Company.
Strategy acquisition and disposal of businesses and major capital investments are agreed between the Chairman the Chief Executive Officer and the Group Finance Director prior to review and approval by the Board.
Meetings of the Board are structured to allow open discussion.
To enable the Board to discharge its duties the Chairman ensures that all Directors receive accurate timely and clear information on all relevant matters in advance of the Board meetings including comprehensive financial and business reports covering the Groups principal activities.
The Non Executive Directors regularly visit major business centres of the Group in order to enhance their knowledge including in relation to the services and products offered which in turn acts to strengthen their contribution to Board debate.
In 2017 visits included JFD and James Fisher Nuclear at their UK headquarters and the NonExecutive Directors also received presentations from management on key strategic plans including relating to individual businesses and markets.
During the year the Board has considered a wide range of matters including safety operations corporate governance strategy forecasts and longterm objectives acquisitions financing taxation risk management internal controls the Groups principal risks management and succession planning and Board composition as well as shareholder announcements.
The Board has a regular programme of six meetings and a schedule which identifies matters to be discussed at each meeting.
The January and July meetings are primarily focused on review of corporate governance matters.
The other quarterly meetings each have a broad based business agenda which covers the items noted above.
Committees
The Board has delegated certain responsibilities to the following Board Committees Audit Committee Remuneration Committee and Nominations Committee.
Each Committee is provided with sufficient resources to undertake their duties and has formal written terms of reference which are reviewed annually and available on the Companys website.
A.2 Division of responsibilities The roles of Chairman and Chief Executive are separate set out in writing clearly defined and approved by the Board.
A.3 Chairman The Chairmans role is to lead the Board and to ensure the Board operates effectively in all aspects.
The Chairman sets the Boards agenda and ensures that adequate time is available for discussion of all agenda items in particular strategic issues.
On his appointment in August 2012 the Board considered Charles Rice to be independent in character and judgement in accordance with the Code.
The Board has considered and is satisfied that the role of Chairman operates effectively.
A.4 Chief Executive Officer
The Chief Executive Officers role is to have the daytoday responsibility for running the Group including leadership of senior management in executing the Companys strategy and managing the operational requirements of the Groups businesses.
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE CONTINUED 31 JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT The Board has considered and is satisfied that the role of
Chief Executive Officer operates effectively.
A.5 NonExecutive Directors The Board considers that the NonExecutive Directors combine broad business and commercial experience to bring independent and objective judgement to bear and to challenge constructively the Executive Directors on issues of strategy performance resource and standards of conduct.
The balance between NonExecutive and Executive Directors enables the Board to provide clear and effective leadership and to maintain the highest standards of integrity across the Groups business activities.
Each NonExecutive Director is expected to commit sufficient time to allow for attendance at Board and Committee meetings and for keeping in touch with the senior management team shareholders and other stakeholders.
Malcolm Paul the Senior Independent NonExecutive Director also acts as a sounding board for the Chairman and as an intermediary for NonExecutive Directors where necessary.
During the year there were no unresolved concerns regarding the running of the Company.
During the year Charles Rice met with the NonExecutive Directors without the Executive Directors present on more than one occasion and Malcolm Paul the Senior Independent NonExecutive Director met with the other NonExecutive Directors without the Chairman present on more than one occasion.
B.
Board Effectiveness B.1 Composition of the Board For further information on the composition of the Board please refer to the Nominations Committee report on pages 38 to 39.
B.2 Appointments to the Board Appointments to the Board are overseen by the Nominations
Please refer to the Nominations Committee report on pages 38 to 39.
B.3 Commitment Following the Board evaluation process detailed further below the Board is satisfied that each of the Directors is able to devote sufficient time to the Company to discharge their responsibilities effectively.
Contracts and letters of appointment with Directors are made available at the AGM or on request.
Executive Directors are encouraged to take up nonexecutive positions in other companies or organisations provided such appointments are approved by the Board which considers amongst other things the time commitment required.
The details of current external appointments are set out in the biographies of the Board of Directors on pages 26 to 27.
B.4 Development On appointment new Directors are given a detailed induction to the Groups business together with an on going programme of visits to the Groups major sites and meetings with senior management.
Ongoing training and development for Directors is available as appropriate and is reviewed and agreed with the Chairman annually.
The Board is confident that all its members have the knowledge ability and experience to perform the functions required of a director of a listed company.
B.5 Information and support All members of the Board are supplied with appropriate clear and accurate information in a timely manner covering matters which are to be considered at forthcoming Board or Committee meetings.
Should Directors judge it necessary to seek independent legal advice about the performance of their duties with the Company they are entitled to do so at the Companys expense.
Directors also have access to the advice and services of the Company Secretary.
The Company Secretary is responsible for advising the Board through the Chairman on all governance matters and for ensuring that Board procedures are followed and applicable rules and regulations are complied with.
The Company Secretary also advises the Directors on any important changes in legislation regulation and best practice.
The appointment and removal of the Company Secretary is a matter requiring Board approval.
In 2017 the Board approved the appointment of Jim Marsh as Group General Counsel and Company Secretary in succession to Michael Hoggan.
B.6 Evaluation At the end of each year the Board undertakes an annual evaluation of its own performance and that of the Remuneration Nominations and Audit Committees and of each individual Director against the framework of Board effectiveness produced by the FRC.
The Board determined that an external facilitation of the annual review of performance was not necessary this year as it would be undertaken next year as part of the 2018 annual review being 3 years since the last external facilitation.
The 2017 performance evaluations were designed to assist the Board in identifying strengths and weaknesses and areas for further improving performance and required each Director to complete in confidence a detailed questionnaire relating to key aspects of Board performance and performance of the Boards principal Committees.
The review included an analysis of the Boards and Committees performance in key areas JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 including corporate governance structure and procedures strategy and its effectiveness risk management and control and communications with stakeholders.
The results of the evaluation were collated by the Company Secretary and reported to the Board via the Chairman with recommendations for further consideration and action as appropriate.
The 2017 review concluded that the Board functions well as a unit and provides a good balance of support and challenge to management.
The annual review of individual Directors performance was conducted internally.
The Chairmans performance was reviewed by the other NonExecutive Directors led by the Senior Independent NonExecutive Director and taking into account the views of the Executive Directors.
The performance of the Executive Directors was reviewed by the NonExecutive Directors with the Chairman in attendance.
The Chairman and the Executive Directors reviewed the performance of each of the other NonExecutive Directors.
The Board considers that each Director continues to contribute and demonstrate commitment to the role.
B.7 Reelection For further information on the Companys compliance with the Code provisions relating to the reelection of Directors please refer to the Directors report on pages 54 to 57.
C.
Accountability
C.1 Financial and business reporting The Board considers that the Annual Report and Accounts taken as a whole present a fair balanced and understandable assessment of the Group and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Groups position and performance business model and strategy.
In making this assessment the Board took into account its own knowledge of the Group the markets in which the Group operates its strategy and performance in the year a detailed review of the content of the Annual Report and Accounts and other periodic financial statements and announcements together with the recommendation of the Audit Committee.
Key considerations included ensuring that there was consistency between the accounts and the narrative provided in the front half of the Annual Report and there was an appropriate balance between the reporting of weaknesses difficulties and challenges as well as successes in an open and honest manner.
The going concern assessment and the viability statement are set out in the Directors report on pages 56 and 57 and the Strategic report on pages 8 and 9 sets out an explanation of the Companys business model and the strategy for delivering the Companys objectives.
C.2 Risk management and internal controls The Board is responsible for determining the nature and extent of the principal risks it is willing to take in achieving its strategic objectives and for ensuring that the Company maintains sound risk management and internal control procedures.
On behalf of the Board the Audit Committee monitors the Groups risk management and internal control process and reviews its effectiveness on an ongoing basis.
This is part of an established process in accordance with the Financial Reporting Councils FRC Guidance on Risk Management Internal Control and Related Financial and Business Reporting published in September 2014 for the identification evaluation and management of the significant risks facing the Group which operates and is reviewed continually throughout the year.
The Groups internal control systems are designed to provide the Board with reasonable assurance as to the effective and efficient operation of the Group and to ensure the quality of internal and external reporting and compliance with all applicable laws and regulations.
However there are inherent limitations in any system of internal control and accordingly even the most effective system can provide only reasonable and not absolute assurance.
The Board has carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Group including those that would threaten its business model future performance solvency or liquidity.
Details of those principal risks and the Groups approach to mitigating them are set out in the Strategic report on pages 19 to 21.
As part of its internal control procedures the Group has a whistleblowing policy which encourages employees to report in good faith any genuine suspicions of fraud bribery or malpractice in order to identify any problems within the Group at an early stage.
The policy is designed to ensure that any employee who raises a genuine concern is protected.
Any concerns can be raised in the first instance with the Company Secretary in confidence.
The Board is committed to ensuring the highest standards in all of the Groups business dealings and condemns corruption in all its forms.
The Group has a formal antibribery and corruption statement and policy and does not tolerate or condone corruption or bribery in any of the Groups business dealings.
This policy has been implemented throughout the Group and is supported by a groupwide training and awareness programme and regular compliance reviews.
This policy is reviewed annually by the Board and is available on the Groups website.
The Board has a zerotolerance approach to any form of modern slavery and is committed to acting in an ethical manner and with integrity and transparency in our Groups business dealings.
The Group has a formal slavery and human trafficking statement which outlines the steps taken by the Group to ensure that slavery and human trafficking is not taking place CORPORATE GOVERNANCE CONTINUED 33 JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT within any part of the Groups business or within the Groups supply chains which is available on the Groups website.
C.3 Audit Committee and auditor For further information on the Companys compliance with the Code provisions relating to the Audit Committee and the Companys auditor please refer to the Audit Committee report on pages 34 to 37.
D.
Remuneration
For further information on the Companys compliance with the Code provisions relating to the level and components of remuneration and remuneration procedure please refer to the Directors remuneration report on pages 40 to 53.
E.
Relations with shareholders The Company communicates with shareholders through the Annual Report and Accounts Half Year Report preliminary announcements interim management statements investor days and the Company website.
The Board takes the opportunity at the AGM to meet and communicate with private and institutional shareholders and welcomes their involvement.
In addition the Company invites regular direct communication with its shareholders as part of the Companys investor relations programme.
Nonattributable feedback on the investor presentations given by the Company to shareholders is circulated to the Board.
The Chairman periodically consults with major shareholders in order to develop a balanced understanding of any issues and concerns and the Senior Independent NonExecutive Director is available to attend meetings with major shareholders if requested.
In addition if at any meetings of the Executive Directors with investors a governance or strategy matter is raised it is relayed back to the Board.
The Board is therefore of the view that appropriate steps have been taken to ensure all Board members in particular the NonExecutive Directors develop an understanding of the views of the major shareholders.
The Dorothy May White comes into service In April 2017 Workington Royal National Lifeboat Institution RNLI volunteers welcomed their new stateoftheart Shannon class lifeboat.
The charitys new 2m lifeboat was partfunded by a substantial donation in 2016 from The Sir John Fisher
The Shannon class lifeboat is the first modern RNLI allweather lifeboat to be powered by water jets and not propellers.
It is capable of 25 knots which is 50% faster than the lifeboats it replaces and is the most agile lifeboat in the RNLIs fleet.
At a ceremony in June 2017 the vessel was named in memory of Dorothy May White who gave a generous legacy to the RNLI and was formally handed over to RNLI Workington by Rowland Hart Jackson a trustee of the Sir John Fisher Foundation.
Since coming into service it has already been called out a number of times including on the morning of 16 September 2017 when it was called out to assist in the rescue of a lone kayaker who had capsized in choppy seas five miles west of St Bees
JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 Audit Committee report Introduction by Malcolm Paul Chairman of the Audit Committee I am pleased to introduce the report of the Audit Committee for the year ended 31 December 2017.
The Committee and the work it performs is of fundamental importance to the Board in discharging its responsibility for oversight and monitoring of financial reporting risk management and internal control.
I have been chairman of the Committee since 2012 and it is my responsibility to ensure that the Committee fulfils its responsibilities in a rigorous and effective manner.
The Committees agenda is designed in conjunction with the Boards to ensure that all significant areas of risk are covered and to enable it to provide timely input to Board deliberations.
In line with the Code this report seeks to focus on specific aspects considered by the Committee during the year and aims to provide assurance to you our shareholders that the control environment of the Group is being properly supervised and monitored.
I am satisfied that the Committee is properly constituted with written terms of reference which include all matters referred to in the Code and is provided with good quality information to allow proper consideration to be given to topics under review.
I am also satisfied that meetings are scheduled to allow sufficient time for discussion and to ensure that all matters are considered fully.
The Committees terms of reference which are available on our website were updated in January 2018 in accordance with the FRC Guidance on Audit Committees April 2016.
Of particular importance is the requirement to ensure that the Groups financial reporting is fair balanced and understandable.
We therefore review all the Groups financial reports before publication including where necessary alternative performance measures with this responsibility at the forefront of our minds and we are satisfied that they provide a fair balanced and understandable assessment of the Groups position and performance.
This year the Committee has continued to focus on reviewing the Groups systems of risk management and internal controls as well as ensuring the integrity of the Groups public financial reporting.
Whilst we do not believe that the UKs future departure from the EU will have a material impact on the Group we keep this matter under constant review.
In addition we have reviewed and endorsed the Groups approach to tax transparency in all the regions of the world in which the Group operates.
The Group has previously accounted for longterm contracts by estimating the percentage stage of completion based on costs incurred to date compared to the estimated total contract costs.
For the last 24 months our finance team led by our Group Finance Director Stuart Kilpatrick has been considering the impact of IFRS 15 Revenue Recognition  Revenue from Contracts with Customers effective 1 January 2018 which focuses on when control over the goods or services passes to the customer.
Through a series of conferences and working parties in association with our auditor KPMG LLP KPMG key issues have been identified analysis undertaken and regular reports made to the Committee.
Specific details of our work in this regard are set out below.
IFRS 16 which becomes effective from 1 January 2019 will in due course impact on the Group accounts.
This new standard will bring operating leases onto the Groups balance sheet for the first time as an asset to be depreciated and a corresponding liability against which future lease payments will be set.
Work is currently underway to establish full details of the leases that will most affect the Group which broadly fall into two categories bareboat vessel leases where the Group charters or hires a vessel with no crew or provisions included as part of the agreement and rented property leases.
The Committee operates in an open manner has clear and concise channels of communication with the Board and should it be necessary I would be available to meet with investors.
Malcolm Paul Chairman of the Audit Committee 35 JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT Audit Committee composition The Committee is chaired by Malcolm Paul and consists exclusively of independent NonExecutive Directors whose biographical details are set out on page 27.
The Board is satisfied that Malcolm Paul a chartered accountant who was formerly finance director of a FTSE 250 company has significant recent and relevant financial experience.
The other members throughout the year were Aedamar Comiskey David Moorhouse and Michael Salter.
Following the Board changes announced on 18 January 2018 Justin Atkinson an independent nonexecutive director and a chartered accountant joined the Committee on 1 February 2018 with the intention of becoming chairman of the Audit Committee with effect from the conclusion of the AGM on 3 May 2018.
The members of the Committee collectively have broad financial commercial professional and technical experience and as a whole are considered to have competence relevant to the sectors in which the Group operates.
Committee attendance is shown on page 30.
The Committee had three scheduled meetings during the year in February August and November on dates to coincide with the financial reporting cycle.
The Group Chairman Chief Executive Officer Group Finance Director the Company Secretary the internal auditor and senior members of the finance team attend each meeting by invitation together with representatives of the auditor including the reporting partner.
At each scheduled meeting the Committee provides the opportunity to discuss matters privately with the auditor and the internal auditor.
In addition the chairman of the Committee holds regular meetings with the KPMG audit reporting partner to discuss matters related to the Group.
The KPMG audit partner for the Group rotated during 2017 from David Bills to Mike Barradell following the audit tender process which was completed in 2016.
Details of the Committees specific responsibilities and how it exercises those responsibilities are set out in the remainder of this report.
The Board and the members of the Committee separately review the performance of the Audit Committee each year and are satisfied that the Committee discharges its duties and responsibilities in accordance with its terms of reference.
Main responsibilities of the Committee The Audit Committees main duties and responsibilities are to monitor the integrity of the Groups financial statements including a review of the significant financial reporting judgements contained therein assess the independence and objectivity of the auditor and make recommendations to the Board for the auditors appointment reappointment and removal approve the auditors remuneration including nonaudit fees terms of engagement and provision of nonaudit services review the Groups internal financial controls and systems for risk management and internal control monitor and review the effectiveness of the internal audit function monitor the Companys policies for handling allegations from whistleblowers and hold a broad remit to review and comment upon market communications including public announcements and analysts presentations.
Financial reporting The Committees primary responsibility in relation to the Groups financial reporting is to review and challenge where necessary with both senior management and the auditor the appropriateness of the Groups Interim Statement and Annual Report and Accounts with particular focus on whether suitable accounting policies have been adopted and properly applied the clarity of disclosures and compliance with financial reporting standards and relevant financial and governance reporting requirements whether management has made appropriate estimates and judgements in material areas or where there has been discussion with or issues raised by the auditor and whether the Annual Report and Accounts taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Groups position and performance business model and strategy.
To facilitate its financial reporting responsibility the Committee received reports from the Companys auditor KPMG at each of the scheduled Committee meetings.
The first meeting in February 2017 considered the accounting financial control and audit issues reported by the auditors that flowed from their audit work and reviewed the financial statements and specific disclosures including the viability and going concern statements for recommendation to the Board.
In addition to standard agenda items the February meeting also received evaluations of the external and internal audit process and reviewed the procedures and outputs for the identification assessment and reporting of risk.
The August meeting received a review by the auditor of the Half Year results and considered the accounting financial control and audit issues arising to enable the Committee to review the Interim Statement and recommend it to the Board.
The November meeting reviewed the planning memorandum for the annual audit including proposed scope and key risks together with an indication of the proposed audit fee which was subject to subsequent agreement.
In addition the meeting considered a detailed report from internal audit on their work for the year and approved the internal audit programme for 2018.
JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 Integrity of financial reporting The Committee has a primary responsibility to review the integrity of the Annual Report and Accounts and the Interim Statement of the Company which includes the review and discussion of papers prepared by management and takes account of the views of the auditor.
The key areas reviewed in the 2017 financial year are set out below.
IFRS 15 Revenue Recognition  Revenue from Contracts with Customers The introduction of IFRS 15 with effect from 1 January 2018 will change the basis for revenue recognition from a stage of completion of a contract to the delivery against identified performance obligations.
The main revenue streams within the Group are goods and services rental income and construction contracts and for the most part revenue is recognised at the point in time when the performance obligation is met.
Longterm contracts often spanning a financial year end are also a feature of some of our business segments most noticeably in Specialist Technical and Marine Support.
In these situations revenue is to be recognised over time having regard to performance obligations identified from the contract.
The Committee received reports on a number of contracts including the Indian submarine rescue contract the Galloper wind farm project the decommissioning of the core nuclear reactor at Winfrith Dorset and the Swimmer Delivery Vehicle initiative.
The Committee critically examined the recognition of revenue and profit on these significant longterm projects to ensure both were recognised in the correct accounting period and that judgements made by management were reasonable and in accordance with the requirements of IFRS 15.
Where appropriate matters arising were discussed with senior management and KPMG in their capacity as auditors and the Committee concluded that the financial statements recognised revenue and profits in accordance with the Groups accounting policy.
Goodwill valuation The Committee considered the Groups carrying value of goodwill and impairment reviews based on underlying assumptions including where appropriate the impact of changes in oil and gas prices together with the achievability of longterm forecasts and the discount rates applied to forecast cash flows.
Senior management provided detailed analysis to determine the sensitivity of the outcome to changes in key assumptions and we are satisfied that the judgements made are both reasonable and appropriate.
Acquisition accounting The level of judgement involved in determining acquisition fair values and the valuation of acquired intangible assets is a potential risk to the Group.
The Committee considered the fair value and accounting policy adjustments made to each acquisition and assessments in respect of contingent consideration provisions.
These were discussed separately with the Group Finance Director and the auditor and the Committee concluded that acquisitions had been accounted for in accordance with the Groups accounting policies.
Operations in overseas jurisdictions with uncertain legislation Due to the diverse nature of the territories in which the Group operates often with local partners there is an inherent commercial and financial risk arising from operating in these locations.
This is particularly prominent in the Groups operations in emerging markets due to a potentially more uncertain legislative political and regulatory environment.
The
Committee received regular updates on the operational and financial performance of the Groups business operations in these territories together with the assessment of areas where specific judgements have been necessary.
The Committee was satisfied that each of the matters set out above was adequately addressed by the Executive Directors and senior management appropriately tested and reviewed by the auditor and the judgements and disclosures made in the 2016 Annual Report and Accounts and 2017 Interim Statement were appropriate.
Going concern The Committee reviewed the appropriateness of the going concern assumption in preparing the financial statements.
This included a review of papers prepared by senior management in relation to the Groups internal budgets forecasts of future performance available financing facilities and facility headroom.
Taking account of possible changes that may impact trading performance and other factors that might affect availability we expect the Group to maintain the necessary headroom under its borrowing facilities for the forthcoming year.
We are satisfied that the going concern basis of preparation continues to be appropriate in preparing the financial statements.
Viability statement The Committee reviewed the Companys viability statement set out on pages 56 and 57 and in particular took care to understand the analysis which was prepared by management and supports the Boards view that the Company will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the period assessed.
AUDIT COMMITTEE REPORT CONTINUED 37 JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT Risk management and internal controls The Board has overall responsibility for the Groups risk management and internal control systems.
The Audit Committee is responsible for monitoring and reviewing the effectiveness of these systems and the Groups internal audit function.
We received regular reports throughout the year from the Group Risk Committee and we have reviewed the Groups systems of risk management and internal controls including financial operational and compliance controls and have concluded that the systems are sound and effective.
Reports on whistleblowing complaints and material internal control failings are referred to the Committee for review and oversight to ensure that appropriate and timely actions are identified and completed.
During 2016 and 2017 there were no whistleblowing reports or material instances of internal control failure brought to the attention of the Committee.
The responsibilities and processes for risk management are described in more detail on page 19.
External audit performance The Committee continually assesses the performance of the auditor KPMG from the initial planning stage when they receive and discuss the audit plan and proposed strategy approach objectives significant risk areas and other areas of focus drawing on input from the Groups senior management until conclusion of the audit.
The Committee conducts annually a formal assessment of the auditors performance based on its own experience and that of the Groups senior management.
This process includes the use of questionnaires which focus on the quality and ability of the audit teams the robustness of the audit process and the quality of communication and governance including the independence of the audit firm.
The results of the review are considered by the Committee and discussed with the auditor who provides input on the preparedness of the Groups own finance teams and the conclusions are reported to and discussed by the Board.
For the 2017 audit the Committee considered that the performance of the auditor including their interaction with the Company senior management and the Committee was good.
The Committee was also satisfied that KPMG provided an effective audit and remain independent and objective.
Nonaudit services The Committee accepts that certain nonprohibited work is best undertaken by the auditor and to safeguard the auditors objectivity and independence the Committee has a longstanding policy on engagement of the auditor for non audit services which the Committee reviews annually and recommends to the Board for approval.
In accordance with EU Audit Regulations and standards published by the FRC in June 2016 the Committee has not engaged the auditor on matters restricted by those Regulations and standards and fees from permitted work have been preapproved by the Committee.
KPMG were not instructed to carry out any nonaudit services during 2017.
Internal audit The Committee is responsible for reviewing the work carried out by the internal audit department which considers reviews and reports on key commercial financial and control risks across the Group.
The internal audit function is managed by an experienced professional assisted by senior financial managers from within the Group who undertake their work in accordance with an annual programme approved by the Committee.
In addition during 2017 we engaged the services of PricewaterhouseCoopers to support our internal audit resources particular at overseas offices.
The scope of each internal audit review is agreed by the Committee in consultation with the internal auditor to ensure that key areas for each business are addressed.
In 2017 25 internal audits were undertaken of which 17 were in the UK and 8 overseas 2016 15.
The internal audit reports were presented to the Committee for review and shared with senior managers for action as well as being provided to the auditor for information.
The internal auditor is responsible to the Committee for ensuring that all required actions are followed up and completed in a timely manner.
The effectiveness of the Groups internal audit function is continually reviewed and a formal review is undertaken annually by the Board and the Committee.
Following the final 2017 review the Committee recommended and the Board concluded that the Groups internal audit process was appropriate and effective.
Malcolm Paul Chairman of the Audit Committee 26 February 2018 38 JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 Nominations Committee report Nominations Committee composition The Committee reports to the Board and is chaired by Charles Rice with all other members being independent NonExecutive
The Committee members are Charles Rice Malcolm Paul Aedamar Comiskey David Moorhouse and Michael
Justin Atkinson joined the Committee on 1 February 2018.
The Committee had three meetings in 2017 and its work included reviewing the composition of the Board and succession planning.
Committee attendance is shown on page 30.
Main responsibilities of the Committee The Nominations Committees terms of reference which are available on our website were updated in January 2018.
The main duties and responsibilities are to regularly review the structure size and composition of the Board including skills knowledge independence and experience and recommend changes succession planning for Directors and senior executives of both the Company and the operating businesses and identifying and nominating for approval to the Board candidates for Board positions.
Board composition and diversity During 2017 there were seven Directors on the Board comprising the NonExecutive Chairman who was considered independent on appointment the Chief Executive Officer the Group Finance Director and four independent NonExecutive
The names and biographical details of the members of the Board are set out on pages 26 and 27.
The Board functions effectively and efficiently and is considered to be of an appropriate size in view of the scale of the Group and the diversity of its businesses.
The Board considers that each Director demonstrates the knowledge ability and experience required to perform the functions of a director of the listed company and is of the calibre necessary to support and develop the Companys longterm strategy and success.
The Board further considers that no individual or small group of individuals dominates the Boards decisionmaking.
The importance of diversity including gender in the Boards composition is recognised and the Board has agreed a target of at least two female Board Directors by 31 December 2018.
The Committee acknowledges however that diversity is not solely in relation to gender ethnicity age educational and professional backgrounds are also important and diversity in senior management and across the entire workforce is supported and encouraged.
The Group has a diversity policy with the purpose of ensuring that the Group benefits from a diverse workforce and has a working environment where all employees are encouraged to realise their full potential and where there is an open atmosphere of trust honesty and respect.
The diversity policy is available on the Group website as part of the Group policies document.
More information about our employees the Groups employment policies and the Groups commitment to equal opportunities and diversity can be found in the Corporate responsibility report on pages 22 to 25 and the Directors report on pages 54 to 57.
Appointments to the Board and succession planning The Committee leads the process for board appointments and makes recommendations to the Board.
Appointments are made on merit against objective criteria with due regard to the benefits of diversity on the Board including gender.
The Committee adopts a formal rigorous and transparent procedure for the appointment of new Directors to the Board working together with external advisors.
The Committee continues to evaluate the balance of skills and experience on the Board and is satisfied that plans are in place for orderly succession for appointments to the Board to maintain that balance whilst ensuring progressive renewal of the Board.
JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT In January 2018 I informed the Board of my decision to step down at the conclusion of the AGM to be held on 3 May 2018.
This decision was made after receiving confirmation that the necessary steps for a smooth transition were in place.
Those steps included NonExecutive Director  the Nominations Committee sought the assistance of Korn Ferry to lead the search for a new NonExecutive Director to join the Board.
Korn
Ferry is an external search consultancy that has no other connection with the Company.
Following the search and interview process the Nominations Committee subsequently recommended Justin Atkinson to join the Board and following the Boards approval Justin was appointed with effect from 1 February 2018.
Since that date he has also become a member of the Audit Nominations and Remuneration Committees.
Justin was formerly Chief Executive Officer of Keller Group plc between April 2004 and May 2015 having previously held the position of Group Finance Director and Chief Operating
Justin trained and qualified as an accountant and spent the early part of his career with Reuters plc.
It is intended that Justin will be appointed as chairman of the Audit Committee with effect from the conclusion of the AGM subject to his election by shareholders at the AGM.
NonExecutive Chairman  the Nominations Committee considered a list of potential external candidates for the Chairman role provided by Korn Ferry but concluded that given the availability of a strong internal candidate in the current Senior Independent NonExecutive Director Malcolm Paul and the suitability of Justin Atkinson to chair the Audit Committee it would recommend the internal candidate.
Malcolm will transition to the role of Non Executive Chairman with effect from the conclusion of the AGM subject to his reelection by shareholders at the
In February 2018 the Nominations Committee decided to appoint Fergus Graham to be an Executive Director with effect from 1 March 2018.
Fergus joined the Group in January 2017 having worked previously at De La Rue plc and other international companies in both operations and crossborder business development.
He has played a senior role within our Marine Support division during the past year and will take over responsibility for the Marine Support division.
Charles Rice Chairman of the Nominations Committee 26 February 2018 40 JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 Directors remuneration report Annual statement Introduction by Malcolm Paul Chairman of the Remuneration Committee On behalf of the Board and the Remuneration Committee which I will chair up until the conclusion of the AGM on 3 May 2018 I am pleased to present the Directors remuneration report for the year ended 31 December 2017.
This report is comprised of two parts namely Remuneration policy report  which provides a summary of the remuneration policy for which shareholder approval was originally obtained at the 2015 AGM and which will need to be resubmitted for shareholder approval at the AGM.
No material changes are being proposed other than a change to shareholding guidelines and the introduction of a postvesting holding period on future longterm incentive plan LTIP awards.
In addition a change to the pension policy is being proposed whereby the Committee will aim to offer reduced pension contributions as a percentage of salary for new executive appointments to the Board and Annual report on remuneration  which sets out payments and awards made to the Directors and details the link between Company performance and remuneration for 2017 and how the remuneration policy will operate for 2018.
Accordingly at our AGM there will be two remunerationrelated resolutions presented i the normal annual advisory vote on our Directors remuneration report and ii the vote to approve our new Directors remuneration policy which will apply to all payments to be made to Directors from the AGM and which unless altered with shareholders approval will apply for a period of three years.
Pay and performance in 2017 James Fisher delivered a good performance in 2017.
The key performance measures for the 2017 financial year were as follows Underlying profit before tax 50.3m 2016 45.8m and Underlying diluted earnings per share 81.4p 2016 76.3p.
Each year the performance of the Executive Directors is assessed against a range of financial and personal objectives which are aligned with the delivery of the Groups strategy and objectives.
By incentivising and rewarding performance that delivers our objectives we ensure that pay is tied to performance and value delivered to shareholders.
The Executive Directors potential maximum level of bonus in 2017 was 100% of base salary with 70% based on meeting the Groups financial objectives and 30% based on individual achievement and personal objectives.
The Groups financial targets for the year ended 31 December 2017 were substantially achieved and therefore 82.5% of this element of bonus was awarded.
The Remuneration Committee concluded that personal objectives were met.
As a result a combined bonus of 87.75% of base salary was approved for Nick Henry and for Stuart Kilpatrick of which the first 70% will be paid in cash and the balance of 17.75% will be settled in shares to be deferred for three years.
Awards under the LTIP granted in 2015 will vest on 6 April 2018 at a currently estimated 15.4% of the maximum with the earnings per share performance targets over the three years to 31 December 2017 70% of awards not having been achieved and an estimated 51.2% vesting against the total shareholder return TSR targets measured over the three years from 6 April 2015 30% of awards.
This is an indicative LTIP vesting result based on an estimate of TSR as at 7 February 2018.
The final vesting result will be determined based on the actual TSR on 5 April 2018.
JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT Further detail of the targets and achievement against them is set out in the Annual report on remuneration on pages 45 and 53.
Shareholder feedback The Company continues to engage and communicate with shareholders regarding the Companys remuneration policy and the Committee considers all feedback received as part of its policy review process.
Major shareholders and representative bodies were consulted at the start of 2018 in respect of the proposed changes to the remuneration policy to be put forward at the AGM and all major shareholders were supportive.
Remuneration policy for 2018 Executive remuneration consists of a base salary pension contribution benefit provision and subject to performance conditions an annual bonus plan part paid in cash and part deferred into shares and shares awarded under an LTIP .
Incentive pay is subject to clawback and malus provisions and postvesting Executive Directors are required to retain 50% of the net of tax shares awarded until they have satisfied the Companys share ownership guidelines.
The Committee considers that the remuneration policy remains appropriate and that it satisfies the Committees objective to operate a remuneration structure which successfully promotes the longterm success of the Group and fully aligns the interests of the Executive Directors with those of our shareholders.
The current remuneration policy was originally approved by shareholders at the 2015 AGM and as the policy is nearing the end of its three year life it will need to be resubmitted for shareholder approval at the AGM.
2018 remuneration Annual pay awards across the Group are determined on a country and sectoral basis to ensure that pay levels are fair and reflect local market and industry conditions.
Individual
Average salary awards across our UK businesses therefore ranged between 0.7% and 3.8% for 2018.
With effect from 1 January 2018 Nick Henrys base salary was increased by 10% to 492000 reflecting a number of changes to the size and complexity of his role and personal performance.
Further details on the rationale behind the increase are set out in the implementation of the remuneration policy for 2018 section of the Annual report on remuneration.
Stuart Kilpatricks base salary was increased by 3.3% to 310000 which is consistent with the guidelines applied to the general workforce this year.
All other elements of the Executive Directors remuneration packages are proposed to remain unchanged.
The annual bonus maximum opportunity and LTIP awards will be 100% and 125% of base salary respectively.
70% of the annual bonus will be determined by adjusted profit before tax targets and 30% on personal measures with the LTIP awards being determined as to 70% by earnings per share targets and 30% by TSR.
Details of a number of adjustments to NonExecutive Director fee levels and the remuneration agreed by the Remuneration Committee excluding myself for my role as Chairman from the AGM are set out in the Annual report on remuneration.
I hope you will join me in supporting the resolutions in respect of this years Directors remuneration report at the AGM on 3 May 2018.
As I move to the role of NonExecutive Chairman I will be stepping down from my role as chairman of the Remuneration Committee.
It is intended that Aedamar Comiskey will take up the role of chairman of the Remuneration Committee with effect from the AGM and I wish her well in that role.
Malcolm Paul Chairman of the Remuneration Committee 26 February 2018 42 JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 Remuneration policy report Overview of Directors remuneration policy James Fisher and Sons plc operates in a competitive international environment.
To continue to compete successfully the Committee considers that it is essential that the level of remuneration and benefits achieves the objective of attracting retaining motivating and rewarding the necessary high calibre of individuals at all levels of the business.
The Company therefore sets out to provide competitive remuneration to all of its employees appropriate to the business environment in those countries in which it operates.
The remuneration strategy is designed not only to align with the Companys fundamental values of fairness competitiveness and equity but also to support the Companys corporate strategy as a significant contributor to competitive advantage.
A cohesive reward structure with a timely pay review process consistently applied to all employees with links to corporate performance is seen as critical in ensuring all employees can associate with and are focused on the attainment of the Companys strategic goals.
Accordingly the remuneration package for the Executive Directors is normally reviewed annually.
Where an Executive Directors responsibilities change during the course of a year the Committee will consider whether a review is appropriate outside of the annual process.
Executive remuneration reviews are based upon the following principles total rewards should be set at appropriate levels to reflect the competitive market in which the Company operates and to provide a fair and attractive remuneration package reward elements should be designed to reinforce the link between performance and reward.
The majority of the total remuneration package should be linked to the achievement of appropriate performance targets and Executive Directors incentives should be aligned with the interests of shareholders.
This is achieved through setting performance targets to reward increase in shareholder value and through the Committees policy to encourage shareholding by Executive Directors.
How the Executive Directors remuneration policy relates to the wider Group The remuneration policy set out within this report provides an overview of the structure that operates for the senior executives in the Group.
Employees below executive level have a lower proportion of their total remuneration made up of incentivebased remuneration with remuneration driven by market comparators and the impact of the role of the employee in question.
Longterm incentives are reserved for those judged as having the greatest potential to influence the Groups earnings growth and share price performance.
While the Remuneration Committee considers pay and conditions across the workforce when reviewing and setting the Executive Director remuneration policy the Committee does not consult with employees on this matter at the current time.
How shareholders views are taken into account The Committee takes an active interest in shareholder views on our remuneration policy and is mindful of the views of shareholders and other stakeholders.
Major shareholders and representative bodies were consulted at the start of 2018 in respect of the proposed changes to the remuneration policy to be put forward at the AGM and all major shareholders were supportive.
Directors remuneration policy The table below summarises the components of reward for Executive Directors of James Fisher and Sons plc that will be put forward for shareholder approval at the AGM.
The main changes from the remuneration policy approved by shareholders at the 2015 AGM are as follows an increase in the share ownership guidelines from 100% to 200% of salary for all Executive Directors the introduction of a postvesting holding period for all LTIP awards granted to Executive Directors following the AGM and while the maximum pension provision will remain at 15% of salary for the existing Executive Directors the Remuneration Committee will aim to reduce pension provision as a percentage of salary for new joiners to the Board where possible.
The level of provision for new Directors will be subject to negotiation at the time of the appointment having regard to the pensions applicable to the other senior management within the Group.
Any commitments made by the Company prior to the approval and implementation of the new policy which were consistent with the policy in force at the time can be honoured even if they would not be consistent with the policy prevailing when the commitment is fulfilled.
DIRECTORS REMUNERATION REPORT CONTINUED 43 JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT
Purpose and link to strategy Operation Maximum
Base salary Designed to attract retain motivate and reward the necessary high calibre of individuals to the Board.
Base salaries are a fixed annual sum normally effective 1 January and payable monthly in cash.
Salaries are reviewed each year normally effective 1 January and recognising the individuals performance and experience developments in the relevant employment market and having regard to the Groups performance as well as comparing each Executive Directors base salary to market data.
No prescribed maximum salary or salary increase.
Salaries are set for each Executive Director within a range around the market median for similar positions in appropriate comparator companies.
The Committee is also guided by the general increase for the employee population although increases may be higher or lower than this to recognise for example an increase in the scale scope or responsibility of an individual andor performance.
Not applicable.
Pensions To offer competitive retirement benefits.
Executive Directors are eligible to join the Groups defined contribution scheme receive a company contribution into a personal pension scheme or be paid a cash supplement in lieu of pension.
Up to a maximum of 15% of base salary although the Committee will aim to reduce pension contributions as a percentage of salary for new joiners to the Board where possible.
The level of provision for new Directors will be subject to negotiation at the time of the appointment having regard to the pensions applicable to the other senior management within the Group.
Not applicable.
Benefits To offer competitive benefits.
Provision of a company car or cash alternative life assurance and healthcare insurance.
Other benefits may be provided where appropriate.
These benefits do not form part of pensionable earnings.
No prescribed maximum.
Not applicable.
Annual bonus To incentivise and reward the Executive Directors to deliver annual financial and operational targets.
Payable on the achievement of financial and personal objectives and nonpensionable.
The first 70% is payable in cash.
Bonus in excess of 70% of basic salary is subject to deferral into shares with awards vesting after 3 years subject to normal goodbad leaver provisions but no further performance targets.
Dividend equivalent payments may be awarded in cash or shares.
Malus and clawback provisions operate.
Up to 100% of base salary.
Majority of the bonus potential is based on a financial target derived from the annual plan Minority of the bonus potential is based on individual achievement and personal objectives.
LTIP To align the interests of the Executive Directors with the Groups long term performance strategy and the interests of shareholders.
Annual grant of share awards.
Non pensionable.
A 2 year postvesting holding period will be applied to awards granted to Executive Directors after the 2018 AGM.
Dividend equivalent payments may be awarded in cash or shares.
Malus and clawback provisions operate.
Up to 200% of base salary.
Awards above 125% will be subject to stretch targets.
Sliding scale relative to EPS andor TSR growth targets.
25% of an award vests at threshold increasing to 100% vesting at maximum.
Share ownership To ensure alignment between the interests of Executive Directors and shareholders.
Executive Directors are required to retain half of the shares vesting after tax under the LTIP until the guidelines are met.
200% of base salary for all Executive
Not applicable.
Sharesave To encourage share ownership and align the interests of allemployees and shareholders.
An allemployee share plan.
As per prevailing HMRC limits.
Not applicable.
Non
Executive
Directors
To provide fees to reflect the time commitment and responsibilities of each role in line with those provided by similarly sized companies.
Fixed annual fee paid monthly in cash reviewed annually Committee determines the Chairmans fees.
The Chairman and Executive Directors determine fees for the other NonExecutive
No prescribed maximum fee or fee increase although fees are limited by the Companys Articles of Association.
The BoardCommittee is guided by market rates time commitments and responsibility levels.
Not applicable.
JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017
The choice of the performance metrics applicable to the annual bonus reflect the Committees belief that any incentive compensation should be appropriately challenging and tied to the delivery of both financial and personal objectives TSR and EPS performance conditions are selected by the Remuneration Committee on the basis that they reward the delivery of longterm returns to shareholders and the Groups financial growth and are consistent with the Companys objective of delivering superior levels of longterm value to shareholders.
The TSR performance condition is monitored by an independent advisor whilst EPS growth is derived from the audited financial statements The Committee operates its share plans in accordance with the plan rules and the Listing Rules and the Committee consistent with market practice retains discretion over a number of areas relating to the operation and administration of the plans e.
Consistent with HMRC legislation the allemployee arrangement does not have performance conditions and In approving the Directors remuneration policy authority is given to the Company to honour any past commitments entered into with current or former Directors including the vesting of share awards granted in the past.
Malus and clawback provisions Malus and clawback provisions operate in respect of the annual bonus cash and deferred shares and LTIP awards with Committee discretion to apply them in the event of i misstatement of results ii an error in determining the share award or iii gross misconduct.
The Committee may decide to operate the malus and clawback provisions within a three year period commencing on the date that the cash part of any annual bonus is paid for cash and deferred share bonus awards and within a three year period of any LTIP vesting date.
Potential value of 2018 remuneration package for Executive Directors In illustrating potential reward opportunities the following assumptions have been made Minimum performance is based on fixed pay only comprising basic salary and pension from 1 January 2018 and the estimated value of benefits for 2018 Target performance is based on fixed pay plus 50% of the maximum values used for the Companys incentive arrangements Maximum performance is based on a a maximum annual bonus of 100% of base salary and b an LTIP award of 125% of basic salary presented at face value and No share price appreciation or dividend reinvestment has been assumed.
Approach to recruitment New Executive Directors will be appointed on remuneration packages with the same structure and elements set out in the Directors remuneration policy table.
Ongoing incentive pay will be limited to Maximum annual bonus of 100% of salary Up to 200% of salary LTIP award and Participation in the Sharesave.
For external appointments the Committee may offer additional cash or sharebased elements to replace deferred or incentive pay forfeited by an executive when leaving a previous employer.
It would seek to ensure where possible that these awards would be consistent with awards forfeited in terms of vesting periods expected value and performance conditions.
Shareholders will be informed of any such payments as soon as practicable following the appointment.
For an internal appointment any variable pay element awarded in respect of the prior role may be allowed to pay out according to its original terms.
In addition any other on going remuneration obligations existing prior to appointment may continue provided that they are put to shareholders for approval at the earliest opportunity.
For external and internal appointments the Committee may agree that the Company will meet certain relocation and incidental expenses as appropriate.
Loss of office The Committee has considered remuneration for Executive Directors leaving the Company and is committed to applying a consistent and equitable approach to ensure the Company is equitable but pays no more than necessary.
The loss of office policy is in line with market practice and will be dependent on whether deemed a good leaver or bad leaver.
The good leaver policy includes payment in lieu of notice equal to one years basic salary or if termination is part way through the notice period the 0 500 1000 1500 2000 580 580 Minimum
Maximum
Chief Executive Officer
Fixed Annual bonus Longterm incentive 371 Minimum
Maximum
Group Finance Director 1068 371 Fixed Annual bonus Longterm incentive 0 500 1000 1500 2000 580 580 Minimum
Maximum
Chief Executive Officer
Fixed Annual bonus Longterm incentive 371 Minimum
Maximum
Group Finance Director 1068 371 Fixed Annual bonus Longterm incentive DIRECTORS REMUNERATION REPORT CONTINUED 45 JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT amount of salary relating to any unexpired notice to the date of termination.
There is an obligation on Directors to mitigate any loss which they may suffer if the Company terminates their service contract bonus payments for the period worked may be made subject to the original performance targets at the discretion of the Committee.
Any such payments would be made on the normal payment date vesting of share scheme awards is not automatic and the Committee retains the discretion to prevent awards from lapsing depending on the circumstances of the departure and the best interests of the Company.
For a good leaver i deferred bonus awards will normally vest in full at the normal vesting date although may vest earlier including at cessation and ii LTIP awards will normally vest at the normal vesting date although may vest earlier including at cessation subject to performance against the performance targets and LTIP awards will normally be prorated.
Good leaver reasons are death injury illness or disability redundancy retirement transfer of business resulting in cessation of the individuals employment within the Group and any other reason at the Committees discretion.
No compensation is paid for summary dismissal save for any statutory entitlements and Executive Directors will also be entitled to a payment in respect of accrued but untaken annual holiday entitlements on termination.
Service contracts It is the Boards policy that Executive Directors are employed on contracts subject to no more than 12 months notice from either side.
The Board recognises however that it may be necessary in the case of new executive appointments to offer an initial longer notice period which would subsequently reduce to 12 months after the expiry of the initial period.
The service agreements do not have a fixed term.
If it becomes necessary to consider termination of a service contract the Committee will have regard to all the circumstances of the case including mitigation when determining any compensation to be paid.
Details of the current service contracts are as follows Contract date Notice period Nick Henry 1 December 2006 12 months Stuart Kilpatrick 1 July 2010 12 months The Executive Directors are permitted to serve as nonexecutive directors of other companies provided the appointment is first approved by the Remuneration and Nominations
Directors are allowed to retain their fees from such appointments.
During the period Nick Henry joined the Board of Britannias Gold Limited as a NonExecutive Director and the Executive Directors held no other appointments.
NonExecutive Directors do not have service contracts but have a letter of appointment setting out their terms and conditions.
NonExecutive Directors are appointed each year for up to 12 months and are entitled to one months prior written notice of early termination for which no compensation is payable.
Details of the letters are set out below Date of appointment Letter of appointment Charles Rice 1 April 2004 1 January 2018 Malcolm Paul 1 February 2011 1 January 2018 Aedamar Comiskey 1 November 2014 1 January 2018 David Moorhouse 1 August 2013 1 January 2018 Michael Salter 1 August 2013 1 January 2018
Fifty per cent of the fee paid to Charles Rice net of deductions is used to buy ordinary shares in the Company and these shares must be held throughout his period in office.
The shares are purchased in accordance with a trading plan agreed with Investec Bank plc dated 7 March 2013.
In the interests of simplicity going forward Malcolm Pauls fee will be paid fully in cash from appointment following this undertaking to increase his shareholding to a total in excess of 200000.
Annual report on remuneration Remuneration Committee The Remuneration Committee was chaired by Malcolm Paul during 2017.
The Committee also comprised three other independent NonExecutive Directors Aedamar Comiskey David Moorhouse and Michael Salter.
Subject to Malcolm Paul s appointment as Chairman at the AGM it is intended that Aedamar Comiskey will take on the role as chairman of the Remuneration Committee immediately following conclusion of the AGM.
The Committee members have no personal financial interest other than as shareholders in the matters to be decided.
They have no conflicts of interest arising from crossdirectorships with the Executive Directors nor from being involved in the daytoday business of the Company.
The Committee operates under clear written terms of reference and confirms that its constitution and operation comply with the applicable provisions of the UK Corporate Governance Code prevailing at the date this report is signed in relation to Directors remuneration policy and practice and that it has applied the Code throughout the year.
The Committees terms of reference include to determine and agree with the Board the framework and policy for Executive Directors and senior managers to review the appropriateness and relevance of the remuneration policy to agree the measures and targets for any performance JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 related bonus and share schemes of the Executive Directors and to determine within the terms of the policy the total individual remuneration package of the Executive Directors.
The Committee met three times during the year and details of attendance at Committee meetings are set out on page 30.
During the year the Committee has considered the appropriateness and relevance of the remuneration policy the Executive Directors remuneration packages including base salaries the grant of sharebased incentive awards the vesting of sharebased incentive awards subject to performance conditions being met and the amount and basis of performance related bonuses.
Charles Rice also attended Committee meetings when invited by the chairman of the Committee and was consulted on matters relating to the Executive Directors who reported to him.
Chairman Charles Rice up to the AGM 237450 237450 Chairman Malcolm Paul from conclusion of the AGM 200000 Other NonExecutive Director fees Basic fee 52000 51000 Additional fee for Audit Committee chairman 12000 12000 Additional fee for the Senior Independent NonExecutive Director and chairman of Remuneration
Additional fee for the chairman of Remuneration Committee 8000 Additional fee for the Senior Independent NonExecutive Director 8000 Advisers to the Remuneration Committee In undertaking its responsibilities the Committee seeks independent external advice as necessary.
T o this end FIT Remuneration Consultants LLP FIT replaced New Bridge Street as the principal external advisers to the Committee during the financial year.
The Committee is comfortable that the FIT team provide independent remuneration advice to the Committee and do not have any other connections with James Fisher and Sons plc that may impair their independence.
FIT is a founding member and signatory of the Code of Conduct for Remuneration Consultants details of which can be found at site During the year FIT provided independent advice on a wide range of remuneration matters including the Remuneration policy review and the Board changes.
FIT provides no other services to the Company.
The fees paid to FIT in respect of work carried out for the year under review were 5000.
Fees paid in year to New Bridge Street were 10500.
NonExecutive Directors For 2018 the NonExecutive Directors fees are set out below.
Reflecting Malcolm Pauls proposed appointment as Chairman from the AGM the fees payable to him as combined Senior Independent NonExecutive Director and chairman of the Remuneration Committee have been separated going forwards.
Information subject to audit Total remuneration earned by the Executive Directors Nick Henry Stuart Kilpatrick Base salary 44telBenefits Pension Bonus in cash 31telBonus in deferred shares Total shortterm remuneration 90telLTIP  performance LTIP  share appreciation LTIP  total
Total remuneration 1013 1104 682 742 The value presented for LTIP awards in 2017 vesting in April 2018 based on performance to 31 December 2017 is based on an estimated value at vesting.
The LTIP values for 2016 vested in April 2017 based on performance to 31 December 2016 were estimates last year using a share price of 16.11 the 3 month average share price to 31 December 2016.
The actual pretax value of these awards based on a share price calculated in accordance with HMRC guidance of 16.27 at vesting on 6 April 2017 was 158291 for Nick Henry and 106162 for Stuart Kilpatrick.
The ESOS values for 2016 vesting in April 2017 based on performance to 31 December 2016 were also estimates using a share price of 16.11 the 3 month average share price to 31 December 2016.
Based on TSR performance to 31 December 2016 44.7% of awards were expected to vest.
25% of awards actually vested on 10 April 2017.
The intrinsic pretax value of these awards based on a closing share price of 16.21 at vesting was 15423 for Nick Henry and 10343 for Stuart Kilpatrick.
DIRECTORS REMUNERATION REPORT CONTINUED 47 JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT Performance measure Performance target Assessment against targets Adjusted profit before tax Minimum threshold 47m Maximum 51m Threshold starts at 0% and increases pro rata to 100% of this element of the bonus at maximum target performance.
The actual adjusted profit before tax was 50.3m resulting in 82.5% of this part of the bonus being achieved.
Benefits
2017 2016
Medical insurance
Cash allowance in lieu of car
Total insurance Total Nick Henry Stuart Kilpatrick tel Paid as cash allowance Paid as pension contribution
Paid as cash allowance Paid as pension contribution
Nick Henry 51  51 49  49 Stuart Kilpatrick Pensions Pension contributions of 13% of base salary are paid into personal pension plans the Company pension scheme or taken as a separate cash allowance subject to income tax.
Annual bonus awards for 2017 The maximum annual bonus for Executive Directors was 100% of base salary with 70% based on financial objectives and 30% based on individual achievement and personal objectives.
Details of the actual performance against the targets are as follows i Financial objectives ii Personal objectives The headline objectives set for Nick Henry were to set communicate and lead key management priorities to deliver balanced growth via organic development and acquisitions to develop management structure including succession planning and to monitor and manage Group risk profile.
The headline objectives set for Stuart Kilpatrick were to lead financial reporting to shareholders and management to improve risk management and internal audit process to manage MandA process and due diligence and to develop and maintain good relationships with investors banks advisers and auditors.
Alongside the headline objectives noted above each Executive Director is given specific objectives for the year.
In
2017 in addition to certain commercially sensitive items which are not disclosed these included for Nick Henry high focus on health and safety and Group risk profile development priorities in JFD renewables subsea certain acquisition prospects and management structure adjustments and for Stuart Kilpatrick development of accounting and legal teams strengthen internal audit function manage the Groups acquisition process effectively.
Both Executive Directors were assessed to have performed well against these objectives and to have achieved a good overall result for the year leading the Committee to award 100% of the personal objectives element of the bonus.
70% of the bonus award is payable in cash while any bonus in excess of 70% of salary will be awarded in deferred shares in line with the remuneration policy.
Vesting of 2015 LTIP awards The LTIP values included in the table below relate to awards granted on 5 June 2015 which vest on 6 April 2018 dependent on EPS and TSR performance.
EPS is measured over the three year period ended 31 December 2017 while TSR is measured over the three year period from 6 April 2015.
Therefore the figures set out below for the LTIP vesting result are indicative based on a recent estimate of TSR.
Under the EPS performance target 70% of awards which uses a sliding scale 25% of this part of an award vests where growth in underlying diluted earnings per share of RPI plus 9% is achieved over the three year performance period increasing prorata to full vesting where growth of RPI plus 18% is achieved.
JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 Performance target Base EPS EPS at 31 December 2017 EPS growth Threshold RPI 9% Maximum RPI 18% Vesting % Underlying diluted EPS 74.0p 81.4p 10.0% 17.0% 26.0% 0% Share price at date of grant Share price at 31 December Proportion to vest Shares to vest
Share appreciation element
Nick Henry 1179p 1570p 15.4% 6978 82271 27284 109555 Stuart Kilpatrick 1179p 1570p 15.4% 4681 55189 18303 73492 Performance target
TSR
Upper Quartile
James Fisher
Vesting % TSR Upper TSR v FTSE 250 excluding investment trusts 26.2% 65.6% 33.7% 51.2% Proportion of salary Maximum shares awarded Share price at date of grant Exercise price at grant TSR Upper LTIPs granted on 9 March 2017 Nick Henry 125% 34728 1610p Stuart Kilpatrick 125% 23292 1610p Under the TSR performance target 25% of this award vests for median TSR increasing pro rata to full vesting for upper quartile TSR measured against the constituents of the FTSE 250 excluding investment trusts.
The estimated three year performance based on TSR calculations up to 7 February 2018 is as follows As a result of not meeting the EPS performance target and based on the indicative TSR performance it is estimated that vesting of 51.2% of the TSR performance target will be achieved the gross value of LTIP share awards that would vest on 6 April 2018 would be as follows Vesting of the 2017 LTIP award is subject to achievement of performance targets over a three year period with 70% of the award based on EPS targets and 30% based on TSR targets.
EPS target performance is measured over the three year period ending on 31 December 2019.
The EPS element of the award vests if EPS growth at least equals the RPI increase over the period plus 9%.
At the threshold level 25% of the EPS element of the award will vest.
Full vesting is achieved if EPS growth is greater than or equal to 18% in excess of the RPI increase over the vesting period.
The TSR element of the award is subject to the Companys TSR performance relative to the FTSE 250 index excluding investment trusts over the three year period from 6 April 2017.
If at the end of the period the Company ranks in the upper quartile all of the TSR element of the award will vest.
If the ranking is at median level 25% of TSR element of the award will vest.
No element of the TSR part of the award will vest for performance below the median.
For intermediate ranking a proportionate part of each award will vest reducing on a straightline basis.
Any part of the award that does not vest at the end of a performance period will lapse immediately.
1 The performance element represents the face value of awards that are currently expected to vest on 6 April 2018.
2 The share appreciation element represents the value due to the change in share price from the date of award to 31 December 2017.
The share price at date of grant is based on a five day average immediately prior to the date of grant and the share price at 31 December 2017 is based on a three month average.
LTIP awards granted in 2017 1 The share price at date of grant is based on a five day average prior to the date of grant.
DIRECTORS REMUNERATION REPORT CONTINUED 49 JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORTtelteltel Annual change in underlying diluted EPS 7% 11% 7% 13% 18% 15% 16% 13% 5% Salary pensions and benefits 000 51tel43tel380 Annual performance bonus 000 392 429 9tel268 256 77 Shortterm remuneration 000 90tel70tel457 Share schemes 000 10tel69tel90 CEO total remuneration 000 1013 1104 907 1486 1393 1346 1201 761 547 Actual bonus as a percentage of the maximum 88% 100% 23% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 30% LTIP vesting as a percentage of the maximum 15% 47% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% ESOS vesting as a percentage of the maximum  45%  100% 100% 100% 40%  60% Proportion of salary Shares awarded Share price at date of grant Exercise price at grant TSR Upper Awards granted on 9 March 2017 Nick Henry 30% 7984 1610p Stuart Kilpatrick 30% 5355 1610p Aligning pay with performance unaudited The following graph shows the total shareholder return compared to the FTSE 250 and the FTSE Small Cap indices excluding investment trusts Growth in the value of 100 holding over nine years Remuneration of highest paid Executive Director compared with growth in underlying diluted earnings per share Deferred bonus awards granted in 2017 in respect of 2016 annual bonus Relates to the annual bonus awarded in respect of 2016 whereby any award in excess of 30% of salary was deferred into shares for 3 years with vesting based on continued service.
The share price at date of grant was based on the average of the closing middlemarket quotations during the period of five dealing days after the date of the announcement of the 2016 results and prior to the date of grant.
2009  2011 represent the remuneration of former Executive Chairman Tim Harris.
2012  2017 represent Nick Henrys remuneration.
This graph shows the value by 31 December 2017 of 100 invested in James Fisher and Sons plc on 31 December 2008 compared with the value of 100 invested in the FTSE 250 and FTSE SmallCap Indices on the same date.
The other points plotted are the values at intervening financial yearends.
Value  rebased 31 Dec 10 31 Dec 11 31 Dec 12 31 Dec 13 31 Dec 14 31 Dec 15 31 Dec 16 31 Dec 17 Total Shareholder Return Index Source Thomson Reuters James Fisher and Sons plc FTSE 250 FTSE SmallCap 50 JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 Percentage change in CEOs remuneration The table below shows the percentage change in salary benefits and annual bonus earned between the year ended 31 December 2016 and the year ended 31 December 2017 for the Chief Executive Officer compared to the average earnings of all of the Groups other UK employees.
The Committee chose the Groups UK employees for pay comparison with the Chief Executive Officer as the most meaningful comparator group 2017 2016 % change
Chief Executive Officer 000 447 429 4.4% UK employee average 000 37 35 5.7%
Chief Executive Officer 000 14 14 UK employee average 000 1 1 Annual bonus Chief Executive Officer 000 391 429 8.7% UK employee average 000 2 3 33.3% Average number of UK employees 1572 1662 5.4% m % change Total employee remuneration 125 119 6 Total dividends paid 14 12 2 Relative importance of remuneration unaudited Interests in shares The interests of Directors and their connected persons in ordinary shares as at 31 December 2017 including any interests in share options and shares provisionally awarded under the LTIP  ESOS and Sharesave are as follows
Number
Unvested LTIP
Unvested
Deferred Bonus
Unvested share options
Number
Sharesave
Number
Vested but unexercised share options
Number
Exercised during the year
Charles Rice 28188 Nick Henry 198669 129111 7984   187752 20138 Stuart Kilpatrick 36503 86597 5355   69961 Malcolm Paul 5000 Aedamar Comiskey David Moorhouse Michael Salter DIRECTORS REMUNERATION REPORT CONTINUED 51 JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT Executive Directors interest in options over shares 1 January
Granted during year
Vested during year
Lapsed during year
31 December Number Vesting date 2017 number Nick Henry LTIP 20656  9729 10927  6 April 2017 LTIP 45433    45433 6 April 2018 LTIP 48950    48950 6 April 2019 LTIP  34728   34728 6 April 2020 Deferred Bonus  7984   7984 9 March 2020 115039 42712 9729 10927 137095 Stuart Kilpatrick LTIP 13854  6525 7329  6 April 2017 LTIP 30473    30473 6 April 2018 LTIP 32832    32832 6 April 2019 LTIP  23292   23292 6 April 2020 Deferred Bonus  5355   5355 9 March 2020 77159 28647 6525 7329 91952 Total 192198 71359 16254 18256 229047 At 31 December Number Exercise price Date from which exercisable Expiry date TSR Upper Nick Henry 26314 354p 21.03.12 21.03.19 7275 1409p 10.04.17 10.04.24 Stuart Kilpatrick 32808 522p 30.03.14 30.03.21 4879 1409p 10.04.17 10.04.24 Total 257713 All options relate to the 2005 ESOS scheme.
The 2005 ESOS expired in April 2015 and was not renewed.
The last awards were made on 10 April 2014.
Options over 20138 2016 29615 shares were exercised by Nick Henry during the year and gains made of 181235 2016 173544.
As at 26 February 2018 being the last practical date prior to the publication of this report there were no changes to Directors options under the ESOS and Sharesave schemes.
Executive Directors interest in share awards The schemes above are unapproved for HM Revenue and Customs purposes.
As at 26 February 2018 being the last practical date prior to the publication of this report there were no changes to the Executive Directors interest in LTIP and Deferred Bonus Share awards.
JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 Sourcing of shares and dilution The Remuneration Committee has regard to the limits on dilution advised by the Investment Association and contained in the relevant share plan rules and reviews the number of shares committed and headroom available under share incentive schemes in accordance with these dilution limits.
On vesting the awards of shares under the LTIP are satisfied by the shares held by the James Fisher and Sons plc Employee Share Trust Trust.
During the year the Trust purchased 71243 ordinary shares on the open market 2016 38823 and at 31 December 2017 the Trust held 27620 2016 45368 ordinary shares.
Share price during the financial year The middle market price of one ordinary share in the Company during the financial year ranged from 1428p to 1750p and at 31 December 2017 was 1565p.
Total fees Charles Rice 237 232 Malcolm Paul 71 65 Aedamar Comiskey 51 50 David Moorhouse 51 50 Michael Salter 51 50 NonExecutive Directors remuneration Shareholder voting The Company is committed to ongoing shareholder dialogue and takes an active interest in voting outcomes.
Where there are substantial votes against resolutions in relation to Directors remuneration the Company seeks to understand the reasons for any such vote and will report any actions in response to it.
The following table sets out actual voting at the 2017 AGM in respect of the Directors remuneration report for the year ended 31 December 2016 and the 2015 AGM when the remuneration policy was originally approved.
Total number of votes % of votes cast Total number of votes % of votes cast TSR Upper For 40757830 98.19 38714064 98.32 Against 750695 1.81 660835 1.68 Total votes cast excluding withheld votes 41508525 39374899 Total votes withheld 6525 794861 Total votes cast including withheld votes 41515050 40169760 4 May 2017 Annual General Meeting Remuneration Policy 30 April 2015 Annual General Meeting Remuneration Policy Implementation of the remuneration policy for Following consultation with major shareholders Nick Henrys 2018 base salary was increased by 10% to 492000 reflecting changes to the size and complexity of his role.
Nick
Henrys responsibilities as CEO increased significantly in 2012 following the retirement of the then Executive Chairman and the subsequent appointment of a NonExecutive Chairman.
While Nick Henry received an increase in base salary at the time to reflect his new responsibilities the level of the remuneration was designed to reflect a period of transition of the Chair from Executive to NonExecutive.
Five years after the handover that transitional period is at an end and over the same period despite the wellpublicised decline in oil and gas markets the performance of the Company in terms of both revenue and profit has increased significantly the Groups market capitalisation has almost doubled new offices have been opened in Asia Pacific Africa and South America and many new initiatives for example in the renewable and defence markets have been put into action.
DIRECTORS REMUNERATION REPORT CONTINUED 53 JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT The Remuneration Committee therefore felt that the increase was fair and reasonable.
Stuart Kilpatricks base salary was increased by 3.3% to 310000 which is consistent with the guidelines applied to the general workforce this year.
Malcolm Pauls fee as Chairman from the AGM as determined by the Remuneration Committee in his absence will be set at 200000 p.
237450.
The maximum bonus opportunity continues to be set at 100% of base salary.
The proposed financial target levels have been set to be challenging and appropriately demanding.
70% of the annual bonus will be determined by adjusted profit before tax targets and 30% by personal objectives.
The targets are commercially sensitive but it is envisaged that disclosure of the targets and performance against targets will be set out in the 2018 Directors remuneration report.
Awards under the 2015 LTIP will be granted to the Executive Directors over shares worth 125% of base salary with 70% of the award based on EPS growth targets and 30% based on relative TSR targets.
The performance period for the EPS element of the award will run for three years from 1 January 2018 with 25% of the EPS element of the award vesting for EPS growth at least equal to the RPI increase over the period plus 9% rising on a straightline basis to maximum vesting for EPS growth greater than or equal to 18% in excess of the RPI increase over the vesting period.
For the TSR element measured against the constituents of the FTSE 250 excluding investment trusts the performance period will be three years from 6 April 2018 with full vesting if the Company ranks in the upper quartile and 25% of the TSR element vesting for ranking median with straightline vesting in between.
Malcolm Paul Chairman of the Remuneration Committee 26 February 2018 54 JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 Directors report The Directors submit their report together with the audited financial statements of the Group for the year ended 31 December 2017.
The Strategic report together with Board of Directors biographies Corporate governance report the Audit Committee report the Nominations Committee report and the Directors remuneration report all form part of the Directors report.
The Directors report and Strategic report comprises the management report for the purposes of the Financial Services Authoritys Disclosure and Transparency Rules.
Principal activities development and performance A review of the Group s principal activities and description of the factors that might affect the Groups development and performance in the future is set out in the Strategic report on pages 1 to 25.
The Strategic report also details the principal risks and uncertainties facing the Company and the Group s approach to mitigating such risks.
The Group is committed to continue investing in research and development and details of the Group s expenditure is set out in notes 4 and 13 on pages 72 and 77.
Results and dividends The Groups profit after tax for the financial year was 40.7m 2016 38.1m.
The results are shown fully in the consolidated financial statements on pages 64 to 67 and summarised in the Financial review on pages 14 to 17.
The Directors recommend a final dividend of 19.30p per share 2016 17.60p making a total dividend of 28.70p per share for the year 2016 26.15p.
Subject to shareholders approval at the Annual General Meeting to be held at 11.00am on Thursday 3 May 2018 at the Abbey House Hotel Abbey Road BarrowinFurness Cumbria LA13 0PA AGM the final dividend will be paid on 11 May 2018 to ordinary shareholders who are on the register on 6 April 2018.
The Notice of AGM is set out on pages 111 to 117.
Post balance sheet events On 19 February 2018 the Group acquired Cowan Manufacturing Pty Limited based in New South Wales Australia which designs and sells portable hyperbaric chambers for consideration of AUD2.6m 1.5m in cash.
Share capital Details of the authorised and issued share capital of the Company and the shares held by the Companys Employee Share Trust are set out in note 27 on page 96.
As at the date of this report 50200541 ordinary shares of 25p each have been issued are fully paid up and are listed on the London Stock Exchange.
The 3.5% cumulative preference shares of 1 each carry a fixed cumulative dividend of 3.5% per annum payable in priority to any dividend on the ordinary shares and payable half yearly in arrears on 30 June and 31 December.
The holders of the ordinary shares are entitled to receive dividends as declared from time to time by the Directors.
The rights and obligations attaching to the shares are set out in the Companys Articles of Association Articles.
Copies of the Articles may be obtained from the Company Secretary and are available for inspection at the Companys registered office during normal business hours.
Subject to rights attaching to existing shares any share may be issued with such rights or restrictions as the Company may by ordinary resolution determine or if the Company has not so determined as the Directors may determine.
Other than those specific provisions set out in the Articles there are no restrictions on the transfer of ordinary shares in the Company or on the exercise of voting rights attached to them except that certain restrictions may from time to time be imposed by laws and regulations for example insider trading laws and market requirements relating to close periods and pursuant to the Listing Rules whereby certain employees of the Company require the approval of the Company to deal in the Companys shares.
Deadlines for exercising voting rights and appointing a proxy or proxies to vote on the resolutions to be considered at the Companys forthcoming AGM are specified in the notes to the Notice of AGM on pages 111 to 117.
The Company is not aware of any agreements between shareholders that may result in restrictions on the transfer of securities or on voting rights.
JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT Substantial shareholders At 23 February 2018 the Company had been notified of the following interests of 3% or more in its issued ordinary shares Shareholder Number % Rowland Frederick Hart Jackson nonbeneficial 8703093 17.34 Schroder Investment Management 4666066 9.29 Therapia Investments Limited 3853541 7.68 Standard Life Aberdeen plc 3122509 6.22 Baillie Gifford and Co Limited 2414695 4.81 Montanaro Asset Management 1983703 3.95 BlackRock Investment Mgt 1744522 3.48 Fidelity Worldwide Investment 1623280 3.23 28111409 56.00 Total number of ordinary shares in issue 50200541 100.00 Purchase of own shares At the 2017 AGM the Company was given authority to purchase up to 2508627 of its ordinary shares until the date of its next AGM.
No purchases were made during the year by the Company.
Directors
The biographies of the Board of Directors are set out on pages 26 and 27.
There were no changes to the Board during the financial year ending 31 December 2017.
Directors interests The beneficial interests of the Directors in the share capital of the Company are Holdings of ordinary shares of 25p each At 31 December
At 31 December
Charles Rice 28188 24310 Nick Henry 198669 191022 Stuart Kilpatrick 36503 38045 Malcolm Paul 5000 5000 Between 31 December 2017 and 26 February 2018 there were no changes to the Directors shareholdings No Director has an interest in the preference shares of the Company or in the shares of any subsidiary or associated undertaking and The Directors interests stated above include any shares held by their connected persons.
Powers of Directors The powers of the Directors are determined by the Companys Articles the Companies Act 2006 and the directions given by the Company in general meeting.
The Directors will be seeking to renew the authorities granted to them in prior years at the forthcoming AGM.
The Directors are authorised to issue and allot ordinary shares to disapply statutory preemption rights and to make market purchases of the Companys shares.
Any shares purchased may be cancelled or held as treasury shares.
Appointment retirement and reelection of
A Director may be appointed by an ordinary resolution of the shareholders in general meeting following nomination by the Board or a member or members entitled to vote at such meeting or following retirement by rotation if the Director chooses to seek reelection at a general meeting.
In addition the Directors may appoint a Director to fill a vacancy or as an additional Director provided that the individual retires or is elected at the next
A Director may be removed by the Company in certain circumstances set out in the Articles for example bankruptcy or resignation or by an ordinary resolution of the Company in general meeting.
The Articles provide that any Director who has held office for more than three years since his last appointment must offer himself or herself up for reelection at the AGM and that at least onethird of the Board is subject to reelection at each AGM.
Charles Rice is standing down from the Board at the AGM and therefore will not be seeking reelection.
Justin
Atkinson and Fergus Graham have been appointed to the Board since the last AGM and are therefore seeking election at the forthcoming AGM.
With respect to the other Directors having regard to the recommendation contained in the Code that all Directors should be subject to annual election by shareholders they will all retire at the AGM and stand for reelection.
JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 Directors and officers liability insurance The Company maintains an appropriate level of directors and officers liability insurance whereby the Directors and officers of the Company and its subsidiaries are indemnified against liability to third parties and to the extent permitted by section 236 of the Companies Act 2006 the Directors may be granted indemnity by the Company pursuant to the Companys Articles.
Directors conflict of interest Under the Companies Act 2006 a director must avoid a situation where a direct or indirect conflict of interest may occur.
The Board has adopted established procedures to address the management of any potential and actual conflicts of interest.
A review of conflicts which have been authorised has been undertaken by the Board which concluded that any conflicts had been appropriately authorised no circumstances existed which would necessitate that any prior authorisation be revoked or amended and the authorisation process continued to operate effectively.
Additional information for shareholders The Articles may only be amended by a special resolution at a general meeting of the shareholders.
In accordance with the Companies Act 2006 certain information has been included in the Corporate responsibility report on pages 22 to 25 which would otherwise be required to be disclosed in the Directors report.
These are as follows Greenhouse gas emissions reporting Employment of disabled persons Employee involvement No political or charitable donations were made during the year.
Details of branches of Group subsidiaries can be found on pages 107 to 109.
Significant agreements  change of control The Company is a guarantor of all of the Groups bilateral bank facilities which upon a change of control could be withdrawn.
The Singapore Submarine Rescue Service Agreement made between James Fisher Singapore PTE Ltd.
Response Marine PTE Ltd.
Fisher Singapore PTE Ltd.
The rules of the Companys LTIP  ESOS and Sharesave schemes set out the consequences of a change of control on the rights of participants under those schemes.
Participants are generally able to exercise their options on a change of control provided that the relevant performance conditions have been satisfied.
There are no agreements between the Company and its Directors or employees providing for compensation for loss of office or employment whether through resignation purported redundancy or otherwise that arise in the event of a change of control of the Company.
Financial instruments Information on the Groups financial risk management objectives and policies along with its exposure to price risk credit risk liquidity risk and cash flow risk can be found in note 26 on page 90.
Information required by UK listing rule 9.8.4 There are no disclosures to be made under listing rule 9.8.4.
Going concern The Groups business activities together with the factors likely to affect its future development the financial position of the Group and a description of the principal risks and uncertainties are set out in the Strategic report on pages 19 to 21.
The
Groups primary sources of funding are bilateral facilities with a core group of banks.
These bilateral facilities totalled 225m at 31 December 2017 2016 175m.
Compliance with banking covenants is tested half yearly for the ratio of net debt earnings before interest tax depreciation and amortisation Ebitda interest cover and fixed charge cover.
No breaches in covenants occurred during the year.
The Group meets its daytoday working capital requirements through operating cash flows with borrowings in place to fund acquisitions and capital expenditure.
The Group had 71.8m 2016 49.7m of undrawn committed facilities as at 31 December 2017.
The Groups forecasts and projections taking account of reasonable changes in trading performance confirm that the Group should be able to operate within the level of its current banking facilities.
The Group uses cash flow forecasts derived from budgets forecasts and mediumterm planning to identify headroom under the covenant tests.
After making enquiries and having evaluated the ongoing trading of the businesses the Directors have reasonable expectation that the Group has adequate resources to continue to operate for a period considered to be at least 12 months from the date of this report.
Accordingly the Directors consider it appropriate to continue to adopt the going concern basis of accounting in preparing the Annual Report and Accounts.
Viability statement The Directors have assessed the Groups viability over a three year period ending 31 December 2020.
The Directors have determined that this is most relevant time period because it is consistent with the Groups planning process whereby the Board reviews the Groups strategy and its detailed three year plan.
This is reviewed and considered in light of the Groups current position and prospects together with factors that might affect the three year plan.
The Board carefully assesses the performance and prospects of each business regarding entering new markets and geographies current and expected growth rates prospective new projects and the timing of such projects and the robustness of individual business performance.
DIRECTORS REPORT CONTINUED 57 JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT The Groups three year plan overlays a number of assumptions and sensitivities which are reviewed by the Board this includes a review of whether additional bank facilities will be required and available in the plan period.
The review also includes a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Group as set out on pages 20 and 21 and the potential impact on its business model future performance solvency and liquidity over the period.
The potential consequence of Brexit and continued global economic uncertainty and the Groups ability to mitigate the impact of any of these risks continued to be considered in 2017.
The Directors have also taken account of the diverse markets and geographies in which the Groups businesses operate and their ability to react quickly to change to help minimise the effect of the principal risks affecting the Group.
Based on their assessment of the Groups prospects and viability the Directors confirm they have a reasonable expectation that the Group will be able to continue to operate and to meet its liabilities as they fall due for the period to 31 December 2020.
Disclosure of information to the Auditor Each Director in office at the date of approval of this Directors report confirms that so far as he is aware there is no relevant audit information of which the Companys auditors is unaware and he has taken all the steps that he ought to have taken as a director to make himself aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that the Companys auditor is aware of that information.
Directors responsibility statement The Directors are responsible for preparing the Annual Report and the Group and parent Company financial statements each financial year in accordance with applicable law and regulations.
Company law requires the Directors to prepare Group and parent Company financial statements for each financial year.
Under that law they are required to prepare the Group financial statements in accordance with IFRS standards as adopted by the EU and applicable law and have elected to prepare the Company financial statements on the same basis.
Under company law the Directors must not approve the financial statements unless they are satisfied that they give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Group and parent Company and of their profit or loss for that period.
In preparing each of the Group and parent Company financial statements the Directors are required to select suitable accounting policies and then apply them consistently make judgements and estimates that are reasonable relevant and reliable state whether they have been prepared in accordance with IFRS standards as adopted by the EU assess the Group and parent Companys ability to continue as a going concern disclosing as applicable matters related to going concern and use the going concern basis of accounting unless they either intend to liquidate the Group or the parent Company or to cease operations or have no realistic alternative but to do so.
The Directors are responsible for keeping adequate accounting records that are sufficient to show and explain the Companys transactions and disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the financial position of the Company and enable them to ensure that its financial statements comply with the Companies Act 2006.
They are responsible for such internal control as they determine is necessary to enable the preparation of financial statement that are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error and have general responsibility for taking such steps as are reasonably open to them to safeguard the assets of the Group and to prevent and detect fraud and other irregularities.
The Directors are responsible for the maintenance and integrity of the corporate and financial information included on the Companys website.
Legislation in the UK governing the preparation and dissemination of financial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
Directors responsibility statement in respect of the annual financial report We confirm that to the best of our knowledge the financial statements prepared in accordance with the applicable set of accounting standards give a true and fair view of the assets liabilities financial position and profit or loss of the Company and the undertakings included in the consolidation taken as a whole and the Strategic report and the Directors report include a fair review of the development and performance of the business and the position of the Company and the undertakings included in the consolidation taken as a whole together with a description of the principal risks and uncertainties that they face.
We consider the Annual Report and Accounts taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Groups position and performance business model and strategy.
N P Henry S C Kilpatrick Chief Executive Officer Group Finance Director On behalf of the Board of Directors 26 February 2018 58 JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 1 Our opinion is unmodified We have audited the financial statements of James Fisher and Sons plc the Company for the year ended 31 December 2017 which comprise the Consolidated Income Statement the Consolidated Statement of Other Comprehensive Income the Consolidated and Company Statement of Financial Position the Consolidated and Company Cash Flow Statement the Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity the Company Statement of Changes in Equity and the related notes including the accounting policies in note 31.
In our opinion the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the Groups and of the Parent Companys affairs as at 31 December 2017 and of the Groups profit for the year then ended the Group financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as adopted by the European Union IFRSs as adopted by the EU the Parent Company financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the EU and as applied in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006 and the financial statements have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006 and as regards the Group financial statements Article 4 of the IAS Regulation.
Basis for opinion We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing UK ISAs UK and applicable law.
Our responsibilities are described below.
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is a sufficient and appropriate basis for our opinion.
Our audit opinion is consistent with our report to the Audit Committee.
We were appointed as auditor by the Directors on 30 June 2008.
The period of total uninterrupted engagement is for the 10 financial years ended 31 December 2017.
We have fulfilled our ethical responsibilities under and we remain independent of the Group in accordance with UK ethical requirements including the FRC Ethical Standard as applied to listed public interest entities.
No nonaudit services prohibited by that standard were provided.
2 Key audit matters our assessment of risks of material misstatement Key audit matters are those matters that in our professional judgement were of most significance in the audit of the financial statements and include the most significant assessed risks of material misstatement whether or not due to fraud identified by us including those which had the greatest effect on the overall audit strategy the allocation of resources in the audit and directing the efforts of the engagement team.
We summarise below the key audit matters in decreasing order of audit significance in arriving at our audit opinion above together with our key audit procedures to address those matters and as required for public interest entities our results from those procedures.
These matters were addressed and our results are based on procedures undertaken in the context of and solely for the purpose of our audit of the financial statements as a whole and in forming our opinion thereon and consequently are incidental to that opinion and we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters.
Revenue from construction contracts 81.7m 2016 91.5m Risk vs 2016 Refer to page 36 Audit Committee report page 103 accounting policy and page 72 financial disclosures.
The risk Complex accounting The contractual arrangements that underpin the measurement and recognition of revenue by the Group can be complex with significant judgements involved in the assessment of current and future financial performance.
In particular where Independent auditors report to the members of James Fisher and Sons plc 59 JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT services rendered are provided through longterm contracts and are not completed at the balance sheet date and output measures cannot be estimated reliably revenue is recognised in proportion to the stage of completion of the transaction measured by reference to either an output measure such as deliverables completed or an input measure such as physical progress attributable man hours and costs incurred measured against the expected outcome.
The stage of completion is estimated by the Group and includes certain judgements as contracts may run over a number of accounting periods and include forecasts in relation to future costs including labour and materials which are not yet known.
Our response Our audit procedures included Methodology choice assessing whether the revenue recognition methodology applied was consistent with accounting standards.
Sampling selecting the contracts for substantive audit procedures based on qualitative factors such as commercial complexity and life of contract and quantitative factors such as financial significance and profitability that we considered to be indicative of risk.
Input assessment agreeing for the sample above observable inputs used in the calculations of costs incurred such as direct costs labour charges and document delivery records to source data including customer acceptance acts and countersigned agreements including testing the allocation of costs incurred to contracts.
Accounting analysis assessing for the sample above whether the judgements made by management over the stage of completion and estimates over cost to complete including specific output measures and costs incurred are consistent with our understanding of contract activities and performance including considering contract losses and recoverability of revenue relating to variation orders in light of managements historical experience on similar contracts.
Assessing transparency assessing the appropriateness of the Groups disclosures in respect of revenue from construction contracts.
Our results We found revenue recognition from construction contracts acceptable 2016 acceptable.
Recoverability of Group intangible assets 199.2m 2016 180.5m and Parent Company investment in subsidiaries 409.2m 2016 363.0m 2016 Risk vs 2016 Refer to page 36 Audit Committee report page 101 accounting policy and page 76 financial disclosures.
The risk Forecast based valuation Goodwill and intangible assets in the Group and Parent Company investment in subsidiaries are the most quantitatively significant items on the Group and Parent Company balance sheet respectively and their recoverability is subjective due to the inherent uncertainty involved in forecasting and discounting future cash flows.
This is considered to be one of the areas that had the greatest effect on our overall Group and Parent Company audits due to their materiality in the context of the Group and Parent Company financial statements and due to the inherent significant judgements involved in the impairment test.
Our response Our audit procedures included Historical comparisons assessing the reasonableness of the budgets by considering the historical accuracy of previous forecasts.
Our sector experience assessing whether assumptions used in particular those relating to forecast revenue growth profit margins and maintenance capital expenditure reflect our knowledge of the business and industry including known or probable changes in the business environment.
Benchmarking assumptions challenging the key inputs used in the impairment test in particular discount rates by comparing them to externally derived data including available sources for comparable companies.
Sensitivity analysis performing breakeven analysis on the key assumptions noted above.
Accounting analysis challenging the Groups assessment of the recoverability of capitalised development costs by assessing the technical feasibility and future profitability of the related assets including comparing the managements judgements to our understanding of project progress and performance to date obtained from our other audit procedures.
Assessing transparency assessing whether the Groups disclosures about the impairment test appropriately reflected the risks inherent in the valuation of intangible assets and investments in subsidiaries.
Our results We found the resulting estimate of the recoverable amount of Group intangible assets and Parent Company investments in subsidiaries to be acceptable.
Group operations in overseas jurisdictions with uncertain legislation Risk vs 2016 Refer to page 36 Audit Committee report page 62 accounting policies and page 105 financial disclosures.
The risk Omitted exposures The Group is multinational and has operations in a number of developing markets.
Operating in these territories presents increased operational and financial risks due to the need to comply with potentially uncertain regulatory and legislative environments including legislation relating to tax.
Breaches of compliance or inappropriate assumptions over provisioning JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 for the uncertain legislation could have a significant effect on the results and financial position of the Group and is one of the judgemental areas our audit is focused on.
Further during 2015 the principal customer of one of the Groups overseas subsidiaries terminated its contract whilst settlement was reached in 2017 with the customer uncertainty remains around the timing and value of any potential residual exposures with the local authorities.
Our response Our audit procedures included Inspection considering the Groups exposure to potential breaches of legislation by making appropriate enquiry of the Group in relation to compliance with laws and regulations and the existence and status of any significant legal matters.
We inspected reports returned by overseas locations to identify actual and potential noncompliance with laws and regulations both those specific to the Groups business and those relating to the conduct of the business generally.
Where significant or potential matters were identified we obtained confirmations from the Groups legal counsel and legal representatives.
Input assessment critically assessing the calculation of provisions and liabilities arising from any legal matters recognised by the Group by challenging management assumptions based on our knowledge and review of underlying correspondence and documentation including formal confirmations and discussions with external and own lawyers where relevant.
Sector experience using our own local specialists analysing and challenging the assumptions used to determine provisions for tax matters based on their knowledge and experience of local regulations and practices.
Assessing transparency assessing the appropriateness of the Groups disclosures in respect of provisions including taxation recognised and contingencies disclosed.
Our results The results of our testing were satisfactory and we considered the liability recognized and the contingency disclosures made to be acceptable 2016 acceptable.
Valuation of the intangibles acquired in a business combination 9.8m 2016 0.5m and contingent consideration 12.8m 2016 6.8m Risk vs 2016 Refer to page 36 Audit Committee report page 101 accounting policies and page 87 financial disclosures The risk Subjective valuation The Group acquired new businesses during the year on a consideration partly contingent on the future performance of the acquired businesses.
The Group also has contingent considerations payable on acquisitions in the past which are remeasured at the end of each year under the provisional acquisition accounting based on an estimated outturn of the future performance of the business.
As there is a significant level of judgement involved in estimating the fair value of acquired intangible assets and contingent consideration we consider this to be a significant audit risk.
Our response Our audit procedures included Methodology choice assessing using our own valuation specialist the results of the intangible asset valuation reports by checking that the valuations were in accordance with relevant accounting standards and acceptable valuation practice.
Benchmarking assumptions challenging the key inputs used in determining the valuation of intangible assets acquired in particular discount rates and comparable market transactions by comparing them to externally derived data.
Our sector experience assessing whether the assumptions used in calculating contingent consideration in particular those relating to forecast revenue growth contract performance and profit margins reflect our knowledge of the business and industry including assessing the results of the businesses since acquisition and historical accuracy of the previous forecasts.
Assessing transparency assessing the appropriateness of the Groups disclosures in respect of fair value measurement of acquired net assets and contingent consideration payables.
Our results We found the valuation of the acquired businesses and contingent consideration to be acceptable 2016 acceptable.
3 Our application of materiality and an overview of the scope of our audit The materiality for the Group financial statements as a whole was set at 2.2m 2016 2.1m determined with reference to a benchmark of Group profit before tax of 49.0m 2016 44.9m of which it represents 4.5% 2016 4.7%.
The materiality for the Parent Company financial statements as a whole was set at 0.7m 2016 1.5m determined with reference to a benchmark of gross assets of 438.5m 2016 360.7m of which it represents 0.2% 2016 0.42%.
We report to the Audit Committee any corrected or uncorrected identified misstatements exceeding 0.1m 2016 0.1m in addition to other identified misstatements that warranted reporting on qualitative grounds.
Of the Groups 188 2016 140 reporting components we subjected 34 2016 40 to full scope audits for Group purposes.
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT CONTINUED 61 JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT We conducted reviews of financial information including enquiry at a further 12 2016 6 nonsignificant components to obtain further coverage.
These components were not individually financially significant enough to require an audit for Group reporting purposes.
The components within the scope of our work accounted for the following percentages of the Groups results The remaining 10% of total Group revenue 14% of Group profit before tax and 11% of total Group assets is represented by 142 of reporting components none of which individually represented more than 10% of any of total Group revenue Group profit before tax or total Group assets.
For these residual components we performed analysis at an aggregated Group level to reexamine our assessment that there were no significant risks of material misstatement within these.
The Group audit team instructed component auditors as to the significant areas to be covered including the relevant risks detailed above and the information to be reported back.
The Group audit team approved the component materialities which ranged from 0.1m to 1.0m 2016 0.1m to 0.5m having regard to the mix of size and risk profile of the Group across the components.
The work on 15 2016 22 of the 48 2016 46 components was performed by component auditors and the rest including the audit of the Parent Company was performed by the Group audit team.
Telephone conferences were held with these component auditors at the locations which were not audited directly by the Group audit team.
At these conferences the findings reported to the Group audit team were discussed in more detail and any further work required by the Group audit team was then performed by the component auditor.
4 We have nothing to report on going concern We are required to report to you if we have anything material to add or draw attention to in relation to the directors going concern statement on page 56 to the financial statements on the use of the going concern basis of accounting with no material uncertainties that may cast significant doubt over the Group and Companys use of that basis for a period of at least twelve months from the date of approval of the financial statements or the related statement under the Listing Rules set out on page 56 is materially inconsistent with our audit knowledge.
We have nothing to report in these respects.
Number of components
Group prot before tax
Audits for Group reporting purposes 36 2016 40 86% 2016 91% 77% 2016 85% 84% 2016 86% Reviews of financial information including enquiry 12 2016 6 4% 2016 3% 9% 2016 6% 6% 2016 2% Total 48 2016 46 90% 2016 94% 86% 2016 91% 90% 2016 88% 5 We have nothing to report on the other information in the Annual Report The Directors are responsible for the other information presented in the Annual Report together with the financial statements.
Our opinion on the financial statements does not cover the other information and accordingly we do not express an audit opinion or except as explicitly stated below any form of assurance conclusion thereon.
Our responsibility is to read the other information and in doing so consider whether based on our financial statements audit work the information therein is materially misstated or inconsistent with the financial statements or our audit knowledge.
Based solely on that work we have not identified material misstatements in the other information.
Strategic report and Directors report Based solely on our work on the other information we have not identified material misstatements in the Strategic report and the Directors report in our opinion the information given in those reports for the financial year is consistent with the financial statements and in our opinion those reports have been prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 2006.
JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 6 We have nothing to report on the other matters on which we are required to report by exception Under the Companies Act 2006 we are required to report to you if in our opinion adequate accounting records have not been kept by the Parent Company or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or the Parent Company financial statements and the part of the Directors remuneration report to be audited are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns or certain disclosures of Directors remuneration specified by law are not made or we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit.
We have nothing to report in these respects.
7 Respective responsibilities Directors responsibilities As explained more fully in their statement set out on page 57 the Directors are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements including being satisfied that they give a true and fair view such internal control as they determine is necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error assessing the Group and Parent Companys ability to continue as a going concern disclosing as applicable matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless they either intend to liquidate the Group or the Parent Company or to cease operations or have no realistic alternative but to do so.
Auditors responsibilities Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or other irregularities see below or error and to issue our opinion in an auditors report.
Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance but does not guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with ISAs UK will always detect a material misstatement when it exists.
Misstatements can arise from fraud other irregularities or error and are considered material if individually or in aggregate they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of the financial statements.
A fuller description of our responsibilities is provided on the FRCs website at www. rc. iteauditorsresponsibilities.
Directors remuneration report In our opinion the part of the Directors remuneration report to be audited has been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 2006.
Disclosures of principal risks and longerterm viability Based on the knowledge we acquired during our financial statements audit we have nothing material to add or draw attention to in relation to the Directors confirmation within the viability statement on page 56 that they have carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Group including those that would threaten its business model future performance solvency and liquidity the Principal risks and uncertainties disclosures describing these risks and explaining how they are being managed and mitigated and the Directors explanation in the viability statement of how they have assessed the prospects of the Group over what period they have done so and why they considered that period to be appropriate and their statement as to whether they have a reasonable expectation that the Group will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the period of their assessment including any related disclosures drawing attention to any necessary qualifications or assumptions.
Under the Listing Rules we are required to review the viability statement.
We have nothing to report in this respect.
Corporate governance disclosures We are required to report to you if we have identified material inconsistencies between the knowledge we acquired during our financial statements audit and the Directors statement that they consider that the annual report and financial statements taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Groups position and performance business model and strategy or the section of the Annual Report describing the work of the Audit Committee does not appropriately address matters communicated by us to the Audit Committee.
We are required to report to you if the Corporate governance statement does not properly disclose a departure from the eleven provisions of the UK Corporate Governance Code specified by the Listing Rules for our review.
We have nothing to report in these respects.
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT CONTINUED 63 JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT Irregularities  ability to detect We identified areas of laws and regulations that could reasonably be expected to have a material effect on the financial statements from our sector experience through discussion with the Directors and other management as required by auditing standards and from inspection of the Groups regulatory and legal correspondence.
We had regard to laws and regulations in areas that directly affect the financial statements including financial reporting including related company legislation and taxation legislation.
We considered the extent of compliance with those laws and regulations as part of our procedures on the related annual accounts items.
In addition we considered the impact of laws and regulations in the specific areas of health and safety antibribery employment law legislation in overseas territories and certain aspects of company legislation recognising the nature of the Groups activities and its legal form.
With the exception of any known or possible noncompliance and as required by auditing standards our work in respect of these was limited to enquiry of the Directors and other management and inspection of regulatory and legal correspondence.
We considered the effect of any known or possible noncompliance in these areas as part of our procedures on the related annual accounts items.
Further detail in respect of Group operations in overseas jurisdictions with uncertain legislation is set out in the key audit matter disclosures in section 2 of this report.
We communicated identified laws and regulations throughout our team and remained alert to any indications of noncompliance throughout the audit.
This included communication from the Group to component audit teams of relevant laws and regulations identified at Group level with a request to report on any indications of potential existence of noncompliance with relevant laws and regulations irregularities in these areas or other areas directly identified by the component team.
As with any audit there remained a higher risk of non detection of irregularities as these may involve collusion forgery intentional omissions misrepresentations or the override of internal controls.
8 The purpose of our audit work and to whom we owe our responsibilities This report is made solely to the Companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006.
Our audit work has been undertaken so that we might state to the Companys members those matters we are required to state to them in an auditors report and for no other purpose.
To the fullest extent permitted by law we do not accept or assume responsibility to anyone other than the Company and the Companys members as a body for our audit work for this report or for the opinions we have formed.
Mike Barradell Senior Statutory Auditor for and on behalf of KPMG LLP  Statutory Auditor Chartered Accountants 1 St Peters Square
M2 3AE 64 JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 Consolidated income statement FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 Year ended 31 December 2017 Year ended 31 December 2016
Before separately disclosed items
Total
Before separately disclosed items
Total
Group revenue 4 505.4  505.4 466.0  466.0 Cost of sales 350.9  350.9 324.3  324.3 Administrative expenses 100.4  100.4 92.3 2.3 94.6 Share of posttax results of joint ventures 15 1.7  1.7 1.4  1.4 Acquisition related income and expense 5  1.3 1.3  1.4 1.4 Operating prot 4 55.8 1.3 54.5 50.8 0.9 49.9 Net finance expense 7 5.5  5.5 5.0  5.0 Prot before taxation 50.3 1.3 49.0 45.8 0.9 44.9 Income tax 8 8.7 0.4 8.3 7.1 0.3 6.8 Prot for the year 41.6 0.9 40.7 38.7 0.6 38.1 Attributable to Owners of the Company 41.1 0.9 40.2 38.5 1.2 39.7 Noncontrolling interests 0.5  0.5 0.2 1.8 1.6 Earnings per share pence pence Diluted 10 79.5 78.7 Consolidated statement of other comprehensive income FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017
Year ended 31 December Year ended 31 December Prot for the year 40.7 38.1 Items that will not be classied to the income statement Actuarial gainloss in defined benefit pension schemes 21 3.2 3.1 Tax on items that will not be reclassified 0.2 0.1 Items that may be reclassied to the income statement Exchange differences on foreign currency net investments 7.5 16.8 Effective portion of changes in fair value of cash flow hedges 26 7.8 3.3 Effective portion of changes in fair value of cash flow hedges in joint ventures 15 0.2 0.1 Net changes in fair value of cash flow hedges transferred to income statement 0.9 0.6 Deferred tax on items that may be reclassified 8 1.0 0.4 Total comprehensive income for the year 41.9 49.3 Owners of the Company 41.4 50.7 Noncontrolling interests 0.5 1.4 JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT Consolidated and Company statement of financial position AT 31 DECEMBER 2017 Group Company
31 December 31 December 31 December 31 December Noncurrent assets Goodwill 12 174.6 165.0 Other intangible assets 13 24.6 15.5 Property plant and equipment 14 132.5 131.0 5.3 5.6 Investment in joint ventures 15 7.1 6.4 Investments in subsidiaries 16   409.2 363.0 Available for sale financial assets 16 2.3 1.4 2.3 1.4 Deferred tax assets 9 3.2 2.9 2.8 4.3 Current assets Inventories 17 52.1 54.1 Trade and other receivables 18 201.9 157.4 6.2 7.9 Cash and cash equivalents 20.3 21.8 12.2 7.4 Current liabilities Trade and other payables 19 132.7 126.1 10.8 26.6 Provisions for liabilities and charges 20 4.8 3.2 Current tax 8.5 8.4 1.4 0.7 Loans and borrowings 24 0.4 3.1 11.9 18.5 Net current assets 127.9 92.5 5.7 30.5 Total assets less current liabilities 472.2 414.7 413.9 343.8 Noncurrent liabilities Provisions for liabilities and charges 20 11.5 5.0 Retirement benefit obligations 21 19.8 26.8 13.7 19.6 Cumulative preference shares 27 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 Loans and borrowings 24 152.3 124.4 152.1 124.3 Deferred tax liabilities 9 2.3 0.1
Called up share capital 27 12.6 12.5 12.6 12.5 Share premium 25.7 25.6 25.7 25.6 Treasury shares 0.4 0.6 0.4 0.6 Other reserves 1.0 2.8 2.5 4.6 Retained earnings 246.1 217.0 207.6 166.9 Equity attributable to owners of the Company 285.0 257.3 248.0 199.8 Noncontrolling interests 1.2 1.0 Total equity 286.2 258.3 248.0 199.8 The consolidated financial statements were approved by the Board of Directors on 26 February 2018 and signed on its behalf by N P Henry
Chief Executive Officer 66
JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 Consolidated and Company cash flow statement FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 Group Company
31 December 31 December 31 December 31 December Prot before taxation 49.0 44.9 53.8 38.5 Adjustments to reconcile profit before tax to net cash flows Depreciation and amortisation 27.4 25.8 1.1 0.9 Acquisition costs charged 1.0 0.7 0.2 Profit on disposal of fixed assets 0.9 0.6 Transferred from hedging reserve to income statement 1.5  1.5 Provision for contract cessation  2.3 Adjustment to provision for contingent consideration 1.7 3.4 Net finance expense 5.5 5.1 0.3 Share of posttax results of joint ventures 1.7 1.4 Share based payments 0.9 1.1 0.9 0.8 Increase in inventories 1.1 Increase in trade and other receivables 44.4 5.7 1.6 4.3 Increasedecrease in trade and other payables 1.6 13.3 8.9 9.3 Defined benefit pension cash contributions less service cost 4.4 4.2 4.0 3.3 Cash generated from operations 29.7 51.3 42.9 50.5 Cash outflow from acquisition costs 0.8 0.6 0.2 Income tax paymentsreceipts 8.0 6.9 1.9 0.7 Cash ow from operating activities 20.9 43.8 44.6 49.8 Investing activities Dividends from joint venture undertakings 1.4 0.7 Proceeds from the disposal of property plant and equipment 2.6 1.7 Proceeds from the disposal of investments  0.1 Finance income 0.4 0.2 4.8 4.2 Acquisition of subsidiaries net of cash acquired 23 2.6 19.1  7.3 Net loans advanced to subsidiaries   46.1 53.6 Investment in joint ventures and available for sale assets 0.6 Acquisition of property plant and equipment 23.1 13.9 0.9 0.2 Development expenditure 4.2 2.7 Cash ows used in investing activities 26.1 33.0 42.2 56.9 Financing activities Proceeds from the issue of share capital 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 Finance costs 5.3 4.1 4.4 3.0 Purchase of own shares by Employee Share Ownership Trust 0.9 0.6 0.9 0.6 Capital element of finance lease repayments 0.1 0.2 Proceeds from borrowings 95.4 95.9 21.3 22.8 Repayment of borrowings 70.4 93.5 Dividends paid 11 13.5 12.3 13.5 12.3 Dividends paid to noncontrolling interests 0.4 Cash ows from nancing activities 4.9 14.7 2.6 7.0 Net decreaseincrease in cash and cash equivalents 25 0.3 3.9 5.0 0.1 Cash and cash equivalents at 1 January 21.8 23.0 7.4 7.6 Net foreign exchange differences 1.2 2.7 0.2 0.1 Cash and cash equivalents at 31 December 20.3 21.8 12.2 7.4 67 JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT Consolidated statement of changes in equity FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 Capital Attributable to equity holders of parent
Share premium
Other
Treasury shares
Non controlling interests
Total comprehensive income   36.6 14.1  50.7 1.4 49.3 Contributions by and distributions to owners Ordinary dividends paid   12.3   12.3  12.3 Share based payments   1.1   1.1  1.1 Tax effect of share based payments   0.3   0.3  0.3 Purchase of shares by ESOT     1.1 1.1  1.1 Sale of shares by ESOT     0.5 0.5  0.5 Arising on the issue of shares  0.1    0.1  0.1 Transfer   1.6  1.6 Balance at 31 December 2016 12.5 25.6 217.0 2.8 0.6 257.3 1.0 258.3 Total comprehensive income   43.2 1.8  41.4 0.5 41.9 Contributions by and distributions to owners Ordinary dividends paid   13.5   13.5 0.4 13.9 Share based payments   0.9   0.9  0.9 Acquisition   0.3   0.3 0.1 0.2 Purchase of shares by ESOT     1.5 1.5  1.5 Sale of shares by ESOT     0.5 0.5  0.5 Arising on the issue of shares 0.1 0.1    0.2  0.2 Transfer   1.2  1.2 Other reserve movements Other reserves
Heading reserve
At 1 January 2016 10.1 1.3 11.4 Other comprehensive income for the period 16.6 2.4 14.2 At 31 December 2016 6.5 3.7 2.8 Other comprehensive income for the period 7.5 5.7 1.8 At 31 December 2017 1.0 2.0 1.0 68 JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 Company statement of changes in equity FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017
Share capital
Retained earnings
Treasury shares
At 1 January 2016 12.5 25.5 143.3 2.3 1.6 177.4 Total comprehensive income   36.1 2.3  33.8 Ordinary dividends paid   12.3   12.3 Share based compensation   1.1   1.1 Tax effect of share based compensation   0.3   0.3 Purchase of shares by ESOT     1.1 1.1 Sale of shares by ESOT     0.5 0.5 Arising on the issue of shares  0.1    0.1 Transactions with shareholders  0.1 10.9  0.6 11.4 Transfer on disposal of shares   1.6  1.6 At 31 December 2016 12.5 25.6 166.9 4.6 0.6 199.8 Total comprehensive income   54.5 7.1  61.6 Ordinary dividends paid   13.5   13.5 Share based compensation   0.9   0.9 Purchase of shares by ESOT     1.5 1.5 Sale of shares by ESOT     0.5 0.5 Arising on the issue of shares 0.1 0.1    0.2 Transfer on disposal of shares   1.2  1.2 JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT Notes to the financial statements 1 General information James Fisher and Sons plc the Company is a public limited company registered and domiciled in England and Wales and listed on the London Stock Exchange.
The consolidated financial statements comprise the financial statements of the Company its subsidiary undertakings and its interest in associates and jointly controlled entities together referred to as the Group for the year ended 31 December 2017.
The Companys shares are listed on the London Stock Exchange.
The
Company and consolidated financial statements were approved for publication by the Directors on 26 February 2018.
The Group and Company financial statements have been prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS adopted by the European Union adopted IFRS.
The financial statements are prepared on a going concern basis and on an historical cost basis modified to include revaluation to fair value of certain financial instruments.
As permitted by section 408 of the Companies Act 2006 a separate income statement and related notes for the holding company have not been presented in these financial statements.
The profit after taxation in the Company was 54.2m 2016 39.8m.
The Group and Company financial statements are presented in Sterling and all values are rounded to the nearest million pounds m except when otherwise indicated.
The consolidated financial statements and those of the Company have been prepared in accordance with IFRS adopted by the EU as at 31 December 2017 and are applied in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006.
2 Alternative performance measures The Group uses a number of alternative nonGenerally Accepted Accounting Practice nonGAAP performance measures which are not defined within IFRS.
The
Directors use these measures in order to assess the underlying operational performance of the Group and as such these measures are important and should be considered alongside the IFRS measures.
The adjustments are separately disclosed and are usually items that are significant in size or nonrecurring in nature.
The following nonGAAP measures are referred to in this Annual Report and Accounts.
2.1 Underlying operating profit and underlying profit before taxation Underlying operating profit is defined as operating profit before amortisation or impairment of acquired intangible assets acquisition expenses adjustments to deferred consideration together referred to as acquisition related income and expense the costs of a material restructuring asset impairment or rationalisation of operations and the profit or loss relating to the sale of businesses.
Amortisation of acquired intangible assets and acquisition expenses are recurring in nature where business combinations are part of a groups strategy.
As acquisition expenses fluctuate with activity and to provide a better comparison to businesses that are not acquisitive the Directors consider that both of these items should be separately disclosed to give a better understanding of operating performance.
The Directors believe that the underlying operating profit is an important measure of the operational performance of the Group.
Underlying profit before taxation is defined as underlying operating profit less net finance expense.
2.2 Underlying earnings per share Underlying earnings per share EPS is calculated as the total of underlying profit before tax less income tax but excluding the tax impact on separately disclosed items included in the calculation of underlying profit less profit attributable to noncontrolling interests divided by the weighted average number of ordinary shares in issue during the year.
The Directors believe that underlying EPS provides an important measure of the underlying earnings capability of the Group.
Underlying earnings per share is set out in note 10.
2.3 Capital employed and Return on Capital Employed ROCE Capital employed is defined as net assets less cash and shortterm deposits and after adding back borrowings.
Average capital employed is adjusted for the timing of businesses acquired and after adding back cumulative amortisation of customer relationships.
Segmental ROCE is defined as the underlying operating profit divided by average capital employed.
The key performance indicator Group posttax ROCE is defined as underlying operating profit less notional tax calculated by multiplying the effective tax rate by the underlying operating profit divided by average capital employed.
2.4 Cash conversion Cash conversion is defined as the ratio of operating cash flow to underlying operating profit.
Operating cash flow comprises cash generated from operations plus dividends from joint venture undertakings.
2.5 Underlying earnings before interest tax depreciation and amortisation Ebitda Underlying Ebitda is defined as the underlying operating profit before interest tax depreciation and amortisation.
2.6 Underlying dividend cover Underlying dividend cover is the ratio of underlying diluted earnings per share to the total dividend per share.
Underlying operating prot and underlying prot before taxation Operating profit 54.5 49.9 Separately disclosed items before taxation 1.3 0.9 Underlying operating profit 55.8 50.8 Net finance expense 5.5 5.0 Underlying profit before taxation 50.3 45.8 70 JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 2 Alternative performance measures continued Return on capital employed for the Group is calculated as follows Capital employed Net assets 286.2 258.3 Less cash and shortterm deposits 20.3 21.8 Plus borrowings 152.8 127.5 Capital employed 418.7 364.0 Underlying operating profit 55.8 50.8 Notional tax at the effective tax rate 9.6 7.8 Average capital employed 378.5 331.3 Return on average capital employed % 12.2% 13.0% Cash conversion Cash generated from operations 29.7 51.3 Dividends from joint venture undertakings 1.4 0.7 Operating cash flow 31.1 52.0 Underlying operating profit 55.8 50.8 Cash conversion 56% 103% Underlying Ebitda Underlying operating profit 55.8 50.8 Underlying depreciation and amortisation 25.4 24.6 Underlying Ebitda 81.2 75.4 Underlying dividend cover pence pence Underlying earnings per share 81.4 76.5 Dividend per share 28.7 26.2 Underlying dividend cover times 2.8 2.9 3 Segmental information For management reporting purposes the Group has four operating segments reviewed by the Board Marine Support Specialist Technical Offshore Oil and
These operating segments form the basis of the primary segmental disclosures below.
Their principal activities are set out in the Strategic report on pages 10 to 13.
The Board assess the performance of the segments based on underlying operating profit.
The Board believes that such information is the most relevant in evaluating the results of certain segments relative to other entities which operate within these industries.
Intersegmental sales are made using prices determined on an arms length basis.
Sector assets exclude cash and shortterm deposits and corporate assets that cannot reasonably be allocated to operating segments.
Sector liabilities exclude borrowings retirement benefit obligations and corporate liabilities that cannot reasonably be allocated to operating liabilities.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 71 JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 3 Segmental information continued Year ended 31 December 2017
Support
Specialist
Technical
Offshore
Oil
Tankships
Corporate
Total
Segmental revenue 237.5 156.3 56.6 57.0  507.4 Intersegmental sales 1.2 0.6 0.2   2.0 Underlying operating prot 24.5 21.1 3.8 8.8 2.4 55.8 Acquisition costs 0.7 0.3    1.0 Amortisation of acquired intangibles 1.4 0.3 0.3   2.0 Adjustment to provision for contingent consideration 0.9 0.8    1.7 Operating prot 23.3 21.3 3.5 8.8 2.4 54.5 Net finance expense 5.5 Prot before taxation 49.0 Income tax 8.3 Prot for the year 40.7 Assets and liabilities Segmental assets 233.8 183.6 128.0 32.2 33.9 611.5 Investment in joint ventures 4.1 3.0    7.1 Segmental liabilities 69.0 56.2 13.4 8.1 185.7 332.4 Other segmental information Capital expenditure 15.7 2.8 2.0 2.4 0.3 23.2 Depreciation and amortisation 9.9 4.0 9.6 3.3 0.6 27.4 Year ended 31 December 2016
Support
Specialist
Technical
Offshore
Oil
Tankships
Corporate
Total
Segmental revenue 203.9 152.7 55.5 55.5  467.6 Intersegmental sales 0.3 0.9 0.4   1.6 Underlying operating prot 21.0 19.9 4.2 8.2 2.5 50.8 Contract cessation costs 2.3     2.3 Acquisition costs 0.2 0.3 0.2   0.7 Adjustment to provision for contingent consideration 2.8 0.5    3.3 Amortisation of acquired intangibles 0.4 0.8    1.2 Operating prot 20.9 19.3 4.0 8.2 2.5 49.9 Net finance expense 5.0 Prot before taxation 44.9 Income tax 6.8 Prot for the year 38.1 Assets and liabilities Segmental assets 208.6 141.8 133.6 33.4 31.7 549.1 Investment in joint ventures 3.7 2.7    6.4 Segmental liabilities 48.4 60.3 8.4 7.2 172.9 297.2 Other segmental information Capital expenditure 4.6 2.1 5.6 1.4 0.2 13.9 Depreciation and amortisation 7.4 4.0 11.0 3.2 0.2 25.8 72 JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 3 Segmental information continued Geographic information Geographical revenue is determined by the location in which the product or service is provided.
Where customers receive the product or service in one geographical location for use or shipment to another it is not practicable for the Group to identify this and the revenue is attributed to the location of the initial shipment.
The geographical allocation of segmental assets and liabilities is determined by the location of the attributable business unit.
United Kingdom Rest of Europe Middle East Africa and Americas Asia Pacific Total
Intersegmental sales 2.0 1.5  0.1     2.0 1.6 Investment in joint ventures 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 6.9 6.2 7.1 6.4 4 Revenue and operating charges Revenue disclosed in the income statement comprises of goods and services of 388.8m 2016 335.8m rental income of 34.9m 2016 38.7m and construction contract income of 81.7m 2016 91.5m.
Operating charges reected within operating prot include Research and development costs 0.7 0.4 Net foreign currency losses 1.1 2.3 Cost of inventories recognised as an expense 82.6 96.7 Operating lease rentals property 5.4 5.9 ships 7.1 7.9 other 0.5 0.6 hire of vessels  2.5 Auditors remuneration comprises the following Audit of the financial statements of the parent 0.1 0.2 Local statutory audits of subsidiaries 0.6 0.5 Taxation services  0.1 Total fees payable to Group auditor 0.7 0.8 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 73 JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 5 Separately disclosed items In order for a better understanding of the underlying performance of the Group certain items are disclosed separately as set out in note 2.
Separately disclosed items are as follows Administrative expenses Contract cessation costs in Angola  2.3 Acquisition related income and expense Costs incurred in acquiring businesses 1.0 0.7 Amortisation of acquired intangibles 2.0 1.2 Adjustment to provision for contingent consideration Separately disclosed items before taxation 1.3 0.9 Tax on separately disclosed items The adjustment to the provision for contingent consideration is based on the most recent business forecasts and relates to businesses acquired in 2013 and 2015.
6 Group employee costs a Staff costs including Directors remuneration were as follows Wages and salaries 110.6 104.3 Social security costs 9.6 9.4 Pension costs 3.7 3.8 Share based compensation 0.9 1.1 The monthly average number of persons including Executive Directors employed by the Group was
Number
Technical and administrative 2460 2480 Seafarers 264 275 2724 2755 The Directors remuneration and their interest in shares of the Company are set out in the Directors remuneration report on pages 40 to 53.
The amount charged against operating profit in the year in respect of Director shortterm remuneration was 1.4m 2016 1.3m in respect of emoluments and 0.1m 2016 0.1m in respect of pension contributions to defined contribution schemes.
The charge for share based payments in respect of Directors was 0.6m 2016 0.5m and aggregate gains under the exercise of options was 0.2m 2016 0.2m.
Shortterm employee benefits 2.3 2.1 Share based payments 0.6 0.6 Key management personnel include the Board of Directors of the Company and other senior members of the management team.
7 Net finance expense Finance income Interest receivable on shortterm deposits 0.4 0.2 Finance expense Bank loans and overdrafts 4.4 4.0 Interest element of cash flow hedges 0.5 Net interest on pension obligations 0.7 1.0 Unwind of discount on contingent consideration 0.3 0.2 Net finance expense 5.5 5.0 74 JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 8 Taxation a The tax charge is based on profit for the year and comprises Current tax UK corporation tax 3.1 4.7 Overseas tax 6.8 4.7 Adjustment in respect of prior years UK corporation tax 0.2 0.3 Overseas tax 0.8 0.3 Total current tax 9.3 8.8 Deferred tax Origination and reversal of temporary differences UK corporation tax 0.5 0.8 Overseas tax 0.5 1.2 Total taxation on profit for the year 8.3 6.8 The total tax charge in the income statement includes a further 0.2m 2016 0.2m which is stated within the share of posttax results of joint ventures.
Current tax Current tax on foreign exchange losses on internal loans 0.5 0.1 Current tax on contributions to defined benefit pension schemes 0.8 1.1 Current tax relating to derivatives 0.1 Current tax relating to share based payments 0.1 0.1 Deferred tax Deferred tax on actuarial loss on defined benefit pension schemes 1.0 1.1 Deferred tax relating to derivatives 1.0 0.4 Deferred tax relating to share based payments 0.1 0.1 c Reconciliation of effective tax rate The Group falls under the UK tonnage tax regime on its ship owning and operating activities and a charge is based on the net tonnage of vessels operated.
Profits for these activities are not subject to corporation tax.
The tax on the Groups profit before tax differs from the theoretical amount that would arise using the rate applicable under UK corporation tax rules as follows Profit before tax 49.0 44.9 Tax arising from interests in joint ventures 0.2 0.2 Tax on profit at UK statutory tax rate of 19.25% 2016 20% 9.5 9.0 Tonnage tax relief on vessel activities 1.0 1.0 Expenses not deductible for tax purposes 0.2 0.4 Over provision in previous years Current tax 0.6 0.7 Deferred tax  0.2 Higher tax rates on overseas income 0.8 0.4 Research and development relief 0.3 0.2 Nontaxable income 0.3 1.0 Impact of change of rate 0.1 0.7 Losses not recognised 0.8 0.5 Other 0.7 0.5 The effective rate on profit before income tax from continuing operations is 16.9% 2016 15.1%.
The effective income tax rate on the underlying profit before tax is 17.2% 2016 15.4%.
Over provision in previous years arose due to the timing in which certain transactions have been accounted for rather than any correction.
At 31 December 2017 the Group had unrecognised tax losses of 10.2m 2016 8.4m.
A deferred tax asset has not been recognised in respect of these losses due to the uncertainty relating to their future recovery.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 75 JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 9 Deferred tax Deferred tax at 31 December relates to the following Group Company Deferred tax assets Retirement benefits 2.8 3.6 1.9 2.5 Share based payments 0.9 1.0 0.9 1.0 Derivative financial instruments  0.7  0.6 Losses carried forward 3.1 2.5 Temporary differences 1.2 1.0 0.4 0.3 Deferred tax liabilities Property plant and equipment 2.7 3.0 0.1 Intangible assets 4.0 3.0 Derivative financial instruments 0.4  0.5 0.1 Net deferred income tax assets 0.9 2.8 2.8 4.3 Deferred tax assets and liabilities included in the consolidated balance sheet have been offset where appropriate when they arise in the same tax jurisdiction.
The gross movement on the deferred income tax account is as follows Group Company Balance at 1 January 2.8 3.0 4.3 4.3 Charged to comprehensive income 2.0 0.7 1.7 0.1 Charged to equity 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 Credited to income statement 1.0 2.0 0.3 Transfer from current taxation 0.4 1.9 Exchange adjustments 0.1 0.4 Acquisitions 1.1 0.1 Balance at 31 December 0.9 2.8 2.8 4.3 At 31 December 2017 the Group has no recognised deferred income tax liability 2016 nil in respect of taxes that would be payable on the unremitted earnings of certain of the Companys subsidiaries.
No deferred income tax liability has been recognised in respect of this temporary timing difference due to the foreign profits exemption the availability of double taxation relief and the ability to control the remittance of earnings.
Deferred tax credited to the income statement in the year ended 31 December 2017 relates to the following The gross movement on the deferred income tax account is as follows Group Deferred tax assets 0.1 1.4 Deferred tax liabilities Property plant and equipment 0.5 0.5 Intangible assets 0.2 0.3 Other items 0.2 2.1 Deferred income tax credit 1.0 0.1 10 Earnings per share Basic earnings per share is calculated by dividing the profit attributable to equity holders of the Company by the weighted average number of ordinary shares in issue during the year after excluding 27620 2016 45368 ordinary shares held by the James Fisher and Sons plc Employee Share Ownership Trust ESOT as treasury shares.
Diluted earnings per share are calculated by dividing the net profit attributable to ordinary equity holders of the Company by the weighted average number of ordinary shares that would be issued on conversion of all the dilutive potential ordinary shares into ordinary shares.
At 31 December 2017 105840 options 2016 112108 were excluded from the diluted weighted average number of ordinary shares calculation as their effect would be antidilutive.
The average market value of the Companys shares for the purposes of calculating the dilutive effect of share options was based on quoted market prices for the period during which the options were outstanding.
JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 10 Earnings per share continued Weighted average number of shares Number of shares Number of shares Basic weighted average number of shares 50163144 50096089 Potential exercise of share based payment schemes 391640 387067 Diluted weighted average number of shares 50554784 50483156 Underlying earnings per share To provide a better understanding of the underlying performance of the Group underlying earnings per share on continuing activities is reported as an alternative performance measure note 2.
Underlying profit is as follows Profit attributable to owners of the Company 40.2 39.7
Separately disclosed items 1.3 0.9 Noncontrolling interest in separately disclosed items  1.8 Tax on separately disclosed items 0.4 0.3 Underlying profit attributable to owners of the Company 41.1 38.5 Earnings per share pence pence Basic earnings per share 80.1 79.4 Diluted earnings per share 79.5 78.7 Underlying basic earnings per share 82.0 76.9 Underlying diluted earnings per share 81.4 76.3 11 Dividends paid and proposed pence per share pence per share Declared and paid during the year Equity dividends on ordinary shares 2016 final dividend 17.60 16.00 8.8 8.0 2017 interim dividend 9.40 8.55 4.7 4.3 A final dividend in respect of the year ended 31 December 2017 of 19.30p per share 2016 17.60p is proposed.
12 Goodwill
Marine
Support
Specialist
Technical
Offshore Oil
Total
At 1 January 2016 55.5 34.5 40.1 10.3 140.4 Acquisitions 6.1 6.8 4.8  17.7 Exchange differences 4.6 0.4 1.9  6.9 At 31 December 2016 66.2 41.7 46.8 10.3 165.0 Acquisitions 15.6    15.6 Transfer 1.3  4.3  5.6 Exchange differences 0.3  0.1  0.4 At 31 December 2017 80.2 41.7 42.4 10.3 174.6 Impairment of goodwill Goodwill acquired through business combinations has been allocated for impairment testing purposes to cash generating units CGUs of which there are 13 in total.
The recoverable amount of these units has been assessed based on value in use calculations using cash projections based on 3 year plans approved by the Board together with projections derived from those plans for the following 2 years.
A terminal value of cash flows beyond that date has been calculated at a growth rate in line with managements longterm expectations for the relevant market.
The key assumptions used in the value in use calculations include gross margin discount rate inflation of overheads and payroll and growth rates.
For presentation purposes the CGUs are grouped into the appropriate division.
Growth estimates are based on the levels achieved in the current and historic periods adjusted for management expectations of the impact of management actions and the future development of the relevant market.
Shortterm growth rates for turnover are based on the 3 year plan.
These growth rates vary depending on the market conditions in which the CGU operates.
Direct costs are expected to increase in line with turnover.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 77 JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 12 Goodwill continued Discount rates applied to cash projections reflect managements estimate of the return required from the business to reflect the cost of funds plus an appropriate risk premium.
This has been determined with reference to the CGUs weighted average cost of capital WACC adjusted for risks specific to each CGUs cash flows.
The range of pretax discount rates used was 6.1% to 7.1% 2016 7.0% to 7.5%.
Effective tax rates of between nil% and 30% 2016 16.5% depending on which jurisdiction the operations are forecast to take place in have been assumed as estimated longterm rates.
Based on the value in use calculations set out above no impairment of the goodwill of the CGUs was identified.
Sensitivity to impairment The Directors have carried out sensitivity analysis to determine the impact on the carrying value of goodwill of a change in discount rate revenue growth and terminal value growth and identified that movements of 1% would not give rise to an impairment to goodwill in any of the CGUs.
13 Other intangible assets
Development costs
Customer relationships
Cost
At 1 January 2016 11.7 5.0 6.8 23.5 Additions 2.6 0.1  2.7 Disposals 0.1   0.1 Exchange differences   0.4 0.4 At 31 December 2016 14.2 5.1 7.2 26.5 Additions 4.2  4.1 8.3 Transfer  2.7 2.9 5.6 At 31 December 2017 18.4 7.8 14.2 40.4
At 1 January 2016 3.2 0.6 3.6 7.4 Charge for the period 1.8 0.4 1.2 3.4 Exchange differences   0.2 0.2 At 31 December 2016 5.0 1.0 5.0 11.0 Charge for the period 2.3 0.5 2.0 4.8 At 31 December 2017 7.3 1.5 7.0 15.8 Net book value at 31 December 2017 11.1 6.3 7.2 24.6 Net book value at 1 January 2017 9.2 4.1 2.2 15.5 Net book value at 1 January 2016 8.5 4.4 3.2 16.1 Customer relationships relate to items acquired through business combinations which are amortised over their estimated useful economic life.
Development costs relate to new products developed by the Group and intellectual property represents amounts purchased or acquired relating to technology in the Groups activities.
Based on an assessment of value in use there are no indications that any impairment of these assets has arisen during the period.
Company
The Company has no intangible assets.
JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 14 Property plant and equipment
Vessels
Assets under construction
Plant and equipment
Cost
At 1 January 2016 72.8 4.1 28.7 143.1 248.7 Additions 1.9 4.2 0.8 7.0 13.9 Reclassifications 0.2 6.5 1.6 6.2 1.7 Acquisitions   4.5 4.0 8.5 Disposals 0.8  0.5 3.4 4.7 Exchange differences 2.3 0.3 1.0 11.2 14.8 At 31 December 2016 76.4 2.1 32.9 168.1 279.5 Additions 4.6 8.6 1.1 8.9 23.2 Transfer    2.3 2.3 Reclassifications 0.7 1.6 0.7 1.6 Acquisitions    1.7 1.7 Disposals 0.5 0.1  3.1 3.7 Exchange differences 0.5 0.1 0.3 2.5 3.4 At 31 December 2017 80.7 8.9 33.0 177.0 299.6 Depreciation and impairment At 1 January 2016 47.2  5.7 68.2 121.1 Provided during the year 4.6  1.3 16.6 22.5 Disposals 0.8  0.1 2.7 3.6 Exchange differences 1.2  0.3 7.0 8.5 At 31 December 2016 52.2  7.2 89.1 148.5 Provided during the year 4.9  1.6 16.2 22.7 Reclassifications 0.3  0.1 0.4 Disposals 0.4  0.1 1.7 2.2 Exchange differences 0.3   1.6 1.9 At 31 December 2017 56.7  8.8 101.6 167.1 Net book value at 31 December 2017 24.0 8.9 24.2 75.4 132.5 Net book value at 1 January 2017 24.2 2.1 25.7 79.0 131.0 Net book value at 1 January 2016 25.6 4.1 23.0 74.9 127.6 Property plant and equipment held under leasing arrangements The carrying value of plant and equipment held under finance leases and hire purchase contracts at 31 December 2017 was 0.5m 2016 0.3m.
Included in vessels are assets with a cost of 6.7m 2016 6.6m and accumulated depreciation of 6.3m 2016 6.1m which relate to assets held under operating leases.
Included in property plant and equipment is aggregate interest capitalised of 0.8m 2016 0.9m.
Company
Vessels
Freehold and leasehold property Plant and equipment
Cost
At 1 January 2016 9.5 2.1 2.6 14.2 Additions   0.1 0.1 Disposals 0.3   0.3 At 31 December 2016 9.2 2.1 2.7 14.0 Additions 0.6 0.2 0.1 0.9 At 31 December 2017 9.8 2.3 2.8 14.9
At 1 January 2016 5.6 1.1 1.1 7.8 Provided during the year 0.4 0.1 0.4 0.9 Disposals 0.3   0.3 At 31 December 2016 5.7 1.2 1.5 8.4 Provided during the year 0.6 0.1 0.5 1.2 At 31 December 2017 6.3 1.3 2.0 9.6 Net book value at 31 December 2017 3.5 1.0 0.8 5.3 Net book value at 1 January 2017 3.5 0.9 1.2 5.6 Net book value at 1 January 2016 3.9 1.0 1.5 6.4 Included in property plant and equipment is aggregate interest capitalised of 0.1m 2016 0.1m.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 79 JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 15 Investment in subsidiaries associates and joint arrangements Details of the Groups joint ventures and associated undertakings are set out on pages 107 to 109.
The Groups share of the assets liabilities and trading results of these joint venture entities at 31 December 2017 which are accounted for under the equity accounting method are as follows Current assets 25.5 22.2 Noncurrent assets 19.0 21.3 Current liabilities 16.8 18.1 Noncurrent liabilities 22.6 21.0 Loans to associate 2.0 2.0 Revenue 11.5 10.5 Cost of sales 9.5 6.2 Administrative expenses 0.6 1.9 Profit from operations 2.6 2.4 Net finance expense 0.7 0.8 Profit before income tax 1.9 1.6 Taxation 0.2 0.2 Profit after tax 1.7 1.4 Segmental analysis of profit after tax Marine Support 1.1 0.8 Specialist Technical 0.6 0.6 Movement on investment in joint ventures At 1 January 6.4 6.3 Acquisitions 0.6 Disposals  0.9 Profit for the period 1.7 1.4 Dividends received 1.4 0.7 Share of fair value losses on cash flow hedges 0.2 0.1 Exchange adjustments  0.4 At 31 December 7.1 6.4 There are no capital commitments or contingent liabilities in respect of the Groups interests in joint ventures.
16 Financial assets Available for sale
At 1 January 1.4 1.5 Additions 0.9 Impairment  0.1 At 31 December 2.3 1.4
At 1 January 1.4 1.4 Additions 0.9 At 31 December 2.3 1.4 Available for sale financial assets include a 17.2% 2016 17.2% equity interest in ordinary shares in SEML De Cooperation Transmanche an unlisted company incorporated in France whose main activity is a port and ferry operator.
In addition the Group has a 50% interest in JFD Domeyer GmbH a company incorporated in Germany which provides inservice support and aftermarket services to the German navy.
The Group does not actively participate in the operation and control of that business.
During the year the Group acquired an option to subscribe for ordinary shares in Britannias Gold Limited at a cost of 0.9m and in exchange for marine services supplied.
The investments above are in unquoted entities which are held at initial cost and are subject to an annual impairment review.
JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 16 Financial assets continued
Company
Subsidiary undertakings
Loans
Total
Cost
At 1 January 2016 159.9 143.1 303.0 Additions 6.8 75.9 82.7 Repayments  22.3 22.3 At 31 December 2016 166.7 196.7 363.4 Additions 0.2 100.2 100.4 Disposal 1.8  1.8 Recapitalisations 7.4 7.4 Repayments 0.2 52.2 52.4 At 31 December 2017 172.3 237.3 409.6 Amount provided At 1 January 2016 0.4  0.4 At 31 December 2016 0.4  0.4 At 31 December 2017 0.4  0.4 Net book value at 31 December 2017 171.9 237.3 409.2 Net book value at 31 December 2016 166.3 196.7 363.0 A list of subsidiary undertakings is included on pages 107 to 109.
17 Inventories
Work in progress 12.1 15.1 Raw materials and consumables 6.6 5.9 Finished goods 33.4 33.1 Inventories are stated net of impairment provisions of 3.1m 2016 4.2m.
During the year nil 2016 nil was charged to the income statement to write down inventories to net realisable value.
18 Trade and other receivables Group Company Trade receivables 83.9 70.4 Amounts owed by group undertakings   1.3 1.6 Amounts owed by joint venture undertakings 4.3 2.3 Other nontrade receivables 13.0 9.9 3.9 5.0 Taxation and social security   0.4 0.4 Prepayments 10.3 15.3 0.6 0.9 Accrued income 90.4 59.5 Of the above other nontrade receivables of 1.1m 2016 0.2m are expected to be recovered in more than one year.
At 31 December 2017 the aggregate recognised profits less recognised losses to date under open construction contracts amounted to 51.6m 2016 40.5m.
Retentions relating to construction contracts included in trade receivables are 0.3m 2016 0.3m.
Included within the trade and other receivables balances is 8.3m 2016 15.0m in relation to construction contracts in progress.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 81 JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 19 Trade and other payables Group Company Trade payables 48.4 32.6 0.4 1.6 Amounts owed to group undertakings   5.9 15.0 Amounts owed to joint venture undertakings 0.2 0.2 Taxation and social security 4.5 4.5 0.2 0.2 Other payables 16.0 20.2 1.2 6.1 Accruals and deferred income 20 Provisions for other liabilities and charges
Warranty
Total
At 1 January 2016 8.1 0.6 8.7 Acquisitions 1.0  1.0 Creditedcharged to the income statement 2.5 0.8 1.7 Unwinding of discount At 1 January 2017 6.8 1.4 8.2 Acquisitions 8.8  8.8 Paid 1.5  1.5 Creditedcharged to the income statement 1.6 2.1 0.5 Unwinding of discount At 31 December 2017 12.8 3.5 16.3 Analysis of total provisions Current liability 4.8 3.2 Noncurrent liability Total 16.3 8.2 Contingent consideration Contingent consideration are further potential amounts payable for acquisitions made by the Group which is contingent on achieving profit targets in future years.
Warranty
This provision is based on managements assessment of the previous history of claims and expenses incurred and an estimate of future obligations on goods supplied where a warranty has been provided to the customer.
21 Retirement benefit obligations The Group and Company defined benefit pension scheme obligations relate to the James Fisher and Sons plc Pension Fund for Shore Staff Shore staff the Merchant Navy Officers Pension Fund MNOPF and the Merchant Navy Ratings Pension Fund MNRPF.
The financial statements incorporate the latest full actuarial valuations of the schemes which have been updated to 31 December 2017 by qualified actuaries using assumptions set out in the table below.
The Groups obligations in respect of its pension schemes at 31 December 2017 were as follows Group Company Shore staff 5.8 10.1 5.8 10.1
JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 21 Retirement benefit obligations continued Shore staff The assets of this scheme are held in a separate trusteeadministered account and do not include any of the Groups assets.
The scheme was closed to new members in October 2001 and closed to future accrual on 31 December 2010.
The most recent actuarial valuation was as at 31 July 2016.
It is valued every three years following which deficit contributions and the repayment period are subject to agreement between the Company and the Trustees.
Estimated contributions to this scheme in 2018 are 1.6m.
MNOPF
The MNOPF is an industrywide pension scheme which is accounted for as a defined benefit scheme.
It is valued every three years and deficits have typically been funded over a ten year period.
The most recent triennial actuarial valuation of the scheme was as at 31 March 2015 and no additional deficit funding was requested by the Trustees.
The respective share of the Group and Company in the net retirement benefit obligation of the MNOPF are 3.2% 2016 3.0% and 1.6% 2016 1.4% respectively.
Disclosures relating to this scheme are based on these allocations.
The liability recognised represents the discounted value of committed cash flows.
Information supplied by the trustees of the MNOPF has been reviewed by the Companys actuaries.
The principal assumption in the review is the discount rate on the schemes liabilities which was 2.50% 2016 2.75%.
The disclosures below relate to the Groups share of the assets and liabilities within the MNOPF.
Estimated contributions to this scheme in 2018 are 1.9m.
MNRPF
The MNRPF is an industrywide pension scheme.
The most recent actuarial valuation of the MNRPF was at 31 March 2017 and the Group and Company have recognised a liability based on the discounted value of expected cash contributions.
The share of the Group and the Company in the net retirement benefit obligation of the MNRPF are 2.46% and 0.89% respectively.
The principal assumption in the MNRPF valuation is the discount rate on the schemes liabilities which was 2.50% 2016 2.75%.
Subject to any changes arising out of the actuarial valuation as at 31 March 2017 estimated contributions to this scheme in 2018 are Actuarial assumptions The schemes assets are stated at their market values on the respective balance sheet dates.
The overall expected rates of return on assets reflect the riskfree rate of return plus an appropriate risk premium based on the nature of the relevant asset category.
The principal assumptions used in updating the latest valuations for each of the schemes were 2017 2016 Inflation % 3.15 3.25 Rate of increase of pensions in payment  Shore staff % 3.05 3.10 Discount rate for scheme liabilities % 2.50 2.75 Expected rates of return on assets % 2.50 2.75 Postretirement mortality years Shore staff scheme Current pensioner at 65 male 20.9 21.1 Current pensioner at 65 female 22.7 23.1 Future pensioner at 65 male 21.9 22.7 Future pensioner at 65 female 24.0 24.9 The postretirement mortality assumptions allow for the expected increase in longevity.
The current disclosures above relate to assumptions based on longevity in years following retirement at the balance sheet date with future being that relating to a member who is currently 45 years old.
Sensitivities
The key sensitivities on the major schemes may be summarised as follows Shore staff scheme Key measure Change in assumption Change in deficit Discount rate Decrease of 0.25% Increase by 3.2% Rate of inflation Increase by 0.25% Increase by 1.6% Rate of mortality Increase in life expectancy of 1 year Increase by 4.2%
Key measure Change in assumption Change in deficit Discount rate Decrease of 0.25% Increase by 0.7%
Key measure Change in assumption Change in deficit Discount rate Decrease of 0.25% Increase by 0.2% NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 83 JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 21 Retirement benefit obligations continued In determining the discount rate assumptions have been made in relation to corporate bond yields and the expected term of liabilities.
As noted above a change in discount rate applied has a significant impact on the value of liabilities.
Group Company As at 31 December 2017
MNOPF
MNRPF
Total
Shore staff
MNRPF
Total
Equities 4.7  1.9 6.6 4.7  0.6 5.3 Giltscorporate bonds  57.4 25.3 82.7  29.0 8.9 37.9 Other investments 51.0 43.7 1.1 95.8 51.0 22.1 0.4 73.5 Cash or liquid assets 0.4 7.7 0.9 9.0 0.4 3.9 0.3 4.6 Fair value of scheme assets 56.1 108.8 29.2 194.1 56.1 55.0 10.2 121.3 Present value of scheme liabilities 61.9 108.8 32.5 203.2 61.9 60.0 13.1 135.0 Effect of asset ceiling  6.8 3.9 10.7 Net pension liabilities recognised in the balance sheet 5.8 6.8 7.2 19.8 5.8 5.0 2.9 13.7 Group Company As at 31 December 2016
MNOPF
MNRPF
Total
Shore staff
MNRPF
Total
Giltscorporate bonds  44.0 21.0 65.0  20.7 7.4 28.1 Other investments 49.2 45.6 2.4 97.2 49.2 21.5 0.8 71.5 Cash or liquid assets 0.1 12.8 1.8 14.7 0.1 6.0 0.6 6.7 Fair value of scheme assets 54.2 104.0 27.8 186.0 54.2 49.0 9.7 112.9 Present value of scheme liabilities 64.3 112.5 36.0 212.8 64.3 55.3 12.9 132.5 Net pension liabilities recognised in the balance sheet 10.1 8.5 8.2 26.8 10.1 6.3 3.2 19.6 The Merchant Navy Ratings Pension Fund MNRPF and the Merchant Navy Officers Pension Fund MNOPF contributions paid by the Group are not refundable in any circumstance and the balance sheet liability reflects an adjustment for any agreed deficit recovery contributions in excess of deficit determined using the Groups assumptions.
Other investments in the shore staff scheme comprise diversified growth funds liability driven investments absolute return and private market funds.
Group Company Year ended 31 December 2017
MNOPF
MNRPF
Total
Shore staff
MNRPF
Total
Expenses 0.1   0.1 0.1   0.1 Interest cost on benefit obligation 1.7 3.1 1.0 5.8 1.7 1.5 0.4 3.6 Return on scheme assets 1.4 2.9 0.8 5.1 1.4 1.3 0.3 3.0 The actual return on the Shore staff plan assets is 3.9m.
Group Company Year ended 31 December 2016
MNOPF
MNRPF
Total
Shore staff
MNRPF
Total
Expenses 0.2   0.2 0.2   0.2 Interest cost on benefit obligation 2.2 3.7 1.1 7.0 2.2 1.9 0.4 4.5 Return on scheme assets 1.9 3.4 0.8 6.1 1.9 1.6 0.3 3.8 The actual return on the Shore staff plan assets is 8.4m.
JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 21 Retirement benefit obligations continued c Movements in the net dened benet liability Year ended 31 December 2017 Group Company
MNOPF
MNRPF
Total
Shore staff
MNRPF
Total
As at 1 January 2017 10.1 8.5 8.2 26.8 10.1 6.3 3.2 19.6 Expense recognised in the income statement 0.4 0.2 0.2 0.8 0.4 0.2 0.1 0.7 Contributions paid to scheme 1.5 1.9 1.2 4.6 1.5 1.5 0.4 3.4 Remeasurement gains and losses 3.2   3.2 3.2   3.2 Year ended 31 December 2016 Group Company
MNOPF
MNRPF
Total
Shore staff
MNRPF
Total
As at 1 January 2016 8.6 9.7 8.6 26.9 8.6 7.4 3.1 19.1 Expense recognised in the income statement 0.5 0.3 0.3 1.1 0.5 0.3 0.1 0.9 Contributions paid to scheme 1.6 1.9 0.7 4.2 1.6 1.7  3.3 Remeasurement gains and losses 2.6 0.4  3.0 2.6 0.3  2.9 d Changes in the present value of the dened benet obligation are analysed as follows Year ended 31 December 2017 Group Company
MNOPF
MNRPF
Total
Shore staff
MNRPF
Total
Current service cost Expenses 0.1   0.1 0.1   0.1 Interest cost 1.7 3.1 1.0 5.8 1.7 1.5 0.4 3.6 Remeasurement gainloss Actuarial gainloss arising from scheme experience 1.4 1.8 0.6 1.0 1.4 4.7 0.2 3.5 Actuarial gain arising from changes in demographic assumptions 1.0   1.0 1.0   1.0 Actuarial loss arising from changes in financial assumptions 1.8   1.8 1.8   1.8 Net benefits paid out 3.5 1.9 1.2 6.6 3.5 1.5 0.5 5.5 Group Company Year ended 31 December 2016
MNOPF
MNRPF
Total
Shore staff
MNRPF
Total
Expenses 0.2   0.2 0.2   0.2 Interest cost 2.2 3.7 1.2 7.1 2.2 1.9 0.4 4.5 Remeasurement lossgain Actuarial loss arising from scheme experience  17.0 6.2 23.2  8.0 2.2 10.2 Actuarial loss arising from changes in financial assumptions 9.2 0.2  9.4 9.1 0.2  9.3 Net benefits paid out 6.7 2.0 0.7 9.4 6.6 1.7 0.2 8.5 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 85 JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 21 Retirement benefit obligations continued e Changes in the fair value of the plan assets are analysed as follows Group Company Year ended 31 December 2017
MNOPF
MNRPF
Total
Shore staff
MNRPF
Total
Return on scheme assets recorded in interest 1.5 2.9 0.7 5.1 1.5 1.3 0.3 3.1 Remeasurement loss Return on plan assets excluding interest income 2.4 1.8 0.7 4.9 2.4 4.7 0.3 7.4 Contributions by employer 1.5 2.0 1.2 4.7 1.5 1.5 0.4 3.4 Net benefits paid out 3.5 1.9 1.2 6.6 3.5 1.5 0.4 5.4 Group Company Year ended 31 December 2016
MNOPF
MNRPF
Total
Shore staff
MNRPF
Total
Return on scheme assets recorded in interest 1.9 3.4 0.8 6.1 1.9 1.6 0.3 3.8 Remeasurement loss Return on plan assets excluding interest income 6.5 16.7 6.3 29.5 6.5 8.0 2.2 16.7 Contributions by employer 1.7 2.0 0.7 4.4 1.7 1.6  3.3 Net benefits paid out 6.7 2.0 0.7 9.4 6.7 1.6 0.3 8.6 f History of experience gains and losses Shore staff Fair value of scheme assets 56.1 54.2 50.8 53.8 49.3 Defined benefit obligation 61.9 64.3 59.4 64.3 59.1 Deficit in scheme 5.8 10.1 8.6 10.5 9.8 Remeasurement gainloss Return on plan assets excluding interest income 2.4 6.5 1.3 3.5 2.0 Remeasurement gainloss on scheme liabilities 1.4  0.1 0.4
Group
Fair value of scheme assets 108.8 104.0 83.9 80.1 76.8 Defined benefit obligation 115.6 112.5 93.6 91.4 90.3 Deficit in scheme 6.8 8.5 9.7 11.3 13.5
Company
Fair value of scheme assets 55.0 49.0 39.5 37.7 36.1 Defined benefit obligation 60.0 55.3 46.9 46.3 45.9 Deficit in scheme 5.0 6.3 7.4 8.6 9.8
Group
Fair value of scheme assets 29.2 27.8 20.7 Defined benefit obligation 36.4 36.0 29.3 Deficit in scheme 7.2 8.2 8.6 86 JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 21 Retirement benefit obligations continued
Company
Fair value of scheme assets 10.2 9.7 7.5 Defined benefit obligation 13.1 12.9 10.6 Deficit in scheme 2.9 3.2 3.1 The cumulative amount of actuarial gains and losses relating to all schemes recognised since 1 January 2004 in the Groups and Companys statement of comprehensive income is a loss of 50.3m 2016 53.5m.
The Group operates a number of defined contribution schemes.
The pension charge for the year for these arrangements is equal to the contributions paid and was 3.7m 2016 3.8m.
During the year the Company contributed 0.3m 2016 0.4m into defined contribution schemes.
22 Share based payments The Company operates a LongTerm Incentive Plan LTIP in respect of Executive Directors and certain senior employees and details of these are set out in the Directors remuneration report on pages 40 to 53.
The Company also operates a Sharesave scheme Sharesave for eligible employees which is HM Revenue and Customs approved.
LongTerm Incentive Plan LTIP The Group recognises an expense for these benefits provided to employees and the amount charged in respect of equitysettled share based payments was 0.9m Company 0.6m Group and Company 2016 1.1m.
The Company has granted conditional awards in the form of options over shares or conditional rights to have shares transferred to certain employees under the LTIP scheme over 377100 2016 358625 ordinary shares of 25p each.
The weighted average exercise prices WAEP and movements in share options during the year are as follows nil options
Number WAEP Number WAEP
Number
Outstanding at 1 January 678122 7.09 792245 7.03 358625 321598 Granted during the year 40684 15.67 68632 12.43 105840 148737 Forfeited during the year 61940 13.73 93195 10.96 48883 4331 Exercised 92214 6.57 89560 6.66 38482 107379 Outstanding at 31 December 564652 7.07 678122 7.09 377100 358625 Exercisable at 31 December 420132 5.09 467210 4.74 The weighted average share price at the date of exercise for the options exercised was 16.69 2016 12.80.
For the share options outstanding at 31 December 2017 the weighted average remaining contractual life is 2 years and 7 months 2016 3 years and 4 months.
The weighted average fair value of options granted during the year was 10.94 2016 8.83.
The range of exercise prices for options outstanding at the end of the year was 3.54  15.67 2016 3.54  14.89.
Company
Number WAEP Number WAEP
Number
Outstanding at 1 January 528922 5.84 653571 6.21 230017 192094 Granted during the year 6563 15.67 3503 12.43 69238 96463 Forfeited during the year 37004 14.76 63918 10.40 19058 Exercised 66039 4.94 64234 5.46 30384 58540 Outstanding at 31 December 432442 5.35 528922 5.84 249813 230017 Exercisable at 31 December 420303 5.09 467040 4.74 The weighted average share price at the date of exercise for the options exercised was 16.64 2016 12.57.
For the share options outstanding at 31 December 2017 the weighted average remaining contractual life is 2 years and 11 months 2016 3 years and 9 months.
The weighted average fair value of options granted during the year was 12.85 2016 11.34.
The range of exercise prices for options outstanding at the end of the year was 3.54  15.67 2016 3.54  14.89.
The fair value of share based payments has been estimated using the BlackScholes model for the Sharesave and the earnings per share EPS element of the LTIP .
The fair value of share based payments relating to the total shareholder return TSR element of the LTIP has been estimated using the Monte Carlo model.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 87 JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 22 Share based payments continued The inputs to the models used to determine the valuations fell within the following ranges 2017 2016 Dividend yield % 1.6% 1.8% Expected life of option years 3  7.22 3  7.22 Share price at date of grant 15.94  16.67 12.54 Expected share price volatility % 30% 30% Riskfree interest rate % 0.17% 0.54%  0.89%
All employees subject to the discretion of the Remuneration Committee may apply for share options under an employee Save As You Earn plan which may from time to time be offered by the Company.
An individuals participation is limited so that the aggregate price payable for shares under option at any time does not exceed the statutory limit.
Options granted under the plans will normally be exercisable if the employee remains in employment and any other conditions set by the Remuneration Committee have been satisfied.
Options are normally exercisable at the end of the related savings contract but early exercise is permitted in certain limited circumstances.
The performance period will not normally be less than three and a half years or greater than seven and a half years.
Awards were made under this scheme on 12 April 2017.
23 Business combinations Year ended 31 December 2017 On 22 March 2017 the Group acquired the entire share capital of Rotos 360 Limited Rotos 360 for an initial consideration of 1.5m in cash with potential further consideration of up to 5.0m subject to profit targets for the three years ending 31 December 2019.
Rotos 360 uses the latest technological innovation to provide solutions to the inspection repair and reconditioning of wind farm rotor blades primarily in the offshore environment and was established in 2013 as part of a UK Government funded research project to reduce the cost of operation and maintenance of offshore wind turbines.
The acquisition which joined the Marine Support division provides the Group with marketleading capability in wind turbine blade repair further broadening its offering in the growing offshore wind farm sector.
On 6 December 2017 the Group acquired the entire share capital of EDS HV Group Limited EDS for an initial consideration of 9.0m in cash with potential further consideration of up to 5.6m subject to profit targets for the two years ending 30 September 2019.
EDS headquartered in Lancashire provides a complete range of high voltage engineering services to the renewables industry covering the design and installation stages of new wind farm construction projects through to the subsequent monitoring and fault management repair and maintenance of the operating assets.
The acquisition which is in the Marine Support division further broadens the Groups offering to the offshore wind farm sector.
As the acquisition of EDS was made in December 2017 the fair values disclosed below will be reassessed prior to the end of the next half year period.
The initial assessment of fair values of the assets and liabilities acquired are set out below
Book value Fair value adjustments
Intangible assets 0.1 2.7 2.8 Property plant and equipment 0.7  0.7 Trade and other receivables 4.1 0.5 3.6 Cash and shortterm deposits 1.0  1.0 Trade and other payables 2.2 0.3 2.5 Interest bearing loans and borrowings 1.0  1.0 Deferred tax 0.1 0.5 0.6 Fair value of net assets acquired 2.6 1.4 4.0 Goodwill 10.2
Cash consideration 9.0 Deferred consideration 5.2 JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 23 Business combinations continued Rotos 360
Fair value adjustments
Intangible assets  1.3 1.3 Property plant and equipment 0.9  0.9 Trade and other payables 0.6 0.2 0.8 Interest bearing loans and borrowings 0.2  0.2 Deferred tax 0.1 0.2 0.3 Fair value of net assets acquired 0.0 0.9 0.9 Goodwill 4.2
Cash consideration 1.5 Contingent consideration 3.6 Other acquisitions
Fair value adjustments
Property plant and equipment 0.2  0.2 Trade and other receivables  1.2 1.2 Interest bearing loans and borrowings 0.1  0.1 Deferred tax  0.2 0.2 Fair value of net assets acquired 0.1 1.0 0.9 Goodwill 1.2 Cash consideration 0.3 The book value of these business combinations has been adjusted for fair value adjustments relating to fixed assets the write down of irrecoverable debtors and amounts capitalised as intangibles.
None of the goodwill is expected to be deductible for income tax purposes.
The fair value adjustments in the Other acquisitions table relate to revisions of estimates made regarding businesses acquired in 2016.
Cashow in respect of business combinations
Rotos 360
Prior period acquisitions
Cash paid 0.2 1.5 0.3 1.6 3.6 Cash and shortterm deposits acquired 1.0    1.0 Acquisition of business net of cash acquired 0.8 1.5 0.3 1.6 2.6 Interest bearing loans and borrowings acquired 1.0 0.2   1.2 Acquisition costs 0.1 0.1 0.5 0.1 0.8 Contribution to Group results The businesses acquired during the period contributed 0.7m to the Groups profit after tax and 7.7m of revenues.
If these businesses had been acquired at the start of the financial year the contribution to Group profit after tax would have been 1.4m with revenue of 15.8m.
24 Loans and borrowings Group Company Noncurrent liabilities Finance leases 0.2 0.1 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 89 JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 24 Loans and borrowings continued Group Company Current liabilities Overdrafts   11.9 18.5 Bank loans 0.2 3.0 Finance leases 0.2 0.1 Bank loans Loans analysed by currency are repayable as follows Year ended 31 December 2017 Group Company Currency GBP USD Total GBP USD Total Due within one year 0.2  0.2 Due between one and two years 39.2  39.2 39.2  39.2 Due between two and five years 106.5 6.4 112.9 106.5 6.4 112.9 Year ended 31 December 2016 Currency GBP
USD Total GBP
USD Total Due within one year 3.0  3.0 Due between two and five years 104.4 19.9 124.3 104.4 19.9 124.3 The interest rates charged during the year ranged from 1.4% to 2.1% 2016 1.4% to 2.2%.
There were no loans secured against the assets of the Group or Company in the current or prior period.
Obligations under finance leases and hire purchase contracts
The Group uses finance leases in respect of certain items of plant and equipment.
The minimum future lease payments due under finance leases and hire purchase contracts are as follows Future minimum payments due Within one year 0.2 0.1 Within two to five years 0.2 0.1 Less finance charges allocated to future periods Present value of minimum lease payments is analysed as follows Within one year 0.2 0.1 Within two to five years 0.2 0.1
The Company does not have any outstanding finance lease commitments.
JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 25 Reconciliation of net debt Net debt comprises interest bearing loans and borrowings less cash and cash equivalents.
Group
1 January
Other
Exchange movement 31 December Cash in hand and at bank 21.8 0.3  1.2 20.3 Debt due after 1 year 124.4 27.8 0.8 0.8 152.2 Debt due within 1 year 3.0 2.8   0.2 Finance leases 0.1 0.1 0.4  0.4 1 January
Other
Exchange movement 31 December Cash in hand and at bank 22.9 3.9  2.8 21.8 Debt due after 1 year 116.6 4.1 0.0 3.7 124.4 Debt due within 1 year  1.7 4.8 0.1 3.0 Finance leases 0.2 0.2 0.1 0.0 0.1 26 Financial instruments Capital management The primary objective of the Groups capital management policy is to maintain a strong credit rating and covenant ratios in order to be able to support the continued growth of its trading businesses and to increase shareholder value.
The Group meets its daytoday working capital requirements through operating cash flows with borrowings in place to fund acquisitions and capital expenditure.
At 31 December 2017 the Group had 71.8m 2016 49.7m of undrawn committed facilities none of which expire within twelve months.
The Group is required under the terms of its loan agreements to maintain covenant ratios in respect of net debt to Ebitda and net interest costs to earnings before interest Ebit.
The Group met its covenant ratios for the year ended 31 December 2017.
The Directors have prepared forecasts of the cash flows for the subsequent eighteenmonth period which indicate that taking into account the factors noted above the Group will meet its covenant requirements for this period.
The total amount that it is able to borrow under existing revolving credit facilities is limited to a maximum of 200m 2016 175m.
The Group manages its capital structure so as to maintain investor supplier and market confidence and to provide returns to shareholders that will support the future development of the business.
Capital is monitored by measuring the gearing ratio which is net debt divided by capital.
Net debt comprises interest bearing loans and borrowings less cash and cash equivalents.
Capital represents net equity attributable to the equity holders of the parent.
Return on capital employed is also monitored.
The Groups dividend policy is based on the expected growth in sustainable income streams after making provision for the retention of capital to invest in growth and acquisitions.
In evaluating growth investment opportunities the Group has a target of a 15% pretax return on the capital invested.
Interest bearing loans and borrowings 152.7 127.5 Less cash and cash equivalents 20.3 21.9 Net debt 132.4 105.6 Equity attributable to the equity holders of the parent 285.0 257.3 Gearing ratio 46.5% 41.0% The Group has exposure to the following financial risks a Credit risk Credit risk is the risk of financial loss to the Group if a customer or counterparty to a financial instrument fails to meet its contractual obligations.
These arise principally from the Groups receivables from customers and from cash balances held with financial institutions.
The carrying amount of financial assets represents the maximum credit exposure.
There are no significant concentrations of credit risk within the Group.
The Groups exposure to credit risk is influenced mainly by the individual characteristics of each customer and the industry and country in which each customer operates.
The Group has a number of large customers including Government agencies in the UK and overseas major oil companies and other multinational corporations.
The ten largest customers of the Group accounted for approximately 20% of Group revenue 2016 24%.
No customer accounted for more than 3% 2016 4% of Group revenue.
New customers are subject to creditworthiness checks and credit limits are subject to approval by senior management.
Goods are sold subject to retention of title clauses so that in the event of nonpayment the Group may have a secured claim.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 91 JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 26 Financial instruments continued The maximum exposure to credit risk at the reporting date was Group Company Available for sale financial assets 2.3 1.4 2.3 1.4 Receivables 186.7 142.0 2.3 6.1 Cash and cash equivalents 20.3 21.8 12.2 7.4 Interest rate swaps used for hedging Assets 3.4 0.9 3.4 0.9 Trade receivables are noninterest bearing and are generally on 30 to 60 days terms.
At 31 December the value of trade debtors outstanding was
2017 2016 gross allowance gross allowance Not past due 48.5  33.9 Past due 39.0 3.6 38.0 1.5 Group Company gross gross gross gross Not yet due 48.5 33.9 Overdue 1 to 30 days 15.2 15.2 Overdue 31 to 60 days 6.8 7.8 Overdue 61 to 90 days 5.5 8.4 Overdue more than 90 days 11.5 6.6 The movement in the provision for impairment of trade receivables is as follows Group Company Balance at 1 January 1.5 1.3 Exchange differences  0.1 Provided in the year 2.8 0.7 Recoveries 0.2 Writeoffs 0.5 0.6 The Group considers that the trade receivables that have not been provided against and are past due by more than 30 days are still collectable based on historic payment behaviour and extensive analysis of underlying customers credit ratings.
Based on historic default rates the Group believes that apart from the amounts included in the table above no impairment allowance is necessary in respect of trade receivables.
Liquidity risk is the risk that the Group will not be able to meet its financial obligations as they fall due.
The Group manages its cash resources and borrowings to ensure that it will have sufficient liquidity to meet its liabilities as they fall due but in a manner designed to maximise the benefit of those resources whilst ensuring the security of investment resources.
The Group forecasts the profile of its cash requirements on a monthly basis and ensures that sufficient facilities are available to meet peak requirements which occur at predictable times in the year.
The Group manages the maturity profile of its borrowings by maintaining a regular dialogue with its lenders and ensuring that it commences the renegotiation of facilities sufficiently early to allow a comprehensive review of its requirements before completion.
The Groups revolving credit facilities extend over several accounting periods and fall due for renewal in different accounting periods ensuring that the Group negotiations with individual lenders follow an orderly process which does not expose the Group to the possibility of a significant reduction in available facilities in any single period.
At 31 December 2017 the Group had 71.8m 2016 49.7m of undrawn committed bank facilities.
JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 26 Financial instruments continued The following are the contractual maturities of financial liabilities including interest payments 31 December 2017
Nonderivative financial liabilities
Contractual cash ows Within 1 year years years Unsecured bank loans 152.3 163.0 4.0 43.0 116.0 Finance lease liabilities 0.4 0.4 0.2 0.2 Trade and other payables 136.5 136.5 136.5 Derivative financial liabilities Interest rate swaps used for hedging 0.7 0.8 0.3 0.1 0.4 Outflow on forward exchange contracts used for hedging 2.3 35.2 35.2 31 December 2016
Nonderivative financial liabilities
Contractual cash flows Within 1 year years years Unsecured bank loans 127.4 133.5 3.0  130.5 Finance lease liabilities 0.1 0.1 0.1 Trade and other payables 104.7 104.7 104.7 Derivative financial liabilities Interest rate swaps used for hedging  0.6 0.3 0.3 Outflow on forward exchange contracts used for hedging 4.7 65.6 55.3 10.3 31 December 2017
Nonderivative financial liabilities
Contractual cash ows
1 year years years Unsecured bank loans 152.1 162.9 3.9 43.0 116.0 Trade and other payables 4.5 4.5 4.5 Derivative financial liabilities Interest rate swaps used for hedging 0.7 0.8 0.3 0.1 0.4 Outflow on forward exchange contracts used for hedging 2.3 35.2 35.2 31 December 2016
Nonderivative financial liabilities
Contractual cash flows
1 year years years Unsecured bank loans 124.3 130.5   130.5 Trade and other payables 3.1 3.1 3.1 Derivative financial liabilities Interest rate swaps used for hedging  0.6 0.3 0.3 Outflow on forward exchange contracts used for hedging 4.7 65.6 55.3 10.3 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 93 JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 26 Financial instruments continued c Foreign exchange risk The Group is exposed to foreign currency risks on sales purchases cash and borrowings denominated in currencies other than Sterling.
These transactional exposures are mainly to movement in the US Dollar and the Euro.
The Group uses forward exchange contracts to hedge its transactional exposures.
Most forward exchange contracts have maturities of less than one year after the balance sheet date.
Forward exchange contracts which qualify as effective cash flow hedges are stated at fair value.
The principal translation exposures relate to the Norwegian Kroner.
The Groups exposure to foreign currency transactional risk in its principal currencies was as follows based on notional amounts 31 December 2017 31 December 2016
EUR
NOK
SGD
AUD
NGN
USD
EUR
NOK
SGD
AUD
NGN
Trade receivables 35.8 3.2 0.1   90.9 25.9 2.0    101.3 Cash at bank and in hand 7.6 2.2 0.3  0.1 533.6 4.2 3.8 0.1 0.2 0.1 1154.9 Unsecured bank loans 8.7         5.3 Gross balance sheet exposure 26.9 2.6 0.6 0.1 0.1 622.0 26.8 2.2 5.5 5.3 0.4 1256.2 Forecast sales 125.0 11.1    215.0 123.4 9.9 Forward exchange contracts 55.6      68.3 Changes in the level of exchange rates will have an impact on consolidated earnings.
The following table shows the impact on earnings of a 5% strengthening in the exchange rate in the Groups key currencies against Sterling.
The obverse movements would be of the same magnitude.
These amounts have been calculated by applying changes in exchange rates to the Groups foreign currency profits and losses and to financial instruments denominated in foreign currency.
2017 2016
Income
Equity
Income
US Dollar 1.8 3.3 1.9 2.4 Norwegian Kroner 0.1 0.1  0.2 Singaporean Dollar 0.5 0.5 0.4 0.6 Australian Dollar 0.3 0.3 0.5 0.1 Nigerian Naira   0.2 d Interest rate risk The Group uses interest rate swaps to convert interest rates on certain borrowings from floating rates to fixed to hedge exposure to fluctuations in interest rates.
The interest rate profile of the Groups financial assets and liabilities are set out in the table below Group Company Fixed rate instruments Financial liabilities 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 Variable rate instruments Financial assets 20.3 21.8 12.2 7.4 Financial liabilities 152.3 127.4 164.0 142.8 JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 26 Financial instruments continued Where hedging criteria are met the Group classifies interest rate swaps as cash flow hedges and states them at fair value.
Over the longerterm permanent changes in interest rates would have an impact on consolidated earnings.
At 31 December 2017 a general increase of one percentage point would have had the following impact
Income
Variable rate instruments 1.3 1.0 Interest rate swaps 0.8 0.3 Cash flow sensitivity 0.5 0.7 e Fair values There are no material differences between the book value of financial assets and liabilities and their fair value other than set out below Group Note 2017 2016
Fair value
Fair value Liabilities carried at amortised cost Unsecured bank loans 24 152.3 145.6 127.4 120.7 Trade and other payables 19 136.5 136.5 104.7 104.7 Finance leases 24 0.4 0.5 0.1 0.1 Preference shares 27 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1
Liabilities carried at amortised cost Overdrafts 24 11.9 11.9 18.5 18.5 Unsecured bank loans 24 152.1 145.5 105.7 99.3 Trade and other payables 19 4.5 4.5 3.1 3.1 Preference shares 27 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 Fair value has been determined by reference to the market value at the balance sheet date or by discounting the relevant cash flows using current interest rates for similar instruments.
The fair value of the financial assets has been assessed by the Directors with reference to the current prospects of the investments and risks associated with those prospects.
Fair value hierarchy The Group classifies fair value measurement using a fair value hierarchy that reflects the significance of inputs used in making measurements of fair value.
The fair value hierarchy has the following levels a Level 1  Quoted prices unadjusted in active markets for identical assets or liabilities Level 2 Inputs other than quoted prices included within Level 1 that are observable for the asset or liability either directly i. i. c Level 3  Inputs for the asset or liability that are not based on observable market data unobservable inputs.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 95 JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 26 Financial instruments continued Financial instruments carried at fair value are all level 2 as set out below
Level 2 Financial assets measured at fair value Forward exchange contracts  cash flow hedges 2.3 0.1 Interest rate swaps  cash flow hedges 1.1 0.8 Financial liabilities measured at fair value Forward exchange contracts  cash flow hedges  4.8 Interest rate swaps  cash flow hedges 0.4 0.8 Financial liabilities not measured at fair value Unsecured bank loans 145.6 120.7 Finance leases 0.5 0.2
Level 2 Financial assets measured at fair value Forward exchange contracts  cash flow hedges 2.3 0.1 Interest rate swaps  cash flow hedges 1.1 0.8 Financial liabilities measured at fair value Forward exchange contracts  cash flow hedges  4.8 Interest rate swaps  cash flow hedges 0.4 0.8 Financial liabilities not measured at fair value Unsecured bank loans 145.5 99.3 There have been no transfers between categories during the period.
The fair value of interest rate swap contracts and forward exchange contracts are calculated by management based on external valuations received from the Groups bankers and is based on forward exchange rates and anticipated future interest yields respectively.
Fair value hedges  Group and Company At 31 December 2017 and 31 December 2016 the Group did not have any outstanding fair value hedges.
Cash flow hedges  Group and Company At 31 December 2017 the Group and Company held forward currency contracts designated to hedge future commitments in US Dollars.
The terms of the contracts are as follows
Exchange rate Fair value
US 47603000 January 2018  December 2018 1.2800 2.3 At 31 December 2016 the Group and Company held forward currency contracts designated to hedge future commitments in US Dollars Japanese Yen and Swedish
The terms of the contracts are as follows
Exchange rate Fair value
US 81036004 January 2017  June 2018 1.3441 4.7 JPY 19900000 February 2017  April 2017 132.3144
SEK 1000000 January 2017  June 2017 11.5599 The foreign exchange contracts have been negotiated to match the expected profile of receipts.
At 31 December 2017 these hedges were assessed to be highly effective and an unrealised gain of 6.0m 2016 loss 3.3m relating to the hedging instruments is included in equity.
JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 26 Financial instruments continued Interest rate swaps The Group and Company entered into interest rate swap contracts in respect of Sterling denominated debt to swap a variable rate liability for a fixed rate liability.
These instruments have been allocated against the Group and Company debt in the tables shown above.
Details of the contracts and their fair values at 31 December are set out below
Maturity
Fixed rate % Fair value Sterling interest rate swaps 81.0 31.0 30 January 2019 to 31 October 2022 0.47%  3.71% 0.7 27 Share capital Group and Company
83200000 ordinary shares of 25p each 100000 3.5% cumulative preference shares of 1 each Allotted called up and fully paid In millions of shares 25p ordinary shares 1 cumulative preference sharestel 2016 In issue on 1 January and 31 December 50.2 50.2 0.1 0.1 Issued share capital 12.6 12.5 0.1 0.1 The preference shareholders are entitled to receive 3.5% cumulatively per annum on the par value of the shares and are treated as a liability in the balance sheet.
The ordinary shareholders receive dividends as declared from time to time by the Directors.
Shares all carry equal voting rights of one vote per share held.
Neither type of share is redeemable.
In the event of a windingup order the amount receivable in respect of the cumulative preference shares is limited to their nominal value.
The ordinary shareholders are entitled to an unlimited share of the surplus after distribution to the cumulative preference shareholders.
Treasury shares 27620 2016 45368 ordinary shares of 25p 0.4 0.6 The Company has an established Employee Share Ownership Trust the James Fisher and Sons plc Employee Share Ownership Trust to meet potential obligations under longterm incentive schemes awarded to employees.
The market value of these shares at 31 December 2017 was 0.4m 2016 0.7m.
The Trust has not waived its right to receive dividends.
In the year ended 31 December 2017 18128 2016 8415 ordinary shares with an aggregate nominal value of 4532 2016 2104 were issued to satisfy awards made under the Companys Executive Share Option Scheme at an option price of 354p 2016 596p per share giving rise to total consideration of 64173 2016 50151.
During the year the Trust purchased 71243 2016 38823 of the Companys shares in the market at an average cost per share of 16.38 2016 13.66 and a total cost of 1166653 2016 530412.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 97 JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 28 Commitments and contingencies Operating leases The Group has entered into leases on certain properties vessels plant and motor vehicles.
These leases have a life of between one and ten years and are renewable at the option of the lessee.
The future minimum rentals payable under noncancellable operating leases at 31 December are as follows Group Company Within one year 12.5 14.2 After one year but not more than five years 17.3 20.7 1.5 1.5 After five years 7.0 9.7 0.5 0.5 Capital commitments At 31 December capital commitments for which no provision has been made in these accounts amounted to Group Company Contingent liabilities In the ordinary course of the Companys business counter indemnities have been given to banks in respect of custom bonds foreign exchange commitments and bank guarantees.
A Group VAT registration is operated by the Company and 25 Group undertakings in respect of which the Company is jointly and severally liable for all amounts due to HM Revenue and Customs under the arrangement.
A guarantee has been issued by the Group and Company to charter parties in respect of obligations of a subsidiary James Fisher Everard Limited in respect of charters relating to nine vessels.
The charters expire between 2018 and 2021.
Subsidiaries of the Group have issued performance and payment guarantees to third parties with a total value of 44.6m 2016 42.4m.
The Group is liable for further contributions in the future to the MNOPF if additional actuarial deficits arise or if other employers liable for contributions are not able to pay their share.
The Group and Company remains jointly and severally liable for any future shortfall in recovery of the deficit.
The Group has given an unlimited guarantee to the Singapore Navy in respect of the performance of First Response Marine Pte Ltd its Singapore joint venture in relation to the provision of submarine rescue and related activities.
In the normal course of business the Company and certain subsidiaries have given parental and subsidiary guarantees in support of loan and banking arrangements.
The Group operates in overseas jurisdictions with uncertain legislation and assesses the regulatory compliance and taxation potential liability on a case by case basis.
The Company and its subsidiaries may be parties to legal proceedings and claims which arise in the ordinary course of business and can be material in value.
Appropriate provision has been made in these accounts where in the opinion of the Directors liabilities may materialise.
29 Related party transactions Transactions with related parties FCM businesses The Group has interests of between 40% and 50% in several joint ventures providing shiptoship transfer services in Northern Europe and Asia through its wholly owned subsidiary Fender Care Marine Services Group Limited.
First Response Marine The Group holds through James Fisher Marine Services Limited JFMS a 50% interest in First Response Marine Pte Ltd FRM.
FRM provides submarine rescue services to the Singapore government under a 20 year service contract which commenced in March 2009.
Included in the contract is the provision of a submarine rescue vessel acquired by FRM from JFMS.
FRM subcontracts part of the provision of the submarine rescue service to JFMS and its subsidiary James Fisher Singapore Pte Ltd.
JFMS has also provided a loan to FRM of 2.0m to support its daytoday operations.
The loan which is included in the Group balance sheet as part of the investment in joint ventures is interest bearing and is repayable at the end of the project.
Interest charged in the period amounted to 0.1m 2016 0.1m.
Dividends received or receivable during the period included in the results of the Group are 0.6m 2016 0.4m.
JFD
Domeyer
The Group through JFD Limited has a 50% stake in JFD Domeyer an entity which provides inservice support and aftermarket services to customers in
Details of equipment sales to this entity are set out in the table below.
Eurotestconsult
The Group through James Fisher Testing Services Limited has a 50% stake in Eurotestconsult Limited an entity which provides testing services to customers in
Details of service sales and recharges for labour and subcontractor works to this entity are set out in the table below.
JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 29 Related party transactions continued Britannias Gold Limited BGL During the year the Group acquired an option to subscribe for ordinary shares in Britannias Gold Limited in exchange for marine services provided to BGL at a cost of 0.9m.
Nick Henry Group CEO is a non executive Director of BGL.
Details of the transactions carried out with related parties are shown in the table below Services to related Sales to related
Amounts owed by
FCM businesses 2017  0.2 0.8 0.4 0.2 2016  0.4 1.0  0.2 First Response Marine 2017 3.4   1.7 2016  3.4  0.9 JFD Domeyer 2017  0.8  0.1 2016  1.3  1.0 Eurotestconsult 2017 0.2 1.2  0.1 2016  1.3  0.4 Wuhu Divex Diving Systems 2017  0.7  2.0 BGL 2017 4.2 No provision for bad debts has been made in respect of these balances 2016 nil.
No bad debts arose during the period relating to these transactions 2016 nil.
All transactions with related parties are priced on an arms length basis on terms equivalent to those provided to wholly external parties.
Company
The Company has entered into transactions with its subsidiary undertakings primarily in respect of the provision of accounting services finance and the provision of share options to employees of subsidiaries.
The amount outstanding from subsidiary undertakings to the Company at 31 December 2017 was 237.3m 2016 196.7m.
Amounts owed to subsidiary undertakings by the Company at 31 December 2017 totalled 5.9m 2016 15.0m.
The Company has had no expense in respect of bad or doubtful debts of subsidiary undertakings in the year 2016 nil.
30 Post balance sheet event On 19 February 2018 the Group acquired Cowan Manufacturing Pty Limited based in New South Wales Australia for 1.5m.
The business designs and sells portable hyperbaric chambers.
31 Significant accounting policies The principal accounting policies which have been applied consistently throughout the year and the preceding year are set out below.
31.1 Basis of preparation of the consolidated financial statements The results of subsidiaries are consolidated for the periods from or to the date on which control has passed.
Control exists when the Company controls an investee when the investor is exposed or has rights to variable returns from its involvement with the investees and has the ability to affect those returns through its power over the investee.
Acquisitions are accounted for under the purchase method of accounting from the acquisition date which is the date on which control is passed to the Group.
The financial statements of subsidiaries are prepared for the same reporting period as the Parent Company using consistent accounting policies.
All intragroup balances transactions income and expenses are eliminated in the consolidated financial statements.
Payment for the future services from employees or former owners are expensed.
Any payments to employees or former owners in respect of the acquisition of the business are capitalised.
This is carefully managed during the acquisition process so that former owners andor employees do not receive any incentive payments during an earnout period.
Joint arrangements A joint arrangement is an arrangement over which the Group and one or more third parties have joint control.
These joint arrangements are in turn classified as Joint ventures whereby the Group has rights to the net assets of the arrangement rather than rights to its assets and obligations for its liabilities and Joint operations whereby the Group has rights to the assets and obligations for the liabilities relating to the arrangement.
Any investment in joint ventures is carried in the balance sheet at cost plus the Groups post acquisition share in the change in net assets of the joint ventures less any impairment provision.
The income statement reflects the Groups share of the posttax result of the joint ventures.
The Groups share of any changes recognised by the joint venture in other comprehensive income are also recognised in other comprehensive income.
Noncontrolling interests Noncontrolling interests represent the proportion of profit or loss and net assets not held by the Group and are presented separately in the income statement and in the consolidated statement of financial position.
On the acquisition of noncontrolling interests the difference between the consideration paid and the fair value of the share of net assets acquired is recognised in equity.
Losses applicable to the noncontrolling interests in a subsidiary are allocated to the non controlling interests even if doing so causes the noncontrolling interests to have a deficit balance.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 99 JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 31 Significant accounting policies continued Company investments in subsidiaries and joint ventures In its separate financial statements the Company recognises its investments in subsidiaries and joint ventures at cost.
Income is recognised from these investments when its right to receive the dividend is established.
31.2 Foreign currency
The financial statements of subsidiary undertakings are prepared in their functional currency which is the currency of the primary economic environment in which they operate.
For the purpose of the consolidated financial statements the results and financial position of each entity are translated into UK Sterling which is the Groups presentational currency.
Foreign currency transactions in functional currency Transactions in currencies other than the entities functional currency are initially recorded at rates of exchange prevailing on the date of the transaction.
At each subsequent balance sheet date Foreign currency monetary items are retranslated at rates prevailing on the balance sheet date and any exchange differences recognised in the income statement ii Nonmonetary items measured at historical cost are not retranslated and iii Nonmonetary items measured at fair value are retranslated using exchange rates at the date the fair value was determined.
Where a gain or loss is recognised directly in equity any exchange component is also recognised in equity and conversely where a gain or loss is recognised in the income statement any exchange component is recognised in the income statement.
Exchange differences arising on monetary items forming part of the Groups net investment in overseas subsidiary undertakings which are denominated in the functional currency of the subsidiary undertaking are taken directly to the translation reserve and subsequently recognised in the consolidated income statement on disposal of the net investment.
Exchange differences on foreign currency borrowings to the extent that they are used to provide an effective hedge against Group equity investments in foreign currency are taken directly to the translation reserve.
Translation from functional currency to presentational currency The assets and liabilities of operations where the functional currency is different from the Groups presentational currency are translated at the period end exchange rates.
Income and expenses are translated at the average exchange rate for the reporting period.
All other exchange differences on transactions in foreign currencies are recorded at the rate ruling at the date of the transaction.
Resulting exchange differences are recognised in the consolidated statement of other comprehensive income.
Tax charges and credits attributable to exchange differences included in the reserve are also dealt with in the translation reserve.
Company
Transactions in foreign currencies are recorded at the rate ruling at the date of the transaction.
Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are retranslated at the rate of exchange ruling at the balance sheet date.
Exchange differences arising on settlement of monetary items or on the retranslation of monetary items at rates different from those at which they were initially recognised are taken to the income statement.
All exchange differences on assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are taken to the income statement other than investments in foreign operations and foreign currency borrowings used to hedge those investments where exchange differences are taken to the translation reserve.
31.3 Financial instruments a Loans and receivables These comprise nonderivative financial assets such as trade receivables with fixed or determinable payments that are not quoted in an active market.
Such assets are recognised initially at fair value plus any directly attributable transaction costs.
Subsequent to initial recognition loans and receivables are measured at amortised cost using the effective interest method if the time value of money has a significant impact on their value less any impairment losses.
Gains and losses are recognised in the income statement when the loans or receivables are derecognised impaired or amortised.
If in a subsequent period the factors which indicated the original decision to impair the asset cease to exist then the previously recognised impairment loss is reversed subject to the revised carrying value of the asset not exceeding its amortised cost at the date the impairment is reversed.
Any reversal of an impairment loss is recognised in the income statement.
Available for sale financial assets are nonderivatives that are included as noncurrent assets unless intended to be disposed of within twelve months of the balance sheet date.
After initial recognition they are measured at fair value with gains and losses being recognised in the statement of other comprehensive income until the investment is derecognised or deemed to be impaired at which point the cumulative gain or loss previously reported in equity is included in the income statement in the period in which it arises.
Any impairment loss in respect of an available for sale asset is transferred from other comprehensive income to the income statement and any reversal of impairment loss is not recognised in the income statement.
Where investments are held in unlisted equity shares where there is no active market the investment is held at cost and is subject to an annual impairment review.
JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 31 Significant accounting policies continued c Derivative financial instruments Derivative financial instruments are classified as held for trading unless they are designated as hedging instruments.
Assets are carried in the statement of financial position at fair value with gains or losses recognised in the income statement unless designated as a hedging instrument.
The Group is exposed to foreign exchange risk arising from currency exposures primarily relating to the US Dollar Euro and Norwegian Krone.
It is also exposed to the risk of interest rate changes in its borrowings.
The Group uses derivative financial instruments to manage risk in the form of foreign currency contracts to manage foreign exchange risk and interest rate swaps to reduce exposure to interest rate movements.
The Group does not hold or issue derivative financial instruments for speculative purposes.
All derivatives are initially recognised at fair value on the date that the derivative contract is entered into and are subsequently remeasured at their fair value at the balance sheet date.
Fair value is calculated by reference to current forward exchange contracts with similar maturity profiles and for interest rate swaps determined by reference to market values for similar instruments.
The recognition of the gains or losses arising on these movements in fair value depends on whether a derivative is designated as a hedge and if so the nature of the item being hedged.
The Group recognises two classes of hedges for derivative financial instruments Hedges of highly probable forecast transactions or recognised assets or liabilities cash flow hedge and Hedges of the fair value of recognised assets or liabilities or an unrecognised firm commitment fair value hedge.
Cash flow hedges can include forward foreign currency contracts if the instrument is related to a foreign currency risk of a firm commitment it involves the same currency as the hedged item and it reduces the risk of foreign currency exchange movements on the Groups operations.
Cash flow hedges may also include interest rate swaps where the instrument is related to a recognised asset or a liability and it changes the character of the interest rate by converting a variable rate to a fixed rate.
The effective portion of changes in the fair value of derivatives designated and qualifying as cash flow hedges are recognised in the consolidated statement of other comprehensive income.
Gains or losses arising on any portion deemed to be ineffective are recognised immediately in the income statement.
Where the hedge relates to a firm commitment or forecast transaction which subsequently results in the recognition of an asset or liability the cumulative gain or loss relating to that item is removed from equity and included in the initial measurement of the asset or liability.
Otherwise the cumulative amount is removed from equity and recognised in the income statement at the same time as the related movements on the hedged transaction.
When the term of the hedging instrument expires or it is sold or where the hedge no longer meets the criteria for hedge accounting any cumulative gain or loss included in other comprehensive income is retained in equity until either the related forecast transaction occurs in which case it is recognised in accordance with the policy stated above or if the hedged transaction is not expected to take place it is recognised immediately in the income statement.
Where a derivative is designated as a hedge of the variability in the fair value of an asset or liability it is designated as a fair value hedge.
Changes in the fair value of these derivatives are recorded in the income statement at the same time as the related movements in the hedged asset or liability.
All interestbearing loans and other borrowings are initially recorded at fair value which represents the fair value of the consideration received net of any issue costs associated with other borrowings.
Finance charges including any premiums payable on settlement or redemption of debt instruments including preference shares and the direct costs of issue are accounted for on an amortised cost basis in the income statement.
Charges are calculated using the effective interest method and are recognised in the income statement over the term of such instruments at a constant rate on the carrying amount.
Changes in the fair value of any derivatives which do not qualify for hedge accounting under any of the criteria outlined above are recognised immediately in the income statement.
The fair value of financial instruments traded in active markets is based on quoted market prices at the balance sheet date.
The fair value of financial instruments that are not traded in an active market is determined using assumptions based on market conditions at the balance sheet date or discounted cash flow techniques.
Cash and shortterm deposits included in the statement of financial position comprise cash at bank and in hand and shortterm deposits with an original maturity of three months or less from the original acquisition date.
Cash and cash equivalents included in the cash flow statement comprise cash and shortterm deposits net of bank overdrafts.
31.4 Intangible assets Intangible assets excluding goodwill arising on a business combination are stated at cost or fair value less any provision for impairment.
Intangible assets assessed as having finite lives are amortised over their estimated useful economic life and are assessed for impairment whenever there is an indication that they are impaired.
Amortisation charges are on a straightline basis and recognised in the income statement.
Estimated useful lives are as follows Development costs 5 years or over the expected period of product sales if less Intellectual property 3 to 20 years Patents and licences 5 years or over the period of the licence if less Other intangibles 5 years NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 101 JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 31 Significant accounting policies continued a Goodwill arising on a business combination Goodwill arising on the acquisition of a subsidiary represents the excess of the aggregate of the fair value of the consideration over the aggregate fair value of the identifiable assets liabilities and contingent liabilities acquired.
Goodwill is initially recognised at cost and is subsequently measured at cost less any accumulated impairment losses.
Costs related to an acquisition other than those associated with the issue of debt or equity securities incurred in connection with a business combination are expensed to the income statement.
The carrying value of goodwill is reviewed annually for impairment but more regularly if events or changes in circumstances indicate that it may be impaired.
When an impairment loss is recognised it is not reversed in a subsequent accounting period even if the circumstances which led to the impairment cease to exist.
Intangible assets that are acquired as a result of a business combination including but not limited to customer relationships supplier lists patents and technology and that can be separately measured at fair value on a reliable basis are recorded initially at fair value and amortised over their expected useful life.
Amortisation is expensed to the consolidated income statement.
31.5 Property plant and equipment Property plant and equipment is stated at cost less accumulated depreciation and any provision for impairment losses.
Refit costs relating to vessels are capitalised when incurred and amortised over their estimated useful economic life of 30 months.
Cost comprises expenditure incurred during construction delivery and modification.
Where a substantial period of time is required to bring an asset into use attributable finance costs are capitalised and included in the cost of the relevant asset.
Depreciation is provided to write off the cost of property plant and equipment to their residual value in equal annual instalments over their estimated useful lives as follows Freehold property 40 years Leasehold improvements 25 years or the period of the lease if shorter Plant and equipment Between 5 and 20 years
Between 10 and 25 years No depreciation is charged on assets under construction.
Residual values of vessels are set initially at 20% of purchase cost or fair value at acquisition which the Directors believe to be an approximation of current residual values.
Residual values and estimated remaining lives are reviewed annually by the Directors and adjusted if appropriate to reflect the relevant market conditions and expectations obsolescence and normal wear and tear.
31.6 Impairment of tangible and intangible assets At each reporting date the Group assesses whether there are any indications that an asset has been impaired.
If any indication exists an estimate of the recoverable amount of the asset is made which is determined as the higher of its fair value less costs to sell and its value in use.
These calculations are determined for an individual asset unless that asset does not generate cash inflows independently from other assets in which case its value is determined as part of that group of assets.
To assess the value in use estimated future cash flows relating to the asset are discounted to their present value using a pretax discount rate that reflects current market assessment of the time value of money and risks specific to the asset.
Where the carrying amount of the asset exceeds its recoverable amount the asset is considered to be impaired and is written down to its recoverable amount.
Impairment losses are recognised in the income statement.
Goodwill acquired in a business combination is allocated against the appropriate combination of business units deemed to obtain advantage from the benefits acquired with the goodwill.
These are designated as cash generating units CGU.
Impairment is then assessed by comparing the recoverable amount of the relevant CGU with the carrying value of the CGUs goodwill.
Recoverable amount is measured as the higher of the CGUs fair value less cost to sell and the value in use.
Where the recoverable amount of the CGU is less than its carrying amount including goodwill an impairment loss is recognised in the income statement.
An impairment loss for goodwill is not reversed in a subsequent period.
If any indication of a potential impairment exists the recoverable amount is estimated to determine the extent of any impairment loss.
Assets are grouped together for this purpose at the lowest level for which there are separately identifiable cash flows.
Research expenditure is expensed in the income statement as incurred.
Expenditure on development which represents the application of research to the development of new products or processes is capitalised provided that specific projects are identifiable technically feasible and the Group has sufficient resources to complete development.
The useful life of projects meeting the criteria for capitalisation is determined on a project by project basis.
Capitalised development expenditure is measured at cost and amortised over its expected useful life on a straightline basis.
Other development costs are recognised in the income statement as incurred.
If an event occurs after the recognition of an impairment that leads to a decrease in the amount of the impairment loss previously recognised the impairment loss is reversed.
The reversal is recognised in the income statement to the extent that the carrying value of the asset does not exceed its amortised cost at the reversal date.
JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 31 Significant accounting policies continued 31.7 Inventories Inventories are stated at the lower of cost and net realisable value.
Cost includes all costs incurred in bringing each product to its present location and condition.
Raw materials consumables stores and finished goods for sale are stated at purchase cost on a first in first out basis.
Work in progress and finished goods are stated at the cost of direct materials and labour plus attributable overheads allocated on a systematic basis based on a normal level of activity.
Net realisable value is based on estimated selling price less the estimated costs of completion and sale or disposal.
31.8 Taxation Corporation tax is provided on taxable profits from activities not qualifying for tonnage tax relief and is recognised in the income statement except to the extent that it relates to items recognised directly in equity or in other comprehensive income.
Current tax is the expected corporation tax payable or receivable in respect of the taxable profit for the year using tax rates enacted or substantively enacted at the balance sheet date less any adjustments to tax payable or receivable in respect of previous years.
Deferred tax is recognised in respect of all temporary differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities included in the financial statements and the amounts used for tax purposes that will result in an obligation to pay more a right to pay less or to receive more tax with the following exceptions No provision is made where a deferred tax liability arises from the initial recognition of goodwill or of an asset or liability in a transaction which is not a business combination that at the time of the transaction affect neither accounting nor taxable profit and No provision is made for deferred tax that would arise on all taxable temporary differences associated with investments in subsidiaries and interests in joint ventures where the timing of the reversal of the temporary differences can be controlled and it is probable that the temporary difference will not reverse in the foreseeable future.
Deferred tax assets are recognised only to the extent that the Directors consider that it is probable that there will be suitable taxable profits from which the future reversal of the underlying temporary differences and unused tax losses and credits can be deducted.
Deferred tax is measured on an undiscounted basis at the tax rates that are expected to apply in the periods in which the asset is expected to be realised or liability settled based on tax rates and laws enacted or substantively enacted at the balance sheet date.
Deferred tax arising on actuarial gains and losses relating to defined benefit pension funds is recorded in other comprehensive income.
Where the cash contributions made to the schemes exceed the service costs recognised in the income statement the current tax arising is recorded in other comprehensive income.
31.9 Leases A lease arrangement under which substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership rest with the lessee are classified as finance leases and capitalised at the inception of the lease at the lower of the fair value of the related item or the present value of the minimum lease payments.
Lease payments are apportioned between finance charges and a reduction in the lease liability so as to achieve a constant rate of interest on the remaining balance of the liability.
Finance charges are expensed to the income statement.
Capitalised leased assets are depreciated over the shorter of the lease term and the estimated useful life of the asset.
All other leases are classified as operating leases and rentals payable are charged to the income statement on a straightline basis over the lease term.
In preparation for the adoption of IFRS 16 Leases in the financial statements for the year ending 31 December 2019 management are in the process of assessing the potential impact.
31.10 Pension plans i Defined contribution schemes Predetermined contributions paid to a separate privately administered pension plan are recognised as an expense in the income statement in the period in which they arise.
Other than this contribution the Group has no further legal or constructive obligation to make further contributions to the scheme.
A defined benefit scheme is a pension plan under which the amount of pension benefit that an employee receives on retirement is defined by reference to factors including age years of service and compensation.
The schemes are funded by payments determined by periodic actuarial calculations agreed between the Group and the trustees of trusteeadministered funds.
The cost of providing benefits is determined using the projected unit credit method which attributes entitlement to benefits to the current period current service cost and to current and prior periods to determine the present value of the defined benefit obligation.
Current service costs are recognised in the income statement in the current year.
Past service costs are recognised in the income statement immediately.
When a settlement which eliminates all obligations for benefits already accrued or a curtailment which reduces future obligations as a result of a reduction in future entitlement occurs the obligation and related plan assets are remeasured using current actuarial assumptions and any gain or loss is recognised in the income statement.
The interest element of the defined benefit charge is determined by applying the discount rate to the net defined benefit liability at the start of the period and is recognised in the income statement.
A liability is recognised in the statement of financial position which represents the present value of the defined benefit obligations at the balance sheet date less the fair value of the scheme assets and is calculated separately for each scheme.
The defined benefit obligations represent the estimated amount of future benefits that employees have earned in return for their services in current and prior periods discounted at a rate representing the yield on a high quality corporate bond at the balance sheet date denominated in the same currency as the obligations and having the same terms to maturity as the related pension liability applied to the estimated future cash outflows arising from these obligations.
When the calculation results in a benefit to the Group the recognised asset is limited to the total of any unrecognised past service costs and the present value of economic benefits available from any future refunds from the plan or reductions in future contributions to the plan.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 103 JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 31 Significant accounting policies continued When the benefits of a plan are improved the portion of the increased benefit related to past service by employees is recognised in profit or loss on a straight line basis over the average period until the benefits become vested.
To the extent that the benefits vest immediately the expense is recognised immediately in the income statement.
Actuarial gains and losses on experience adjustments and changes in actuarial assumptions are recognised in the statement of other comprehensive income.
31.11 Share based payments Executive savings related share option schemes are operated under which options are granted to employees of the Group.
An expense is recognised in the income statement with a corresponding credit to equity in respect of the fair value of employee services rendered in exchange for options granted which is determined by the fair value of the option at the date of grant.
The amount is expensed over a specified period until the options can be exercised the vesting period.
The fair value of an option is determined by the use of mathematical modelling techniques including the BlackScholes option pricing model and the Binomial model.
Nonmarket vesting conditions such as profitability and growth targets are excluded from the fair value calculation but included in assumptions about the number of options that are expected to become exercisable.
An estimate is made of the number of options that are expected to become exercisable at each balance sheet date.
Any adjustments to the original estimates are recognised in the income statement and equity over the remaining vesting period with any element of any adjustments relating to prior periods recognised in the current period.
No expense is recognised for awards that do not ultimately vest except for awards where vesting is conditional upon a market condition such as total shareholder return of the Group relative to an index.
These are treated as vested irrespective of whether or not the market condition is satisfied provided that all other performance conditions are satisfied.
In addition to failure by the employee to exercise an option in accordance with the exercise period allowed by the scheme an award made to an employee under a share option scheme is deemed to lapse when either the scheme is cancelled by the Company or when an employee who continues to qualify for membership of a scheme ceases to pay contributions to that scheme.
In these circumstances the full remaining unexpired cost of the award is expensed in the period in which the option lapses.
Where the exercise of options is satisfied by the issue of shares by the Company the nominal value of any shares issued from the exercise of options is credited to share capital with the balance of the proceeds received net of transaction costs credited to share premium.
31.12 Shortterm employee benefits The Group recognises a liability and an expense for shortterm employee benefits including bonuses only when contractually or constructively obliged.
31.13 Share capital and reserves Ordinary shares are classified as equity.
Costs attributable to the issue of new shares are deducted from equity from the proceeds.
Shares issued by the Company which are held by the Company or its subsidiary entities including the Employee Share Ownership Trust ESOT are designated as treasury shares.
The cost of these shares is deducted from equity.
No gains or losses are recognised on the purchase sale cancellation or issue of treasury shares.
Consideration paid or received is recognised directly in equity.
Company shares are held in an ESOP .
The finance costs and administration costs relating to the ESOP are charged to the income statement.
Dividend income arising on own shares is excluded in arriving at profit before taxation and deducted from aggregate dividends paid.
The Group maintains the following reserves Translation reserve The translation reserve comprises all foreign currency differences arising from the translation of operations whose financial statements are denominated in foreign currencies as well as from the translation of liabilities that hedge the Companys net investment in a foreign subsidiary.
Hedging reserve The hedging reserve comprises the effective portion of the cumulative net change in the fair value of cash flow hedging instruments related to hedged transactions that have not yet occurred.
31.14 Revenue recognition Revenue after excluding trade discounts and value added tax represents the provision of goods and services by the Group in the normal course of business and is recognised when the significant risks and rewards of ownership have passed to the buyer.
The transfer of risks and rewards is assumed to pass to the customer on delivery of the goods or completion of the provision of the relevant services.
When the Group acts as a lessor for shortterm spot rentals revenue is recognised in the income statement on a straightline basis over the period of the hire.
Where the outcome of a construction contract can be estimated reliably revenue and costs relating to it are recognised in accordance with the stage of completion of the contract in the period in which the work is performed.
To assess a construction contract at the outset total contract costs are established by using supplier quotes for third party costs internal hours based on experience the nature of the project and the time taken for similar projects in the past to which current labour rates are applied.
The stage of completion is assessed by reference to an output measure such as deliverables completed or an input measure such as physical progress attributable man hours and costs incurred measured against the expected outcome depending on which is the most appropriate method for the specific type of contract.
Construction contract costs are monitored on a monthly basis and total expected costs incurred costs to date and expected costs to complete are reviewed against the original cost budget.
Progress made is reviewed to assess whether the longterm project is progressing in accordance with the planned level of completion on a regular basis.
Any cost overruns resulting in an expected total cost in excess of original budget results in a reduced margin being accounted for on the revenue recognised to date.
Revenue from the contract is under the percentage of completion method by reference to the assessed stage of completion of the contract.
Predetermined ratios or percentages are not used in the estimation process.
JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 31 Significant accounting policies continued In determining whether the outcome of a construction contract can be assessed reliably the Group considers the nature of each contract the experience of the project manager with this type of contract whether it is similar to contracts delivered in the past the customer the time period over which the contract runs and forms a view of the likely risk in estimating the project outcome.
Contract costs incurred that relate to future activity are deferred and recognised as inventory.
When a loss is expected to be incurred on a construction contract it is recognised as an expense immediately in the income statement.
When the outcome of a construction contract cannot be estimated reliably no profit is recognised.
Revenue is recognised to the extent that it is probable that costs incurred will be recovered.
Where the Group has a contract to design and assemble an asset followed by a longterm service contract to operate and maintain that asset the revenue is recognised separately on the respective parts of the contract.
All bid costs incurred relating to contracts for the design manufacture or operation of assets or the provision of services to third parties are expensed to the income statement as incurred except for those costs incurred after the point at which the contract award is virtually certain.
Directly attributable costs incurred subsequent to this point are included within contract costs and amortised over the life of the initial period of the contract to which they relate.
Provision is made for warranties offered with products where it is probable that an obligation to transfer economic benefits to the customer in future will arise.
This provision is based on managements assessment of the previous history of claims and probability of future obligations arising on a product by product basis.
Provisions for warranty costs are set out in note 20.
31.15 Noncurrent assets held for sale On classification as held for sale noncurrent assets are recognised at the lower of carrying amount and fair value less costs to sell.
Impairment losses on initial classification as held for sale are included in profit or loss as are any gains and losses on subsequent remeasurement.
31.16 Intragroup financial instruments Where the Company enters into financial guarantee contracts to guarantee the indebtness of other companies within the Group the Company considers these to be insurance arrangements and accounts for them as such.
In this respect the Company treats the guarantee contract as a contingent liability until such time as it becomes probable that the Company will be required to make a payment under the guarantee.
32 Significant accounting judgements and estimates In preparing these consolidated financial statements management has made judgements estimates and assumptions that affect the application of the Groups accounting policies and the reported amount of assets liabilities income and expenses.
The outcome may differ from these estimates.
Estimates and underlying assumptions are reviewed and revised on an ongoing basis.
Information about judgements made in applying accounting policies that have the most significant effects on the amounts recognised in the consolidated financial statements is included below Financial and business risks The Groups activities expose it to a variety of financial and business risks.
Where possible the Group seeks to minimise these risks through its risk management policies.
Impairment of goodwill Goodwill which is set out in note 12 of 174.6m 2016 165.0m is tested annually for any permanent impairment in accordance with the accounting policy in note 31.6.
The value in use of the Groups cash generating units CGU requires assumptions about future levels of demand gross margins and cost inflation.
Inherent uncertainty involved in forecasting and discounting future cash flows is a key area of judgement.
If indicators of impairment exist the carrying value of goodwill is compared to its recoverable amount which represents the higher of the net present value of the CGUs forecast cash flow and its carrying value.
The assessment also includes sensitivity analysis to identify the range of outcomes and the validity of underlying assumptions.
Business combinations Business combinations are set out in note 23 and the Group makes an assessment of the fair values of the assets and liabilities arising in a business combination and of any related contingent consideration.
Judgement is applied in assessing appropriate fair values of the assets and liabilities required identifying any intangible assets of the acquired business and in estimating the likelihood of contingent targets being achieved during the relevant period.
The outcome of contingent consideration arrangements depends on a number of factors outside the control of the business including but not limited to competition general economic conditions and the availability of resources within the business to meet its obligations to its customers.
The Group regularly assesses the likelihood of the targets being achieved during the performance period and makes appropriate adjustments to the provision for contingent consideration through the income statement.
The
Group uses a discounted cash flow analysis to assess the value of contingent consideration.
Revenue
Revenue is set out in notes 4 and 31.14.
Revenue is recognised when the significant risks and rewards of ownership have been transferred to the customer the amount of revenue can be measured reliably and recovery of the consideration is probable.
The timing of the transfer of risks and rewards will vary depending on the terms of the sales agreement the evaluation of the specific risks associated with the performance of the contract for example design construction and testing or generally accepted practice where there are no specific arrangements in the contract.
Areas of judgement relate to construction contract accounting and specifically estimating the stage of completion and forecast outturn of the contract.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 105 JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 32 Significant accounting judgements and estimates continued Income taxes Taxation is set out in notes 8 9 and 31.8.
The Group is subject to income taxes in several jurisdictions.
Significant judgement is required in determining the provision for income taxes.
There are many transactions and calculations for which the ultimate tax determination is uncertain during the ordinary course of business.
The Group recognises liabilities for anticipated tax risk issues based on estimates of whether additional taxes will be due.
Where the final tax outcome of these matters is different from the amounts that were initially recorded such difference will impact the income tax and deferred tax provisions in the period in which such determination is made.
The Group has entered the UK tonnage tax regime under which tax on its ship owning and operating activities is based on the net tonnage of vessels operated.
Income and profits outside this regime are taxed under normal tax rules.
This means that it is necessary to make estimates of the allocation of some income and expenses between tonnage and nontonnage tax activities.
These estimates are subject to agreement with the relevant tax authorities and may be revised in future periods.
Operating in overseas jurisdictions The Group operates in emerging markets which increases contractual operational and financial risk with potentially uncertain or changing regulatory and political environments.
This is referred to in the Groups principal risks and uncertainties on page 21 and in note 26.
In preparing the consolidated financial statements the management form a judgement about the risk of exchange control regulations political stability potential changes to tax regions and operating environments.
Information about assumptions and estimation uncertainties that have a significant risk of resulting in a material misstatement to the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities within the year ending 31 December 2018 is included in the following notes Note 9  recognition of deferred tax assets and the availability of future taxable profit against which tax losses carried forward can be used Notes 12 and 13  impairment test of intangible assets and goodwill key assumptions underlying recoverable amounts including the recoverability of development costs and Note 23  Business combinations.
33 Standards issued but not yet effective IFRS 15 and 16 are expected to have a material impact on the Groups financial statements in the period of initial application.
IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers IFRS 15 establishes a comprehensive framework for determining whether how much and when revenue is recognised.
It replaces existing revenue recognition guidance including IAS 18 Revenue and IAS 11 Construction Contracts.
Sale of goods Revenue is currently recognised when the significant risk and rewards of ownership have passed to the buyer which is assumed to pass on delivery of the goods.
Revenue is recognised at this point provided that the revenue and costs can be measured reliably the recovery of the consideration is probable and there is no continuing management involvement with the goods.
Under IFRS 15 revenue will be recognised when a customer obtains control of the goods.
Rendering of Services The Group is involved in providing a range of services including submarine rescue services.
The transfer of risks and rewards is assumed to pass to the customer on delivery of the goods or stage of completion of the provision of the relevant services.
Under IFRS 15 the total consideration in the service contracts will be allocated to individual performance obligations as identified within the contract.
The standalone selling prices will be determined based on the list prices at which the Group sells such services in separate transactions.
The estimated negative impact on retained earnings at 1 January 2017 as a result of these changes in accounting for contracts that have not been completed at that date is 0.6m.
Construction Contracts Contract revenue and costs currently are recognised in accordance with the stage of completion of the contract where the outcome can be estimated reliably in the period in which the work is performed.
Under IFRS 15 performance obligations in contracts with customers are identified and the total contract value is allocated to each of the performance obligations identified.
Revenue is recognised as each performance obligation is satisfied.
For some of the goods that the Group provides the customer controls all of the work in progress as the products are manufactured or the goods manufactured are of a specialised nature.
The revenue from these contracts will be recognised as the products are manufactured in line with the performance over time criteria set out in IFRS 15.
Where the identification of IFRS 15 performance obligations gives rise to more or less recognition criteria than previous contracts is estimated to be an impact on revenue recognised.
The estimated negative impact on retained earnings at 1 January 2017 as a result of these changes in accounting for contracts that have not been completed at that date is approximately 4.5m.
Bid Costs Currently all bid costs incurred relating to the design manufacture or operation of assets or the provision of services to third parties are expensed except for those incurred after the point at which the contract award is virtually certain that would not have arisen if the contract was not secured.
Under IFRS 15 management do not expect any significant changes to arise.
The Groups assessment indicates that this will result in a reduction of the opening retained earnings of 0.4m at 1 January 2017.
The Group will continue to work to finalise the impact of the new requirements of IFRS 15 including its subsidiaries and joint ventures.
As a result of this ongoing work it is possible that there may be changes to the impact outlined below.
However these are not expected to be significant.
JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 33 Standards issued but not yet effective continued
The Group plans to adopt IFRS 15 using the full retrospective method utilising the practical expedients available.
As a result the Group will apply the requirements of IFRS 15 to the comparative period presented together with its financial statements for the year ending 31 December 2018.
The expedients available are Expedient 1  Contracts started and completed in the same annual reporting period.
An entity need not restate completed contracts that begin and end in the same annual reporting period Expedient 1A  Further an entity can elect not to restate contracts that are completed contracts at the beginning of the earliest period presented Expedient 2  That allows an entity to use the transaction price at the date on which the contract was completed rather than estimating the variable consideration amounts in each comparative reporting period Expedient 3  An entity need not separately evaluate the effect of contract modifications before the start of the earliest reporting period presented and Expedient 4  An entity does not need to disclose for reporting periods presented before the date of initial application January 2018 Amount of the transaction price allocated to remaining performance obligations and An explanation of when it expects to recognise the revenue The Groups assessment indicates that the adoption of these expedients will not result in a significantly different outcome.
Estimated impact of the adoption of IFRS 15 The Group is required to adopt IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers from 1 January 2018.
The Group has assessed the estimated impact that the initial application of IFRS 15 will have on its consolidated financial statements.
The estimated impact of the adoption of this standard on the Groups equity as at 1 January 2017 is based on assessments undertaken to date and is summarised below.
The actual impacts of adopting the standards as at 1 January 2018 may change because the new accounting policies are subject to change until the Group presents its first financial statements that include the date of initial application.
Estimates to 1 January may also change due to the adoption of the retrospective transition option.
Balance at 31 December 2016
Balance at 1 January 2017
Retained earnings 217.0 5.0 212.0 The total estimated adjustment net of tax to the opening balance of the Groups equity at 1 January 2017 is 5.0m.
The estimated impact on the consolidated income statement in 2017 is to reduce revenue by approximately 6.0m and to reduce profit before taxation by 0.7m IFRS 16 Leases IFRS 16 replaces existing leases guidance including IAS 17 Leases IFRIC 4 Determining whether an arrangement contains a Lease SIC15 Operating Leases Incentives and SIC27 Evaluating the Substance of Transactions Involving the Legal Form of a Lease and is effective for annual periods beginning on or after 1 January 2019.
IFRS 16 requires lessees to reflect all leases on their balance sheet.
A lessee will recognise a rightofuse asset reflecting its right to use the asset and a lease liability recognising its obligation to make lease payments.
There are exceptions for shortterm leases and leases of lowvalue items.
IFRS 16 replaces the straightline operating lease expense with a depreciation charge for the rightofuse assets and interest expense on lease liabilities.
The Group has completed an initial assessment of the potential impact on its consolidated financial statements.
The actual impact of applying IFRS 16 on the financials statements in the period of initial application will depend on future economic conditions including the Groups borrowing rate at 1 January 2019 the composition of the Groups lease portfolio at that date the Groups latest assessment of whether it will exercise any renewal options and the extent to which the Group chooses to use the practical expedients and recognition exemptions.
The most significant impact is that the Group will recognise an asset and liability for its operating leases of vessels.
As at 31 December 2017 the Groups future minimum lease payments under noncancellable operating leases of vessels amounted to 12.8m on an undiscounted basis see note 28.
As part of its assessment the Group will determine whether it is appropriate to restate comparative information or adopt a modified retrospective approach.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 107 JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT Subsidiaries and associated undertakings Name of company Address
Group percentage of equity capital Marine Support Clariden Holdings SA 80 Broad Street City of Monrovia County of Mosterrado Liberia 100% James Fisher Subsea Excavation
Limited
133 Cecil Street 1601 Keck Seng Tower
100% EDS HV Group Limited BarrowinFurness 100% James Fisher Subsea Limited BarrowinFurness 100% EDS HV Management Limited BarrowinFurness 100% James Fisher Testing Services Ireland Limited Unit D Zone 5 Clonminam Business Park Portlaoise County Laois Ireland 100% EDS HV Services Limited BarrowinFurness 100% James Fisher Testing Services
BarrowinFurness
100% Electricity Distribution Services
BarrowinFurness
100% JCM Scotload Ltd BarrowinFurness 100%
Limited co Trident Trust Trident Chambers Road Town Tortola British Virgin Islands 100% JF STS Guernsey Limited 4th Floor West Wing Trafalgar Court Admiral Park St Peter Port Guernsey GY1 2JA 100% Fender Care Changshu Ltd Room 1211 Building 4 Huifeng Times Plaza No 22 Huanghe Road Changshu City Jiangsu  China 100% Load Test Sdn Bhd Ground Floor 8 Lorong Universiti B Section 16 46350 Petaling Jaya Selangor Darul Ehsan
100% Fender Care do Brasil Comercio E Servicos Navais LTDA Rua 01 SN Lote 115 Quadra 01 Balneario das Garcias Rio de Janeiro Brazil 28890000 100% Maritime Engineers Asia Pacic Pte Ltd 1 North Bridge Road 0615 High Street Centre
100% Fender Care Limited BarrowinFurness 100% Maritime Engineers Pty Ltd 23 Sparks Road Henderson WA 6166 Australia 100% Fender Care Marine Asia Pacic Pte Ltd 6 Pioneer Place  Singapore 100% Mojo Maritime France 3 rue de France Comte CS50311 Hauts de Quimpcanpoix 5103 Cherbourg France 100% Fender Care Marine Gibraltar Limited 28 Irish Town Gibraltar 100% Mojo Maritime Limited BarrowinFurness 100% Fender Care Marine Ltd BarrowinFurness 100% Namibia Subtech Diving and Marine Proprietary Limited PO Box 90757 Shop 48 Second Floor Old Power Station Complex Armstrong Street Windhoek
100% Fender Care Marine Products Asia Pacic Pte Limited 6 Pioneer Place  Singapore 100% Osiris Marine Services Limited BarrowinFurness 100% Fender Care Marine Services Group
BarrowinFurness
100% Osiris Underwater Engineering Services Limited
100% Fender Care Marine Sohar LLC Al Batinah Region PO Box 37 Sohar 32770% Prolec Limited BarrowinFurness 100% Fender Care Marine Solutions Limited BarrowinFurness 100% Rotos 360 Limited BarrowinFurness 100% Fender Care Norway AS Kaiveien 4 9900 Kirkenes Norway 100% Scotload Ltd Oldmeldrum 100% Fendercare Australia Pty Ltd 23 Sparks Road Henderson WA 6166
100% Strainstall Engineering Services
BarrowinFurness
100% Fendercare Marine Ghana Limited 11 Aduemi Close North Kaneshie Accra
50% Strainstall Group Limited BarrowinFurness 100% Fendercare Marine West Limited 5th Floor Anderson Square Sheddon Road PO Box 866 George Town KY1 1103 Cayman Islands 100% Strainstall Malaysia Sdn Bhd Ground Floor 8 Lorong Universiti B Section 16 46350 Petaling Jaya Selangor Darul Ehsan
100% Fendercare Servicos Marinhos do Brasil LTDA Rua 01 SN Lote 115 Quadra 01 Balneario das Garcias Rio de Janeiro Brazil 28890000 100% Strainstall Middle East Limited Vistra Cayman Grand Pavilion Hibiscus Way 802 West Bay Road PO Box 31119 Grand Cayman KY11205 Cayman Islands 100% Foresight HV Operations Limited Second Floor Sketrick House Jubilee Road Newtownards Northern Ireland BT23 4YH 100% Strainstall Singapore Pte Ltd 50 Rafes Place 0600 Singapore Land Tower
100% Hughes Marine Engineering Limited BarrowinFurness 100% Strainstall UK Limited BarrowinFurness 100% Hughes Sub Surface Engineering
BarrowinFurness
100% Subtech Pty Ltd Warehouse 1 20 Rustic Close Briardene Durban 4051 South Africa 100% Insight Marine Projects Limited BarrowinFurness 100% Subtech Pty Ltd Rua da Educacao No.38 Matola Mozambique Branch Integrated Mooring Solutions Limited BarrowinFurness 100% Subtech Core Innovation Pty Ltd PO Box 18897 Dalbridge KwaZulu Natal 4014 100% James Fisher Fender Care Limited BarrowinFurness 100% Subtech Diving and Marine Tanzania Limited The Slipway Road Msasani Peninsula Dar Es Salaam United Republic of Tanzania 100% James Fisher Marine Services Limited BarrowinFurness 100% Subtech Group Holdings Pty Ltd Warehouse 1 20 Rustic Close Briardene Durban 4051 South Africa 100% James Fisher MFE Limited BarrowinFurness 100% Subtech Marine Pty Ltd PO Box 90757 Shop 48 Old Power Station Complex Armstrong Street Windhoek Namibia 70% James Fisher MIMIC Limited BarrowinFurness 100% Subtech Middle East Saudi Co LLC Ofce 102 Al Jazira Building Alkhobar Saudi
95% Subsidiary undertakings 108 JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 SUBSIDIARIES AND ASSOCIATED UNDERTAKINGS CONTINUED Name of company Address
Group percentage of equity capital Marine Support continued James Fisher Nigeria Limited 34 Awolowo Road Ikoyi Lagos Nigeria 49% Subtech Norte Limitada Rua da Educacao No.38 Matola Mozambique 100% James Fisher Ocean Team Limited Rooms 131819 13F Hollywood Plaza 610 Nathan Road Mongkok Kowloon Hong Kong 60% Subtech Offshore Ltd Ocra Mauritius Limited Level 2 Max City Building Remy Ollier Street Port Louis Mauritius 100% James Fisher Personnel SA de CV Gabriel Mancera 1041 Del Valle Benito Juarez 03100 Ciudad de Mexico D.
Mexico
100% Subtech South Africa Pty Ltd Warehouse 1 20 Rustic Close Briardene Durban 4051 South Africa 100% James Fisher Servicos Empresariais
Rua 01 No 223 Quadra 02 Lote 146 part Balneario das Garcas Brazil 100% Testconsult Limited BarrowinFurness 100% James Fisher Subsea Excavation
21559 Provincial Boulevard Katy TX 77450 United States 100% Vision Marine Ltd 80 Broad Street City of Monrovia County of Mosterrado Liberia 100% James Fisher Subsea Excavation Mexico SA de CV Gabriel Mancera 1041 Del Valle Benito Juarez 03100 Ciudad de Mexico D.
Mexico
100% Specialist Technical Cowan Manufacturing Pty Limited 7A Walker Street Warners Bay New South Wales 2282 Australia 100% James Fisher Nuclear GmbH Uwestrae 12 D22525 Hamburg Germany 80% Divex Asia Pacic Pty Ltd 54 Bushland Ridge Bibra Lake WA 6163
100% James Fisher Nuclear Limited Oldmeldrum 100% Divex FZE PO Box  Jebel Ali Free Zone Dubai United Arab Emirates 100% James Fisher Rumic Limited BarrowinFurness 100% Divex Limited Oldmeldrum 100% James Fisher Singapore Pte Ltd 19 Loyang Lane Singapore  100% Harsh Environment Systems Limited BarrowinFurness 100% James Fisher Technologies LLC Units 1 and 2 1234 Sherman Drive Longmont CO 80501 Colorado 51% Hatch Holdings Limited BarrowinFurness 100% JF Nuclear Limited BarrowinFurness 100% High Technology Sources Limited BarrowinFurness 100% JFD Australia Pty Ltd BDO 38 Station Street Subiaco WA 6008 Australia 100% Inspection Holdings Limited BarrowinFurness 100% JFD Limited Oldmeldrum 100% James Fisher RoRo Limited BarrowinFurness 100% JFD Singapore Pte Ltd 19 Loyang Lane Singapore  100% James Fisher Defence Italy SRL Via Giulio Caccini  Rome Italy 100% JFD South Africa Pty Ltd co Mazars Mazars House Rialto Road Grand Moorings Precinct Century City Cape Town SA 7441 South Africa 100% James Fisher Defence Limited BarrowinFurness 100% Lexmar Sat Systems Pte Ltd 19 Loyang Lane Singapore  100% James Fisher Defence North America
Suite 808 1220 North Market Street Wilmington DE 19801 United States 100% NDT Inspection and Testing
BarrowinFurness
100% James Fisher Defence Sweden
Rindovagen Rindo Vastra 185 41 Vaxholm Sweden 100% Raygen Limited BarrowinFurness 100% James Fisher NDT Limited BarrowinFurness 100% Remac Limited BarrowinFurness 100% Offshore Oil Buchan Technical Services Limited BarrowinFurness 100% RMSPumptools FZE 1153 THUB Dubai Silicon Oasis Dubai United Arab Emirates 100% James Fisher Air Supply Norway
BarrowinFurness
100% RMSPumptools Limited BarrowinFurness 100% James Fisher and Sons Seaoor Dynamex Limited
100% SC Limited Oldmeldrum 100% James Fisher Eiendom AS Finnestadsvingen 23 4029 Stavanger
100% Scan Tech AS Finnestadsvingen 23 4029 Stavanger Norway 100% James Fisher Marine Services Malaysia Ltd Level 1 Lot 7 Block F Sanguking Commercial Building Jalan PatauPatau 87000 Labuan FT Malaysia 100% Scan Tech Personell AS Finnestadsvingen 23 4029 Stavanger Norway 100% James Fisher Marine Services Middle East Limited FZCO PO Box  Dubai United Arab
100% Scan Tech Produkt Personell AS Finnestadsvingen 23 4029 Stavanger Norway 100% James Fisher Norway AS Finnestadsvingen 23 4029 Stavanger
100% Scantech Offshore do Brasil Comercio E Servicos Ltda R 01 223 Lote 146 Quadra 02 Balneario das Garcas Rio das Ostras 28.898268 Brazil 100% James Fisher Offshore Limited Oldmeldrum 100% Scantech Offshore Limited BarrowinFurness 100% James Fisher Offshore Malaysia Sdn
Room A Ground Floor Lot 7 Block F Saguking Commercial Building Jalan PatauPatau 87000 Labuan FT Malaysia 100% Scantech Offshore Pty Ltd 23 Sparks Road Henderson WA 6166 Australia 100% JF Singapore Holdings Pte Ltd 160 Robinson Road 1701 SBF Center
100% Scantech Offshore UK Limited Oldmeldrum 100% Monyana Engineering Services Limited Oldmeldrum 100% Solmead Limited Oldmeldrum 100% Pump Tools Limited Oldmeldrum 100% Solvapli Limited Oldmeldrum 100% Return to Scene Limited BarrowinFurness 100% Strata Oil Tools Limited Oldmeldrum 100% 109 JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT Name of company Address
Group percentage of equity capital
Cattedown Wharves Limited BarrowinFurness 100% James Fisher New Zealand
Level 10 34 Shortland Street Auckland 1010 New Zealand 100% Everard Guernsey Ltd 4th Floor West Wing Trafalgar Court Admiral Park St Peter Port Guernsey GY1 2JA 50% James Fisher Shipping Services
BarrowinFurness
100%
Everard Shipping Limited BarrowinFurness 100% James Fisher Everard Limited BarrowinFurness 100%
100% Onesimus Dorey Shipowners
4th Floor West Wing Trafalgar Court Admiral Park St Peter Port Guernsey GY1 2JA 100% James Fisher Crewing Services
BarrowinFurness
100% Scottish Navigation Company
Oldmeldrum
100% James Fisher Guernsey Limited 4th Floor West Wing Trafalgar Court Admiral Park St Peter Port Guernsey GY1 2JA 100% Holding Companies James Fisher Aberdeen Limited BarrowinFurness 100% JF Australia Holding Pty Ltd 54 Bushland Ridge Bibra Lake WA 6163 100% James Fisher Holdings UK Limited BarrowinFurness 100% JF Nordvik Limited 12 Castle Street St Helier Jersey JE2 3RT 100% James Fisher Hong Kong Limited Level 17 Silvercord Tower 2 30 Canton Road Tsim Sha Tsui Kowloon Hong Kong 100% JF Overseas Limited BarrowinFurness 100% James Fisher Nuclear Holdings Limited BarrowinFurness 100% James Fisher Subtech Group
BarrowinFurness
100% James Fisher Properties Limited Oldmeldrum 100% James Fisher and Sons Nigeria
7th Floor 1 Kingsway Road Falomo Ikoyi Lagos Lagos State Nigeria 99% James Fisher Tankships Holdings
BarrowinFurness
100% Associated undertakings and significant holdings in undertakings other than subsidiary undertakings Marine Support Asteria Navigation Inc 80 Broad Street City of Monrovia County of Mosterrado Liberia 45% Fendercare Marine Omega India Private Limited JA 1104  1106 DLF Tower  A Jasole District Centre New Delhi 11044 India 50% Eurotestconsult Limited Clonminan Industrial Estate Portlaoise County Laois Ireland 50% James Fisher Angola Limitada Rua Damiao de Gois No.67 Alvalade Borough District of Maianga Ingombota Municipality Angola 49% Eurotestconsult UK Limited Ruby House 40A Hardwick Grange Woolston Warrington Cheshire WA1 4RF 50% James Fisher Angola UK Limited BarrowinFurness 50% FC Viking SDN BHD Suite 6.01 6th Floor Plaza See Hoy Chan Jalan Raja Chulan 50200 Kuala Lumpur
49% Lome Offshore Services Inc Trust Co Complex Ajeltake Road Majouro Marshall Islands 45% Fender Care Benelux B.
Torontostraat 20 3197 KN Rotterdam Botlek Netherlands 50% Offshore Lightering Services Ltd Trust Co Complex Ajeltake Road Majouro Marshall Islands 45% Fender Care Marine LLC Fujairah Port PO Box 5198 Fujairah United Arab Emirates 49% Silvertide Navigation Inc 80 Broad Street City of Monrovia County of Mosterrado Liberia 45% Fender Care Marine Services LLC G013 GH1 Industrial City of Abu Dhabi ICAD1 Mussafeh PO Box 45628 Abu Dhabi United Arab Emirates 49% Strainstall Laboratories WLL PO Box 2255 Dohar Qatar 49% Fender Care Middle East LLC PO Box 25896 Shartandhaid Fujairah Road Route 88 Al Jaffa Sharjah United Arab Emirates 49% Strainstall Middle East LLC S4 plot 5991254 Jebel Ali Industrial Area 1 Dubai United Arab Emirates 49% Fender Care Omega Middle East FZC ELOB Ofce No.
E69G20 PO Box 51602 Hamriyah Free Zone  Sharjah United Arab Emirates 50% Strainstall Saudi Arabia Limited PO Box 30124 Riyadh 11372 Saudi Arabia 49% Fendercare Marine M SDN BHD 52 Jalan 109E Desa Business Park Taman Desa Off Jalan Klang Lama 58100 Kuala Lumpur Wilayah Persekutuan Malaysia 40% Strainstall Testing Lab LLC PO Box 62579 Abu Dhabi UAE 49% Work Boat Services Inc Trust Co Complex Ajeltake Road Majouro Marshall Islands 45% Specialist Technical First Response Marine Pte Ltd 16 Benoi Road  Singapore 50% Wuhu Divex Diving System
No.58 Yongchang Road Jiujiang District Wuhu City Anhui Province China 49% JFD Domeyer GmbH KonsulSmidtStr.
15 28217 Bremen
50% 1 Fisher House PO Box 4 BarrowinFurness Cumbria LA14 1HR 2 North Meadows Oldmeldrum Aberdeenshire AB51 0GQ held by the Parent Company all other subsidiaries are held by an intermediate subsidiary consolidated as subsidiary undertakings held by nominee shareholders 110 JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 Group financial record FOR THE FIVE YEARS ENDED 31 DECEMBER
Specialist Technical 155.7 151.8 129.4 121.5 81.9 Offshore Oil 56.4 55.1 63.0 104.9 99.2 Underlying operating profit Marine Support 24.5 21.0 19.3 14.2 18.3 Specialist Technical 21.1 19.9 13.9 13.3 7.7 Offshore Oil 3.8 4.2 7.4 22.4 19.7 Tankships 8.8 8.2 7.2 4.7 4.0 Common costs 2.4 2.5 2.2 3.1 3.1 Net finance costs 5.5 5.0 4.4 4.6 5.3 Underlying profit before taxation 50.3 45.8 41.2 46.9 41.3 Separately disclosed items 1.3 0.9 5.0 2.3 4.9 Profit before taxation 49.0 44.9 46.2 49.2 46.2 Taxation 8.3 6.8 5.5 8.7 7.5 Profit after taxation 40.7 38.1 40.7 40.5 38.7 Intangible assets 199.2 180.5 156.5 127.1 113.7 Property plant and equipment 132.5 131.0 127.6 116.6 108.2 Investment in associates and joint ventures 9.4 7.8 7.7 10.6 10.8 Working capital 117.8 86.3 68.1 49.5 44.8 Contingent consideration 12.8 9.2 14.5 9.1 12.1 Pension obligations 19.8 26.8 27.0 21.8 23.1 Taxation 7.6 5.6 4.1 6.4 4.2 Capital employed 418.7 364.0 314.3 266.5 238.1 Net borrowings 132.5 105.7 93.9 62.3 54.3 pence pence pence pence pence Earnings per share
Underlying diluted 81.4 76.3 68.5 74.0 65.6 Dividends declared per share 28.7 26.1 23.8 22.0 20.0 Other key performance indicators Operating margin % 11.0% 10.9% 10.4% 11.6% 11.3% Return on capital employed posttaxation % 12.2% 13.0% 13.5% 16.5% 16.9% Net gearing % 46.5% 41.0% 43.0% 30.7% 29.6% Dividend cover times 2.8 2.9 2.9 3.4 3.3 111 JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT Notice of Annual General Meeting Notice is hereby given that the Annual General Meeting AGM of James Fisher and Sons plc will be held at the Abbey House Hotel Abbey Road BarrowinFurness LA13 0PA on Thursday 3 May 2018 at 11.00am to consider and if thought fit to pass Resolutions 1 to 15 inclusive as ordinary resolutions and Resolutions 16 to 19 as special resolutions.
Ordinary Resolutions Resolution 1 To receive the Annual Accounts and the reports of the Directors and the auditor thereon for the year ended 31 December 2017.
Resolution 2 To approve the remuneration policy contained in the Annual report on remuneration for the year ended 31 December 2017 as set out on pages 42 to 45 inclusive in the Annual Report and Accounts.
Resolution 3 To approve the Annual statement by the chairman of the Remuneration Committee and the Annual report on remuneration other than the part containing the remuneration policy for the year ended 31 December 2017 as set out on pages 40 and 41 and on pages 45 to 53 inclusive in the Annual Report and Accounts.
Resolution 4 To declare a final dividend for the year ended 31 December 2017 of 19.30p per ordinary share.
Resolution 5 To reelect Mr N P Henry as a Director of the Company.
Resolution 6 To reelect Mr S C Kilpatrick as a Director of the Company.
Resolution 7 To reelect Mr M S Paul as a Director of the Company.
Resolution 8 To reelect Ms A I Comiskey as a Director of the Company.
Resolution 9 To reelect Mr D G Moorhouse as a Director of the Company.
Resolution 10 To reelect Mr M J L Salter as a Director of the Company.
Resolution 11 To elect Mr J R Atkinson as a Director of the Company.
Resolution 12 To elect Mr F H S Graham as a Director of the Company.
Resolution 13 To reappoint KPMG LLP as auditor of the Company to hold office until the conclusion of the next AGM of the Company.
Resolution 14 To authorise the Audit Committee to determine the auditors remuneration.
Resolution 15 That the Directors of the Company be and are hereby generally and unconditionally authorised for the purposes of section 551 of the Companies Act 2006 the Act to exercise all the powers of the Company to allot shares in the Company and to grant rights to subscribe for and convert any security into shares in the Company Rights up to an aggregate nominal amount of 4183378 provided that this authority shall expire on the date of the next AGM of the Company or if earlier on 30 June 2019 save that the Company shall be entitled to make offers or agreements before the expiry of such authority which would or might require shares to be allotted or Rights to be granted after such expiry and the Directors shall be entitled to allot shares and grant Rights pursuant to any such offer or agreement as if this authority had not expired and that all authorities previously granted to the Directors to allot shares and grant Rights that remain unexercised at the commencement of this meeting be and are hereby revoked.
Special Resolutions Resolution 16 That subject to the passing of Resolution 15 the Directors be and are hereby given power to allot equity securities as defined in section 560 of the Companies Act 2006 the Act of the Company for cash pursuant to the authority conferred by Resolution 15 andor to sell ordinary shares held by the Company as treasury shares for cash as if section  of JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 NOTICE OF ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING CONTINUED the Act did not apply to such allotment or sale provided that this power shall be limited to the allotment of equity securities in connection with an offer of securities in favour of the holders of ordinary shares on the register of members at such record date as the Directors may determine and other persons entitled to participate therein where the equity securities respectively attributable to the interests of the ordinary shareholders and other persons are proportionate as nearly as may be practicable to the respective numbers of ordinary shares held or deemed to be held by them on any such record date subject to such exclusions or other arrangements as the Directors may deem necessary or expedient to deal with treasury shares fractional entitlements or legal or practical problems arising under the laws of any overseas territory or the requirements of any regulatory body or stock exchange or by virtue of shares being represented by depositary receipts or any other matter and the allotment otherwise than pursuant to subparagraph a above to any person or persons of equity securities up to an aggregate nominal amount of 627507 and shall expire upon the expiry of the general authority conferred by Resolution 15 above save that the Company shall be entitled to make offers or agreements before the expiry of such power which would or might require equity securities to be allotted after such expiry and the Directors shall be entitled to allot equity securities pursuant to any such offer or agreement as if the power conferred hereby had not expired.
Resolution 17 That subject to the passing of Resolution 15 the Directors be and are hereby given power in addition to any authority granted under Resolution 16 to allot equity securities as defined in section 560 of the Companies Act 2006 the Act for cash under the authority given by Resolution 15 andor to sell ordinary shares held by the Company as treasury shares for cash as if section 561 of the Act did not apply to any such allotment or sale such authority to be limited to the allotment of equity securities or sale of treasury shares up to a nominal amount of 627507 and used only for the purposes of financing or refinancing if the authority is to be used within six months after the original transaction a transaction which the Directors of the Company determine to be an acquisition or other capital investment of a kind contemplated by the Statement of Principles on Disapplying PreEmption Rights most recently published by the PreEmption Group prior to the date of this Notice and shall expire upon the expiry of the general authority conferred by Resolution 15 above save that the Company shall be entitled to make offers or agreements before the expiry of such power which would or might require equity securities to be allotted after such expiry and the Directors shall be entitled to allot equity securities pursuant to any such offer or agreement as if the power conferred hereby had not expired.
Resolution 18 The Company be and is hereby generally and unconditionally authorised for the purposes of section 701 of the Companies Act 2006 the Act to make one or more market purchases within the meaning of section  of the Act on the London Stock Exchange of up to a maximum aggregate of 2510027 ordinary shares of 25p each in the capital of the Company at a price per share exclusive of expenses of not less than 25p and not more than an amount equal to the higher of a 105% of the average of the middle market quotations for such ordinary share as derived from the London Stock Exchange Official List for the five business days immediately preceding the day of purchase and b an amount equal to the higher of the price of the last independent trade of an ordinary share and the highest current independent bid for an ordinary share on the trading venue where the purchase is carried out unless previously renewed revoked or varied such authority will expire at the close of the next AGM of the Company or if earlier on 30 June 2019 save that the Company may purchase ordinary shares at any later date where such purchase is pursuant to any contract or contracts made by the Company before the expiry of this authority.
Resolution 19 That any general meeting other than an AGM may be called on not less than 14 clear days notice.
By order of the Board Jim Marsh Company Secretary 26 February 2018 Registered office Fisher House PO Box 4 BarrowinFurness Cumbria LA14 1HR Registered in England number
Any member who has not elected to receive a printed copy of the Annual Report and Accounts for 2017 may obtain copies by writing to the Company Secretary Fisher House PO Box 4 BarrowinFurness Cumbria LA14 1HR.
Members who wish to receive the printed Annual Report and Accounts free of charge in future years should write to the Companys Registrars FREEPOST SAS 34 Beckenham Road BR3 9ZA.
Please note that delivery using this service can take up to 5 business days.
JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT Any member entitled to vote at the above meeting may appoint one or more proxies to attend speak and vote on a show of hands or on a poll instead of him.
A proxy need not be a member of the Company but must attend the meeting in order to represent a member.
If you wish your proxy to speak on your behalf you will need to appoint someone other than the Chairman or other Director as your proxy.
A proxy could be the Chairman another Director of the Company or if you wish the proxy to speak on your behalf another person who has agreed to attend and represent a member.
Details of how to appoint the Chairman or another person as a proxy using the proxy form are set out in the notes to the proxy form.
A member can appoint more than one proxy in relation to the meeting provided that each proxy is appointed to exercise the rights attaching to different shares held by him.
Completion of the proxy form will not preclude a member from attending and voting in person in which case that members proxy appointment will automatically be terminated.
Proxy forms duly executed including any authority under which it is executed or a copy of the authority certified notarially should be returned to Link Asset Services 34 Beckenham Road BR3 4TU.
Alternatively you may submit your proxy form online by accessing the shareholder portal at site logging in and selecting the proxy voting link.
If you have not previously registered for electronic communications you will first be asked to register as a new user for which you will require your investor code which can be found on your proxy card share certificate or dividend tax voucher family name and postcode if resident in the UK.
In each case your proxy instruction must be received no later than 11.00am on 1 May 2018.
If you are a CREST member see note 4 below.
The deadline for receipt of proxy appointments also applies in relation to amended instructions and any attempt to amend a proxy appointment after the relevant deadline will be disregarded.
Where two or more valid proxy appointments are received in respect of the same share in respect of the same meeting the one which is last sent shall be treated as replacing and revoking the other or others.
The right to appoint a proxy cannot be exercised by persons who have been nominated by a member to enjoy information rights under section 146 of the Companies Act 2006 Nominated Person they can only be exercised by the member.
However a Nominated Person may have a right under an agreement between him and the member by whom he was nominated to be appointed as a proxy for the meeting or to have someone else so appointed.
If
Nominated persons should contact the registered member by whom they were nominated in respect of these arrangements.
CREST members who wish to appoint a proxy or proxies by utilising the CREST electronic proxy appointment service may do so by utilising the procedures described in the CREST Manual available via site.
CREST personal members or other CREST sponsored members and those CREST members who have appointed a voting service providers should refer to their CREST sponsor or voting service providers who will be able to take the appropriate action on their behalf.
In order for a proxy appointment made by means of CREST to be valid the appropriate CREST message a CREST Proxy Instruction must be properly authenticated in accordance with Euroclear UK and Ireland Limiteds EUI specifications and must contain the information required for such instructions as described in the CREST
The message regardless of whether it constitutes the appointment of a proxy or an amendment to the instruction given to a previously appointed proxy must in order to be valid be transmitted so as to be received by the issuers agent ID number  RA10 by the latest times for receipt of proxy appointments specified in the Notice of
For this purpose the time of receipt will be taken to be the time as determined by the timestamp applied to the message by the CREST Applications Host from which the issuers agent is able to retrieve the message by enquiry to CREST in the manner prescribed by CREST.
The Company may treat as invalid a CREST Proxy Instruction in the circumstances set out in Regulation 355 a of the Uncertificated Securities Regulations 2001.
A member of the Company which is a corporation may authorise a person or persons to act as its representatives at the AGM.
In accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006 each such representative may exercise on behalf of the corporation the same powers as the corporation could exercise if it were an individual member of the Company provided that they do not do so in relation to the same shares.
Representatives of shareholders that are corporations will have to produce evidence of their proper appointment when attending the general meeting.
Please contact our Registrar if you need any further guidance on this.
Copies of the Directors service contracts the letters of appointment of the NonExecutive Directors together with a copy of the Companys Articles of Association will be available for inspection at the Companys registered office during normal business hours on any weekday Saturdays Sundays and English public holidays excepted until the close of the AGM and are available for inspection at the place of the AGM from 10.30am on the date of the meeting until the close of the meeting.
JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 NOTICE OF ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING CONTINUED Members satisfying the thresholds in section 527 of the Companies Act 2006 the Act can require the Company to publish a statement on its website setting out i any matter relating to the audit of the Companys accounts including the auditors report and the conduct of the audit that are to be laid before the meeting or ii any circumstances connected with an auditor of the Company ceasing to hold office since the previous meeting at which Annual Accounts and Reports were laid in accordance with section 437 of the Act that the members propose to raise at the meeting.
The Company cannot require the members requesting the publication to pay its expenses.
Any statement placed on the website must also be sent to the Companys auditor no later than the time it is made available on the website.
The business which may be dealt with at the meeting includes any statement that the Company has been required to publish on its website.
The Company must cause to be answered any question relating to the business being dealt with at the meeting which is put by a member attending the meeting except where a to do so would interfere unduly with the preparation for the meeting or involve the disclosure of confidential information b the answer has already been given on a website in the form of an answer to a question or c it is undesirable in the interests of the Company or the good order of the meeting that the question be answered.
A copy of this Notice and other information required by section 311A of the Act can be found at site A member may not use any electronic address provided by the Company in this document or any related documents including the proxy form for communication with the Company for any purpose other than as expressly stated in it.
Only persons entered on the register of members of the Company at close of business on 1 May 2018 or if the meeting is adjourned at close of business on the date which is two days prior to the adjourned meeting shall be entitled to attend and vote at the meeting or adjourned meeting.
Changes to entries on the register after this time shall be disregarded in determining the rights of persons to attend or vote and the number of votes they may cast at the meeting or adjourned meeting.
As at 26 February 2018 being the latest practical date before the publication of this Notice the Companys issued share capital consists of 50200541 ordinary shares carrying one vote each and 100000 preference shares carrying one vote each.
Therefore the total voting rights in the Company are 50300541.
There are no shares in treasury.
As soon as practicable following the AGM the results of the voting at the meeting and the number of votes cast for and against and the number of votes withheld in respect of each resolution will be announced via a Regulatory Information Service and also placed on the Companys website at site 115 JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT Explanatory Notes Resolution 1  Annual Report The Companies Act 2006 requires the Directors of a public company to lay its Annual Report before the Company in general meeting giving shareholders the opportunity to ask questions on the contents.
The Annual Report comprises the accounts the auditors report the Directors report the Directors remuneration report and the Strategic report.
The
Company proposes as an ordinary resolution a resolution on its Annual Report in accordance with the UK Corporate Governance Code Code.
Resolution 2  Approval of the Directors remuneration policy In accordance with the Companies Act 2006 the Company proposes an ordinary resolution to approve the Directors remuneration policy contained in the Annual report on remuneration.
The proposed policy is set out on pages 42 to 45 of the Annual Report.
The vote on Resolution 2 is a binding vote and if passed will mean that the Company can only make remuneration payments to a current or future director or a payment for loss of office to a past director if that payment is made in accordance with the approved policy.
The Company is required to ensure that a vote on its remuneration policy takes place at least every three years or earlier if any changes to the policy are proposed.
As the Directors remuneration policy was last approved at the 2015 AGM it is required to be approved at this years AGM.
Resolution 3  Approval of the Annual statement by the chairman of the Remuneration Committee and the Annual report on remuneration The Company proposes an ordinary resolution to approve the Annual statement by the chairman of the Remuneration Committee and the Annual report on remuneration for the financial year ended 31 December 2017 other than the Directors remuneration policy covered by Resolution 2.
The
Annual statement and the Annual report on remuneration are set out on pages 40 and 41 and on pages 45 to 53 of the Annual Report.
The vote on this Resolution 3 is advisory only and the Directors entitlement to remuneration is not conditional on its being passed.
The Companys auditor KPMG LLP  has audited those parts of the Directors remuneration report that are required to be audited.
Resolution 4  Declaration of final dividend A final dividend can only be paid after it has been approved by the shareholders in general meeting and may not exceed the amount recommended by the Board.
The Directors recommend a final dividend of 19.30p per ordinary share in respect of the financial year ended 31 December 2017.
If the meeting approves Resolution 4 the final dividend will be paid on 11 May 2018 to ordinary shareholders who are on the register at the close of business on 6 April 2018.
Resolutions 5 to 12  Reelection and election of Directors The Companys Articles of Association require that one third of the Directors will retire each year and that each Director must stand for reelection at least every three years.
Charles Rice is standing down from the Board at the AGM and therefore will not be seeking reelection.
Subject to his reelection Malcolm Paul will replace Charles Rice as Chairman from the end of the
Justin Atkinson who joined the Company on 1 February 2018 as a NonExecutive Director will be proposed for election for the first time at this years AGM as will Fergus Graham who joined the Board on 1 March 2018 as an Executive Director .
With respect to the other Directors in accordance with the provision of the Code they will all retire from office and offer themselves for reelection at the AGM.
Following performance reviews the Chairman and the Board believe that each of the Directors standing for reelection continue to perform effectively and with commitment to their role including commitment of time for Board and Committee meetings and other duties.
In addition the Board believes that Justin Atkinson should be elected because he will bring experience of successfully managing a group on a similar growth path to the Group.
The Board also considers that each of the NonExecutive Directors is independent in character and judgement.
Each of Resolutions 5 to 12 shall be proposed as ordinary resolutions.
Biographical details of each of our Directors appear on pages 26 and 27 of the Annual Report.
Resolutions 13 and 14  Reappointment of auditorauditors remuneration The Company is required to appoint an auditor at each general meeting at which accounts are laid before the Company to hold office until the conclusion of the next such meeting.
These resolutions propose the reappointment of KPMG LLP as the Companys auditor to hold office from the conclusion of the AGM until the conclusion of the next general meeting at which accounts are laid before the Company and authorises the Audit Committee to agree the auditors remuneration.
Resolution 15  Authority to allot shares Authority is given to the Directors to allot shares in the Company and to grant rights to subscribe for and convert any security into shares in the Company up to a total nominal amount of 4183378 representing approximately 33% of the nominal value of the Companys total issued ordinary share capital as at 26 February 2018 being the latest practical date before publication of this Notice.
The authority will expire at the conclusion of the AGM to be held in 2019 or if earlier on JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 NOTICE OF ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING CONTINUED 30 June 2019 and replaces an authority granted on 4 May 2017 which expires at the conclusion of the forthcoming AGM.
The Directors have no present intention to exercise this authority.
At 26 February 2018 the Company does not hold any treasury shares.
Resolutions 16 and 17  Permission to allot a limited number of shares other than to existing shareholders Resolution 16 which will be proposed as a special resolution seeks to renew the authority conferred on the Directors at last years AGM to issue equity securities of the Company for cash without first offering them to existing shareholders in proportion to their existing shareholdings.
Other than in connection with a rights issue or other preemptive offer where difficulties arise in offering shares to certain overseas shareholders and in relation to fractional entitlements the authority contained in this resolution will be limited to an aggregate nominal value of 627507 which includes the sale on a non preemptive basis of any shares the Company holds in treasury for cash and which represents approximately 5% of the Companys issued ordinary share capital as at 26 February 2018 being the latest practicable date prior to the publication of this Notice.
In line with best practice the Company has not issued more than 7.5% of its issued share capital on a non pre emptive basis over the last three years and the Directors confirm their intention to follow the best practice set out in the PreEmption Groups Statement of Principles which provides that companies should not issue shares for cash on a non preemptive basis representing more than 7.5% of the Companys issued share capital in any rolling three year period other than in connection with an acquisition or specified capital investment as described in the PreEmption Groups Statement of Principles without prior consultation with shareholders.
The Directors have no present intention to exercise this authority.
Resolution 17 is in addition to Resolution 16 and is also a special resolution.
In line with the PreEmption Groups Statement of Principles as updated in March 2015 Resolution 17 will enable the Directors to allot shares for cash or sell shares out of treasury up to a further nominal amount of 627507 representing approximately 5% of the Companys issued ordinary share capital as at 26 February 2018 being the latest practicable date before the publication of this Notice without first having to offer them to existing shareholders in proportion to their existing shareholdings.
The authority under Resolution 17 will only be used to allot shares or sell shares out of treasury in connection with an acquisition or specified capital investment of a kind contemplated by the Statement of Principles and which is announced contemporaneously with the allotment or has taken place in the preceding sixmonth period and is disclosed in the announcement of the allotment.
The Directors have no current intention of exercising this authority.
If this authority is used the Company will publish details of the placing in its next Annual Report and Accounts.
The authorities under Resolutions 16 and 17 will lapse at the conclusion of the AGM to be held in 2019 or on 30 June 2019 whichever is earlier.
The maximum nominal value of equity securities which could be allotted if both authorities were used would be 1255014 which represents approximately 10% of the Companys issued ordinary share capital as at 26 February 2018.
Resolution 18  Authority to purchase own shares This special resolution gives the Company authority to purchase in the market up to 2510027 of its ordinary shares of 25p each representing approximately 5% of the Companys total issued ordinary share capital.
The minimum and maximum prices at which such shares can be purchased is as stated in the Resolution.
The authority will expire at the conclusion of the AGM to be held in 2019 or on 30 June 2019 whichever is earlier and replaces a similar authority granted on 4 May 2017 which expires at the conclusion of the forthcoming AGM.
If any ordinary shares purchased pursuant to this authority are not held by the Company as treasury shares then such shares would be immediately cancelled in which event the number of ordinary shares in issue would be reduced.
As at 26 February 2018 being the latest practical date before publication of this Notice there were options over ordinary shares in the capital of the Company representing 1.88% of the Companys total issued ordinary share capital.
If the authority to purchase the Companys ordinary shares was exercised in full and those shares were subsequently cancelled these options would represent 1.97% of the Companys total issued ordinary share capital.
The Directors have no present intention to exercise this authority and in reaching their decision to purchase ordinary shares will take into account amongst other things the Companys cash resources and capital requirements the effect of any purchase on earnings per share and whether it is in the best interests of shareholders generally.
Resolution 19  Authority to hold general meetings other than an AGM on 14 clear days notice The notice period required by the Companies Act 2006 for general meetings is 21 clear days unless shareholders approve a shorter notice period which cannot however be less than 14 clear days.
AGMs must always be held on at least 21 clear days notice.
This special resolution renews an authority given at last years AGM which enables the Company to call general meetings other than an AGM on 14 clear days notice.
In order to preserve this ability shareholders must have approved the calling of meetings on 14 clear days notice.
JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT Resolution 19 which is proposed as a special resolution seeks such approval.
The approval will be effective until the Companys next AGM when it is intended that a similar resolution will be proposed.
The shorter notice period would not be used as a matter of routine for general meetings but only where taking into account the circumstances and noting the recommendations of the UK Corporate Governance Code the Directors consider that the flexibility is merited by the business of the meeting and is in the interests of the Company and shareholders as a whole.
Recommendation
The Directors consider that the proposed resolutions set out in the Notice of AGM are in the best interests of the Company and its shareholders as a whole and they unanimously recommend that you vote in favour of them as the Directors intend to do in respect of their own holdings of shares in the
JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 Investor information Registered Office and Advisers Company Secretary and registered office J H J Marsh James Fisher and Sons plc Fisher House PO Box 4
Cumbria LA14 1HR Registered no.
Registrar
Link Asset Services 34 Beckenham Road
Kent BR3 4TU
KPMG LLP 1 St Peters Square Manchester M2 3AE
Barclays Bank PLC Barclays Commercial Bank 1st Floor 3 Hardman Street
Manchester M3 3HF DBS Bank Ltd London Branch 4th Floor Paternoster House 65 St Pauls Churchyard London EC4M 8AB
First Floor East Bridge Mills
Kendal LA9 4UB HSBC Bank PLC 2nd Floor 4 Hardman Square
Manchester M3 3EB Lloyds Bank PLC 8th Floor 40 Spring Gardens Manchester M2 1EN Santander UK PLC 2 Triton Square Regents Place
NW1 3AN Merchant bankers E C Hambro Rabben and Partners Ltd 3233 St Jamess Place London SW1A 1NR
Investec Bank UK Limited 2 Gresham Street London EC2V 7QP Jefferies International Limited Vintners Place 68 Upper Thames Street London EC4V 3BJ Financial Calendar 5 April 2018 Ex dividend date for 2017 final dividend 6 April 2018 Record date 3 May 2018 Annual General Meeting 11 May 2018 Payment of 2017 final dividend 29 August 2018 Announcement of 2018 Half Year results 3 JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017
This Annual Report has been prepared for the members of the Company only.
The Company its Directors employees and agents do not accept or assume responsibility to any other person in connection with this document and any such responsibility or liability is expressly disclaimed.
This Annual Report contains certain forwardlooking statements that are subject to future events including amongst other matters the economic and business circumstances occurring from time to time in the countries and markets in which the Group operates and the availability of financing to the Group.
As such the forwardlooking statements involve risk and uncertainty.
Accordingly whilst it is believed the expectations reected in these statements are reasonable at the date of publication of this Annual Report they may be affected by a wide range of matters which could cause actual results to differ materially from those anticipated.
The forwardlooking statements will not be updated during the year.
Nothing in this Annual Report should be construed as a profit forecast.
Highlights
Chairmans statement
Chief Executives review 4 Business model
Sector review
Financial review
Key performance indicators Principal risks and uncertainties Corporate responsibility Board of Directors Corporate governance report Audit Committee report Nominations Committee report 38 Directors remuneration report Directors report Independent auditors report Consolidated income statement Consolidated statement of other comprehensive income Consolidated and Company statement of financial position Consolidated and Company cash ow statement Consolidated statement of changes in equity Company statement of changes in equity Notes to the financial statements Subsidiaries and associated undertakings Group financial record 110 Notice of Annual General Meeting Investor information James Fisher and Sons plc is a leading service provider to all sectors of the global marine industry and a specialist supplier of engineering services to the energy industry.
We employ 2700 people across 18 countries.
Our companies and services have a focus on marine related activities which operate in potentially demanding environments where specialist skills are rewarded.
Through innovation and acquisition we have developed marketleading businesses through our four divisions Marine Support Specialist Technical Offshore Oil and Tankships.
Governance Financial statements Strategic report JAMES FISHER AND SONS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 Annual Report and
James Fisher and Sons plc Fisher House PO Box 4
Cumbria
LA14 1HR T 0telF 0telemail This Report has been printed in the UK.
Our printers are environmental management system ISO 14001accredited and Forest Stewardship Council FSC chain of custody certified.
This paper is environmentally friendly ECF elemental chlorinefree and wood free with a high content of selected preconsumer recycled material.
The mill is fully FSCcertified.
The paper is also completely biodegradable and recyclable.
If you have finished reading this Report and no longer wish to retain it please pass it on to other interested readers return it to James Fisher and Sons plc or dispose of it in your recycled paper waste.
Thank you.
This Annual Report is available at site James Fisher and Sons plc Annual Report 2017 www .
