GLOBAL SPECIALISTS Annual Report 2017 2 Global Specialists 4 Financial Highlights 5 Where we Operate 6 Our Mission Strategy and Values 7 Our Colleagues Clients and Culture 8 Our Businesses at a Glance 10 JLT International Network
Chairmans Statement
Chief Executives Review
Market Factors impacting JLT Our Business Model Reviewing and Delivering our Strategy Key Performance Indicators Group Executive Committee Review of Operations Finance Directors Review
Risk Management Report
47 Corporate Responsibility 57 Corporate Governance Report 67 Audit and Risk Committee Report Nominations Committee Report
78 Directors Remuneration Report
Directors Report
Independent Auditors Report
Consolidated Income Statement Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income Consolidated Balance Sheet Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows Significant Accounting Policies Notes to the Financial Statements Company Financial Statements Group Five Year Review 178 Advisers and Shareholder Information
JL T Of fices 181 Corporate Sponsorship STRATEGIC REPORT This section contains information comprising the Companys Strategic Report.
It includes an introduction to JLT with a review of 2017 including performance highlights information on our colleagues our culture and our mis sion strategy and values.
It also includes the Chairmans Statement Chief Executives and Finance Directors Reviews as well as details of our markets business model strategic progress operations and key risks.
CORPORATE
GOVERNANCE
This section includes a review of our corpo rate governance and summaries of the work of our Board and its Committees.
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS This section includes the Group and Company financial statements and r elated notes.
ADVISERS and
INFORMATION
This section includes the Gr oup five year r eview shareholder information and information regarding the Gr oup s advisers and principal of fices.
CONTENTS
FRONT COVER JLT provides services to two of the top four worlds largest communications network manufacturers.
Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 1 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION 2 Global Specialists 4 Financial Highlights 5 Where we Operate 6 Our Mission Strategy and Values 7 Our Colleagues Clients and Culture 8 Our Businesses at a Glance 10 JLT International Network
Chairmans Statement
Chief Executives Review
Market Factors impacting JLT Our Business Model Reviewing and Delivering our Strategy Key Performance Indicators Group Executive Committee Review of Operations Finance Directors Review
Risk Management Report
47 Corporate Responsibility STRATEGIC REPORT 2 STRATEGIC REPORT 100bn
JLTs London construction team manages the insurance requirements for projects globally with a value in excess of 100bn
EMPLOYEE
BENEFITS
JLT is the UKs largest administrator of private sector pensions Focusing and growing in specialist areas where we offer distinctive products services and independent choice such as GLOBAL SPECIALISTS
40%
Representing 40% of the worlds airline operators with 10 or more aircraft in service Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 3 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION 30%
JLT handles in excess of 30% of the worlds mobile drilling rig fleet 50% REAL ESTATE Broker to more than 50% of all commercial properties in the City of London 60% SPECIAL RISKS JLT has been broker to over 60% of the worlds biggest sporting events over the last decade 4 STRATEGIC REPORT m 2017 2016 Change Total revenue 1386.0 1261.3 10% Underlying trading profit 213.7 193.7 10% Underlying profit before tax 191.5 172.6 11% Reported profit before tax 181.6 134.9 35% SEGMENTAL BREAKDOWN We are pleased to present a set of results that reflect substantial financial progress.
Pence per share 2017 2016 Change Underlying diluted EPS 58.5p 51.4p 14% Reported diluted EPS 54.7p 37.8p 45% Total dividend per share 34.0p 32.2p 6% % 2017 Growth Rate % 2017 Growth Rate % 2017 Growth Rate % 2017 Growth Rateteltelteltel 1386.0 1261.3 1155.1
FINANCIAL HIGHLIGHTS
Total Revenue Underlying Trading Profit Underlying Profit Before Tax Underlying Diluted EPS
Rest of the World 3% Europe 8% Australia and New Zealand 13% Asia 16% Turnover  Revenue excluding investment income 2017 Turnover by Division 2017 Turnover by Location of Client 1378.6m 1378.6m United Kingdom 26% Americas 34% Risk and Insurance 1058.4m % Employee Benefits % Underlying results exclude exceptional items.
See notes 1 and 3 of the Financial Statements on pages 118 and 122 for details of exceptional items.
Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 5 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION JLT is a global organisation of specialists and one of the worlds leading providers of insurance reinsurance and employee benefits related advice brokerage and associated services.
We own offices in over 40 territories with more than 10000 colleagues.
Supported by the JLT International Network we service clients in over 135 countries.
Our collaborative approach enables us to share knowledge solve problems and deliver the best solutions for our clients.
We have the freedom to take on new challenges think creatively and capture opportunities that others may not.
We always aim to do what is right for our clients our colleagues our trading partners and our shareholders.
Owned locations
Australia
Bahrain
Barbados
Belgium
Bermuda
Brazil
Canada
Chile
China
Colombia
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Guernsey
Hong Kong
Indonesia
Ireland
Japan
Macau
Malaysia
Myanmar
Netherlands
New Zealand
Peru
Philippines
Singapore
South Africa South Korea
Switzerland
Taiwan
Thailand
Turkey
UAE Dubai
USA
Vietnam
Associates
AustriaCentral and Eastern Europe
India
Italy
Malta
Mexico
Spain
The Group has agreed the sale of its holding in its associate in Mexico which is expected to complete in early 2018.
See page 10 for more detail on the JLT International Network.
WHERE WE OPERATE
EMPLOYEES
COUNTRIES 6 STRATEGIC REPORT OUR VALUES
We recognise that our people drive our success.
Our people work together as One JLT to share knowledge solve problems and deliver the best solutions for our clients.
RIGOUR
We work with integrity and discipline and stand up for what we believe in.
Our work is thorough and our solutions are robust because it matters to us to do what is right for our clients our colleagues our trading partners and our shareholders.
AGILITY
We think fast move swiftly and act decisively.
Our entrepreneurial drive gives us the freedom to take on new challenges think creatively and capture opportunities that others may not.
OUR MISSION OUR MISSION STRATEGY and VALUES OUR STRATEGY Our strategy balances the interests of our four key stakeholders our clients our colleagues our trading partners and our shareholders.
There are four pillars to our strategy To become the leading global specialist risk adviser and broker.
CULTURE
Living a distinctive entrepreneurial and client focused culture that attracts develops and retains the best experts.
SPECIALIST
Focusing on growing in specialist areas where we have deep knowledge and experience understanding of the risks involved first rate transactional capability and market standing contacts and reputation.
COORDINATION
Ensuring global coordination across divisions regions and industry practices to provide a seamless service to clients.
INTERNATIONAL
Continuing to develop JLTs International Network to ensure that we have the right representation in the right locations.
Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 7 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION OUR COLLEAGUES OUR CLIENTS OUR TRADING PARTNERS OUR SHAREHOLDERS Our colleagues are the reason for JLTs success.
We collaborate take personal accountability and are recognised and rewarded for our efforts.
OUR CLIENTS Our clients value our specialists who solve their complex risk challenges with creativity and collaboration.
We are clientfirst and put our clients at the heart of everything we do.
We are not all things to all people.
We understand that success requires focus and tradeoffs and when specialty and expertise are aligned we can achieve unparalleled results for our clients.
OUR CULTURE Our core culture is about collaborating to serve clients.
Our colleagues work together to share their strengths globally for their clients pooling experience and developing each other s expertise.
Our culture helps us to attract and retain the very best talent by valuing and recognising their expertise.
Our clients colleagues and trading partners work with us because our culture delivers consistent outcomes.
We are fiercely protective of our culture and as we grow we take care to preserve it.
We ensure that it always supports the very best talent and drives successful and compelling client results.
OUR COLLEAGUES We believe that our people are the best in the industry.
We attract and retain specialists who want to work with the leading global specialist risk adviser and broker.
We invest in our colleagues by offering a comprehensive range of learning and development opportunities that stretch far beyond mandatory training courses.
During the year we rolled out our Growing Every Day initiative globally providing training to managers to help them support employees with feedback and a greater focus on career development.
2017 also saw the launch of the JLT University which aims to be the single point of entry for all learning activity across the Group.
The JLT University provides access to technical and soft skills training in a consistent and accessible way globally.
We continue to focus on leadership development to prepare our future leaders across the business.
INTERNATIONAL SENIOR MANAGEMENT
In 2017 JLT once again ran the International Senior Management Programme ISMP for some of our most promising leaders drawn from across the Group.
Its purpose was to build worldclass leadership capabilities deepen peoples understanding of the JLT Group promote greater collaboration strengthen relationships and preserve the Groups culture.
Employees attending the 2017 ISMP included Mark McNulty Philip Rong Luis Ganoza Tyrone Farinha Pedro Farme Alok Mathur Kevin Rimmer Stuart Winter Toby Pollard Joe Addison David Flandro Matthew Bacon Collin Yap David Smith Doris Yung Colin Daly Beatriz Protasio Carrie ONeil Maurice Gatto Toby Sisson and Lucas Salcedo.
ENTREPRENEURIAL
COLLABORATIVE
INDEPENDENT
CLIENT FIRST
INNOVATIVE EXPERT OUR COLLEAGUES CLIENTS and CULTURE
CULTURE 8 STRATEGIC REPORT RISK and INSURANCE RISK and INSURANCE Our Risk and Insurance business comprises our global Specialty insurance and Reinsurance broking operations.
Our specialist teams focus on those sectors where we have a distinctive level of knowledge and expertise.
Working in partnership with clients to manage the complex risks they face we act as their intermediary with insurers and reinsurers and provide related risk management analytical advisory and other services.
Advice and consultancy Advice to our clients on their insurance and reinsurance programmes ensuring that they understand the likelihood and potential severity of the risks they face the options available to mitigate these risks and the potential cost of doing so.
Brokerage and placement Acting on our clients behalf using our specialist knowledge to negotiate and place insurance cover with insurers and reinsurers all over the world.
Specialist insurance products Providing our clients with access to certain exclusive insurance facilities binders and other products without taking balance sheet underwriting risk.
Other services Providing a range of related services to our clients and insurance market counterparties in areas such as captive management claims management and administration and capital raising and corporate insurance advice.
OUR GLOBAL RISK and INSURANCE BUSINESSES PROVIDE SERVICES INCLUDING
1065.8m % 2016 960.9m Trading Margin % 2016 17% Underlying Trading Profit % 2016 166.6m
2016 5460 RISK and INSURANCE OUR BUSINESSES JLT Europe p28 JLT Re p28 JLT Australia and NZ p29 JLT Asia p29 JLT Latin America p30 JLT Specialty USA p30 JLT Canada JLT Middle East and Africa p31 JLT Insurance
CONTRIBUTION TO GROUP REVENUE 2017 % Excludes employees in shared service operations OUR BUSINESSES AT A GLANCE Throughout 2017 our business activities were undertaken by two divisions Risk and Insurance and Employee Benefits.
Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 9 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION EMPLOYEE BENEFITS EMPLOYEE BENEFITS Our Employee Benefits business offers a comprehensive range of employee benefits advice and services to companies pension trustees and individuals.
Our specialist teams act as advisers intermediaries and service providers in the areas of pensions consultancy and administration employee benefits and healthcare life insurance and wealth management.
Retirement Solutions Providing a range of actuarial and administration services for pension trustees corporate sponsors and scheme members including support of outsourced scheme administration payroll communications documentation and technical services.
Offering integrated risk management services to UK pensions trustees and corporate sponsors including actuarial investment and risk transfer consultancy scheme design governance and independent trustee services.
Benefits Consulting Advice on employee health and benefit programmes medical claims administration occupational health and rehabilitation services and placement of health and risk protection policies.
Provision of autoenrolment flexible benefits voluntary benefits and total reward statements through our market leading platform Benpal Scheme design management services including advice on suitable insurance providers for defined contribution pension schemes.
Wealth and Investment
Advice and support to individuals on financial planning including atretirement services tax planning and life protection requirements.
Providing discretionary management of assets for both high net worth individuals and company pension schemes in addition to asset hosting services.
Technology Solutions Provider of one of the most widely used UK pensions administration and fund accounting software platforms to corporate pension schemes.
Providing integrated web solutions to enable members to access information and services facilitating selfservice benefits management.
OUR GLOBAL EMPLOYEE BENEFITS BUSINESSES PROVIDE SERVICES INCLUDING
2016 300.4m Trading Margin % 2016 16% Underlying Trading Profit % 2016 49.5m
2016 2656 EMPLOYEE BENEFITS OUR BUSINESSES UK and Ireland p33 Asia p33 Australia and NZ p33 Latin America p34 Canada p34 Middle East and Africa p34 CONTRIBUTION TO GROUP REVENUE 2017 % Excludes employees in shared service operations 10 STRATEGIC REPORT All brokers in the Network are carefully selected for their specialist knowledge local market reputation and quality of service.
We expect them to have the capability not only to service JLTs multinational clients to the highest standards but to compete for and win the largest accounts in their own territories in collaboration with JLTs Reinsurance Specialty and Employee Benefits teams.
Service standards are codified through our Global Service Standards Guide a set of clear operating procedures designed to ensure that each client regardless of their size consistently receives the highest level of care and attention.
Each member of our Network is also required to adhere to JLTs Code of Ethical Conduct.
A further area of differentiation is JLTs Global Service Team hubs multilingual groups that provide clients with a single point of contact managing their global programmes via the JLT International Network.
These specialty teams are used as a centre of excellence delivering advice to clients and colleagues globally on insurance market practices regulation and the compliance of global insurance programmes in a fastchanging and challenging environment.
Overall responsibility for the Network sits with the JLT International Network Management Team whose role is to ensure common service standards through the sharing of expertise and best practices across the Network whilst offering a clear channel through which to escalate and resolve issues with speed and efficiency.
The JLT International Network offers our multinational clients risk management and employee benefit solutions in over 135 countries providing a global reach.
Our Network is comprised of majorityowned and associate operations in all of the worlds key economies supplemented by nonowned partner operations.
The Network also offers a global distribution channel for JLTs Reinsurance Specialty and Employee Benefits activities.
JLT INTERNATIONAL NETWORK Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 11 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION I am pleased to present the Groups Annual Report for the financial year ended 31 December 2017.
JLT has delivered a strong set of financial results in 2017.
The Group made substantial financial progress returning to strong overall organic revenue growth of 5%.
During the year we carried out a reexamination of the Groups strategy and we have made some important decisions which we believe will position the Group for continued success.
PERFORMANCE
Total revenues increased by 10% or 6% at constant rates of exchange CRE to 1.39 billion.
The Groups underlying trading profit increased by 10% to 213.7 million and by 7% at CRE.
Underlying profit before tax increased by 11% to 191.5 million.
The Groups trading margin was maintained at 15.4%.
Our reported profit before tax increased by 35% to 181.6 million which includes the impact of net exceptional items of 9.9 million.
Reported diluted EPS increased to 54.7p and underlying diluted EPS increased to 58.5p.
INCREASED DIVIDEND The Directors have recommended a final dividend of 21.8 pence per share 2016 20.6 pence for the year to 31 December 2017.
The dividend will be paid on 8 May 2018 to shareholders who are on the register as at 3 April 2018.
This will bring the total dividend for the year to 34.0 pence per share an overall increase of 5.6% and the ninth consecutive year that JLT has paid an increased dividend.
The business has delivered a Total Shareholder Return TSR of 328% over the past nine years as illustrated in the chart on page 87.
CORPORATE ACTIVITY
Our Risk and Insurance businesses delivered organic revenue growth of 5% in the year with strong client retention and new business in JLT Europe delivering good performances from most divisions in challenging market conditions.
The buildout of our US Specialty platform continues with revenues approaching USD 100 million in 2017.
The net investment losses peaked in 2016 and reduced in 2017 and we remain fully focused on achieving profits as planned in 2019.
JLT Re achieved organic revenue growth of 4% with a trading margin of 20% which reflected its continued investment in the business.
The UK and Ireland Employment Benefits businesses saw a return to growth in 2017.
Trading profits increased by 40% from 2016 with organic revenue growth of 8%.
In the year the Group completed three acquisitions for a total consideration of 61.2 million as it continued to build further scale in its existing businesses and geographies.
The Group is making investments to strengthen its representation in continental
These investments support the Groups preparations for different Brexit scenarios.
In light of the investments being made and the preparatory work that has been undertaken we do not anticipate that Brexit will materially impact our ability to serve clients and access markets in the European Union.
CHAIRMANS STATEMENT
The Group made substantial financial progress returning to strong overall organic revenue growth of 5%.
TOTAL REVENUE INCREASE ON 2016 TOTAL DIVIDEND 1.39bn 10% 34.0p Geoffrey Howe 12 STRATEGIC REPORT REEXAMINATION OF GROUP STRATEGY During 2017 we carried out a reexamination of the Groups strategy in order to ensure that it remains appropriate to support and enable our future growth plans so we can continue to create longterm value for our stakeholders.
The review resulted in a number of key conclusions in respect of the future shape of the Groups strategy recognising the importance of JLTs distinctive identity and culture and deep specialist strength as key differentiators between JLT and its larger competitors and the importance of consistent and coordinated collaboration across divisions regions and industry practices.
The review also recognised JLTs international development needs and opportunities including in the US where our representation now creates the opportunity for us to move from an international to a global business.
As a result of the review the Group reformulated its mission during the year To become the leading global specialist risk adviser and broker.
To progress towards our mission the Group is undertaking a number of strategic initiatives including the simplification of our business and management structure.
As we announced in January from 1 April 2018 our regional insurance broking operations will be brought together into an integrated Specialty division.
The Groups businesses will then be structured into three divisions Reinsurance Specialty and Employee Benefits the implementation of a Global Transformation Programme to streamline the operational processes we use to serve clients in each of our divisions to deliver global consistency and eliminate duplicated costs building on the firm foundation we have already established in the US through continuing organic revenue growth complemented by targeted acquisitions and coordinating the marketing and operation of our Employee Benefits activities worldwide.
Further details regarding the strategy review and these key initiatives can be found in the Chief Executives Review on pages 14 to 17 and in the Reviewing and Delivering Our Strategy section on pages 22 to 24.
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE The Board continues to recognise the need for a strong corporate governance framework and supporting processes across the Group and believes that good governance with tone set from the top is a key factor in delivering sustainable business performance and creating value for the Groups stakeholders.
The Board feels that it has a good balance of experience skills and knowledge to support and challenge the management team and that it is supported by effective governance and control systems.
More information on these systems can be found in the Corporate Governance Report on pages 57 to 66.
In addition the Directors Report on pages 91 to 98 reports on JLTs compliance with the 2016 UK Corporate Governance Code the Code during 2017.
During the year the Board and its Committees undertook reviews of their effectiveness.
The conclusions from these reviews provided useful feedback to each body on its performance.
Further details are provided in the Corporate Governance Report on pages 57 to 66.
JLTs share incentive schemes are designed to ensure that decisions are made by management to support longterm growth that the right behaviours are rewarded and that managements interests are aligned with those of shareholders.
Further details of the operation of these schemes can be found in the Directors Remuneration Report set out on pages 78 to 90.
The strength and support of Jardine Matheson has been and will continue to be an important factor in the success of JLT.
Since 2014 a Relationship Agreement has been in place with Jardine Matheson in accordance with the Listing Rules of the Financial Conduct Authority FCA which require shareholders with a 30% or more shareholding to comply with certain independence provisions set out in a written and legally binding agreement.
More detail on the relationship with Jardine Matheson is set out on page 66.
BOARD AND SENIOR MANAGEMENT
There were a number of Board and senior management changes during 2017.
Two Directors stepped down from the Board Bruce CarnegieBrown retired on 14 June 2017 following his appointment as the Chairman of Lloyds of London and Jonathan Dawson retired on 3 October 2017.
I should like to record the Boards thanks to Bruce and Jonathan for their respective valuable contributions to the Board and its Committees.
We were pleased to welcome Andrew Didham and Richard Meddings who both joined the Board on 2 October 2017.
Richard has become Chair of the Remuneration Committee and Andrew has become Chair of the Audit and Risk
Annette Court has succeeded Jonathan Dawson as the Companys Senior Independent Director.
As we announced on 28 February 2018 Lynne Peacock will also join the Board as a NonExecutive Director with effect from 1 May 2018.
Lynne brings with her a broad range of board skills and extensive experience gained in the financial services industry over many years.
Lynne along with our existing Directors will be proposed for election at this years Annual General Meeting and Lynnes biographical details will be set out in the Notice of Annual General Meeting.
At a senior management level and following the reexamination of our strategy Lucy Clarke was appointed as Chief Executive of the Groups worldwide insurance broking activities with effect from 1 April 2018 with the title Global CEO of JLT Specialty.
The remit of this new role covers all the Groups business activities except Reinsurance broking and Employee Benefits and reports to the Group Chief Executive Dominic Burke.
Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 13 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION Jonathan PalmerBrown stepped down from the Group Executive Committee at the end of the year and continues to act as an Adviser to the Group Chief Executive.
Leo Demer retired as CEO of our Australia and New Zealand business at the end of 2017 and has been succeeded by Nick Harris.
Nick joined the Group Executive Committee with effect from 1 January 2018.
Leo assumes the new role of Head of Global Public Sector Specialties.
With effect from 26 February 2018 Mike Rice became Executive Chairman of JLTs US Specialty business to focus on MandA and to continue to play a leading role in driving new business development.
Pat Donnelly formerly President and Deputy CEO assumed the role of CEO of that business.
In view of the changes to the Group business and management structure the Group Executive Committee will be reconstituted from 1 April 2018.
The members of the Committee will comprise Dominic Burke Mark Drummond Brady Charles Rozes Lucy Clarke Ross Howard Mike Methley William Nabarro Jim Pierce Mike Reynolds and Bala Viswanathan.
OUR PEOPLE On behalf of the Board I would like to thank everyone in JLT for their continued hard work and contribution to the Group s results in 2017.
I would also like to welcome all our new colleagues who have joined JLT during the year.
Whatever part of the Group I visit I always see evidence of the distinctive culture at JLT that values agility and entrepreneurial drive rigour and depth of thought and a collaborative approach that puts customers first.
There is further information about our colleagues and culture on page 7.
OUR ROLE IN SOCIETY JLT takes its role in society seriously and has an active Corporate Responsibility programme.
JLTs approach is coordinated by a Corporate Responsibility Steering Committee which has Board Group Executive Committee and senior management membership.
JLT supports the charitable efforts of colleagues around the Group.
We currently focus on three strategic partners aligned to our own areas of business sharing the social benefits of knowledge wellbeing and resilience.
Our current partners on these strategic themes are Udaan Foundation knowledge Alzheimers Society wellbeing and RedR resilience.
We manage the majority of our charitable giving businessbybusiness with a central fund to provide greater support to our strategic partners.
We regularly engage clients in joint fundraising activities and see this as an important part of client relationship building.
We match poundforpound money raised by UK staff in fundraising activities and all UK staff are entitled to take one Charity Day per year when they can spend company time helping a charity.
The Group Charities Committee considers the many requests we receive from charities and takes a particular interest in those charities connected to communities local to our offices.
Our Diversity Committee has defined our diversity agenda on the basis of three pillars Networking Sponsorship and Involvement while ensuring that all of our activities are inclusive whether externally or internally focused.
In 2017 JLT supported a number of initiatives both internally and at public events in the London and other markets to help drive a more diverse and inclusive business and to play our part in addressing diversity challenges in our industry.
We are also keen to ensure that we minimise our environmental impact and we take a number of steps to reduce our carbon footprint such as encouraging the use of teleconferencing facilities where possible instead of travelling to facetoface meetings.
Further details can be found in our Corporate Responsibility Report on pages 46 to 55.
SHARE BUYBACK AUTHORITY We will be seeking renewal of our standing share buyback authority at the forthcoming Annual General Meeting up to a maximum of 10% of the Companys issued share capital.
As in previous years we will not be seeking shareholder approval for a dispensation under Rule 9 of the Takeover Code in relation to this authority.
This means that if the Directors were to initiate a buyback then in order to avoid triggering a mandatory offer obligation on Jardine Matheson Holdings JMH under Rule 37 of the Takeover Code JMH would need to be able to participate in those buybacks so that its overall percentage holding which as at 22 February 2018 was 40.16% did not increase following the buyback.
Although the Company has not utilised the authority to buy back shares since 2008 the Board believes it would be in the interests of all shareholders for the Company to have the right to purchase its own shares in the market in the appropriate circumstances.
We would only exercise this authority if we believe it is in the best interests of the shareholders and would result in an improvement in earnings per share.
OUTLOOK
Overall the Group is in very good shape and well placed to take advantage of the current market environment.
We enter 2018 looking forward to continuing strong organic revenue growth and further financial progress.
Geoffrey Howe
28 February 2018 14 STRATEGIC REPORT KEY FINANCIAL
JLT made substantial financial progress in 2017 returning to strong organic revenue growth.
JLT achieved total revenues of 1386 million in 2017 an increase of 10% over 2016.
This included strong organic revenue growth of 5% in line with historical rates.
Our underlying profit before tax increased by 11% to 191.5 million or by 8% at constant rates of exchange CRE.
The trading margin was maintained at 15.4%.
RISK and INSURANCE Our global Risk and Insurance businesses grew revenues to 1066 million an increase of 11% with organic revenue growth of 5%.
Trading profit rose substantially increasing from 166.6 million to 197.9 million and contributing to a 2% increase in trading margin to 19%.
JLT Europe delivered total revenues of 399.3 million in 2017.
After adjusting for the disposal of Thistle at the end of 2016 this represented revenue growth of 7% or 4% growth on an organic revenue basis.
Trading profit in JLT Europe increased by 9% to 90.6 million and the trading margin increased from 22% to 23% on an adjusted basis.
Strong client retention and new business drove good performances from most divisions including in Financial Lines Northern Europe and Credit and Political Risks.
This achievement was delivered despite challenging market conditions particularly in the Energy and Marine sectors.
We made investments in 2017 to strengthen our presence in continental Europe including the acquisition of Belgibo the Belgian specialty broker in August.
These investments for growth also support our Brexit planning enabling JLT to manage the consequences of different Brexit scenarios.
Outside of Europe we also delivered strong growth in our international Specialty businesses which achieved revenues of 449.4 million a headline increase of 21% with organic revenue growth of 8%.
The combined trading margin in the international Specialty businesses increased from 12% to 14%.
JLTs Australia and New Zealand businesses grew revenues by 7% to 125.7 million.
We anticipate that earnings from a number of important client wins will help these businesses return to organic revenue growth in 2018.
Our business in Asia had a good performance with an 11% increase in revenues to 100.3 million with 6% organic revenue growth.
Revenue performance was driven by our core specialties particularly Financial Lines and Construction.
Our Latin American operations grew revenues by 31% to 93.3 million with 19% organic revenue growth.
Trading profit increased by 24% to 26.1 million a 17% increase at CRE.
We have been making significant investments in building our Specialty capabilities across Latin America and these results demonstrate the success of that strategy.
The US Specialty business continued to make good progress in the year delivering revenue approaching USD 100 million.
Net investment losses reduced from 27 million to 16 million delivering on our previous guidance that these losses reached the high water mark at the end of 2016.
The US business is now firmly established with 335 employees in 17 locations and an increasing market presence now representing 5% of the Fortune 500.
CHIEF EXECUTIVES
2017 was an important year for the JLT Group.
The decisions we took during the year and the strategic developments we have initiated will I believe mark the start of a new chapter in the growth of JLT.
Dominic Burke Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 15 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION JLT Re our global reinsurance broking business increased revenues by 11% to 217.1 million reflecting organic revenue growth of 4%.
This performance was delivered despite a continued decline in pricing across most lines of reinsurance and in most geographies during the year.
This was underlined by the 1 January 2017 renewals which saw riskadjusted global propertycatastrophe pricing reduce by almost 6%.
JLT Res trading profit increased by 5% to 42.4 million.
The trading margin was 20% in the year reflecting JLT Res continued investment in market leading talent across all of its geographies increasing headcount by approximately 10% year on year.
Organic revenue growth in Europe and North America was offset in part by Asia Pacific where we saw significant headwinds from the rating environment combined with reductions in facultative buying activity.
EMPLOYEE BENEFITS JLTs global Employee Benefits EB operations delivered overall revenue growth of 7% with 4% organic revenue growth.
Within the global total the UK EB business achieved particularly strong organic revenue growth of 8% which was offset by some weakness in regions of the international EB business.
JLTs UK and Ireland EB business grew revenues by 7% to 172.0 million reflecting impressive organic revenue growth of 8%.
Trading profit increased by 40% to 17.2 million.
Trading margins in the UK and Ireland EB business increased from 8% to 10%.
We now expect to achieve our 15% trading margin target for this business in 2019 rather than in 2018 with the benefit of the Global Transformation Programme described below.
The Group anticipates that the business will make further progress in 2018 towards this target with the majority of the progress being made in 2019.
JLTs international Employee Benefits businesses achieved mixed headline results although there was improving momentum and some good performances within individual businesses.
In Asia Private Client Services PCS our life assurance broker had a difficult first half to the year.
However this was followed by a positive performance in the second half of the year.
The business is now expanding into new geographies including mainland China.
In Australia structural changes in the workers compensation market resulted in a slower rate of revenue growth.
However we are anticipating a better performance in 2018 building on the trading profit growth in 2017.
In Brazil corporate payrolls fell as the economy remained weak leading to slower headline revenue growth and a year on year reduction in trading profit in the region.
However Latin America EB has been successful in winning significant volumes of new business and we look forward to growth rates returning to former levels in this business as economies in the region recover.
Details of the performance of each individual business are set out in the Review of Operations on pages 27 to 34.
A YEAR OF PROGRESS AND STRATEGIC DEVELOPMENT 2017 was an important year for the JLT Group.
The decisions we took during the year and the strategic developments we have initiated will I believe mark the start of a new chapter in the growth of JLT.
The Groups acquisition of TW Re in late 2013 followed by the establishment of JLTs US Specialty business in 2014 has given JLT a firm foundation in the US.
That increase in scope and opportunity provided the context for the Groups reexamination of its strategy during 2017.
The process confirmed that JLTs deep specialist strength is a key differentiator between JLT and its larger competitors and representation in the US now gives JLT the opportunity to move from an international to a global business across each of Reinsurance Specialty and Employee Benefits.
JLT rearticulated its mission To become the leading global specialist risk adviser and broker and the Group is now taking a number of important steps towards its strategic objectives.
BUSINESS AND MANAGEMENT STRUCTURE We are making a number of structural changes to the businesses and management of JLT.
Collaboration has always been a key part of the JLT culture.
However becoming truly global requires us to graduate from informal ad hoc collaboration to consistent and systematically coordinated working.
As announced in January 2018 Lucy Clarke has been appointed to the new role of Global CEO of the Groups Specialty business with effect from 1 April.
Bringing JLTs regional insurance broking operations together into an integrated Specialty division with leaders appointed in each of its principal industry specialty businesses Energy Construction Financial Lines Aerospace Marine and Cargo and Credit and Political Risks responsible for globally coordinated sales and delivery to clients will enable JLT to operate as a combined group of global specialists.
16 STRATEGIC REPORT An integrated global management structure is already operating effectively and delivering value in JLTs Reinsurance division.
The Group is confident that JLT will realise the same benefits in Global Specialty and that its Specialty businesses will see accelerated growth operating on a global basis.
Employee Benefits will also operate as a worldwide business.
UK and Ireland and International Employee Benefits including PCS will be the third of JLTs three business divisions.
From 1 April 2018 the Groups businesses will therefore be structured into three divisions Reinsurance Specialty and Employee Benefits and the same structure will be adopted when reporting the Groups future results.
GLOBAL TRANSFORMATION PROGRAMME TRANSFORMING OUR OPERATIONAL CAPABILITIES For some time JLT has been investigating how we can streamline the operational processes used to serve clients in each of our divisions to deliver global consistency and eliminate duplicated costs.
The Group will be implementing a twoyear plus Groupwide Global Transformation Programme.
From 2020 JLT expects to use a consistent set of processes and core operating platforms for the delivery of each of Reinsurance Specialty and Employee Benefits.
The benefits will be significant in terms of seamless global service and delivery communications internally and externally to clients and data collection and analysis.
In financial terms the Group expects the programme to deliver annualised savings of 40 million by 2020 for a oneoff cost of 45 million.
Further financial details can be found in the Finance Directors Review on page 38.
Operating on a consistent basis across all of JLTs global businesses will achieve significant tangible benefits a better client experience improved cost efficiency and stronger controls.
JLT SPECIALTY USA  BUILDING A BUSINESS OF SCALE The objective of building a US Specialty business that contributes to the Group on a scale that better reflects the importance of the US to the global economy is at the heart of the Groups medium term strategy.
In addition to revenues and profits generated in and from the US the Group believes that a strong US business will create further opportunities for growth in other parts of the world.
We therefore intend to build on the firm foundation that JLT has already established in the US through continuing organic revenue growth complemented by targeted acquisitions.
This began with the purchase of a controlling interest in the construction specialist Construction Risk Partners in January 2017 which has proven to be highly successful delivering a continuing stream of domestic wins and increasing coordination throughout the Group to win and service international construction clients.
In 2017 the US Specialty business represented 5% of the Groups revenues.
That proportion is expected to grow in the next few years.
Following a move into profitability in 2019 we anticipate that trading margins in the US Specialty business will move broadly into line with those in JLTs other major global Specialty businesses in the medium term.
EMPLOYEE BENEFITS  ESTABLISHING A COORDINATED GLOBAL BUSINESS The Group is confident about the momentum throughout the Employee Benefits busnesses going into 2018 and the prospects for the divisions revenue and profit growth.
In UK EB the largest business we anticipate further strong growth in both revenue and trading margin as we see a return on the investments made in recent years.
The UK EB business has a strong position in the occupational pension scheme market.
It is also making appropriate investments for the future so as to generate new business from todays employees.
These investments are in the new world areas of retirement savings occupational health insurance employee wellness workplace marketing and flexible benefits made available by employers to their workforces as well as serving the growing needs of workers in the gig economy.
JLT now operates Employee Benefits across the Group and through its international network and we have begun work to coordinate the presentation and marketing of our Employee Benefits activities worldwide.
During 2017 we took advantage of JLTs international coverage to launch a coordinated global Employee Benefits offering sold managed and delivered by a single global team.
The initial response from clients confirms that JLT can grow revenues in the international employee benefits market.
Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 17 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION LOOKING FORWARD After five consecutive years of falling reinsurance rates global property catastrophe rates have experienced some upward pressure but with significant variances across regions driven in large part by the losses experienced following hurricanes Harvey Irma and Maria.
Across most lines and most classes of reinsurance and specialty the trend of steady price reductions through a number of years seems to have moderated or ended.
However a consistent pattern is not evident and it would be premature to refer to a hardening market.
In todays market each risk needs the broker to demonstrate real understanding of the risk and real transactional expertise to secure appropriate cover on the optimum terms for the client.
This is the specialist capability that JLT has built over the past decade and the Group is confident that JLT is well placed to grow and execute on its strategy.
JLT has entered 2018 with real momentum but we do not expect a consistently hard insurance market.
While the Group is positive with regards to the factors within its control volatile currency markets present a risk.
Therefore taken together JLT enters 2018 looking forward to continuing strong organic revenue growth and further financial progress.
Dominic Burke Group Chief Executive 28 February 2018 18 STRATEGIC REPORT JLT is a global provider of reinsurance insurance and employee benefits related advice brokerage and services.
Our business is influenced by a number of external factors at both an industryspecific level and more generally.
A summary of some key market factors which currently affect JLT and are expected to continue to impact it in the coming years is set out below.
MARKET FACTORS IMPACTING JLT The IMF estimates that global output grew by 3.6% in 2017 and that it will grow by 3.9% in 2018 with sustained growth momentum across North America Europe and the emerging markets.
Risks to the global growth forecast are seen as broadly balanced in the near term but remain skewed to the downside over the medium term.
The future development of the UK economy remains less clear and subject to volatility in the near term as negotiation of the UKs exit from the EU continues.
Higher oil prices in recent months have stimulated some new exploration activity but overall global exploration spend is not expected to increase in 2018.
Similarly forecasts for maritime industry activity are mixed.
IMPACT ON JLT JLTs growth prospects are sensitive to macro trends higher levels of economic growth lead to more corporate activity investment and increasing personal wealth.
This increased activity stimulates demand for our services.
In light of the Groups investments to strengthen its representation in the European Union and the preparatory work undertaken JLT does not anticipate that Brexit will materially impact its ability to serve clients and access markets in the EU.
Conditions remain challenging in industries such as energy and marine which represent important client concentrations for JLT.
For the longer term JLTs strategy is increasingly aligned with fastergrowing sectors and geographies where demand is driven by market trends and demographic factors such as population growth ageing urbanisation and increasing middle class wealth.
GLOBAL MACRO ECONOMIC TRENDS STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 19
THE RATING ENVIRONMENT For several years high levels of available capital in the insurance markets with relatively low loss levels have led to sustained downward pressure on premiums.
The level of capital deployed in the insurance and reinsurance markets remains high.
Towards the end of 2017 upward pricing pressure was experienced in some reinsurance markets.
This was primarily a result of the higher property catastrophe losses caused by hurricanes Harvey Irma and Maria striking coastal regions of the US and the Caribbean.
Wild fires in California also added to market losses.
At the start of 2018 the trend of significant price reductions seems to have moderated or ended with renewal rates seeing increases in areas where there were heavy losses.
However other lines of business are still seeing price reductions albeit at a slower pace and a consistent pattern is not yet evident.
IMPACT ON JLT JLT is adversely affected by depressed insurance and reinsurance pricing levels as a significant proportion of our income is earned by way of commissions.
This creates challenges for the business in delivering organic growth.
Reduced downward pressure on insurance pricing should provide a better trading environment for JLT but we continue to focus on those specialty sectors and economies where there is particular value in our distinctive proposition.
If available capital and insurance capacity in the market moderates or declines the value of the expertise provided by the broker will increase.
JLT faces a wide range of local regional and international competitors in its Reinsurance Specialty and Employee Benefits operations.
Macro economic headwinds and the depressed rating environment have combined over recent years to create a competitive environment in which some rivals have discounted heavily to retain and win new business as well as offering very significant remuneration packages to attract new staff.
The competitive environment is unlikely to ease significantly in the near future even if the rating environment starts to ease.
IMPACT ON JLT JLT has been able to attract new clients due to its differentiated specialtyled offering and distinctive culture.
We remain confident that the distinctive culture JLT offers to professional colleagues together with our client proposition will allow us to continue to attract and retain talent and business.
20 STRATEGIC REPORT JLT operates under the jurisdiction of a number of different regulators.
Its principal regulator is the UK Financial Conduct Authority FCA.
The level of oversight exercised by the various financial services regulators varies from country to country and often by business activity but the overall trend is towards increasing levels of regulatory oversight.
There is also more consistency in the type of regulation being introduced across many countries in areas such as data protection.
Regulation can also create a more level playing field and help stimulate greater client demand.
Proportionate and fair regulation is something we welcome as being positive for our clients our colleagues and the industry as a whole.
IMPACT ON JLT The trends in global regulation place an additional resource and cost burden on JLT.
They also increase the chances of regulatory action being faced by the Group in the relevant jurisdictions sometimes with a retrospective element.
Furthermore as JLT grows we can expect a greater level of regulatory scrutiny in line with our increased scale particularly for those of our businesses that carry consumer conduct risk.
We continue to invest in our risk and compliance frameworks to ensure that we have the right skills to enable us to advise our businesses on the implications of the changing regulatory environment.
JLT is committed to working constructively with all of our regulators to ensure that we meet our regulatory commitments protect our clients interests and achieve fair client outcomes.
REGULATION
TECHNOLOGY
Advances in technology are bringing rapid changes in how JLTs clients businesses are run and in the risks they face.
Similar pressures directly impact JLTs own business.
Technological change also gives rise to new areas of insurance such as cyber risk cover.
A significant increase in the volume of risk and insurance data that can be collected and analysed is having a significant impact on the industrys actuarial understanding of underlying risk trends and how they should be priced.
Technological advances potentially enable a new generation of competitors to disrupt existing players such as JLT.
IMPACT ON JLT Technological changes create opportunities for JLT to carry out its operations more efficiently and costeffectively.
They also allow us to enhance the service we provide to clients for example through the collection and use of data to drive better insights for our clients or through the adoption of new channels for engaging and communicating with them.
While the level of risk to our own business from cyber attack continues to increase and requires substantial investment in systems and procedures to counter the threats cyber risk offers an opportunity to provide risk management advisory services to clients.
Since a large proportion of the services JLT provides are specialised services in relation to the complex specific risks borne by a base of mainly large clients we believe that JLT is at a comparatively low risk of technologyenabled disruption.
STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 21
Providing insurance broking risk management and claims services for clients across a wide range of business sectors.
Clients include multinational corporations and other public and private sector organisations retail insurance brokers and individuals.
Growth is driven via creation and development of industry specialty practices.
REINSURANCE
Providing reinsurance broking and specialist advisory services in a range of areas including analytics actuarial catastrophe modelling and exposure management capital raising mergers and acquisitions cyber terrorism political risk credit and crisis management workers compensation and strategic consulting.
Clients include regional national and global insurers as well as large captives mutuals and risk pooling groups.
EMPLOYEE BENEFITS Acting as an adviser intermediary and service provider in the pensions consultancy and administration employee benefits and healthcare life insurance wealth management and health and accident claims management sectors.
Clients include national and multinational corporations public and private sector organisations pension trustees and individuals.
OUR MISSION The Groups mission is to become the leading global specialist risk adviser and broker operating through three divisions Reinsurance Specialty and Employee Benefits.
We will achieve that by establishing developing and refining our specialised capabilities and ensuring that there is coordination across the Group to provide a seamless global service to clients that include the largest multinationals.
This will govern the Groups strategy.
FEES AND COMMISSIONS
REMITTED TO SHAREHOLDERS REINVESTED IN BUSINESS OUR BUSINESS MODEL Fees are typically charged either on a timecost or a fixedfee basis and are earned in each of the Reinsurance Specialty and Employee Benefits divisions.
These fees are paid by the client rather than the insurer or reinsurer.
Commissions are typically based on a percentage of the insurance or reinsurance premium being paid by the client.
Frequently the level of this commission payment is also subject to negotiation with the client.
This commission is paid by the insurer or reinsurer rather than the client and is largely earned in the Groups Reinsurance and Specialty businesses.
INVESTMENT INCOME Investment income arises from the holding of cash and investments on behalf of clients.
The holding of client monies largely relates to premium and claims payments which the business holds for a short period of time in its role as the intermediary.
COSTS
Two of the largest underlying costs to the business relate to staff and premises.
In 2017 these represented 62% and 5% respectively of total revenues.
There is a clear focus on cost discipline with the trading margin being a Key Performance Indicator.
The Groups Global Transformation Programme is projected to deliver significant cost reductions.
ACQUISITIONS
Acquisitions to complement organic revenue growth have been and will continue to be an important element of delivering on the Groups strategy.
In 2017 the Group made three new acquisitions for a total consideration of 61.2 million.
In the last 5 years the Group has made a total of 36 acquisitions for a total consideration of 379.9 million.
The three largest of these constituted 64% of this amount.
PEOPLE
The Group continues to retain and recruit marketleading individuals across all of its global operations.
JLT now has over 10000 employees working for the Group.
Key to the success of our recruitment approach has been retaining and attracting individuals who not only add further capabilities but also fit JLTs distinctive culture.
The Group is committed to investing in the training and development of all its employees.
From April 2018 our business will be structured into three divisions Reinsurance Specialty and Employee Benefits.
DIVISIONS 22 STRATEGIC REPORT REVIEWING and DELIVERING OUR STRATEGY REEXAMINATION OF GROUP STRATEGY During 2017 we carried out a reexamination of the Groups strategy in order to ensure that it remains appropriate to support and enable our future growth plans.
The potential created for the Group by our growth in the US includes both further expansion in the US market and the acceleration of our development in other parts of the world.
The US ambition remains at the heart of the Groups medium term strategy.
It was against this backdrop that we reexamined our strategy to ensure that the Group is able to deliver on this growth potential.
The review was also carried out in the context of continuing economic and industry challenges including headwinds in the reinsurance rating environment and challenging market conditions in some industry sectors such as oil and gas.
Other factors included changes in the types of risks that clients face with a move to more communication and processingdominated ways of conducting business across many industries and the emergence of more intangible risks.
Extensive discussions were held with senior colleagues across the Group as well as with our clients and our trading partners in order to gain a detailed understanding of the key challenges and opportunities the business faces.
KEY CONCLUSIONS The review resulted in a number of conclusions in respect of the future shape of the Groups strategy.
These are summarised below.
PRESERVATION OF JLTS DISTINCTIVE CULTURE JLTs distinctive identity and culture  an entrepreneurial approach a focus on clients interests and the provision to colleagues of the opportunity to develop their practices  are key differentiators with clients insurance professionals and markets.
Their preservation and development are seen as paramount.
At the same time it is essential to maintain an equitable balance between the interests of the Groups four principal stakeholders our clients colleagues trading partners and shareholders.
SPECIALIST FOCUS JLT will focus on becoming even more of a Specialty business in the next few years.
Specialty is defined as those practice areas industries or products where JLT has deep knowledge expertise and experience understanding of the risks specific to the area and risk management options first rate transactional capability and market standing contacts and reputation.
OUR MISSION To become the leading global specialist risk adviser and broker.
OUR STRATEGY Our strategy balances the interests of our four key stakeholders our clients our colleagues our trading partners and our shareholders.
The four pillars to our strategy are described in more detail on page 6 Culture Specialist Coordination and International.
STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 23 Specialty also includes those areas where JLT can operate and compete as a valueadding trusted adviser offering services such as data analytics risk evaluation and management services in order to win appointments to carry out placements and to provide the best service to our clients.
A large component of JLTs success is the quality of our people and it is this emphasis on enabling professionals to deploy their strength that makes JLT an attractive employer.
We will not seek to commoditise what is a valueadding professional offering or rely on automatic placement of premiums via client treaties or other mechanisms with the carriers who offer the intermediary the highest return at the lowest cost.
We do recognise however that changes are taking place in how clients address risk which are leading to changes in the types of service they want from JLT.
It is essential for us to deliver what clients want which will mean striking the right balance between complex transactions and simpler more commoditised solutions in some circumstances.
JLT will focus on narrower but deeper penetration of existing clients with increased crossselling of additional lines of cover to existing clients.
JLT will focus its investment in new risk areas as a worldwide evolution of risk from the physical to the intangible occurs.
In particular there will be extensive investment in the management of Cyber Risk and areas such as Credit and Political Risks.
As a result of the review the Group rearticulated its mission during the year To become the leading global specialist risk adviser and broker.
COORDINATION IS A KEY DIFFERENTIATOR Another key conclusion from the review was to reaffirm the importance of collaboration across divisions regions and industry practices as a differentiator between JLT and its competitors.
Working together is central to the JLT culture it has been a major factor behind our success and is and will remain the foundation of our structure and what we offer to clients.
To pursue the Groups mission successfully JLT needs to evolve from casebycase collaboration to working in a more formalised and consistently coordinated way.
This will enable JLT to provide a seamless and consistent global service to multinational clients wherever in the world we engage with them.
AN EFFECTIVE INTERNATIONAL NETWORK JLTs International Network which is a combination of controlled and noncontrolled branded and nonbranded operations is effective.
There are however opportunities to improve collaboration within and between regions through investment in supporting emerging specialties and international development of regional strengths.
The objective of building a US Specialty business that contributes to the Group on a scale that better reflects the importance of the US to the global economy is at the heart of the Groups mediumterm strategy.
The Group intends to build on the firm foundation that it has already established in the US through continuing organic revenue growth complemented by targeted acquisitions.
JLT will focus on strengthening its continental European presence ahead of the UKs exit from the European Union.
JLT will also continue to explore opportunities to strengthen its presence in China.
JLT needs to have the right representation in the right locations to enable us to realise our global Specialty mission in our chosen industries.
STRATEGIC INITIATIVES The Group is undertaking a number of strategic initiatives to progress towards its mission to become the leading global specialist risk adviser and broker details of which are set out in the Chief Executives Review on pages 14 and 15 and the table on page 24.
24 STRATEGIC REPORT STRATEGY ELEMENT ACHIEVEMENTS IN 2017 PRIORITIES IN 2018
AND DEVELOPING JLTS CULTURE AND IDENTITY Carried out a detailed review of the leadership capability and potential of senior management and developed global talent pools to ensure that JLTs talent is being deployed in the right place at the right time.
Continued development of diversity programmes to ensure that we recruit the best and foster career development without limitation.
Built our technical training capability on a global scale.
Implement career development plans addressing the results of the leadership review.
Continued focus on employing the strongest practitioners in our Specialty fields aligned with JLTs culture.
Continue to review our employee development programmes to ensure they fully support our leaders in delivering the strategic aims of the business.
BECOMING MORE
Reinforced our Reinsurance Specialty and Employee Benefits activities in developing markets through selected investments bolton acquisitions and partnerships.
Investment in the continued buildout of our US Specialty business through selective specialist recruitment and the acquisition of Construction Risk Partners LLC.
Continued development of global specialties such as Healthcare and Credit and Political Risks.
Continued investment in new risk areas to reflect the worldwide evolution of risk from the tangible to the intangible including Cyber and Credit and Political Risks.
Deepen the Groups offering of data analytics and risk evaluation and management services through the implementation of the Global Transformation Programme and the launch of JLT Res proprietary analytics software ANSER.
Focus on increased crossselling of additional lines of cover in areas of Specialty strength to existing clients.
IMPROVING
COORDINATION
ACROSS THE GROUP Developing consistent global processes across our Specialty business.
Global coordination of Portfolio Management activities across all our operating entities and geographies supported by an appropriate operating platform and governance structure.
Continued roll out of a single common reinsurance platform across the Group.
Launched a coordinated global Employee Benefits offering sold managed and delivered by a single global team.
Achieved greater alignment across all functional areas.
Implement the new global Specialty structure.
Roll out a global practice approach across all of the Groups key Specialty areas including Energy Construction Financial Lines Aerospace Marine and Cargo and Credit and Political Risks.
Implement the Global Transformation Programme to deliver an integrated approach to facilitate consistent and systematically coordinated working across the Group.
Continue to develop and market Employee Benefits as a coordinated global practice.
DEVELOPING THE
NETWORK
Developed a strategic growth plan for US Specialty which maintains the momentum of the business.
Developed a plan to address the implications for JLTs business arising from the UKs withdrawal from the EU including the acquisition of Belgibo NV .
Expanded our global Employee Benefits practice and local benefits capability to provide international benefits solutions for clients.
Implement the US Specialty plan with targeted acquisition activity complementing continuing organic revenue growth.
Continue to strengthen the Groups presence in continental Europe through acquisition and enhancement of network relationships.
Strengthening the Groups presence in key emerging markets such as China and India.
STRATEGIC ACHIEVEMENTS AND PRIORITIES Set out below is a summary of the key achievements in 2017 against each of the elements of the Groups strategy as reshaped and the Groups strategic priorities in 2018 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 25 Total revenue per employee Trading Margin Revenue per employee increased reflecting a 10% growth in revenue whilst headcount remained at a similar level to 2016.
Across the Group we continued to invest in our Specialty capabilities through the ongoing recruitment of leading industry professionals and targeted acquisitions which has offset headcount reduction from disposals.
The underlying trading margin for the Group was maintained at 15.4%.
Our focus on preserving operating leverage maintained cost growth in line with revenue whilst continuing to invest for the future.
Underlying PBT Underlying Diluted EPS Underlying PBT increased by 11% driven mainly by trading profit in the business and positive foreign exchange movements.
Underlying diluted EPS increased by 14% in the year.
The performance related remuneration of the Executive Directors and other senior executives within the Group is closely aligned to PBT and EPS performance.
This is discussed in more detail in the Directors Remuneration Report on pages 78 to 90.
Total revenue per employee Trading Margin Total revenue per employee Trading Margin 000 000 % %
RISK and INSURANCE EMPLOYEE BENEFITS HOW WE CALCULATE OUR KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS Total revenue fees commissions and investment income per employee is calculated using the average number of employees for the year Trading margin represents trading profit being total revenue less operating expenses excluding exceptional items divided by total revenue Underlying results exclude exceptional items.
See notes 1 and 3 of the Financial Statements on pages 118 and 122 for details of exceptional items KEY PERFORMANCE
Pence
191.5 26 STRATEGIC REPORT GROUP EXECUTIVE
ROSS HOWARD Executive Chairman JLT Re Ross joined JLT in November 2013 on completion of the acquisition of Towers Watson Re and joined the GEC in January 2014.
Ross was formerly the global leader of Towers Watsons reinsurance business.
He has over 35 years experience in the industry.
DOMINIC SAMENGOTURNER CEO JLT Asia Dominic joined JLT and the GEC on 9 February 2015 and was appointed CEO of JLT Asia in May 2015.
Dominic joined the Group from Willis where he spent 20 years most recently as CoChief Executive of Global Specialties and a director of Willis Limited.
KEITH JOHNSON Group General Counsel Keith was appointed as General Counsel for the JLT Group in August 2014 and joined the GEC at the same time.
He was formerly a partner of Linklaters with more than 20 years corporate and management experience in the UK Sweden and Asia.
BALA VISWANATHAN CEO JLT UK and Ireland Employee Benefits International Chairman of Employee Benefits Bala joined the JLT Group in 2006 as CEO of its operations in India.
In April 2014 he was appointed Group COO based in London and joined the GEC at the same time.
In October 2015 Bala became CEO of the UK and Ireland Employee Benefits business and in February 2017 he became International Chairman of Employee Benefits.
MIKE REYNOLDS Global CEO JLT Re Mike joined JLT in November 2012 as Group Finance Director before his appointment as Global CEO JLT Re in September 2014.
Mike has worked in a number of senior finance roles in the insurance industry including as CFO of ACE European Group Limited and Aon Benfield.
From 28 February 2017 Mike also assumed responsibility for JLT Insurance Management.
LUCY CLARKE Deputy CEO JLT Europe Lucy has worked within the insurance industry for over 25 years in the London market.
Having joined JLT in 2002 Lucy is responsible for delivering the JLT Specialty strategy working closely with Paul Knowles CEO of JLT Specialty.
As Deputy CEO Lucy also leads JLTs Energy and Marine teams.
Lucy will become Global CEO of JLT Specialty from 1 April 2018.
MARK DRUMMOND BRADY Deputy Group CEO CEO JLT Latin America and Chairman JLT Canada Mark has been with JLT since 1987.
In March 2011 he was appointed to the Board of JLT and in September 2014 became the Deputy Group
In February 2017 Mark became CEO of JLT Latin America and Chairman of JLT Canada.
MIKE METHLEY Group Chief Operating Officer Mike joined JLT in 1994.
He has been a member of the GEC since 2010.
He was CEO of JLT Latin America from 2013 to 2017 and Chairman of JLT Canada and JLT Insurance Management from 2014 to 2017.
Mike was previously Managing Director of JLT Asia.
Mike was appointed Group Chief Operating Officer in February 2017.
NICK HARRIS CEO JLT Australia and New Zealand Nick joined JLT in London in 2008 later transferring to the Australian operation in 2010 to establish a People Risk business in the region.
Nick became CEO of JLT Australia and New Zealand and joined the GEC in January 2018.
He remains Chairman of Benefit Solutions Australia.
ADRIAN GIRLING Chairman JLT Europe Adrian is Chairman of JLT Specialty Limited along with JLT Ireland
Adrian has been with JLT for 40 years focusing predominantly on corporate insurance and working with larger UK and international companies.
He was previously CEO of Jardine Lloyd Thompson UK Limited for some 16 years and assumed additional responsibility for our European retail business in 2007 and our Canada business in 2009.
MIKE RICE JR Executive Chairman JLT Specialty USA Mike joined the Group in August 2014 as the CEO of US Specialty responsible for overseeing JLTs US Specialty operations and expansion.
He joined the GEC in May 2016.
Prior to joining JLT Mike held several senior positions within Aon over a 25 year career.
With effect from 26 February 2018 Mike became Executive Chairman of US Specialty to focus on MandA and to continue to play a leading role in driving new business development.
CHARLES ROZES Group Finance Director Charles joined JLT in September 2015 as Group Finance Director.
He is also a Director of JLT India.
Charles has held senior roles over a period of 25 years at Barclays Bank of America IBM and
WILLIAM NABARRO Special Adviser to the Group Chief Executive William rejoined JLT in early 2016 and became a member of the GEC in May 2016.
He previously worked for JLT between 2003 and 2010 in a range of senior roles including as a plc Director and Executive Chairman of Employee Benefits.
Prior to this he worked as a merchant banker with Hambros Bank and Lazards and he was also for many years a non executive director of ICAP Plc the wholesale money and securities group.
DOMINIC BURKE Group Chief Executive Dominic joined the Group in 2000 as the CEO of JLTs UK Retail and Employee Benefits business following JLTs acquisition of his business Burke Ford.
He was appointed a Director and Group COO of JLT in January 2005 and was appointed Group Chief Executive in December 2005.
PAUL KNOWLES CEO JLT Europe Paul was appointed CEO of JLT Specialty and joined the GEC in January 2016.
He has been with JLT for more than 20 years and has held a number of senior roles including leading the Construction and Real Estate business and JLT Specialtys Major Corporate business.
Members of the Group Executive Committee and their roles as at the date of this report are shown below.
Following the changes to the Group business and management structure as described in the Chief Executives Review on pages 14 and 15 the Group Executive Committee will be reconstituted from 1 April 2018.
The members of the Committee will comprise Dominic Burke Mark Drummond Brady Charles Rozes Lucy Clarke Ross Howard Mike Methley William Nabarro Jim Pierce Mike Reynolds and Bala Viswanathan.
STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 27 REVIEW OF OPERATIONS ADVICE AND CONSULTANCY BROKERAGE AND PLACEMENT SPECIALIST INSURANCE PRODUCTS OTHER SERVICES Throughout 2017 our business activities were undertaken by two divisions Risk and Insurance and Employee Benefits.
RISK and INSURANCE Our Risk and Insurance business comprises our global Specialty insurance and Reinsurance broking operations.
Our specialist teams focus on those sectors where we have a distinctive level of knowledge and expertise.
Working in partnership with clients to manage the key risks they face we act as their intermediary with insurers and reinsurers as well as providing related risk management analytical advisory and other services.
Advising our clients on their insurance and reinsurance requirements ensuring that they understand the likelihood and potential severity of the risks they face the options available to mitigate these risks and the potential cost of doing so.
Acting on our clients behalf using our specialist knowledge to negotiate and place insurance cover with insurers and reinsurers all over the world.
Providing our clients with access to certain exclusive insurance facilities binders and other products without taking any balance sheet underwriting risk.
Providing a range of related services to our clients and insurance market counterparties in areas such as captive management claims management and administration and capital raising and corporate insurance advice.
RISK and INSURANCE
1065.8m % 2016 960.9m Trading Margin % 2016 17% Underlying Trading Profit % 2016 166.6m
2016 5460 RISK and INSURANCE OUR BUSINESSES JLT Europe p28 JLT Re p28 JLT Australia and NZ p29 JLT Asia p29 JLT Latin America p30 JLT Specialty USA p30 JLT Canada JLT Middle East and Africa p31 JLT Insurance
CONTRIBUTION TO GROUP REVENUE 2017 % Excludes employees in shared service operations 28 STRATEGIC REPORT 2017 2016 % Change Total revenue 399.3m 393.8m 1% Underlying trading profit 90.6m 79.9m 14% Trading margin 23% 20% JLT Europe provides insurance broking risk management and claims services for clients across a wide range of business sectors.
The division employs some 1700 people primarily based in London but with a growing European presence all of which work in close collaboration with the broader JLT International Network supplying them with industry expertise advice and access to international markets.
Review of Operations JLT Europes revenues increased to 399.3 million in 2017.
After adjusting for the disposal of Thistle at the end of 2016 this represented a 7% increase of which 4% was organic.
Trading profit grew by 9% to 90.6 million and trading margin increased to 23% on an adjusted basis.
Strong client retention and new business drove good performances from most divisions including Financial Lines Northern Europe and Credit and Political Risks.
This was achieved despite challenging market conditions particularly in the Energy and Marine industry sectors.
The business made investments in 2017 to strengthen its presence in continental Europe including the acquisition of Belgibo the Belgian specialty broker in August.
These investments support the Groups Brexit planning enabling JLT to manage the consequences of different Brexit scenarios.
Through JLTs continued investment on the continent European revenues are expected to grow over time across several specialty sectors.
Principal lines of business Life Accident and Health Aerospace including General Aviation Construction Communications Technology and Media Cargo Credit and Political Risks Cyber Energy Financial and Professional Fine Art Jewellery and Specie Food and Agribusiness Sports and Entertainment Marine Mining Power Life Science Renewables Real Estate Transportation and Specialty Property and Casualty.
2017 2016 % Change Total revenue 217.1m 195.6m 11% Underlying trading profit 42.4m 40.5m 5% Trading margin 20% 21% JLT Re is one of the worlds largest reinsurance brokers with approximately 700 professionals across 35 locations in 18 countries delivering world class risk analysis and risk transfer solutions.
Review of Operations JLT Res revenues increased by 11% to 217.1 million reflecting organic revenue growth of 4%.
This performance was delivered despite the continued decline in pricing across most lines of reinsurance business and in most geographies during the year.
This was underlined by the 1 January 2017 renewals which saw riskadjusted global property catastrophe pricing fall by almost 6%.
JLT Res trading profit increased by 5% to 42.4 million.
The trading margin was 20% in the year reflecting JLT Res continued investment in market leading talent across all of its geographies increasing headcount by approximately 10% yearonyear.
Organic revenue growth in Europe and North America was offset in part by Asia Pacific which experienced significant headwinds from the rating environment combined with reductions in facultative buying activity.
Principal lines of business All classes of treaty and facultative reinsurance and corporate finance advisory.
JLT EUROPE JLT RE STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 29 JLT AUSTRALIA and NEW ZEALAND 2017 2016 % Change Total revenue 125.7m 117.7m 7% Underlying trading profit 35.5m 34.1m 4% Trading margin 28% 29% JLT Australia and New Zealand is one of the leading insurance brokers in the region combining international depth with local specialist expertise to deliver a comprehensive range of insurance and risk solutions products and services to its clients.
The division employs some 800 people across 20 offices.
Review of Operations JLT Australia and New Zealand saw revenues increase by 7% to 125.7 million.
A number of important client wins were secured in 2017 the earnings from which it is anticipated will help this business return to organic revenue growth in 2018.
Principal lines of business Government Construction Energy Entertainment and Leisure Financial and Professional Services Food and Agribusiness Manufacturing Mining Power and Utilities People Risks Real Estate Retail SME and Consumer Products Sport Transport and Logistics Professional Associations Ecclesiastical Aged Care Risk Consulting and Valuations.
JLT ASIA 2017 2016 % Change Total revenue 100.3m 90.3m 11% Underlying trading profit 17.3m 16.8m 3% Trading margin 17% 19% JLT Asia provides insurance broking and risk management services in selected specialties across the region.
The rich history of the business and indepth local knowledge together with the close working relationship it enjoys with Jardine Matheson have enabled it to become one of the market leaders in Asia.
The division employs around 1000 people across 13 territories.
Review of Operations Asia had a good performance with an 11% increase in revenues to 100.3 million with 6% organic revenue growth.
Revenue performance was driven by our core specialties particularly Financial Lines and Construction.
Principal lines of business Aviation Capital Risks Construction Cyber Energy Entertainment and Leisure Financial and Professional Services Food and Agribusiness Healthcare Manufacturing Marine Real Estate Retail SME and Consumer Products Transport and Logistics.
30 STRATEGIC REPORT JLT LATIN AMERICA 2017 2016 % Change Total revenue 93.3m 71.4m 31% Underlying trading profit 26.1m 21.1m 24% Trading margin 28% 30% JLT Latin America provides insurance broking reinsurance broking and affinity insurance distribution through subsidiary operations in Argentina Brazil Chile Colombia and Peru.
One of the largest brokers in the region the business prides itself on its indepth capabilities in its chosen specialties.
It employs approximately 750 people across 22 offices in 5 countries.
Review of Operations Our Latin American operations grew revenues by 31% to 93.3 million with impressive 19% organic revenue growth.
Trading profit increased 24% to 26.1 million a 17% increase at constant rates of exchange.
We have been making significant investments in building our Specialty capabilities across this region and these results demonstrate the success of this strategy.
Principal lines of business Aviation Construction Energy and Power Financial Lines Marine Industrial Property and Casualty Public Sector Affinity Marketing and Distribution Reinsurance Treaty and Facultative.
JLT SPECIALTY USA 2017 2016 % Change Total revenue 73.9m 41.3m 79% Underlying trading profit 16.4m 27.0m 39% Trading margin 22% 65% JLT Specialty USA serves leading US and global firms within its industry and product specialties.
Its focus on complex risks in each of these specialty areas enables it to provide clients with risk management solutions that are tailored to their strategic and financial goals.
The division employs 335 people in 17 locations across the US.
Review of Operations JLT Specialty USA made good progress in 2017 delivering revenue approaching USD 100 million in only its third full year of operation.
Net investment losses reduced from 27.0 million to 16.4 million delivering on the Groups previous guidance that these losses reached the highwater mark at the end of 2016 and we remain fully focused on achieving profits as planned in 2019.
On 27 January 2017 the Group completed the acquisition of Construction Risk Partners one of the leading construction Risk and Surety specialty brokers in the US.
Principal lines of business Entertainment and Hospitality Aerospace Construction Energy and Transaction Advisory Real Estate Technology Financial Lines and Financial Institutions Marine Cyber Environmental and Credit and Political.
STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 31 JLT CANADA JLT Canada provides insurance broking risk management and claims services across Canada.
In 2017 it continued to make progress significantly increasing market presence and building a stronger reputation.
The business employs approximately 180 people across 7 locations.
Review of Operations JLT Canada reported revenue of 22.5 million in 2017 an increase of 17% on 2016.
The business generated a trading profit of 0.3 million an improvement over 2016.
New business growth was significant over all Specialty lines particularly in Construction.
JLT MIDDLE EAST and AFRICA JLT MEA JLT MEA offers insurance broking and risk management expertise in a region increasingly seeking more specialty risk and advisory services.
The business employs approximately 200 people in the UAE Bahrain Turkey and South Africa across 8 offices.
In addition to these services our DIFC operation also acts as a hub for inward business to the regions insurance and reinsurance markets from across the Groups global network for Specialty lines including Marine Energy Construction Credit and Political Risks and Financial Lines.
Review of Operations JLT MEA reported revenue of 23.2 million in 2017 representing growth of 9% of which 4% was organic.
The business grew its trading profit by 91% from 1.4 million to 2.7 million driven by revenue growth and cost management measures.
JLT INSURANCE MANAGEMENT JLT Insurance Management provides leading corporations with captive management and consulting services in Barbados Bermuda Guernsey Singapore and the US.
The business employs approximately 50 people across these locations.
Review of Operations During the year insurance and reinsurance market conditions continued to reduce demand for new captives in certain regions.
However the business delivered revenues of 10.5 million a 2% increase on 2016 or a decrease of 2% at constant rates of exchange.
Trading profit decreased to a 0.6 million loss from a profit of 0.3 million in 2016.
Through the provision of captive management and consultancy services JLT Insurance Management supports some of JLTs largest global clients and as such plays a key role in programmes that deliver revenue to the wider Group.
OTHER RISK and INSURANCE BUSINESSES 32 STRATEGIC REPORT RETIREMENT SOLUTIONS BENEFITS CONSULTING WEALTH AND INVESTMENT MANAGEMENT TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS Providing a range of actuarial and administration services for pension trustees corporate sponsors and scheme members.
Services include supporting fully outsourced scheme administration payroll communications documentation and technical services.
We also offer integrated risk management services to UK pensions trustees and corporate sponsors including actuarial investment and risk transfer consultancy scheme design governance and independent trustee services.
Providing advice on employee health and benefit programmes medical claims administration occupational health and rehabilitation services and placement of health and risk protection policies.
We also provide autoenrolment flexible benefits voluntary benefits and total reward statements through our market leading platform Benpal For defined contribution pension schemes we offer scheme design management services including advice on suitable insurance providers.
Offering advice and support to individuals in respect of their financial planning including atretirement services tax planning and life protection requirements.
Providing discretionary management of assets for both high net worth individuals and company pension schemes in addition to asset hosting services.
Provider of one of the most widely used UK pensions administration and fund accounting software platforms to corporate pension schemes.
Providing integrated web solutions to enable scheme members to access information and services facilitating selfservice benefits management.
EMPLOYEE BENEFITS Our Employee Benefits business offers a comprehensive range of employee benefits advice and services to companies pension trustees and individuals.
Our specialist teams act as advisers intermediaries and service providers in the areas of pensions consultancy and administration employee benefits and healthcare life insurance and wealth management.
OUR GLOBAL EMPLOYEE BENEFITS BUSINESSES PROVIDE SERVICES INCLUDING EMPLOYEE BENEFITS
2016 300.4m Trading Margin % 2016 16% Underlying Trading Profit % 2016 49.5m
2016 2656 EMPLOYEE BENEFITS OUR BUSINESSES UK and Ireland p33 Asia p33 Australia and NZ p33 Latin America p34 Canada p34 Middle East and Africa p34 CONTRIBUTION TO GROUP REVENUE 2017 % Excludes employees in shared service operations STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 33 UK and IRELAND 2017 2016 % Change Total revenue 172.0m 160.0m 7% Underlying trading profit 17.2m 12.3m 40% Trading margin 10% 8% JLTs Employee Benefits business is one of the largest employee benefit and pension consultants in the UK offering a comprehensive range of employee benefits advice and services to companies pension trustees and individuals.
The business employs some 1400 people across 16 locations in the UK and Ireland.
Review of Operations In 2017 the UK and Ireland Employee Benefits business grew revenues to 172.0 million with an impressive organic revenue growth rate of 8%.
Trading profit grew to 17.2 million an increase of 40% over 2016.
In December Retirement Solutions won its most significant account to date providing administration actuarial and documentation services to a major UK financial services company.
That win further cements JLTs position as the UKs largest provider of pension administration services to the private sector.
Trading margins in the business improved by 200 basis points to 10%.
We now expect to achieve our 15% trading margin target for this business in 2019 rather than in 2018 with the benefit of the Global Transformation Programme.
The Group anticipates that the business will make further progress in 2018 towards this target with the majority of the progress being made in 2019.
Principal lines of business Pension Solutions Benefits Consulting Wealth and Investment Management and Technology Solutions.
ASIA
2017 2016 % Change Total revenue 89.6m 87.3m 3% Underlying trading profit 25.1m 27.2m 8% Trading margin 28% 31% The Employee Benefits business in Asia primarily focuses on helping companies develop employee benefit programmes and wealth protection for high net worth individuals.
The division employs around 500 people across 13 territories.
Review of Operations Private Client Services our life assurance broking business experienced a difficult first half to the year.
However this was followed by a positive performance in the second half of the year.
The business is now expanding into new geographies including mainland China.
Principal lines of business High Net Worth Life Assurance Healthcare Insurance Programmes and Risk Management Services including Wellness Consulting and Prevention Flexible Benefit Consulting Platform Design and Implementation.
AUSTRALIA and NEW ZEALAND 2017 2016 % Change Total revenue 30.1m 27.5m 9% Underlying trading profit 6.3m 5.5m 15% Trading margin 21% 20% The Employee Benefits business in Australia and New Zealand provides consultancy and administration services to corporate and private clients across a wide range of companypaid and voluntary employee benefits programmes.
The business is also one of the regions leading workplace injury risk consultancies and rehabilitation providers having acquired Recovre and Workwise Occupational Health in Australia and Alpha in New Zealand over the past two years.
The division employs some 250 people across 30 locations.
Review of Operations Local factors affected our Employee Benefits operations in Australia in 2017 where a slower rate of revenue growth was a result of structural changes in the workers compensation market.
However we anticipate a better performance in 2018 building on the trading profit growth in 2017.
Principal lines of business Corporate Health Insurance Corporate Life and Group Income Protection Personal Accident Insurance Workers Compensation Software Solutions Occupational Rehabilitation Workplace Health Safety Consulting.
34 STRATEGIC REPORT LATIN AMERICA 2017 2016 % Change Total revenue 23.5m 21.7m 8% Underlying trading profit 1.2m 3.7m 69% Trading margin 5% 17% In Latin America our Employee Benefits business focuses on providing employee benefits programmes often built around a healthcare insurance offering.
This is a rapidly developing market where we see the opportunity to expand our capabilities through health management and consulting.
The division currently employs some 350 people across our office network.
Review of Operations In Brazil corporate payrolls fell as the economy remained weak leading to slower headline revenue growth and a yearonyear reduction in trading profit in the region.
However Latin America Employee Benefits has been successful in winning significant volumes of new business and we look forward to growth rates returning to former levels in that business as economies in the region recover.
Principal lines of business Healthcare Insurance Programmes including Life and Dental and Risk Management Services including Wellness Consulting and Prevention.
OTHER EMPLOYEE BENEFITS
CANADA
Our Employee Benefits business provides consultancy technology and administration services to clients across Canada.
Review of Operations Our Canada Employee Benefits business delivered revenues of 2.1 million an increase of 8% over 2016.
The business reported a trading profit of 0.3 million compared to 0.6 million reported in 2016.
The growth strategy will focus on investments to improve branding software and the addition of new personnel.
We remain optimistic about the growth potential of the business and the opportunities for national expansion.
MIDDLE EAST and AFRICA In South Africa we offer healthcare consultancy to corporate and private clients as well as retirement fund consultancy services.
We employ approximately 65 people in our South Africa Employee Benefits business throughout the country.
Our Employee Benefits business in the balance of the region is beginning to grow steadily from its recent starting point.
Review of Operations Our South African Employee Benefits business continues to demonstrate strong revenue growth with reported revenues of 2.9 million in 2017 representing growth of 50% or 29% growth at constant rates of exchange.
The strong revenue growth was achieved through further investment in the business which resulted in a reduction in the trading margin to 4% at constant rates of exchange.
STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017tel % Change Total underlying contribution to JLT after tax 2.1m 1.0m 120% Associate holding at 31 December 2017 GrECo Central and Eastern EuropeCIS 20% MAGJLT Italy 25% MarchJLT Spain 25% JLT Sterling Mexico 36% JLT Independent India 49%
The Groups income from its Associates in 2017 increased to 2.1 million compared to 1.0 million in 2016.
GRECO JLT GROUP CEECIS MAGJLT ITALY JLT STERLING MEXICO MARCHJLT SPAIN JLT INDEPENDENT INDIA JLT has a 25% shareholding in MAGJLT a leading Specialty broker in Italy with 200 employees in Milan Naples Rome and offices in a further 6 cities around the country as well as a Lloyds broking arm in London.
Key business areas are Corporate Risk Management and Middle Market Aviation Marine Hull and Machinery Liability PandI Cargo High Net Worth Yacht Fine Art Contingency and Affinity Employee Benefits Motor.
JLT has a 20% shareholding in the GrECo JLT Group a leading specialist insurance broker in Central and Eastern Europe the Balkans and the CIS regions.
With its headquarters in Vienna GrECo JLT has 52 offices with 760 employees in 16 countries including the Czech Republic Hungary Poland and Russia.
Principal specialist areas are Aviation Construction and Real Estate Employee Benefits Energy Power and Mining Marine and Marine Cargo Communications Technology and Media Financial Institutions and Hospital and Churches.
JLT has a 49% shareholding in JLT Independent.
Our joint venture partner is Sunidhi Group a leading Indian Financial Services Group.
JLT Independent has 280 employees with offices in Mumbai New Delhi Chennai Bengaluru Hyderabad Gurgaon and Pune.
Key business areas include Energy Construction Marine Aviation Reinsurance Employee Benefits Credit and Political Risks and Liability.
Sterling Re Intermediario de Reaseguro SA de CV which trades as JLT Sterling is an associate company in which JLT has a 36% shareholding with the balance of shares being held by Lorant MMS a leading independent retail insurance broker based in Mexico City.
JLT Sterling provides specialist wholesale and reinsurance services in the Aviation Casualty Construction Energy Marine Marine Cargo Property and Specie sectors.
The Group has agreed the sale of its holding in JLT Sterling which is expected to complete in early 2018.
JLT has a 25% shareholding in MarchJLT which is the 4th largest commercial insurance broker in Spain.
The joint venture partner is Banca March Spains leading privately owned financial institution.
Its core business is corporatefocused with Specialty capabilities including Construction Tourism Marine Financial Risks and Employee Benefits.
The business employs 130 staff with offices in Barcelona Bilbao the Canary Islands Madrid Mallorca Seville and Valencia.
36 STRATEGIC REPORT INCOME STATEMENT The Groups total revenue for the year was 1.39 billion.
Underlying profit before tax was 191.5 million with reported profit before tax of 181.6 million after exceptional items and reported profit after tax and noncontrolling interests of 118.4 million.
Diluted earnings per share EPS was 54.7p up from 37.8p in 2016.
Underlying profit before tax grew by 11% on 2016 and was underpinned by the overall strong trading performance of the business.
The 2017 results have been favourably impacted by changes in foreign exchange rates although the benefit was significantly reduced from 2016.
However sterling has strengthened significantly since December 2017 and should sterling remain at its highest point in the year to date the Group anticipates that this would reduce underlying profit before tax by approximately 10 million.
Revenue
Compared with 2016 JLT delivered a 10% increase in total revenue 6% at constant rates of exchange CRE with 5% organic growth.
Our Risk and Insurance businesses which in 2017 represented approximately 77% of the Groups revenue grew revenues to 1.07 billion an increase of 11% or 5% on an organic basis.
Our Employee Benefits businesses grew revenues by 7% or 4% on an organic basis.
This was principally due to 8% organic growth in our UK and Ireland business.
Organic revenue of our international Employee Benefits businesses remained at similar levels to 2016 reflecting challenging macroeconomic and trading conditions.
Operating costs Total underlying operating costs excluding exceptional items increased by 104 million or 10% to 1.17 billion.
Of the increase 48 million arose from changes in foreign exchange rates.
The mix of the cost base remained broadly unchanged with staff and premises costs being the major individual expense items.
Head office costs rose to 34.3 million in the year in line with previous guidance and are expected to remain at a similar level in 2018 subject to changes in provisions.
The increase in the year related to rising premises costs higher UK employment taxes and normalised selfinsurance costs.
Trading profit The Groups underlying trading profit increased by 10% to 213.7 million and the trading margin was maintained at 15.4%.
Associates
The Groups income from its Associates increased from 1.0 million to 2.1 million.
Finance costs Net finance costs increased by 2.2 million to 24.3 million as we continued to invest across the business including the acquisition of Construction Risk Partners CRP in the US and Belgibo in Belgium.
Underlying profit before tax The Groups underlying profit before tax increased by 11% to 191.5 million.
Exceptional costs In 2017 net exceptional items were 9.9 million 2016 37.7 million primarily driven by 9.1 million related to a settlement of litigation 2.6 million of acquisition and integration costs mainly in respect of CRP and Belgibo offset by 1.8 million of gains on the disposals of the Groups Mexican Associate business and Expacare the small UK expatriate insurance business.
FINANCE DIRECTORS
I am pleased to present the 2017 Finance Directors Review where our results were driven by strong organic revenue growth.
Charles Rozes UNDERLYING OPERATING COST RATIO m 2017 2016 Variance Total revenue 1386 100% 1261 100% 125 Operating costs Staff costs 860 62.0% 785 62.3% 75 Premises 71 5.1% 64 5.1% 7 Depreciation and Amortisation 33 2.4% 34 2.7% 1 Other operating costs 208 15.1% 185 14.5% 23 1172 84.6% 1068 84.6% 104 Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 37 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION
The tax charge for the year was 52.9 million representing an effective tax rate of 29.5% 2016 32.9% excluding share of Associates.
The underlying tax expense was 53.3 million representing an effective tax rate of 28.2% 2016 30.5%.
The yearonyear decrease in the underlying tax rate was driven by the change in the geographical mix of profit and the different tax rates across those geographies.
Profit after tax and noncontrolling interests Profit after tax and noncontrolling interests was 118.4 million 2016 81.5 million.
Diluted earnings per share was 54.7p on a reported basis 2016 37.8p.
BALANCE SHEET The net assets of the Group increased to 398 million from 351 million.
The key movements were an increase in goodwill of 35 million mainly due to the acquisition of 50.1% of CRP and the entire shareholding of Belgibo partly offset by the impact of foreign exchange.
The Group completed three acquisitions for a total consideration of 61.2 million a net increase in working capital of 33 million which is 10 million lower than the same period in 2016 despite higher overall revenues and no significant shift in seasonality a decrease of 29 million in the net pension liability primarily as a result of the Groups annual contributions and returns on scheme assets.
The associated deferred tax asset was recognised accordingly and the derivatives position decreased by 30 million mainly due to mark to market adjustments.
The associated deferred tax asset was recognised accordingly.
Net debt defined as own funds less total borrowings net of transaction costs was 506 million 2016 496 million.
The Groups principal measure of leverage the Net Debt to EBITDA ratio was 1.81 2016 2.11 or 1.61 2016 1.61 on a bank covenant basis.
At 31 December 2017 the Group had committed longterm unsecured revolving credit facilities of 500 million and drawn private placement loan notes equivalent to 420 million resulting in total debt facilities equivalent to 920 million with maturities between 2020 and 2029.
A long term private placement loan note for USD 42 million issued in 2010 was repaid in September 2017.
Gross borrowings were 710 million which includes 691 million of borrowings under the Groups committed facilities leaving unutilised committed facilities headroom of 229 million.
The Group continues to be well funded with an appropriate mix of short and longterm debt with a range of maturities that extend to 2029.
EBITDA 27tel219 Net interest 14 15 15 15 9 Working capital 33 43 1 55 25 Annual capex 57 39 60 49 72 Operational free cash flow 17tel113 Dividends paid 71 66 63 60 58 Tax paid 49 46 37 37 41 Net shares acquired 17 18 26 32 21 Net cash inflowoutflow excl acqdisp Acquisitionsdisposals 55 7 54 68 177 Net cash outflowinflow 49 15 68 97 206 EBITDA is represented by underlying trading profit plus depreciation and amortisation including amortisation of share options income from associates less settled exceptional costs excluding net gains on disposals.
OPERATIONAL CASH FLOWS The Group primarily monitors operational cash flows which report cash and net debt movements but exclude fiduciary funds statutory cash flows include movements in fiduciary funds.
In 2017 the Group generated 279 million of EBITDA reflecting an increase in underlying profit and a reduction in exceptional items.
Operational free cash flows increased to 175 million reflecting the EBITDA growth offset by an increase in annual capex due to the fitout of additional space in the Groups London headquarters as well as improvements to its IT infrastructure.
Acquisition capex was primarily driven by the acquisitions of CRP and Belgibo.
This resulted in an overall net cash outflow of 49 million in 2017.
DIVIDENDS
The Board has recommended a final dividend in respect of 2017 of 21.8p per share.
Together with the interim dividend of 12.2p per share this brings the total dividend to 34.0p per share an increase of 5.6%.
This represents dividend cover of 1.7 times based on underlying diluted earnings per share compared to 1.6 times in 2016.
IMPACT OF NEW ACCOUNTING STANDARDS Details regarding the Groups current assessment of the impact of new accounting standards IFRS 9 Financial Instruments and IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers can be found in the Significant Accounting Policies of the financial statements.
IFRS 9 is anticipated to have an immaterial impact on the Groups profit and loss account mainly due to our conservative bad debt provisioning policy and strong credit control.
38 STRATEGIC REPORT As stated in the Chief Executives review implementation of the two year Groupwide Global Transformation Programme will commence in 2018.
It is projected to deliver a fully sustainable operating cost reduction of 40 million by the end of the 2020 financial year secured at a oneoff cost estimated at 45 million which will be recorded as exceptional items in the year they are incurred.
The benefits will register progressively in 2018 2019 and 2020.
Including the Global Transformation Programme the Group anticipates a shift in the phasing of its profits in 2018 to approximately 49% in the first half and 51% in the second half of the financial year.
PRINCIPAL FINANCIAL RISKS The Group has identified four principal financial risks capital and liquidity risk foreign currency risk counterparty risk and the defined benefit pension scheme risk.
1 Capital and Liquidity Risk The Groups objectives when managing capital are to safeguard its ability to continue to provide returns for shareholders and benefits for other stakeholders and to maintain an efficient capital structure to ensure an optimal cost of capital.
In order to achieve 2 Foreign Currency Risk The Group has transactional and translational foreign currency exposures.
The transactional exposure arises primarily in the London Market businesses which have a sterling cost base but which have a significant proportion of US dollar denominated revenues approximately USD 350 million in 2017.
The Group continues to operate a US dollar hedging programme to reduce the volatility caused by exchange rate movements by entering into forward foreign exchange contracts.
As at 14 February 2018 87% of these anticipated dollar revenues for 2018 earned in the UK approximately USD 360 million are hedged at an average rate of USD 1.39.
For 2019 65% of expected dollar revenues are hedged at an average rate of USD 1.33 for 2020 63% are hedged at an average rate of USD 1.34 and 10% are hedged for 2021 at an average rate of USD 1.46.
Other hedging programmes are operated for other transactional currency exposures primarily in respect of the Euro Indian rupee and Canadian dollar.
The Group has significant investments in overseas operations.
Movements in exchange rates between balance sheet dates will affect the sterling value of the Groups consolidated balance sheet.
The currency profile of the Groups borrowings is managed to mitigate balance sheet translation exposures where practical and cost effective.
Total own funds 204.1 191.6 Borrowings 710.1 687.8 Net debt 506.0 496.2 Total equity 397.7 350.9 Total capital 903.7 847.1 these objectives the Group may adjust for example the amount of dividends paid to shareholders return capital by a share buyback issue new shares or sell assets to reduce debt.
The Group manages its balance sheet through monthly reviews management controls and financial reporting.
In order to manage liquidity risk the Group maintains committed longterm credit facilities to ensure that it is well positioned to meet seasonal capital requirements and to support the strategic growth of the business.
There are no restrictions on the use of these facilities in the normal course of business.
At 31 December 2017 the facility headroom was 229 million.
The insurance and reinsurance broking operations within the Group operate in a number of jurisdictions where local regulation requires a minimum level of capital to be maintained.
The total regulatory capital to be held by the Group is not considered significant in the context of the total available capital.
The total capital of the Group at 31 December 2017 and 2016 was as follows Cost to achieve
Benefit
Annualised
Benefit
JLT has historically recognised inception date as the primary trigger for recognising revenue a practice that has largely been upheld under the new standard.
As a consequence the restatement of 2017 underlying PBT on adoption of IFRS 15 will be limited to an overall rephasing of approximately 4.5 million into subsequent years.
Most of this relates to JLTs UK Employee Benefits business due to the longer term nature of its contracts and a further amount to JLT Re for similar reasons.
The residual balance is split across the remainder of JLTs businesses.
BASIS OF PRESENTATION The Groups 2017 consolidated financial statements include an income statement statement of comprehensive income balance sheet statement of changes in equity and a statement of cash flows.
These statements have been prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as adopted by the European Union.
Statutory accounts of individual Group companies are prepared as required in accordance with applicable local accounting standards.
The balance sheet of the Company Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc on page 171 has been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting practice in the UK.
GLOBAL TRANSFORMATION PROGRAMME Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 39 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION In addition to the transactional foreign exchange exposure JLT is also exposed to translational foreign exchange movements which are not hedged.
Given the relative size and profitability of the Groups Australian business this is the most material such exposure.
3 Counterparty Risk The Groups gross exposure to counterparty risk at 31 December 2017 is 1.64 billion representing own cash fiduciary funds investments and deposits derivative assets and trade receivables.
The Group maintains a counterparty policy based on credit analysis market data and published credit ratings to manage the concentration of funds and its exposure to individual counterparties.
Deposit limits are assigned to each counterparty appropriate to its credit rating and overall financial profile.
The Group manages its own cash and invested fiduciary funds in the form of deposits with a number of banks AA money market funds and other secure shortterm money market instruments.
The Groups counterparty approval criteria include a requirement that financial institutions maintain a minimum long term investment grade rating except where this is not possible or practical due to local operating or regulatory requirements.
The Groups credit criteria also include reference to credit default swap spreads and capital ratios.
All exposures to individual counterparties are subject to a formal credit limit to control concentrations of credit exposure and limit the impact of default risk.
Counterparty limits ratings and credit default spread rates together with utilisation levels are reviewed regularly.
The respective credit quality by rating of each class of financial asset is included within the notes to these accounts.
4 Defined Benefit Pension Scheme Risk The Group has exposure to movements in the balance sheet income statement and statement of comprehensive income as a consequence of changes in the valuation of retirement benefit assets and liabilities and the impact of such changes on the Groups defined benefit pension scheme positions.
The Group seeks to manage this exposure through regular monitoring and reporting of scheme asset performance and liability positions suitable scheme investment and risk mitigation strategies and appropriate funding arrangements based on periodic actuarial valuations.
Assets held in the UK defined benefit pension scheme include annuity buyin contracts which secure the future benefits relating to approximately 70% of pensioner liabilities and which reduce exposure to ongoing longevity and asset risk arising from that portion of the pension scheme liabilities.
The pension trustees are undertaking a revaluation of the UK defined benefit pension scheme position as at 31 March 2017.
A revised deficit recovery schedule will be agreed in 2018 as a part of the scheduled triennial revaluation process.
40 STRATEGIC REPORT PERFORMANCE SUMMARY Total Revenue Trading Margin Trading Profit m 2017 Growth CRE Organic 2016 2017 CRE 2016 2017 CRE 2016 Risk and Insurance JLT Europe 399.3 1% 1% 3% 393.8 23% 22% 20% 90.6 87.2 79.9 JLT Re 217.1 11% 7% 4% 195.6 20% 21% 21% 42.4 43.5 40.5 JLT Australia and New Zealand 125.7 7% 1% 2% 117.7 28% 28% 29% 35.5 32.5 34.1 JLT Asia 100.3 11% 6% 6% 90.3 17% 18% 19% 17.3 17.3 16.8 JLT Latin America 93.3 31% 20% 19% 71.4 28% 29% 30% 26.1 24.7 21.1 JLT Middle East and Africa 23.2 9% 4% 4% 21.3 11% 11% 7% 2.7 2.4 1.4 JLT Specialty USA 73.9 79% 71% 28% 41.3 22% 21% 65% 16.4 15.1 27.0 JLT Canada 22.5 17% 9% 9% 19.2 1% 1% 2% 0.3 0.3 0.5 JLT Insurance Management 10.5 2% 2% 2% 10.3 6% 6% 3% 0.6 0.6 0.3 1065.8 11% 6% 5% 960.9 19% 19% 17% 197.9 192.2 166.6 Employee Benefits UK and Ireland 172.0 7% 7% 8% 160.0 10% 10% 8% 17.2 16.9 12.3 Asia 89.6 3% 2% 1% 87.3 28% 29% 31% 25.1 25.0 27.2 Australia and New Zealand 30.1 9% 1% 1% 27.5 21% 21% 20% 6.3 5.8 5.5 Latin America 23.5 8% 1% 1% 21.7 5% 7% 17% 1.2 1.5 3.7 Middle East and Africa 2.9 50% 29% 28% 1.9 1% 4% 10%  0.1 0.2 Canada 2.1 8%  5% 2.0 14% 14% 31% 0.3 0.3 0.6 320.2 7% 4% 4% 300.4 16% 16% 16% 50.1 49.6 49.5 Head Office         34.3 33.7 22.4 Total 1386.0 10% 6% 5% 1261.3 15.4% 15.6% 15.4% 213.7 208.1 193.7 2017 2016 Underlying trading profit 213.7 193.7 Underlying share of associates 2.1 1.0 Net finance costs 24.3 22.1 Underlying profit before taxation 191.5 172.6 Exceptional items 9.9 37.7 Profit before taxation 181.6 134.9 Underlying tax expense 53.3 52.3 Tax on exceptional items 0.4 8.3 Underlying noncontrolling interests 11.5 9.4 Noncontrolling interests on exceptional items 1.2 Profit after taxation and noncontrolling interests 118.4 81.5 Underlying profit after taxation and noncontrolling interests 126.7 110.9 Diluted earnings per share 54.7p 37.8p Underlying diluted earnings per share 58.5p 51.4p Total dividend per share 34.0p 32.2p Charles Rozes Finance Director 28 February 2018
Organic growth is based on total revenue excluding the effect of currency acquisitions disposals and investment income.
Total revenue comprises fees commissions and investment income.
CRE Constant rates of exchange.
Underlying results exclude exceptional items.
See notes 1 and 3 of the financial statements on pages 118 and 122 for details of exceptional items.
Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 41 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION
RISK MANAGEMENT REPORT
As a global company JLT faces a range of risks any of which has the potential to impact on the achievement of our strategic business objectives and our reputation as well as providing opportunity in the right circumstances.
FULLY ACCOUNTABLE FOR THE IDENTIFICATION ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT OF RISK PROVIDES POLICY ADVICE GUIDANCE AND CHALLENGE TO THE 1ST LINE
INDEPENDENTLY ASSESSES RISK MANAGEMENT
AND CONTROL EFFECTIVENESS
INTERNAL
CONTROL
FRAMEWORK
JLTS INTERNAL CONTROL FRAMEWORK JLT Three Lines of Defence The Group operates a Three Lines of Defence 3LOD model as a core component of its governance arrangements as shown above.
The current 3LOD model has been in place and operating for five years across the Group and has been subject to iterative enhancements during that time.
JLT completed an internal review of its 3LOD model in the UK businesses during 2016 building upon the solid governance framework already in place.
JLT successfully implemented the recommendations of the review during 2017 which were focused on delivering enhanced accountability and ownership of risk within the businesses ensuring that the right people with the right skills are available to the businesses and close to decision making processes clear skilled roles for the control functions in the second line of defence providing specialist advice and strong oversight to the businesses internationally and an enhanced focus on risk management disciplines across the business.
In early 2017 JLT also completed a review of its international 3LOD model which resulted in a number of enhancements being rolled out during the year including designating all international local risk and compliance teams as 1st Line of Defence 1LOD clarifying their role and responsibilities and ensuring a clear delineation from the 2nd Line of Defence 2LOD and strengthening the 2LOD support and oversight of international operations.
JLT regularly reviews its governance arrangements through Board and Audit and Risk Committee ARC effectiveness reviews which are carried out on an annual basis.
More detail can be found in the Corporate Governance and Audit and Risk Committee Reports on pages 57 to 74.
42 STRATEGIC REPORT Key JLT policies include Antibribery and corruption Antimoney laundering and fraud Gifts and entertainment Conflicts of interest Market abuse and insider dealing Complaints HR related policies IT Security Data protection Sanctions Each business maintains an Operating Procedures Manual which contains all key procedures for the business to conduct itself in a compliant and sustainable manner.
RISK MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK
JLTs risk management framework was refreshed and strengthened during 2016 referencing several recognised standards such as the Institute of Risk Management and ISO 31000.
The revised framework was rolled out during 2017.
It is based on seven risk categories IT Finance Operations Strategic People Legal and Compliance and Service and Markets each of which has a Group level sponsor whose daily role is aligned to the subject matter.
The Group specialists are engaged in defining the Group level risk profile which is used in deriving the Principal Risks shown on pages 43 to 45 and in arriving at the Viability Statement on pages 95 and 96.
In addition to the above the businesses maintain their own risk registers and risk reporting which are produced by each executive team and regularly reviewed by their local Entity ARC.
The Entity ARCs consider the key risks and any mitigating action that can be taken to keep the identified risks within the risk appetite of the firm as well as assessing new emerging risks and opportunities.
PRINCIPAL RISKS The principal risks faced by the Group are summarised in the table on pages 43 to 45.
FINANCIAL RISKS The principal financial risks are also discussed in more detail in the Finance Directors Review on pages 38 and 39.
Charles Rozes Finance Director 28 February 2018 JLT GROUP PLC BOARD JLT GROUP PLC AUDIT and RISK COMMITTEE st line The Business nd
Control Functions rd
Internal and External Audit Entity Audit Risk and Committees
Boards
Group Internal
External
Audit
Group Risk and
INTERNAL CONTROLS Underpinning JLTs governance is a suite of policies which are authored and managed by the relevant Group function signed off by the relevant senior Group executive and accessible to employees via the Groups intranet Policy Portal.
There is also a revolving mandatory programme of elearning modules for employees to take throughout the year reinforcing the policy messages.
Adherence to the Groups policies is monitored by the functions who own them and by Group Internal Audit who refer to them during the course of their audits which are reported to the local Entity ARCs and to the Group ARC.
In parallel the Groups Compliance team provides assurance that local regulation is adhered to and that clients interests are at the heart of everything we do.
AUDIT and RISK COMMITTEES JLT has implemented a consistent governance model across the Group run through local Boards and business level ARCs Entity ARCs which are operated as committees of each Board and are overseen by them.
There are over 20 Entity ARCs most chaired by a NonExecutive Director who in most instances is also independent of the JLT Group.
The relevant management team including its Chief Executive Officer Chief Operating Officer Chief Financial Officer and others as required attend Entity ARC meetings to present their view of the risk and compliance environments across their businesses.
Group Risk and Compliance and Group Internal Audit also attend these meetings and provide independent reporting and challenge to ensure that there is adequate discussion of relevant issues including key risks and mitigating controls.
During 2017 JLT introduced a series of subject matter briefing sessions for all NonExecutive Directors across the Group.
These sessions focused on the General Data Protection Regulation GDPR and financial controls.
The following diagram shows the interaction of 3LOD within the governance model.
The membership terms of reference and key areas of focus of the Group Audit and Risk Committee are outlined in the Audit and Risk Committee Report on pages Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 43 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION RISKS NATURE OF RISK MITIGATION STRATEGIC RISKS Economic Instability JLTs business is driven more by economic activity and growth than by reinsurance market rates since greater levels of corporate activity generally drive greater demand for the Groups services.
There is a risk that economic instability reduces client demand.
Global business operations diversified across a broad range of territories and industry sectors.
Well funded balance sheet and access to liquidity.
Annual strategy review at Board and Group Executive Committee.
Strategy and Change
Strategy there are risks to the Companys strategic plan arising from changes in the external environment such as markets e. e. disintermediation technology e. initiatives and the execution of the Companys strategy.
Annual strategy review by the Board and the Group Executive
Formal three year strategic planning process for every business revised annually which includes consideration of material risks to the business plan.
Acquisition due diligence and risk assessment processes.
Brexit  Investments made to strengthen operations in Europe to reduce potential impact on serving clients and the access to markets in the EU.
Change management JLT is an agile organisation that seeks to ensure it maximises opportunities for the benefit of clients and other stakeholders and is well controlled and resilient.
There is a risk that the appetite of the Group for change exceeds its capability and capacity to deliver and absorb changes effectively.
Programme governance over strategic change initiatives.
Reputation JLT recognises the strategic importance and value of its reputation and takes a wide range of measures to protect it.
Damage to reputation can potentially occur as a result of any principal risk crystallising.
At a macro level there is a risk of reputational impact arising from the conduct of employees and parties we work with in the course of our business falling outside of our values policies and expectations.
Formal recruitment processes and employee vetting.
Client and third party due diligence and governance.
Sanctionsanti money laundering screening.
Market security due diligence.
Group Procurement function with supplier screening process.
Group crisis management team plan reputational management plan and public relations agency.
OPERATIONS RISKS Business Interruption Loss of physical site the Group operates from over 100 offices in 41 territories across the world with a number of key strategically important sites.
There is a risk of a business interruption due to a large unexpected incident.
Dedicated Group Business Continuity Management function that provides oversight of plans and solutions and coordinates responses to events.
Detailed Group Business Continuity policy and procedures for each business unit.
Regular independent review and testing of business continuity plans.
Loss of IT The Group is reliant on the ability to process its transactions on behalf of its clients.
Risks arise from nonperformance or failure of IT whether inhouse or from an outsourcing providerIT supplier malicious act andor cybercrime and internal operational issues.
Group Procurement function with supplier screening process.
Formal contracts and service level agreements in place with all outsourcing providers or IT suppliers.
Dedicated IT Security function.
Monitoring of compliance with Group IT Security policy and service level agreements.
Regular IT disaster recovery plan testing by each business unit.
PEOPLE RISKS Loss of Key Staff
The Groups principal asset is its people there is a risk that the organisation may not be able to attract and retain market leading talent.
Distinctive entrepreneurial collaborative and team oriented culture and environment.
Effective staff reward and retention strategies.
Effective staff appraisal and development programmes.
Succession planning processes.
IT RISKS Information Security and Cyber Intermediaries and pension administrators process and retain confidential data in the normal course of business.
Risks relate to loss of customer records or breach of confidentiality due to inadequate security and other key controls.
Risk based monitoring and reviews performed by Group Information Security and Group Internal Audit.
Regular reporting to business Audit and Risk Committees.
IT platform security  Data Loss Prevention tools and processes firewall identity and access management network access controls network and security event monitoring penetration testing and server maintenance.
Mobile device encryption restrictions on USB devices and access to personal email.
NonTechnical and Technical Group Information Security policies and standards and all staff training.
44 STRATEGIC REPORT RISKS NATURE OF RISK MITIGATION LEGAL AND COMPLIANCE RISKS Data Privacy Risks arising from noncompliance with or misinterpretation of local or international data privacy regulationlegislation.
Groupwide information classification schema.
Regular reviews of highly confidential data and corresponding controls and protections.
Group Data Protection policy and training for all staff.
Data loss prevention tools and processes.
Mobile device encryption restrictions on USB device and access to personal email.
Records Management policy including retention and archiving.
Technical Group IT Security policies and standards.
Formal General Data Protection Regulation GDPR implementation programme.
EandO claims Intermediaries run a risk of incurring a loss if the operating procedures in place across the Group in relation to market security placement and claims are not complied with or alleged negligencebreach of contract in the provision of servicesadvice becomes apparent.
Common operating procedures and compliance policy in each business.
Staff training in errors and omissions avoidance.
Central and regional risk and compliance monitoring.
Strong procedural and systems controls.
Quality assurance programmes.
Professional indemnity insurance programme.
Market security processes monitoring and Insurer Impairment Plan.
A global policy of proportionate liability capping wherever practicable.
Litigation Non EandO litigation Litigation risk can arise from a number of different sources such as MandA litigation e.
Agreement breach of employment law and tortious liability arising from the recruitment of individuals.
Dedicated Legal and MandA function with oversight responsibilities.
Staff training in HR policies and procedures.
Formal recruitment processes based upon HR and legal advice.
Competition
Antitrust
Engagement in anticompetitiveantitrust practices could result in infringement of competitionantitrust laws and regulations.
Group Competition Risk policy.
Staff training and awareness in competition laws and regulations.
Bribery and
Risks relating to the engagement in corrupt practices could result in a breach of bribery and corruption legislation and regulation.
Group Antibribery and Corruption policies including Gift and Entertainment and Third Party Payments and Approvals policies.
Client and third party due diligence and governance.
Staff training and awareness in antibribery and corruption laws and regulations.
Segregation of duties.
Operating Procedures manuals.
System and payment controls.
Group Financial Crime team oversight.
Regulatory The Groups footprint brings with it an increasingly complex regulatory landscape to be anticipated and managed.
There is a risk that JLT may fail to take into consideration the requirements leading to legal andor regulatory breach.
Risk can also arise from a regulator conducting a review of past business activities which causes it to revise its view of the productproposition and could result in regulatory sanction fines and remediation costs.
Dedicated first and second line of defence compliance functions.
Group Compliance policies and staff training programmes on regulatory topics.
Regulatory monitoring programmes.
Quality Assurance programmes.
Sanctions As a global company supporting international clients brokers run the risk of engaging with sanctioned territories andor individualsentities which could give rise to a breach in sanctionsexport control orders.
Group Sanctions policy.
Systems screening and sweeping.
Staff training and awareness on sanctions risk and compliance obligations.
Operating Procedures manuals.
System controls.
Group Financial Crime team oversight.
Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 45 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION RISKS NATURE OF RISK MITIGATION FINANCIAL RISKS LiquidityFinancing Risk that the Group is not able to meet its obligations when they fall due or can do so only at excessive cost.
This risk may occur through lack of undrawn credit facilities. at maturity. breach of debt covenants.
Multiple banking facilities.
Cash management processes.
Financial planning and forecasting.
Group Cash Management policy and process.
Foreign Exchange The Group has foreign exchange exposures to risk arising from the need to convert currencies into GBP for reporting purposes and risk arising from revenues and costs being denominated in different currencies.
Prudent management of transactional currency exposures through a structured hedging programme.
Regular review and sensitivity analysis of currency translation impacts to financial reports.
Centralised hedging of material transactional exposures.
Reporting and auditing of hedging and exposures.
Counterparty Counterparty risk can arise for JLT from two key sources Banks risk of loss of own cash fiduciary funds investments and deposits derivative assets and trade receivables as a result of bank failure.
Board approved Investment and Counterparty policy to limit the concentration of funds and exposure with any one counterparty.
Defined Cash and Investments policy.
Active management and monitoring of counterparty limits financial strength and credit profile of key counterparties.
Regular review by Board and Audit and Risk Committee of counterparty limits ratings credit default swap spread rates utilisation levels and compliance with applicable regulation.
ReInsurers JLT owes a duty of care to place clients business with security which may reasonably be regarded as being sufficiently sound financially to meet potential claims as they may fall due.
In the event of insurer impairment this could result in client detriment and damage to the brokerclient relationships.
Also in the event of JLT having been adjudicated not to have exercised reasonable endeavours to mitigate this risk it could result in an EandO claim.
Market security due diligence.
Group Market Security team.
Insurer Impairment Plan.
Defined Benefit Scheme liabilities Risk of adverse financial impact as a consequence of increase in the Defined Benefit Pension Scheme deficit.
Appropriate scheme investment strategy and diversification.
Triennial actuarial valuations and regular trustee funding updates.
Agreed deficit funding plan.
Regular review of long term derisking strategy.
Regular scheme membership data verification.
Effective independent trustee governance.
Regular review of employer covenant.
Regular monitoring and reporting of scheme asset performance and liability positions.
Interest Rate Risk of volatility of earnings and cash flows arising from exposure to movements in interest rates.
This may also impact the Defined Benefit Pension Scheme assets and liabilities.
Group Treasury management of cash balances.
Interest rate hedging programme.
Financial planning and forecasting.
Financial Reporting The risk of inaccurate accounting and reporting internally and externally.
Group Accounting policy.
Attestation process for financial reporting.
Financial reporting policy and procedures.
Internal and external audit of financial controls and reports.
Fraud Risks relating to the theft or misuse of JLT and client monies.
Group Treasury policy procedures and controls.
IT system access management and restrictions.
Segregation of duties.
Segregation of client and company funds.
Whistleblowing policy and hotline.
Financial Crime team.
46 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE RESPONSIBILITY We see it as essential to act in the interests of all our stakeholders  in particular our clients our colleagues our shareholders and our trading partners  in order to build a sustainable long term business one that balances risk with opportunity and that makes a positive contribution to the communities in which we live and work.
We also recognise that one of the key duties which our Directors have under the Companies Act 2006 the Act is to promote the success of JLT for the benefit of its shareholders whilst having regard to the interests of the Companys broad range of other stakeholders and wider social responsibilities.
In this section we review the activities of the Group over the past year in terms of how we have sought to fulfil our environmental social and governance responsibilities.
MANAGEMENT OF CORPORATE
Our approach to Corporate Responsibility CR has a strong focus on the interests of our clients.
Our clients increasingly seek evidence that their service providers are well governed and that we make a sustainable positive contribution to solving the challenges that face our communities our society and the environment.
It is therefore integral to our success that JLT demonstrates high standards of CR  not only delivering the best commercial outcomes for our clients but also taking every opportunity to do so in the most socially responsible and sustainable way.
At JLT our functional teams  including HR Property Services Procurement Finance Risk and Marketing  have a strong focus on delivering CRrelated projects.
Each of our businesses across the Group is also closely involved and colleagues around the world regularly volunteer for a wide range of activities.
The Groups CR strategy and activities are coordinated by the CR Steering Group which has Board Group Executive Committee and senior management membership.
Our CR Steering Group actively pursues the achievement of higher standards in both our socially responsible behaviours and our capacity to measure and benchmark those behaviours for our stakeholders.
This Steering Group includes senior representation for each of JLTs main operating companies worldwide.
These designated representatives are responsible for driving CR activity at a local level and liaise closely with the Steering Group.
The Groups approach to charitable giving is coordinated by the Group Charities Committee.
We are constituents of the FTSE4Good index.
FTSE4Good evaluates companies performance in the areas of Environmental Social and Governance responsibility.
Our continued presence in the index reflects our ongoing commitment to corporate responsibility.
STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 47 ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY We recognise that climate change and the scarcity of natural resources will pose an increasingly significant challenge to society over time.
We believe that JLT has a social responsibility to minimise our environmental impact as far as possible.
We therefore seek to take commercially sustainable measures to manage our environmental impact including how we manage our property portfolio.
For example our preference is always to use energyefficient lighting technologies where we can and to take measures to use water efficiently.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY In line with Mandatory Carbon Reporting MCR requirements within the Companies Act 2006 this report outlines JLTs Greenhouse Gas GHG emissions covering the 2017 financial year.
The scope of JLTs reporting encompasses its operational boundary and includes emissions associated with all of JLTs offices worldwide.
JLT has reported on the mandatory scopes 1 and 2 and for the optional scope 3 has opted to include global business travel given that air travel in particular is acknowledged as a large contributor to greenhouse gas emissions and nonpurchased electricity where available.
JLTs total GHG emissions for 2017 were 20244 tCO e.
The largest proportion of JLTs GHG emissions can be accounted for by air travel which comprises 62% of the total emissions equating to 12566 CO e.
In order to demonstrate JLTs emissions in relation to a quantifiable factor relating to its business activities JLT has calculated its intensity ratio on the basis of the number of JLT employees as this is considered to relate to Company growth and GHG emissions.
The intensity ratio for 2017 is 1.82 tCO eemployee.
JLTS GHG EMISSIONS BY SCOPE AND INTENSITY RATIO Scope Source Details Sub Total Tonnes CO e Total Tonnes CO e 2017 2016 Base Year Intensity Ratio Scope 1
Fuels
Natural gas purchased directly by JLT 1625.59 2074.60 2368.55 0.15 Fugitive emissions Refrigerant leaks and top ups for equipment under direct responsibility of JLT
Transport owned or controlled by JLT 1083.51 Scope 2 Purchased Electricity Location Based Electricity purchased directly by JLT 2506.44 2506.44 2591.59 3842.87 0.22 Purchased Electricity Market Based Electricity purchased directly by JLT 1775.89 1775.89 2319.34 3842.87 0.16 Scope 3 Air Travel Flights taken by JLT employees for business purposes 12565.59 16112.18 14782.14 11908.57 1.45 Rail Travel UK Only Rail Travel by JLT employees for business purposes NonPurchased Electricity Electricity used by JLT but purchased by the landlord 3264.96 Waste Data UK only Waste generated by JLT employees TOTAL LOCATION BASED 20244.21 20244.21 19448.33 18119.99 1.82 TOTAL MARKET BASED 19513.66 19513.66 19176.08 18119.99 1.76 Intensity Ratio Location Based 1.82 1.82 1.74 2.18 What is tCO It is standard practice to report GHG emissions in tonnes of CO equivalents tCO e.
This is a universal unit of measurement used to indicate the global warming potential of the GHG in relation to the global warming potential of one unit of carbon dioxide.
The seven main greenhouse gases that are converted into tCO e are Carbon dioxide CO Methane CH
HFCs Nitrous oxide N O Perfluorocarbons PFCs Sulphur hexafluoride SF and Nitrogen trifluoride NF 48 STRATEGIC REPORT Scope 1 8% Scope 2 12% Scope 3 80%
The methodology employed to calculate the GHG emissions is in accordance with the GHG Protocol Corporate Reporting and Accounting Standard revised edition.
Data has been collated from JLTs global offices for electricity fuels refrigerants and transport directly purchased or controlled by JLT in line with the mandatory scopes 1 and 2.
With regard to the optional scope 3 JLT has included within its report emissions relating to air travel by its employees for business use as this is recognised as a significant contributor to carbon emissions.
JLT has also reported on nonpurchased electricity usage i. the UK only rail travel and waste data.
The relevant UK or international emissions factors have been applied.
There were some limitations to the reporting due to gaps in data and where necessary every reasonable effort has been made to fill these and estimate data as accurately as possible.
For air travel some countries were excluded as this data is not available for this reporting period.
JLT will be working with its global offices to further improve data availability for the 2018 reporting period.
YEARONYEAR REVIEW The total emissions associated with JLTs operations have increased.
The intensity ratio of emissions per employee has increased by 0.08 tCO eemployee.
The number of employees has decreased slightly.
There has been a wider data set included this year for instance more countries able to report on nonpurchased electricity and the inclusion of waste data.
The wider data set alongside an increase in air travel emissions has meant that the scope 3 emissions have increased whereas both scopes 1 and 2 have decreased.
JLTs focus on reducing its environmental impact extends beyond reporting on its emissions.
For JLTs London head office there is now an environmental management system in place which is committed to reducing the impact of its activities and promoting good environmental practice.
RECYCLING
We actively promote recycling and encourage the removal of general waste bins and the provision of sorting bins and facilities in our offices.
This initiative has been particularly successful in our London headquarters and in our Mumbai operations which between them represent more than 35% of our JLT colleagues.
JLTs GHG Emissions by Scope Carbon Intensity Ratio tCO2eemployee STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 49 In London the Corporation of Londons Clean City Awards scheme has awarded our London headquarters The St Botolph Building a Gold rating for its zero to landfill approach to waste management.
TRAVEL
In 2017 JLT introduced a new global Travel and Entertainment
This policy establishes as a minimum standardisation of JLTs approach to travel consolidation of travel data and improvement in traveller tracking.
The policy builds on our commitment to reduce all travel particularly for internal staff meetings national or international and we continue to extend our teleconferencing facilities in JLT offices globally.
Where there is an identified need to travel we are actively promoting the benefits of combining trips and taking advantage of multisector air tickets thus reducing our carbon footprint.
We also continue to monitor our air travel usage as part of our statutory GHG reporting responsibilities.
We are fully aware of our corporate responsibility with regards to the regulations associated with the Modern Slavery Act 2015 which our hotel selection procedure recognises.
PAPER CONSUMPTION We recognise both a cost benefit and an environmental benefit in limiting our consumption of paper and seek to manage our consumption of paper with the environment in mind.
To that end we uphold the following principles to use print suppliers whose sustainability programme employs the replanting of crop. to set laser printer defaults to twosided printing.
Adopted in JLT Group IT policy this requirement is reducing paper consumption and waste and to circulate documents e. in a format that avoids the need for printing.
The Group employs cloudbased software systems to distribute board and committee papers electronically saving on paper as well as reducing overheads associated with distribution.
50 STRATEGIC REPORT SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY Our colleagues across the world are active and enthusiastic contributors to community life.
They take real pride in exercising their personal responsibility to make a positive contribution to the environment and to the communities in which they live and work.
We believe community engagement makes a positive difference to our team spirit and ultimately to the quality of the work our teams can deliver for clients.
JLT supports and encourages colleagues initiatives  this can include time off work to take part in volunteering activities and matchedfunding to support charitable fundraising.
TOTAL 10453 employees TOTAL 1085 employees
To maximise the impact we can have we focus on 3 strategic partners aligned to our own areas of business sharing the social benefits of knowledge Specialty wellbeing Employee Benefits and resilience Reinsurance.
Our current partners on these strategic themes are Udaan Foundation knowledge Alzheimers Society wellbeing and RedR resilience.
We manage the majority of our charitable giving businessbybusiness with a central fund to provide greater support to our strategic partners.
Charitable Donations Our focus on inclusion is global and tailored to meet the needs of our individual businesses and geographies as well as the needs of the businesses they serve.
Having established our Diversity Committee in 2015 we defined JLTs Diversity agenda on the basis of three pillars  Networking Sponsorship and Involvement each of which has inclusion at its core.
In 2017 JLT supported many initiatives both internally and in public events in the London Market and other insurance hubs to help to drive a more diverse and inclusive business and to play our part in solving these challenges in our industry.
Across 2018 our efforts will be focused around building inclusion in particular ensuring that we continue to reinforce the need for inclusive working practices and an awareness of innate biases through all of the employee life cycle.
Following a review of our career management processes strategic impact has been defined with greater precision.
As a result the inscope population in determining the makeup of JLTs senior management has reduced in number.
A restatement of the figures previously reported for 2016 on this basis results in 76% of the senior management population being male and 24% being female.
The 2017 position is as follows We regularly engage clients in joint fundraising activities and see this as an important part of client relationship building.
Perhaps the most longstanding example is JLTs annual golf day in aid of Sydneys Westmead Hospital which to date has raised more than AUD 1.8 million for the Childrens Cystic Fibrosis clinic.
We actively manage the risk that charitable payments may be misused as inducements with training and monitoring in place as part of our bribery and corruption controls framework.
DIVERSITY and INCLUSION At JLT we strive to provide an inclusive working environment that encourages everyone to fulfil their potential.
We believe an inclusive culture encourages diversity which in turn leads to better business decisions and better solutions for clients drawing on a wide range of experience.
We aim to recruit the most talented and ambitious people irrespective of differences in education religion nationality race gender age physical ability social background or sexual orientation.
Male
49.0% 51.0%
All Employees
77.5% 22.5%
Senior Management STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 51
In 2017 email launched in Australia.
The inaugural event was held in Sydney and focused on the challenges faced by women in their careers.
In the UK JLT continued its membership of the City Womens Network.
Additionally
JLT colleagues across the UK participated in the Independent Women In Insurance iWIN network and the Gender Inclusion Network for Insurance.
Collaboration with others in the insurance industry included the second joint leadership event with Hiscox in London on career challenges.
JLT also hosted its second private dinner for the London Insurance Supper Club a network of senior women within our sector on the subject of wellness at work.
Sponsorship
Our sponsorship of Lloyds Dive In festival Diversity and Inclusion in Insurance continued for a third year.
A breakfast event for millennials was hosted in JLTs offices in Sydney Australia while in Singapore JLT cosponsored the Dive In.
JLT was a silver sponsor of the Dive In festival in EMEA and hosted a follow up event later in the year in London on the use of language at work.
In Hong Kong JLT is sponsoring a project in conjunction with the Hong Kong Council on Social Services on the empowerment of women.
Involvement
JLT supports the Chartered Insurance Institutes involvement in the HeForShe campaign which aims to achieve gender parity.
This support was reconfirmed with senior leaders publicly making their HeForShe pledges.
We recognise that making diversity part of our DNA demands an inclusive environment.
Our training and development in this area continues to be enhanced with inclusive leadership being a critical part of all our leadership and management development programmes.
It is also integrated into our Performance Management training.
We are making the way we recruit more deliberately inclusive and enhancing our ability to track and manage our performance on a range of relevant metrics.
HEALTH and WELLBEING As a major global provider of Employee Benefits services to our clients employees we have a natural insight into the health and welfare responsibilities of employers especially through the occupational rehabilitation services we deliver on behalf of our clients in various territories.
We offer a range of standard and discretionary health benefits to our employees in most territories alongside support for healthy lifestyles.
The Wellbeing theme in our internal CR programme includes a range of activities with third parties for example the Mindset charity in Hong Kong and Singapore working with Jardine
Globally across 2018 we will be bringing greater focus to mental health in the workplace including expanding the use of accessible resources for employees and establishing stress management workshops for managers to recognise the early signs of mental health issues.
LABOUR STANDARDS As a specialist professional services firm our exposure to the risk of low labour standards is not significant.
We are opposed to forced labour or child labour.
Our Employee Handbooks specify clear standards for acceptable working practices.
We apply due diligence in our procurement policy and processes to ensure that we work with appropriate subcontractors.
In addition our Employee Benefits business frequently helps clients to improve their own capabilities in the area of employee wellbeing through helping to minimise risks and deliver healthcare and rehabilitation support services contributing to enhanced labour standards in the markets we serve.
HUMAN RIGHTS and MODERN SLAVERY As an employer in both the developing and developed worlds and with clients who have diverse businesses in some of the most remote and poor as well as the most affluent corners of the world we recognise and support the need to work together to ensure that principles of respect fairness and integrity remain at the heart of how we run our business.
We respect and uphold the human rights and principles set out in detail in The UN Universal Declaration of Human Rights and The International Labour Organisations Declaration on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work We have a zero tolerance for modern slavery and human trafficking in our organisation and in our supply chain.
Our supply chains include providers of professional services IT services and equipment office facilities services recruitment and training advertising and marketing and business operations and infrastructure support.
As a service based insurance broking and employee benefits business we believe the risk of modern slavery andor human trafficking in or business and supply chain is low.
We have a Code of Ethical Conduct.
This sets the standards we expect from both our own people and those of our partners.
We are committed to improving our supply chain vetting and due diligence.
In the UK we carry out an annual risk assessment with our supply partners to ensure that compliance to our standards remain in place.
In 2016 we increased our scrutiny of our UK supply chain in respect of the specific abuse of human rights that is human trafficking in recognition of both the spirit and letter of the UKs Modern Slavery Act.
52 STRATEGIC REPORT In 2017 we made further progress in improving our supply chain vetting and due diligence for our operations outside of the UK.
This is an ongoing process.
In addition in 2018 we will be launching a training and awareness programme to appropriate members of staff to ensure a high level of understanding of the risk of modern slavery and human trafficking within the business.
In accordance with the Act we publish on our website an annual statement detailing our commitments and the progress we are making towards assuring that our supply chain conforms to the principles we uphold.
SOCIAL BUSINESS and PRO BONO WORK We are increasingly looking for opportunities to apply our professional expertise to support the communities in which we operate.
Our Local Community Insurance Services LCIS team in JLT Australia for example delivers low cost access to insurance services for small notforprofit organisations and clubs who might otherwise face insurmountable obstacles to hosting events or accepting volunteers.
At the same time we are sometimes able to offer our specialist expertise on a pro bono basis for good causes which we are pleased to do whenever our expert advisers have the capacity.
An example of this is where the fund managers at The Future Generation Investment Company and the Future Generation Global Investment Fund waive all management and performance fees enabling 1% of assets to be donated to young Australians affected by mental illness every year.
As their risk partner were honoured to provide broking services on a pro bono basis supporting their innovative venture and the millions of dollars they raise.
STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 53 REDR UK On 1 March 2017 JLT in London hosted an annual drinks event for patrons of RedR the disaster relief experts and our resilience charity partner.
The event was led by the Princess Royal HRH Princess Anne who is President of the charity and was attended by 120 patrons and friends of the charity including many of our contacts in the Construction and Energy sectors.
UDAAN SCHOOL JLT partners with the Udaan India Foundation which is close to its office in Mumbai a notforprofit organisation working with children from lowincome communities in the field of education.
The primary aim is to ensure that every school child is gaining a strong and holistic educational foundation to become a responsible compassionate and confident citizen of tomorrow.
MINDSET CHALLENGE HONG KONG The annual Walk Up Jardine House is one of Jardine Matheson Groups most notable philanthropic initiatives in Hong Kong and has been taking place since 1985.
In March 2017 five of JLT Hong Kongs colleagues ran up 49 floors covering 947 steps in just over five minutes contributing to the HK40 million raised for charity.
ALZHEIMERS SOCIETY JLT Specialty is proud to be partnering with the Alzheimers Society in 2017 and 2018 with a campaign to raise 150000 to assist them with their vital work in combating dementia.
Through the hard work of all concerned they were able to present a cheque to the charity for the sum of 80000 at the end of 2017.
THE CHILDRENS HOSPITAL AT WESTMEAD JLT Australias annual golf day in aid of The Childrens Hospital at Westmead Sydney is one of our longest standing charity partnerships.
Over 14 years it has raised more than AUD 1.8 million.
These funds have annually sponsored a young paediatric doctor the JLT Medical Fellow to undergo Specialist training in Cystic Fibrosis.
T wo of these doctors are now worldleading researchers in Cystic Fibrosis.
BRAZIL
In 2017 JLT Brazil colleagues dedicated time to bring a smile to more than 800 children in deprived areas of So Paulo and Rio de Janeiro on Easter Childrens day and Christmas also developing a warm clothing campaign.
Our colleagues donated more than 400 toys to help Santa deliver Christmas gifts to the children.
MAKING A POSITIVE CONTRIBUTION Our colleagues across the world are active and enthusiastic contributors to community life.
They take real pride in exercising their personal responsibility to make a positive contribution to the communities in which they live and work.
54 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE RESPONSIBILITY As a financial services group with operations across the world JLTs governance capability is highly developed.
We hold each other to high standards of integrity  our culture is committed to transparency and fairness to the client and the rigorous pursuit of their best interests.
This section highlights topics of particular relevance to Corporate Responsibility benchmarks.
For a fuller account refer to the Risk Management section on pages 41 to 45 and the Corporate Governance Report on pages 57 to 66.
RISK MANAGEMENT
As a global company JLT faces a range of risks each of which has the potential to negatively impact the delivery of our strategic business objectives outcomes for clients and our reputation.
These risks can also provide opportunities in the right circumstances.
Taking risk in a disciplined and considered way is essential to our growth and continued success.
It allows us to maximise the positive impact that our business can have on society and communities and minimise the downside risk.
JLTs risk management arrangements enable us to understand the risks we face manage risk in an intelligent conscious disciplined agile and balanced way enhance performance and maximise opportunities and operate with rigour to protect our key stakeholders our reputation and our results from events that could have been reasonably foreseen provide our clients and other key stakeholders with confidence that we are a sustainable and resilient business that is able to service their needs when they need us and comply with applicable regulations laws and corporate governance obligations.
The Group operates a 3 lines of defence governance model.
The first line the business is responsible for the identification and management of all the risks inherent in its operations the second line Group Risk and Compliance provides policy advice guidance and challenge to the business and the third line Group Internal Audit independently assesses and reports on the effectiveness of governance risk management and internal controls.
The Group operates an enterprisewide risk management framework which is based around recognised standards and good practice including the Institute of Risk Management and ISO 31000 and which is tailored to align with JLTs role as a reinsurance broker and employee benefits solutions provider.
The framework is periodically reviewed to ensure that it remains appropriate and in keeping with the nature and scale of the Company and the environment within which we trade.
For more detail on the principal risks we track and the governance structure we apply to maintain rigorous risk management see pages 41 to 45.
BRIBERY and CORRUPTION We are committed to actively contributing towards the international efforts to eradicate all forms of financial crime.
Limiting our exposure to financial crime is an integral part of JLTs activities and helps us maintain our reputation.
As a global business listed on the London Stock Exchange JLT is subject to the UK Bribery Act which requires us to have adequate procedures to prevent bribery and corrupt action by those working for JLT or on its behalf.
Antibribery and corruption is also a key feature of global regulatory regimes that JLT complies with.
JLTs policies and procedures are based around external good practice and use leading worldwide corruption data such as that provided by Transparency
We actively guard against bribery and corruption by Maintaining Anti Bribery and Corruption ABC policies we have an overarching ABC policy which is underpinned by a number of specific policies including Gifts and Entertainment Third Party Payments and Approvals and Conflicts of Interest policies.
These provide clarity to staff on our commitment legal and regulatory obligations both corporate and personal and the requirements we have as a Group to minimise the risk of bribery and corruption including reporting any actual or suspected instances of bribery and corruption.
These policies are maintained and set out within our Employee Handbook and are accessible on our company intranet Training  our set goal is to train every employee from director to broker to support functions globally so not only can they recognise and prevent the use of JLT in the furtherance of bribery and corruption but they can anticipate where to look.
Training includes global elearning modules in eight languages and is supplemented by face to face training and briefings for higher risk jurisdictions Vigilance  all staff are reminded of their legal obligations in relation to reporting suspicious activity or transactions and JLT provides communication channels to enable employees to discuss and report any suspicion of bribery and corruption.
JLT also has a whistleblowing policy as described on page 55 Investigation  JLT will investigate any instance of alleged bribery and corruption as well as assisting the police and other appropriate authorities in any resultant investigation and prosecution and Financial Crime Team  this JLT team supports the active reduction of bribery and corruption risk by managing and providing oversight of the Groups ABC policies and providing tools training and specialist expertise including investigation.
STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 55
JLT has a global whistleblowing policy and 24 hour hotline provided by a specialist external firm.
This provides an alternative channel for those colleagues who might feel unable to report wrongdoing or suspicions of wrongdoing through their normal line management channels.
The hotline allows employees across the world to report issues or concerns online or by phone in a range of languages and with complete confidence and without fear of dismissal or retaliation.
The whistleblowing policy is actively communicated during the year and managers are required to ensure that their teams understand the purpose of the policy how concerns can be raised and the protections afforded to employees.
Any reports of incidents events or concerns made under this policy are investigated and resolved confidentially.
JLTs policy and systems conform with the differing regulatory requirements of all the countries in which we operate and gives colleagues the option of anonymity or complete confidentiality wherever this is permitted by law.
The Groups whistleblowing arrangements are monitored and reviewed by the Group Audit and Risk Committee.
TAX TRANSPARENCY The Groups updated tax principles which comply with section 162 schedule 19 of the Finance Act 2016 are published on the Groupsite We believe these principles are based on good corporate practice in the area of tax management and tax transparency balancing the interests of our stakeholders.
We will continue to revise and strengthen these principles as necessary in response to the needs and expectations of our stakeholders.
The Strategic Report is signed for and on behalf of the Board.
Dominic Burke Group Chief Executive 28 February 2018 56 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE 57 Corporate Governance Report 67 Audit and Risk Committee Report 75 Nominations Committee Report
78 Directors Remuneration Report
91 Directors Report
GOVERNANCE
REPORT
This section includes a review of our corporate governance processes and summaries of the work of the Board and its Committees.
STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 57 INTRODUCTION FROM THE CHAIRMAN On behalf of the Board I am pleased to introduce the Companys Corporate Governance Report for the financial year ended 31 December 2017.
We continue to believe that how the Group does business is as important as what it does and recognise the need for a strong corporate governance framework and supporting processes across the
Good governance with high standards set from the top is a key factor in delivering sustainable business performance and creating continued value for the Groups shareholders.
In the following pages you will find details of how JLT approaches governance including the operation of the Board and its Committees and an explanation of how we comply with the 2016 UK Corporate Governance Code the Code.
You will also find a summary of the key outputs from the latest review of the Boards effectiveness  the results of which were very positive  and Reports from each of the Boards Committees.
We recognise the importance of effective corporate governance throughout the Group and of having robust governance structures and processes in all our businesses.
Each of the Groups businesses is governed by a board of directors and on an individual business or regional basis an audit and risk committee further details of which can be found in the Risk Management Report on page 41.
BOARD COMPOSITION During 2017 a number of changes were made to the membership of the Board and its Committees.
Two Directors retired from the Board during the year Bruce CarnegieBrown retired in June following his appointment as the Chairman of Lloyds of London and Jonathan Dawson retired in October.
I should like to express the Boards thanks to Bruce and Jonathan for their respective contributions to the Board.
Andrew Didham and Richard Meddings both joined the Board on 2 October 2017.
Richard has become Chair of the Remuneration Committee and Andrew has become Chair of the Audit and Risk Committee.
Annette Court has succeeded Jonathan Dawson as the Companys Senior Independent Director.
We are also pleased to welcome Lynne Peacock who will join the Board as a NonExecutive Director with effect from 1 May 2018.
CODE COMPLIANCE We remain committed to the principles of good corporate governance established by the Code.
We confirm that the Company applied the main principles and complied with the relevant provisions of the Code during 2017 with the exception of provisions B.1.2 B.2.1 C.3.1 and D.2.1 relating to the composition of the Board and its Committees.
This was primarily due to the roles of two Jardine Matheson appointed Directors on the Board.
The Board strongly believes that the continuation of these arrangements is in the Companys best interests.
This is explained further in the Directors Report on pages 91 to 98 which provides an overview of the Companys compliance with the Code and an explanation for the areas of noncompliance.
I should like to thank the Directors for their support throughout the year.
Geoffrey Howe
28 February 2018 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
Good governance with high standards set from the top is a key factor in delivering sustainable business performance and creating continued value for the Groups shareholders.
Geoffrey Howe 58 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE DIRECTORS PROFILES Geoffrey Howe was appointed a NonExecutive Director in January 2002 and became Joint Deputy Chairman in November 2004.
He was appointed Chairman in April 2006 and is Chairman of the Nominations Committee.
Geoffrey is the senior independent director of Close Brothers.
He was formerly chairman of Nationwide Building Society chairman of Railtrack Group plc a director of Investec plc a director and general counsel of Robert Fleming Holdings and managing partner of Clifford Chance.
Mark Drummond Brady was appointed a Director of Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc in March 2011 and became the Deputy Group CEO in September 2014.
Mark is also a member of the Group Executive Committee.
Mark has been with JLT since 1987 and has held a number of senior posts in the Group and was the Groups International Chairman of Risk and Insurance until September 2014.
In February 2017 Mark became CEO of JLT Latin America and Chairman of JLT Canada.
Dominic Burke joined Jardine Lloyd Thompson in 2000 as the Chief Executive Officer of JLTs UK Retail and Employee Benefits business following JLTs acquisition of his business Burke Ford.
He was appointed a Director and Chief Operating Officer of Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc in January 2005 and was appointed Group Chief Executive in December 2005.
Charles Rozes joined Jardine Lloyd Thompson on 1 September 2015 as Group Finance Director.
He is a member of the Group Executive Committee.
He is also a Director of JLT India and a member of its Audit and Risk Committee.
He joined the Group from Barclays where since 2011 he had held the role of global head of investor relations.
Prior to that he was chief financial officer of Barclays UK Retail and Business
Charles has also held senior roles at Bank of America IBM and
GEOFFREY HOWE GROUP CHAIRMAN MARK DRUMMOND BRADY DEPUTY GROUP CEO DOMINIC BURKE GROUP CHIEF EXECUTIVE CHARLES ROZES GROUP FINANCE DIRECTOR Annette Court was appointed a NonExecutive Director in August 2012.
She is a member of the Audit and Risk Remuneration and Nominations
Annette was appointed as Senior Independent Director on 3 October 2017.
Annette has extensive insurance industry experience.
Annette was appointed as a nonexecutive director of Admiral Group plc in 2012 and became its chairman on 26 April 2017.
Between 2007 and 2010 she was chief executive officer Europe General Insurance for Zurich Financial Services and a member of the group executive committee.
She is a former chief executive officer of RBS Insurance the insurance division of RBS Group which owned the Direct Line and Churchill brands.
In the role she was also a member of the RBS group executive management committee.
Annette was a nonexecutive director of Foxtons Group plc until May 2017 and has previously served as a member of the board of the ABI.
Andrew Didham was appointed a NonExecutive Director on 2 October 2017 and Chairman of the Audit and Risk Committee on 3 October 2017.
Andrew is also a member of the Remuneration and Nominations Committees.
Andrew has been a nonexecutive director and chairman of the audit committee at Shawbrook Group plc since February 2017.
He has been a nonexecutive director of Charles Stanley Group plc since September 2015 where he is also senior independent director chairman of the risk committee and a member of the nominations audit and remuneration committees.
Andrew was previously group finance director of Rothschild the international investment banking group from 1997 to 2012.
He became an executive vice chairman of Rothschild in 2012 and remains a director of NM Rothschild and Sons the UK business of the Rothschild group.
Andrew is a Chartered Accountant and before joining Rothschild he spent 18 years at KPMGThomson McLintock including as a partner.
His experience includes audit responsibility for a number of global financial institutions assignments on behalf of the Bank of England and the EU and extensive dealings with regulatory authorities in the UK Europe Asia Australia and the USA.
ANNETTE COURT SENIOR INDEPENDENT DIRECTOR ANDREW DIDHAM NONEXECUTIVE DIRECTOR STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 59 Adam Keswick was appointed a NonExecutive Director and Deputy Chairman on 1 September 2016.
He is a member of the Remuneration and Nominations Committees.
Adam joined the Jardine Matheson Group in 2001 before being appointed to the Board in 2007.
He was deputy managing director of Jardine Matheson Holdings Limited from 2012 to 2016 and became chairman of Matheson and Co. in 2016.
He is also a director of Dairy Farm Hongkong Land Jardine Strategic Mandarin Oriental and Ferrari and a supervisory board member of Rothschild and Co.
He is a director of the Yabuli China Entrepreneurs Forum.
Lord Sassoon joined the Board as a NonExecutive Director in April 2013.
He is a member of the Audit and Risk Remuneration and Nominations Committees.
He began his career at KPMG before joining S.
Warburg later UBS Warburg in 1985.
From 2002 to 2006 he was in the United Kingdom Treasury as a civil servant where he had responsibility for financial services and enterprise policy.
Following this he chaired the Financial Action Task Force and conducted a review of the UKs system of financial regulation.
From 2010 to 2013 Lord Sassoon was the first Commercial Secretary to the Treasury.
He is also a director of Jardine Matheson Holdings Matheson and Co.
Dairy Farm Hongkong Land and Mandarin Oriental.
He is chairman of the ChinaBritain Business Council and a trustee of the British Museum.
Richard Meddings was appointed a NonExecutive Director and Chairman of the Remuneration Committee on 2 October 2017 and is also member of the Audit and Risk and Nominations Committees.
Richard has been a nonexecutive director and chairman of the audit committee of Deutsche Bank AG since October 2015 and has been a non executive director and chairman of the audit committee of HM Treasury since July 2014.
In addition Richard was appointed as a nonexecutive director of TSB Banking Group plc in September 2017 and chairman as of February 2018.
Richard also serves as a trustee of Teach First.
Richard was previously a nonexecutive director of Legal and General Group plc and chairman of the group risk committee from December 2014 to May 2017.
He was also a nonexecutive director of 3i Group plc from September 2008 to July 2014 and chair of the audit and risk committee and from 2010 to 2014 was senior independent director.
Richard held executive management roles at Standard Chartered plc from 2002 to 2014 as group executive director risk and control from 2002 to 2005 and as group finance director from 2006 to 2014.
Prior to joining Standard Chartered Richard spent nearly 20 years in a range of senior roles in the financial services sector.
Richard is a Chartered Accountant.
He is a member of the governing body of the International Chamber of Commerce UK and a member of the Financial Reporting Review Panel.
Nicholas Walsh joined the Board as a NonExecutive Director in October 2014.
He is a member of the Audit and Risk Remuneration and Nominations Committees.
He has held a variety of underwriting distribution and senior management roles in the insurance industry with a career of 42 years with American International Group Inc.
AIG.
His most recent roles were vice chairman of AIG Property and Casualty Inc.
AIG Asia Pacific Insurance Pte.
Ltd.
Prior to this he was president and CEO of American International Underwriters.
Nicholas is an adviser to Norton Rose Fulbright.
ADAM KESWICK DEPUTY CHAIRMAN RICHARD MEDDINGS NONEXECUTIVE DIRECTOR NICHOLAS WALSH NONEXECUTIVE DIRECTOR LORD SASSOON Kt NONEXECUTIVE DIRECTOR Nominations Committee Remuneration Committee Audit and Risk Committee 60 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE Audit and Risk Committee Andrew Didham Chairman Annette Court Richard Meddings Lord Sassoon Nicholas Walsh Remuneration Committee Richard Meddings Chairman Annette Court Andrew Didham Adam Keswick Lord Sassoon Nicholas Walsh Nominations Committee Geoffrey Howe Chairman Annette Court Andrew Didham Adam Keswick Richard Meddings Lord Sassoon Nicholas Walsh Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc JLT Group Board Geoffrey Howe NonExecutive Chairman NonExecutive Directors Adam Keswick Deputy Chairman Annette Court Senior Independent Director Andrew Didham Richard Meddings Lord Sassoon Nicholas Walsh Executive Directors Dominic Burke Group Chief Executive Mark Drummond Brady Deputy Group CEO Charles Rozes Group Finance Director STRUCTURE AT A GLANCE The structure below sets out the composition of the Board and its Committees as at 31 December 2017 GOVERNANCE FRAMEWORK The Board and its Committees operate within a wider governance framework.
This ensures that decisions are taken at the right level in the business by the people best placed to take them.
Our framework is designed to maintain high standards of governance.
The work of the Board is supported by the Audit and Risk Remuneration and Nominations Committees.
The roles and activities of the Committees are described in more detail in the Reports of the respective Committees on pages 67 to 90.
Terms of reference for each of the Committees which are reviewed regularly can be found on the Companys websitesite The Board has delegated the daytoday management of the Group development of the Groups strategic direction for consideration and approval by the Board and implementation of the agreed strategy to the Group Chief Executive Dominic
The Group Executive Committee operates to support the Group Chief Executive in the running of the Group and comprehensive Group Delegated Authorities govern the taking of all significant decisions and the provision of approval for a broad range of matters.
Further details of the composition of the Group Executive Committee can be found on page 26.
In addition the Group has a Disclosure Committee which oversees the Companys compliance with the Groups disclosure obligations.
The Disclosure Committee is not a Committee of the Board but reports to the Board or to the Group Audit and Risk Committee as appropriate.
The Committee is chaired by Charles Rozes Group Finance Director.
The Board is collectively responsible for approving and overseeing the implementation of the Groups strategy to create and deliver long term value for our shareholders in a way that is supported by the right culture values and behaviours across the Group.
The Board is also responsible for reviewing the performance of management ensuring that appropriate systems of internal controls and risk management are in place and that the provision of the right resources are in place throughout the Group.
The Board has established a schedule of reserved matters which include the aforementioned areas of responsibility as well as a range of other areas including the approval of financial results announcements the Annual Report and Accounts and shareholder circulars decisions relating to the Groups capital structure approval of dividend recommendations and the approval of material acquisitions and disposals.
THE ROLE OF THE BOARD STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 61
At the date of this Report the Board comprised the Chairman who was independent on appointment the Group Chief Executive Group Finance Director Deputy Group CEO four Independent NonExecutive Directors and two NonIndependent NonExecutive Directors.
During the year Bruce CarnegieBrown and Jonathan Dawson left the Board and Andrew Didham and Richard Meddings were appointed as Independent NonExecutive Directors.
Lynne Peacock has also been appointed as an Independent NonExecutive Director with effect from 1 May 2018.
CHAIRMAN
The Chairmans role is to lead the Board by providing direction and focus ensure that there is a clear structure for the effective operation of the Board and its Committees set the agenda for Board discussions and promote effective and constructive debate and a sound decision making process ensure that the Directors receive accurate timely and clear information and that effective communication takes place with the Companys shareholders work closely with the Group Chief Executive to ensure that the strategies and actions agreed by the Board are effectively implemented and provide support and advice to the Group Chief Executive while respecting his executive responsibility for managing the Group.
The division of responsibilities between the Chairman and the Group Chief Executive has been clearly defined and has been agreed by the Board.
GROUP CHIEF EXECUTIVE The role of the Group Chief Executive is to manage the overall direction and management of the Group develop and agree with the Chairman and the Board the Groups strategy and key performance indicators formulate and agree budgets develop remuneration proposals for consideration by the Remuneration Committee build and maintain the Companys standing with shareholders and financial institutions and the public consult the Chairman on all significant matters ensure that appropriate systems of control organisational and management structures and culture exist in the Group and ensure that the Groups strategy is effectively implemented and the interests of the Groups stakeholders are promoted.
NONEXECUTIVE DIRECTORS The NonExecutive Directors perform a vital role in corporate accountability.
The role of the NonExecutive Directors is to provide a strong independent element to the Board and offer constructive challenge to and support for management bring an appropriate breadth of skills and experience to the Board together with the rest of the Board satisfy themselves that the Groups financial controls and systems of risk management are robust and effective and contribute to the effective functioning of the Boards Committees.
SENIOR INDEPENDENT DIRECTOR The role of the Senior Independent Director is to act as a sounding board for the Chairman and an intermediary for other Directors bring experience and independent judgement to the Board lead the Chairmans annual performance evaluation and be available as an additional point of contact for shareholders to discuss matters of concern which would not be appropriate through normal communication channels with the Chairman Chief Executive or Group Finance Director.
No such matters of concern were raised by shareholders during the year or by 22 February 2018 being the latest practicable date prior to the date of the Report.
GROUP COMPANY SECRETARY The role of the Group Company Secretary is to act as Secretary to the Board and all of its Committees support the smooth operation of each of these bodies by working with the Group Chairman and Chairmen of the Committees advise the Directors on Board procedures and corporate governance matters and support the Chairman in ensuring compliance with relevant legal and regulatory requirements.
INDEPENDENT ADVICE The Company ensures that if required its Directors have access to independent professional advice at the Companys expense relating to the performance of any aspect of their duties.
This is facilitated by the Group Company Secretary who is also available to each Board member for consultation as required.
62 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE DIRECTORS AND OFFICERS INSURANCE COVER The Group maintains Directors and Officers Insurance cover for the benefit of individuals and this cover is reviewed annually to ensure that its scope remains appropriate.
DIRECTORS CONFLICTS OF INTEREST Under the Companies Act 2006 all Directors have a duty to avoid conflicts of interest and disclose any interests and outside appointments.
The Board has formal processes in place for the declaration and management of conflicts of interest and the Group Company Secretary maintains a Conflicts of Interest
On appointment new Directors are advised of the process for dealing with conflicts of interest and Directors interests are reviewed on an ongoing basis as well as annually as part of the year end process.
JLTs relationship with Jardine Matheson is discussed on page 66.
DIRECTORS ELECTION AND REELECTION In accordance with the requirements of the Code newly appointed Directors and all existing Directors submit themselves for election or reelection as the case may be at the Companys Annual General Meeting.
Andrew Didham and Richard Meddings who were appointed to the Board with effect from 2 October 2017 together with Lynne Peacock who joins the Board with effect from 1 May 2018 will be proposed for election at the Companys AGM.
All other Directors will be proposed for reelection.
The Board recommends the election or reelection as the case may be of each member of the Board based upon their skills experience and contribution to the Board and its Committees.
BOARD EXPERIENCE AND BALANCE Following review the Board remains satisfied that it continues to have the appropriate balance of expertise experience independence and knowledge to run the business effectively and to deliver longterm shareholder value.
The chart below provides an overview of the experience of each of the current Directors.
Position as at 31 Dec Length of service as Board member as at 31 Dec 2017 Independent Other public board experience
Insurance
International
LegalMandA experience
Government experience Geoffrey Howe NonExecutive
16 years No Annette Court Senior
Director
5 years 5 months
Andrew Didham NonExecutive
3 months Yes Richard Meddings NonExecutive
3 months Yes Nicholas Walsh NonExecutive
3 years 3 months
Lord Sassoon NonExecutive
4 years 8 months
Adam Keswick Deputy
1 year 4 months
Dominic Burke Group Chief
13 years NA Mark Drummond
Deputy Group
6 years 10 months
Charles Rozes Group Finance
2 years 4 months
BOARD DIVERSITY The Board supports the Codes recommendation that diversity and gender should be considered when making Director appointments.
The Board seeks to ensure that it has the right balance of skills experience independence and knowledge to enable it to achieve its objectives and discharge its responsibilities and duties effectively.
The Boards policy is to select the best candidate irrespective of background.
The Company has taken and continues to take steps to promote diversity and inclusion including gender diversity both at senior management level and in the boardroom.
During the year the business has continued to progress its diversity programme.
Further information is available in the Nominations Committee Report on page 75 and the Corporate Responsibility Report on pages 50 and 51.
Taking into account all relevant factors set out in the Code the independence of the NonExecutive Directors has been assessed as indicated.
Lynne Peacock will join the Board as an additional Independent NonExecutive Director on 1 May 2018.
STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 63 The Board met on seven scheduled occasions throughout the year including a strategy day and attendance at those meetings is set out below.
The Board also convened by telephone on three occasions during the year to approve the final form of the Q1 Interim Management Statement IMS the Interim Results Statement and the Q3 IMS.
If a Director is unable to attend a Board meeting they are invited to provide feedback on Board papers ahead of the meeting and are provided with an update after the meeting of the key issues which were discussed.
The Directors attendance at Committee meetings is set out in the respective Committee Reports on pages 67 to 90.
The Chairman also met with NonExecutive Directors during the year without management being present.
Eligible to attend Attended Geoffrey Howe 7 7 Dominic Burke 7 7 Mark DrummondBrady Charles Rozes 7 7 Bruce CarnegieBrown Annette Court 7 7 Jonathan Dawson Andrew Didham Adam Keswick 7 7 Richard Meddings Lord Sassoon 7 7 Nicholas Walsh 7 7 Mark Drummond Brady did not attend the Board meeting held on 27 April 2017 due to overseas business commitments Bruce CarnegieBrown retired from the Board on 14 June 2017 Jonathan Dawson retired from the Board on 3 October 2017 Andrew Didham and Richard Meddings were appointed to the Board on 2 October 2017 SUCCESSION PLANNING Succession planning and talent development has been an important focus for the Board and its Committees in the year.
Substantial progress has been made in promoting talent across the Group and the Board is confident that there is a strong senior management succession pipeline.
During the year management worked with external consultants to carry out a review of the leadership capability and potential of a cohort of nearly 40 of JLTs senior managers.
The review focused on the capability of the cohort as leaders within JLT using the Groups five pillar leadership model measuring their leadership potential using a number of external tools and against a large group of executives in other businesses.
The exercise was seen as important in assessing the strength of JLTs leadership team and how well positioned it was to drive JLT forward.
The results of the review indicated that JLTs cohort had strong leadership in core areas and an appropriate succession pipeline.
Training and development plans with appropriate coaching and mentoring are being tailored to help individuals meet their individual development needs.
The Group operates a range of programmes focused on the development of future leaders including its International Senior Managers Programme ISMP and its Emerging Leaders
More details on the ISMP can be found on page 7.
During the year the Nominations Committee discussed succession planning for the Group Chief Executive and the Group Chairman.
The work of the Nominations Committee in respect of succession planning is described in greater detail in the Nominations Committee Report on pages 75 and 77.
BOARD MEETINGS A forward agenda for the Board is maintained to ensure that all necessary and appropriate matters are covered during the year and to allow sufficient time for discussion and debate.
The Board receives papers and presentations from the Executive Directors and senior managers are regularly invited to attend to provide further detailed insight on specific matters.
64 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE HOW THE BOARD SPENT ITS TIME IN 2017 The table below provides a high level overview of the Boards main areas of focus and how it spent its time in 2017 January February April June
July October December
Group Strategy Three Year Plan Global Transformation Programme
CEO Report FD Report Financial Performance Business Presentations Business Unit Reports
Budget
Capital Structure and Funding Treasury Report
IFRS 15 and 9 Implementation Year End Process Interim Process
MandA Activity Board ObjectivesEvaluation Committee Reports Directors Conflicts of Interest Review Legal Report
Investor Relations Update Employee Feedback Insurance Carrier Feedback Client Feedback The Group Chief Executive provided regular updates to the Board on business performance and developments operations market trends MandA activity people matters and investor engagement.
The Group Finance Director also regularly updated the Board in relation to the Groups financial performance against budgets and targets as well as in respect of accounting pension tax and treasury matters.
The Board received updates on the work of its Committees following each Committee meeting.
It discussed regular reports from the Group General Counsel regarding litigation and regulatory matters and also received updates from the Group Company Secretary in relation to governance developments and routine governance matters.
The Board reviewed the Annual Report interim results and interim management statements.
It considered the assessments of the going concern and viability statements the Groups principal risks and the effectiveness of the Groups systems of risk management and internal controls.
The Board also discussed updates on the views of stakeholders during the year including feedback from employees shareholders clients and insurance carriers.
During the year the Board held a strategy day at which a range of issues were discussed including the macroeconomic environment the market context in which the Group operates and the re examination of the Group s strategy which is described in more detail in the Strategic Report on pages 22 to 24.
STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 65 DIRECTORS INDUCTION AND DIRECTORS
An induction programme is provided to new Directors which is tailored to their roles on the Board and its Committees.
The programme is designed to provide new NonExecutive Directors with an understanding of the Group its business and the markets in which it operates.
It also provides a briefing on Directors responsibilities and the governance framework within which the Board operates.
The programme provides Directors with the opportunity to meet and establish relationships with key people in the business as well as the Groups key advisers.
A tailored induction programme was agreed for the new Directors Andrew Didham and Richard Meddings who joined the Board during the year.
The programme was facilitated by the Chairman and the Group Company Secretary.
It involved indepth introductory meetings with a range of key people including the Executive Directors the members of the GEC and other function heads including the Group Head of Internal Audit the Group Head of Risk and Compliance the Group Treasurer the Group Human Resources Director and the Group Company Secretary.
Meetings were also arranged with the Groups auditor corporate brokers and public relations media advisers.
The programme of meetings was supported by the provision of a range of background information about JLT and its business the Board and general guidance on the duties and responsibilities of a listed company director.
Members of the Board and its Committees are provided with regular training in order to keep them abreast of industry and legal and regulatory developments facilitated by professional advisers where appropriate.
During the year Directors were provided with briefings on new accounting developments including the introduction of IFRS 15 and IFRS 9 data protection issues including the implementation of the General Data Protection Regulation the actions being taken by the Group to manage cyber risks and governance developments including the governance green papers issued by the UK government and the consultation launched by the FRC on a replacement for the Code.
Directors are encouraged to visit different parts of the business on a regular basis in order to enhance their understanding of those businesses and the key issues they face.
INFORMATION
The Board and its Committees receive briefing papers and information prior to meetings to ensure Directors are fully briefed on the matters for discussion.
Directors also have access to the Group Company Secretary and senior management should they wish to receive additional information on any of the items for discussion.
BOARD PERFORMANCE REVIEW The Boards performance is reviewed annually.
Following an externally led review of the Board and its Committees in 2016 an internally facilitated review was conducted in 2017.
The results of the review were generally very positive and the Board was seen as functioning well and covering the right ground.
Discussions were considered to be of a high quality and there was felt to be open and constructive debate pitched at the right level with effective challenge where appropriate.
The Board was seen as being particularly effective at managing performance and risk as well as investment appraisal and had a clear approach to strategy.
A number of recommendations were made as to how to increase the effectiveness of the Board further including reviewing the breadth of skills and experience on the Board in the context of its future needs reviewing the pipeline of top talent in the business and adopting improvements to Board processes.
The Chairman also met with each individual Director to discuss performance as well as any training and development needs.
The Senior Independent Director Annette Court led a review of the performance of the Chairman the results of which were very positive and concluded that he continues to provide effective leadership to the Board.
Following these processes the Board remains satisfied that in line with the Code all the Directors have sufficient time to carry out their responsibilities as Directors effectively.
RISK MANAGEMENT AND INTERNAL CONTROLS The Board has overall responsibility for the Groups systems of internal control and for reviewing their effectiveness.
The implementation and maintenance of the risk management and internal control systems are the responsibility of the Executive Directors and senior management.
The Board is responsible for determining the nature and extent of any significant risks the Group is willing to take in order to achieve its strategic objectives as well as for maintaining sound risk management and internal control systems to ensure that an appropriate culture is embedded throughout the Group.
Owing to the limitation inherent in any system of internal control this system provides robust but not absolute assurance against material misstatement or loss.
The Groups risk management and internal control systems comprise Group policies procedures and practices covering a range of areas including the appropriate authorisation and approval of transactions the application of financial reporting standards and the review of financial performance and significant judgements.
66 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE The Board monitors the effectiveness of the Groups systems of internal control carefully throughout the year and carries out an annual review covering their adequacy and effectiveness.
The Board has delegated part of this responsibility to the Audit and Risk Committee.
The role and work of the Audit and Risk Committee in this regard and the role of the Groups Internal Audit function are described in the Audit and Risk Committee Report on pages 67 to 74.
CULTURE AND ETHICS The Board recognises the importance of demonstrating its full support for ethical conduct and leadership.
During the year the Board considered the subject of culture and ethics in the context of JLTs style tone and organisation.
The Board has a strong focus on ensuring that there is a continuing open and straightforward culture of integrity and honesty across the Group and that the behaviour of employees ensures that the Group is compliant with applicable legal and regulatory requirements.
The Board takes the views of its staff seriously and regularly provides an opportunity to provide feedback.
In 2017 the Board considered the results of an employee engagement survey which emphasised that JLTs culture of collaboration inventiveness agility and client centricity was seen as remaining strong.
During the year the Company refreshed and reissued its Employee Handbook which emphasises the importance of JLTs culture of compliance.
In addition employees are required to undertake regular training courses including online training covering a range of ethical legal and regulatory issues such as the prevention of bribery and corruption sanctions data security and market abuse.
JLT has published its Code of Ethical Conduct on its websitesite along with its modern slavery policy.
RELATIONSHIPS WITH
ENGAGEMENT WITH SHAREHOLDERS Our Board welcomes the opportunity to engage openly with shareholders as it recognises the importance of a continuing effective dialogue whether with major institutional investors private shareholders or employee shareholders.
The Board is regularly updated on shareholder views.
The Board aims to ensure that investors understand the Groups strategy and objectives.
The Chief Executive Officer
In addition the Chairman and NonExecutive Directors are available to discuss matters with institutional shareholders and the Board is also available at the Annual General Meeting to respond to questions.
The Investor Relations team arranges communication with institutional shareholders with a combination of analyst briefings and presentations including at the annual and half year results.
In addition the Companys websitesite has an investor section which contains further information about the Company and details of regulatory news releases which may be of interest to shareholders.
Following a tender held during the year Barclays were appointed as joint corporate brokers to the Company alongside JP Morgan.
The addresses of the Groups brokers can be found on page 178.
The Company regularly consults its brokers in relation to disclosure matters.
RELATIONSHIP WITH JARDINE MATHESON GROUP The Group continued to have a number of armslength trading links with the Jardine Matheson group of companies during the financial year which are set out in note 32 on page 160.
At 22 February 2018 being the latest practicable date prior to the date of this Report Jardine Matheson Holdings Limited Jardine Matheson Holdings had an interest in 40.16% of the Companys issued share capital.
This interest is held through JMH Investments Limited a whollyowned subsidiary of Jardine Matheson Holdings.
The Company entered into a Relationship Agreement on 23 October 2014 as required by Listing Rule 9.2.2AR2 a and in March 2016 an amended Relationship Agreement was signed with Jardine Matheson Holdings.
The Agreement is intended to ensure that Jardine Matheson Holdings as the Groups controlling shareholder complies with certain independence provisions.
It contains undertakings that transactions and arrangements with Jardine Matheson Holdings andor any of its associates will be conducted at armslength and on normal commercial terms that neither Jardine Matheson Holdings nor its associates will take any action which could prevent the Company from complying with its Listing Rules obligations and that neither Jardine Matheson Holdings nor its associates will propose any shareholder resolution intended to circumvent the proper application of the Listing Rules.
The Board confirms that since the date of entry into the Agreement the Group has complied with its provisions and that so far as the Company is aware Jardine Matheson Holdings and its associates have also complied with the independence and procurement obligations set out in the Agreement.
The updated Agreement formalised the processes the Company has in place to control the provision of information to Jardine Matheson and clarified when and how information may be requested by Jardine Matheson from JLT.
Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION The Committee has continued to play a crucial role in providing comfort to the Board on the integrity of the Groups processes and procedures relating to financial reporting internal control and risk management.
Andrew Didham AUDIT and RISK COMMITTEE
INTRODUCTION FROM THE COMMITTEE
I am pleased to present the Audit and Risk Committee Report for the year ended 31 December 2017.
I became Chairman of the Committee on 3 October 2017 upon the retirement of Jonathan Dawson who had been Chairman of the Committee since March 2013.
On behalf of the Committee I would like to thank Jonathan for his strong leadership of the Committee over the past four years and wish him well for the future.
The Committee has continued to play a crucial role in providing comfort to the Board on the integrity of the Groups processes and procedures relating to financial reporting internal control and risk management.
This report highlights the extensive work carried out by the Committee during 2017 including its continued focus on the risks and controls in key areas of the Group s businesses.
The Committee s work has reflected the further expansion of the Group s geographical footprint including in the US and Asia external challenges affecting the Group s key risk exposures and internal changes in business organisation structure and leadership.
The Committee has carried out a number of indepth risk reviews during the year.
This included thematic reviews in respect of cyber risk business continuity and Brexit.
The Committee remains focused on ensuring that relevant laws and regulations are complied with and that the business operates within the right control framework.
During the year the Committee monitored key compliance activities including the development and implementation of systems and controls to address the requirements of the new General Data Protection Regulation the Senior Managers and Certification Regime and the Criminal Finances Act 2017.
The Committee continued to oversee preparations for the implementation of new accounting standards in particular IFRS 9 Financial Instruments and IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers as further described in the Significant Accounting Policies in the financial statements.
The Committee continues to focus on these key areas in 2018.
As part of its role the Committee supported the Board in its assessment of whether the Annual Report and Financial Statements are fair balanced and understandable and provide sufficient information to allow an assessment of the Groups position and performance business model and strategy.
The Committee also considered in detail managements assessment of the going concern and viability statements and the underlying models and assumptions used prior to their consideration by the Board.
Finally in addition to Jonathan Dawsons retirement and my joining the Committee there have been other changes to the composition of the Committee during the year.
Bruce CarnegieBrown retired from the Committee and the Board in June 2017 following his appointment as Chairman of Lloyds of London.
Richard Meddings joined the Committee on 2 October 2017 bringing a broad range of skills and experience including many years as a finance director and as a Chartered Accountant.
Andrew Didham Chairman Audit and Risk Committee 28 February 2018 68 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE COMMITTEE COMPOSITION SKILLS AND
The members of the Audit and Risk Committee who served during the year are listed in the table below.
Committee Members during the year Andrew Didham Chairman joined 2 October 2017 Bruce CarnegieBrown retired on 14 June 2017 Annette Court Jonathan Dawson retired on 3 October 2017 Richard Meddings joined 2 October 2017 Lord Sassoon Nicholas Walsh The UK Corporate Governance Code 2016 the Code requires the Board to establish an audit committee of at least three independent NonExecutive Directors.
The Committee currently comprises five NonExecutive Directors of which four are independent.
The Board is satisfied that Andrew Didham and Richard Meddings each possess recent and relevant financial experience for the purposes of the Code and the requisite competence in accounting.
In addition the Board considers that the Committee as a whole has competence relevant to the sector in which JLT operates.
The experience and expertise of Committee members is set out on page 62 and in their biographies on pages 58 and 59.
In addition to the Committee members a number of other people routinely attend meetings by invitation.
The list of the additional invitees is set out in the following table Meeting Attendees Group Company Secretary Group Chairman Group Chief Executive Deputy Group CEO Group Finance Director Group Head of Internal Audit Group Head of Risk and Compliance Group Chief Operating Officer Group General Counsel External Auditor COMMITTEE MEETINGS AND ATTENDANCE The Committee held six scheduled meetings during the 2017 financial year.
Each meeting agenda was designed to reflect the Companys financial reporting cycle and to incorporate other matters of importance to the Committee.
The Committee has a forward planner which is designed to ensure that the Committee discharges its responsibilities in full during the year.
The Chairman of the Committee reports to the Board after each meeting and Committee meetings are scheduled close to Board meetings in order to facilitate a timely reporting process.
The table below shows the Committee members during the year and their attendance at scheduled meetings.
Committee members Scheduled meetings eligible to attend
Andrew Didham Bruce CarnegieBrown Annette Court 6 6 Jonathan Dawson Richard Meddings Lord Sassoon 6 6 Nicholas Walsh 6 6 Andrew Didham joined the Committee on 2 October 2017 and became Chairman on 3 October 2017.
Jonathan Dawson retired on 3 October 2017.
Bruce CarnegieBrown retired on 14 June 2017.
Richard Meddings joined the Committee on 2 October 2017.
Additional ad hoc meetings may also be held as and when necessary.
During the year the Committee also held separate sessions with Group Internal Audit and the external auditor in order to provide additional opportunity for open dialogue and feedback without management being present.
The Chairman of the Committee also met with the Group Finance Director Group Head of Internal Audit Group Head of Risk and Compliance and Group Company Secretary on an ad hoc basis and prior to each Committee meeting.
COMMITTEE ROLE AND RESPONSIBILITIES The role of the Committee is to provide oversight and advice to the Board on matters of financial reporting financial controls and risk management together with the assessment and reporting of key risks whilst maintaining an appropriate relationship with the Companys external auditor.
The business of the Committee is closely linked to the Groups internal calendar of events and external financial reporting cycle.
The Committee works independently of management and liaises with other Group Committees.
Crossmembership between each of the Group Committees ensures that members have a better understanding of the work of each Committee and that communication is more efficient.
Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION The Committees role and responsibilities are set out in its terms of reference which were updated in October 2017 and which can be found on the Companys websitesite The Committees responsibilities include Role and Responsibilities of the Audit and Risk Committee
Reporting
Monitoring and review of the integrity of the financial statements of the Group any formal announcements relating to the Groups financial performance and significant financial reporting judgements contained therein.
Narrative
Reporting
Reviewing the Annual Report and Financial Statements and advising the Board on the process to confirm whether it is fair balanced and understandable and provides shareholders with sufficient information to assess the Companys position and performance business model and strategy.
Internal
Controls
Monitoring and reviewing the effectiveness of the Groups system of internal controls including financial operational and compliance controls as well as reviewing and addressing audit findings.
Risk
Management
Monitoring and review of the Groups risk management framework risk appetite and risk strategy to ensure that these are appropriate for the activities of the Group.
Ensuring that appropriate arrangements are in place to effectively manage and mitigate material risks facing the Group.
Review of thematic and business risk reviews and business continuity plans.
External Audit Monitoring and review of the effectiveness of the external audit process taking into consideration relevant professional and regulatory requirements.
Monitoring and review of the external auditors independence and objectivity together with the policy on the engagement of the external auditor to supply nonaudit services.
Consideration of the appointment of the external auditor the nature and scope of the external audit and approval of the audit fee.
Internal Audit Monitoring and review of the effectiveness of the Groups Internal Audit function in the context of the overall risk management system and ensuring that the function is adequately resourced and has appropriate standing within the Group.
Agreeing internal audit plans reviewing reports of internal audit work and reviewing managements responsiveness to control observations made by the internal auditor.
Compliance Discussing relevant compliance and governance issues and reviewing the implications of new legislation and regulation.
Whistleblowing Monitoring and review of the Groups arrangements by which employees and contractors may in confidence raise concerns about possible improprieties in financial reporting and other matters.
IT Security Monitoring and review of the steps taken by the Group to ensure IT resilience and cyber security.
January February April July October December
Review of draft Preliminary Results Statement Review of draft Annual Report and Financial Statements ViabilityGoing Concern Review Group Finance update External Audit PwC reports Consideration of the Audit Plan Audit fees NonAudit fees Auditor independence External Audit Effectiveness Review Other Activity Internal Audit reports External Audit report Annual Review of Systems of Internal Control Risk Management and Compliance reports Indepth Risk Reviews Committee evaluation Denotes thematic risk specific business unit or function review COMMITTEE ACTIVITIES The table below highlights some of the main activities carried out by the Committee during 2017.
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE In order to satisfy its responsibilities the Committee in the ordinary course of business reviewed a wide range of matters including the drafting of the interim report preliminary announcement and relevant sections of the Annual Report and Financial Statements before their submission to the Board reports from the Group Finance Director including updates on currency exposures the treatment of exceptional items key accounting judgements market counterparty security the Group insurance programme and financial reporting standards and controls reports from the Group Head of Internal Audit on areas where control weaknesses had been identified together with the mitigation and remediation plans of management the activities within the function and resourcing matters reports from the Group Head of Internal Audit in respect of the overall control environment reports from the Group Head of Risk including updates on dealings with the regulators in the UK and in other jurisdictions reports from the Companys external auditor including in respect of financial reporting and accounting matters reports on the management of professional indemnity risk exposure and the extent of any litigation or other provisions held and the effectiveness of the Committee.
In addition to its regular agenda of matters the Committee considered key and emerging risks in a number of business areas which were supported by Risk Review presentations delivered by senior management and in some cases the Chairman of the Audit and Risk Committee of the relevant business area.
Key business areas reviewed US Specialty Insurance Management JLT Europe Canada UK Employee Benefits Middle East and Africa
Criminal Finances Act 2017.
The Committee reviewed the work performed by the Group in the year to assess and respond to the implications for the business arising from the new regulations and to prepare the Group for compliance the risk scenario analysis underpinning the Groups viability and going concern statements to be included in the Annual Report and Financial Statements themes relating to the development of the Groups internal control environment framework and regular reviews of compliance monitoring.
The Committee is focused on ensuring that the Group complies with its regulatory obligations and monitors current and emerging developments including reviews and investigations carried out by regulators in the jurisdictions in which the Group operates.
The Committee discussed reports during the year in respect of a number of regulatory developments reviews and investigations including an FCA marketwide study of competition in the wholesale insurance broker sector an FCA review of IT resilience and capabilities across the financial services sector JLTs participation following a market study into the asset management sector by the FCA in a Competition and Markets Authority review of investment consultancy and fiduciary management services in the UK an FCA conduct and anticompetition review concerning aviation broking the competition aspect of which has now been passed to the European Commission for investigation and the ongoing review by the Financial Conduct Authority of enhanced transfer value pension products previously sold by a number of market participants.
The Group continues to assist the relevant regulators with their reviews and is monitoring developments closely.
Business Audit and Risk Committees Entity ARCs JLT operates Entity ARCs as part of its global governance across the Group.
Each Entity ARC is provided with a template planner to ensure that all matters in the terms of reference are addressed during the year.
The Entity ARCs focus on the oversight of risk registers emerging risks and financial reporting together with their regulatory and compliance responsibilities and the review of reports from Internal Audit.
Entity ARCs are typically chaired by a NonExecutive Director and have a formal reporting process to the Group Audit and Risk Committee.
The Committee Chairman meets periodically with the Chairs of Entity ARCs to discuss common themes and emerging risks and to share areas of best practice across the Group.
The Committee also considered the following thematic topics during the year a review of the increasing challenges associated with IT security and in particular cyber risk a review of global sanctions regimes and their application across the Group the implementation of a consistent limitation of liability programme across the Group commensurate with the type and nature of services that each business offers a review of financial accounting developments ongoing review of the key risks and themes of Brexit the further development and implementation of the Groups business continuity plans and framework Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION SIGNIFICANT FINANCIAL STATEMENT ISSUES CONSIDERED BY THE COMMITTEE The Committee considered the following significant issues in the year taking account of the views of the Companys external auditor.
Issue How the issue was addressed by the Committee
Liability
Valuation
The Committee discussed the maintenance of complete and accurate pension scheme data on which the pension liability assumptions are based and noted that no exceptions had been found from testing.
The Committee considered the appropriateness of the methodology used by management including the key assumptions used to value the pension liabilities.
The key assumptions include the appropriateness of the discount rate used for the UK scheme by reference to the iBoxx AA 15 corporate bond index the adjustment made by management to match the duration of the liabilities and compared this to assumptions adopted by other schemes with a similar duration the rates used by management for each of these elements to the Bank of England inflation curve and the appropriateness of the base tables selected for use by management by reference to the mortality experience analysis completed by the UK Pension Scheme Trustees as part of the 2014 funding valuation.
The Committee concluded that the key assumptions made were reasonable and that the overall pension deficit is appropriately calculated.
Intangibles
Impairment
Assessment
The Committee reviewed managements process for testing goodwill and other intangible assets for potential impairment.
This included the results of managements impairment assessment including an assessment of the appropriateness of the methodology used to perform this.
The Committee considered the appropriateness of the key assumptions within managements valuation in particular the terminal growth rates in the forecasts by comparing them to economic and industry forecasts and the weighted average cost of capital by assessing the cost of capital for the Company and comparable organisations.
The Committee considered the substantive testing results performed by the Companys external auditor of all inputs into the valuation for example agreeing to approved budgets and checking historical performance against the budget.
The Committee concluded that the impairment assessment results are appropriate.
Litigation
Provisions
The Committee members received and reviewed errors and omissions and other litigation reports addressing key disputes and discussed with management the key judgements made including relevant legal advice if received.
The Committee members also discussed litigation provisions with the Companys external auditor and received reports from Group Internal Audit and Group Risk and Compliance on quality controls designed to minimise the incidence of errors and omissions.
As a result it was determined that the overall provision is appropriate but it was recognised that due to the inherent uncertainties of litigation the final results could differ.
New
Accounting
Standards
The Committee reviewed managements reports on the progress being made towards the adoption of IFRS 9 Financial Instruments and IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers.
Management briefed the Committee on the key elements of the standards how management had interpreted them and their key judgements in the design of the resultant Group accounting policies.
In respect of IFRS 15 in particular the Committee was kept informed of the progress being made by the business in collecting and analysing data and enhancements to systems and procedures needed to adopt the new policy.
The Committee was kept informed of the major financial implications of adoption and the additional disclosure requirements.
EFFECTIVENESS OF THE AUDIT and RISK COMMITTEE An internal review of the Committees effectiveness was carried out in respect of 2017.
All of the members and regular attendees of the Committee were asked to complete a questionnaire and the feedback was discussed by the
The results of the review were very positive overall with the Committee seen as functioning effectively and being wellchaired.
Discussions were seen to be of a high quality focusing on the right areas and with a good level of constructive debate and challenge in an open environment.
The Committee was also considered to have a good understanding of the Groups inherent risks and risk management activities.
The Committee will increase its focus on operational risks and controls as the Group implements a number of planned transformation programmes.
Some opportunities were also identified to make Committee papers more concise and focused and to develop the professional training provided to the Committee.
GROUP INTERNAL AUDIT The Committee is accountable to the Board in relation to the effectiveness of the Group Internal Audit GIA function.
The functions terms of reference were reviewed by the Committee during the year and were considered to remain appropriate.
There was no change to the holder of the Group Head of Internal Audit position during the period.
An external review of the GIA function took place in 2016 in accordance with the Chartered Institute of Internal Auditors
This confirmed the functions effectiveness at that time and its positive contribution to improving the control environment.
The Committee considers the effectiveness of the GIA function on an ongoing basis during the year and is satisfied that it remains effective and is adequately resourced.
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE During 2017 the Committee reviewed evaluated and monitored the independence of the GIA function the annual GIA plan and other audit activities undertaken by the function reports from the Group Head of Internal Audit on the results of audit work performed and the effectiveness of the Groups systems of internal control reports and recommendations from the Group Head of Internal Audit on themes affecting the development of the Groups internal control framework coordination between the internal and external auditors other control functions within the Group and with external regulators managements responsiveness to the findings and recommendations of GIA and the monitoring of follow up actions relating to these the adequacy of the resources of the GIA function including plans for managing that resource to meet the demands of the business and the overall effectiveness of the Group Head of Internal Audit and the GIA function in promoting and influencing improvements in the Groups internal control environment.
The Committee and separately the Committee Chairman on a onetoone basis regularly meets with the Group Head of Internal Audit to discuss the work of the GIA function and the findings of audits performed.
EXTERNAL AUDITOR The Committee is accountable to the Board in relation to the appointment of the external auditor PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP PwC and for overseeing the relationship with PwC.
During the year the Committee agreed PwCs remuneration for audit services including satisfying itself that the level of audit fee was appropriate to enable an adequate audit to be carried out.
The Committee also reviewed and monitored fees in respect of nonaudit services approved the external audit plan and ensured that it was consistent with the scope of the audit engagement approved the terms of engagement including the engagement letter issued at the start of each audit and the scope of the audit assessed PwCs independence including in relation to non audit services provided reviewed the findings of PwC including discussion of any major issues arising and any accounting and audit judgements and held meetings with PwC without management present.
PwC contribute an independent perspective on certain aspects of the Companys financial control systems arising from its work and report its findings to the Committee.
EFFECTIVENESS OF EXTERNAL AUDITOR The Committee considers the effectiveness independence and objectivity of the external auditor throughout the year.
An internal effectiveness review of PwC was undertaken during the year.
The review focused on areas including PwCs expertise and resources the robustness and effectiveness of the external audit process and the quality of reporting.
Feedback was obtained from finance directors across the business.
The Committee considered the feedback from the review which was generally very positive and concluded that PwC continued to operate to the expected standards.
The Committee and PwC agreed areas where there were opportunities for development in order to further enhance the audit process.
NONAUDIT FEES AND EXTERNAL AUDITOR
To safeguard auditor objectivity and independence the Group has a policy for the approval of nonaudit services provided by PwC.
All proposed services must be preapproved in accordance with the nonaudit services policy which sets out defined and escalating approval levels in reference to materiality.
This policy was reviewed and updated by the Committee in February 2018.
All nonaudit services with fees exceeding 50000 must be preapproved by the Committee Chairman or the Committee which also reviews the nonaudit fees charged by PwC during the year.
Prior to approving nonaudit services consideration is given to whether it is in the interests of the Company that the services are purchased from PwC rather than another supplier.
Where PwC was chosen to provide nonaudit services during the year this was as a result of its detailed knowledge of the structure of our business combined with an understanding of JLTs industry which together made PwC the best supplier to carry out the relevant work cost effectively.
In such instances both JLT and PwC were satisfied that appropriate safeguards were in place to ensure the preservation of PwCs independence as external auditor.
Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION Fees paid to PwC for audit and nonaudit services are set out in note 7 to the financial statements and are summarised in the table below.
Audit 3387 2649 Nonaudit 960 755 Total 4347 3404 Total spend on nonaudit services as % of the total fees paid to PwC 22% 22% The audit fees increased in the year primarily due to the additional work required in connection with the implementation of IFRS 9 and IFRS 15 and certain component auditor scope changes.
The table below summarises some of the more significant non audit services carried out by PwC in 2017 and the safeguards to preserve PwCs independence Nature of Service Safeguards to preserve independence Tax advisory and compliance services in international markets Tax specialists are separate to the audit team.
PwC acts as adviser only and is not involved in making or influencing management decisions.
No contingency fee involved.
PwC does not directly handle or take custody of any client funds.
Forensic services Data is not accounting information and does not relate to risk management.
Specialists involved are separate to the audit team.
Advocacy threats are mitigated.
No contingency fee involved.
Other advisory services Specialists involved are separate to the audit team.
Advocacy threats are mitigated.
No contingency fee involved.
The Committee remains satisfied with PwCs independence and its responsiveness to management in respect of work undertaken in 2017.
PwC have also assessed and confirmed their independence to the Committee.
EXTERNAL AUDITOR REAPPOINTMENT The Committee reviews and makes recommendations to the Board with regard to the reappointment of the external auditor each year.
In making this recommendation the Committee takes into account auditor independence and effectiveness audit partner rotation and any other factors that may impact the Committees judgement regarding the external auditor.
Based on the Committees recommendation the Board is proposing that PwC is reappointed to office at this years AGM.
EXTERNAL AUDITOR ROTATION PwC was appointed as the external auditor of Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc in 1997 following the merger of JIB Group plc and Lloyd Thompson Group plc prior to which PwC was the external auditor of JIB Group plc from 1991.
The Committee is aware of the EUwide regulations concerning audit tenure and the longevity of audit firm relationships with the companies they audit.
Under current EU transitional arrangements it is anticipated that the last financial year for which PwC will audit the Groups accounts will be that ending 31 December 2019.
The current audit partner Nick Wilks took up his role in 2015.
Continuity and consistency of audit quality are important but the Committee is mindful of the fact that PwC has been the Companys auditor for 21 years without retender and it remains the Companys intention to initiate an audit retendering process in 2018.
The Company believes that this timing is appropriate as it aligns with the rotation cycle for the current engagement partner.
There are no contractual obligations that would restrict the selection of a different auditor.
The Committee considers that the Company has throughout the year ended 31 December 2017 complied with The Statutory Audit Services for Large Companies Market Investigation Mandatory Use of Competitive Tender Processes and Audit Committee Responsibilities Order 2014.
RISK MANAGEMENT
A description of the processes followed by the Group to identify and manage risk is included in the Risk Management Report on pages 41 to 45.
CYBER RISK The risk of any firm being compromised by some form of cyber event is ever present.
JLT takes cyber risk very seriously and seeks to address any threats from internal or external sources whether intentional and malevolent or by simple human error.
JLT also recognises the interrelationship between addressing cyber risk and dealing with other subjects such as the forthcoming General Data Protection Regulation in particular that creating a strong environment to manage one will assist with addressing the other.
Cyber risk and related subjects have been the topic of regular discussion by the Committee for several years.
Rather than running a oneoff programme JLT adopts the stance that this area requires a constant focus across people processes and technology in order to stay current and to mitigate this threat.
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
The Committee recognises that a strong and transparent corporate culture is a valuable asset to protect and generate value.
Companies need to have a strong purpose culture and ethical values in order to succeed be sustainable and build trust among their stakeholders.
JLTs corporate culture is underpinned by a clear alignment of business purpose values strategy and incentives people at all levels of the organisation understand JLTs values and act in accordance with these.
Corporate culture is led by the Board and is not about rules but about actions.
A key objective for both the Board and senior management is to communicate the behaviours they want to see in the business and to find constructive ways to encourage and build those behaviours.
The Committee also has an important role to play in supporting the right culture across the Group by overseeing the provision of high quality insightful reporting both internally and externally to the Groups stakeholders which demonstrates that the Group has in place the right structures and processes to support the right behaviours by employees.
The Committee seeks to recognise and address any instances where there is misalignment between behaviour purposes and values.
The Committees work in this regard is supported by the key control functions including Group Risk and Compliance Group Internal Audit and Group Corporate Secretariat as well as by the Groups external auditor.
The Committee has increased its focus on this area in the past year and has discussed a number of matters relevant to the fostering of an appropriate corporate culture within JLT including the improving maturity of the control environment in the Groups businesses and in the context of the year end review of internal controls.
GLOBAL COMPLIANCE Our businesses around the Group are at differing levels of maturity but they have all implemented a suitable governance and control environment which in many cases either mirror or are based upon JLT Group standards and structures.
Businesses adopt appropriate quality assurance processes and all significant businesses operate an independently chaired Audit and Risk Committee.
Businesses are also subject to regular internal audits.
Where local laws or regulations impose standards or practices which differ from those of the wider JLT Group for example in relation to licensing requirements or the applicable sanctions regime adjustments are made to policies and practices as appropriate.
The compliance framework of each of our businesses will continue to evolve in response both to their growth and local legal and regulatory changes.
DIRECTORS FAIR BALANCED AND UNDERSTANDABLE STATEMENT At the request of the Board the Committee carried out a detailed review of the robust processes which were followed in preparing the Annual Report and Financial Statements and reported the results of that review to the Board.
The review supported the Directors in satisfying themselves that they could make the statement on page 95 of the Annual Report and Financial Statements that the Annual Report and Financial Statements taken as a whole are fair balanced and understandable and provide the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Groups position and performance business model and strategy.
Andrew Didham Chairman Audit and Risk Committee 28 February 2018 Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION It has been an active year for the Committee with a strong focus on succession planning.
Geoffrey Howe NOMINATIONS COMMITTEE
INTRODUCTION FROM THE COMMITTEE
I am pleased to present the Nominations Committee report for the year ended 31 December 2017.
It has been an active year for the Committee with a strong focus on succession planning for both the Board and senior management.
During 2017 there were a number of Board and Committee changes.
Two
Directors left the Board during the year Bruce CarnegieBrown retired from the Board and as Senior Independent Director on 14 June 2017 following his appointment as the Chairman of Lloyds of London and Jonathan Dawson retired on 3 October 2017.
I should like to express the Boards thanks to Bruce and Jonathan for their respective contributions to the Board and its Committees.
The Committee oversaw the selection and appointment of new NonExecutive Directors and appointed executive search firm The Zygos Partnership a signatory to the Voluntary Code of Conduct of Executive Search Firms to compile a long list of candidates for the respective roles.
In October Andrew Didham and Richard Meddings were appointed
Richard has become Chair of the Remuneration Committee and Andrew has become Chair of the Audit and Risk Committee.
The Committee was also pleased to recommend the appointment of Annette Court as the Companys Senior Independent Director.
In February 2018 the Committee recommended the appointment of Lynne Peacock.
Lynne will join the Board as a NonExecutive Director on 1 May 2018.
At a senior management level Lucy Clarke was appointed as Global CEO of JLT Specialty with effect from 1 April 2018.
Further details can be found in my Chairmans Statement on page 12.
Jonathan PalmerBrown stepped down from the Group Executive Committee at the end of the year and continues to act as an Adviser to the Group Chief Executive.
Leo Demer retired as CEO of our Australia and New Zealand business at the end of December 2017 and has been succeeded by Nick Harris.
Nick joined the Group Executive Committee with effect from 1 January 2018.
Leo assumes the new role of Head of Global Public Sector Specialties.
With effect from 26 February 2018 Mike Rice became Executive Chairman of JLTs US Specialty business to focus on MandA and to continue to play a leading role in driving new business development.
Pat Donnelly formerly President and Deputy CEO assumed the role of CEO of that business on the same date.
Another key area of focus for the Group has continued to be diversity.
We have defined JLTs diversity agenda on the basis of three pillars Networking Sponsorship and Involvement.
In 2017 JLT supported a number of initiatives both internally and in public events in the London Market and other insurance hubs to help to drive a more diverse and inclusive business and to play our part in solving these challenges in our industry.
More details are available in the Corporate Responsibility Report on pages 50 and 51.
The Committee continues to focus on succession planning and executive development and during the year it oversaw a detailed review by management with the assistance of external consultants of the leadership capability and potential of a cohort of nearly 40 of JLTs senior managers.
More details of this review and its conclusions are set out in the following Report.
Geoffrey Howe Chairman Nominations Committee 28 February 2018 76 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE COMMITTEE MEMBERSHIP AND ATTENDANCE The following table shows the Committee membership during the year Committee Members Geoffrey Howe Chairman Adam Keswick Bruce CarnegieBrown Richard Meddings Annette Court Lord Sassoon Jonathan Dawson Nicholas Walsh Andrew Didham The Group Company Secretary acts as Secretary to the Committee and where appropriate a number of others attend meetings by invitation including the Group Chief Executive and the Group Human Resources Director.
The table below shows the Committee members attendance at Committee meetings during 2017 Committee members Eligible to attend Attended Geoffrey Howe Chairman 4 4 Bruce CarnegieBrown 1 1 Annette Court 4 4 Jonathan Dawson 3 3 Andrew Didham 1 1 Adam Keswick 4 4 Richard Meddings 1 1 Lord Sassoon 4 4 Nicholas Walsh 4 4 COMMITTEE RESPONSIBILITIES The Committee is responsible for reviewing the structure and composition of the Board and its Committees and ensuring that they have the right balance of skills knowledge and experience.
The Committee ensures that there is a formal rigorous and transparent process for new Board appointments.
It is the Committees responsibility to lead this process by preparing a description of the role and capabilities required for each particular appointment appointing external search consultants as appropriate and overseeing the search process and making recommendations on new appointments to the Board.
All appointments to the Board are made on merit and against objective criteria.
The Committee has responsibility for considering a range of other issues including diversity inclusion and gender equality.
The terms of reference of the Committee are available on the
PRINCIPAL ACTIVITIES The Committee met formally on two occasions during 2017 as well as meeting on an ad hoc basis on several occasions to discuss key events during the year.
During the year the Committee focused on succession planning and the development of Directors and high performing members of senior management as well as on the promotion of diversity and inclusion across the organisation.
Key activities during the year NonExecutive Director Appointments Succession Planning Consideration of Diversity Review of Board Composition Oversight of Director Induction and Training NONEXECUTIVE DIRECTOR APPOINTMENTS The Board appointed two new NonExecutive Directors in 2017 Andrew Didham and Richard Meddings.
An external search consultancy The Zygos Partnership was engaged to lead the search process for both candidates.
The Zygos Partnership has no other connections with the Company.
A detailed longlist was prepared and discussed with the Committee and a shortlist of candidates was then interviewed.
The Committee met twice to discuss the results of the process and recommended the appointment of the two final candidates to the Board.
The Committee subsequently engaged The Zygos Partnership to lead the search for a further Independent NonExecutive
The Committee discussed the results of the process during 2018 and recommended the appointment of Lynne Peacock to the Board with effect from 1 May 2018.
During 2017 the Committee also reviewed and recommended the extension of Nicholas Walshs appointment as a Non Executive Director following three years of service on the Board.
SUCCESSION PLANNING One of the key roles of the Committee is to discuss succession planning for the Board and other senior management positions.
It is important that a pipeline of talent is recognised and nurtured within the business and that the skills and experience of senior management are developed.
Ultimate responsibility for making senior management appointments rests with the Group Chief Executive.
The Committee works closely with management to ensure that succession planning looks ahead over multiple years and addresses any identified skill shortages.
Bruce CarnegieBrown retired from the Committee on 14 June 2017 Jonathan Dawson retired from the Committee on 3 October 2017 Andrew Didham and Richard Meddings were appointed to the Committee on 2 October 2017 Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION During the year the Committee oversaw a detailed review by management with the assistance of external consultants Korn Ferry of the leadership capability and potential of a cohort of nearly 40 of JLTs senior managers.
The review focused on the capability of the cohort as leaders within JLT using the Groups five pillar leadership model as well as on their leadership potential measured using a number of external tools and against a large group of executives in other businesses.
The exercise was seen as important in assessing the strength of JLTs leadership team and how well positioned it is to drive JLT forward to deliver on the Groups strategy.
The results of the review indicated that JLTs cohort had strong leadership in core areas and great potential.
Training and development plans with appropriate coaching and mentoring are being tailored to help individuals meet their development needs.
The Committee also continued to discuss future succession plans for the role of Group Chief Executive.
Korn Ferry carried out further work to evaluate several potential internal candidates for the role in order to identify development opportunities for those individuals.
The Committee also spent time considering succession planning in respect of the Chairman and is comfortable that an appropriate plan is in place.
The Committee is confident that there are succession plans in place for Directors and senior management across the Group which are appropriate to enable the implementation of our corporate strategy and our future growth plans.
DIVERSITY AND INCLUSION The Committee aims to maintain an appropriate balance of skills experience expertise and background on the Board.
In preparing to recommend new appointments the Committee takes into account the benefits of diversity whilst considering candidates on merit against objective criteria.
The Board supports the recommendations made in the reviews published by Davies HamptonAlexander and Parker and supports the Codes recommendation that diversity and gender should be considered when making Board appointments.
JLT recognises the benefits of having a diverse Board and is committed to achieving a Board which includes and makes the best use of differences in culture gender skills background regional financial and industry experience and other qualities.
More details of JLTs approach to diversity can be found in the Corporate Responsibility Report on pages 50 and 51.
BOARD INDUCTION AND TRAINING The Committee is focused on ensuring that an appropriate induction programme is provided to all new Directors which is tailored to their roles on the Board and its Committees.
A programme has been developed which is designed to provide new Directors with an understanding of the Group its governance framework its business and the markets in which it operates.
Members of the Board and its Committees are provided with regular training in order to keep them abreast of industry and legal and regulatory developments facilitated by professional advisers where appropriate.
Further details regarding the induction and training programmes provided during the year can be found on page 65.
For and on behalf of the Board.
Geoffrey Howe Chairman Nominations Committee 28 February 2018 78 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE DIRECTORS REMUNERATION
INTRODUCTION FROM THE COMMITTEE
I am pleased to introduce the Directors Remuneration Report for 2017.
In doing so I would like to thank the Board and senior management for their support since my appointment to the Committee on 2 October 2017 and to thank my predecessor Bruce CarnegieBrown for his leadership during the early part of the year and in particular for his consultation with shareholders on the full review of JLTs Remuneration Policy.
The Remuneration Policy was subsequently approved at the 2017 AGM by 95.59% of shareholders.
At JLT we believe that our Remuneration Policy is appropriate for rewarding Executive Directors in line with business performance while remaining in line with the interests of shareholders.
The Committee is keeping under review the Financial Reporting Councils current consultation on the UK Corporate Governance Code and its potential implications for the Groups Remuneration Policy.
KEY PRINCIPLES Our Policy continues to be based on the following key principles simple consistent and transparent supports the cultural and behavioural priorities of the Group and achieves a balance between pay and performance such that fixed pay remains at an appropriate level when considered against a competitive global market place ensuring we are able to attract and retain high calibre staff and variable pay and incentives provide a strong and demonstrable link between the performance of the Company and the performance of its Executive Directors and senior management team members.
The Committee believes this philosophy provides a direct incentive for our employees to create longterm sustainable value for our shareholders together with upholding the strong cultural identity and expected standards of behaviour.
Share awards continue to be an essential tool in aligning the interests of employees with those of shareholders.
In setting remuneration levels the Committee is mindful that our business operates in a competitive global market.
The Committee takes into account appropriate remuneration data relevant to UK public companies of a similar size and complexity however also recognises that there are no directly comparable UK companies and that its principal competitors are often businesses which are part of much larger groups primarily based in the US.
In 2017 the Committee spent the early part of the year focused on executive compensation in relation to 2016 performance and considering appropriate revisions to the Remuneration Policy in order to be in a position to recommend full approval of the new Policy by shareholders at the 2017 AGM.
Following approval of the Remuneration Policy the Committee implemented the revised Policy as it related to senior management compensation.
During the year the Committee took a wider view on compensation matters for the top 100 highest paid individuals in the Group.
The Committee was satisfied that total compensation for these individuals aligned with shareholder interests in terms of value creation.
The Committee also considered the figures relating to the required reporting requirements under the Gender Pay Gap regulations in the UK.
The Committee when reviewing the outcomes endorsed managements stance on addressing the talent agenda which in common with many other UK businesses is highlighted by the Gender Pay Gap figures.
Creating longterm sustainable value for shareholders whilst upholding our strong cultural identity and expected standards of behaviour.
Richard Meddings Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION Salary Market competitive Pensions Pension contributions are aligned with those of employees and are at a modest level compared to the market to reflect our focus on performancerelated reward Bonus Linked to challenging profit and individual performance targets Target 125% of salary 150% for CEO.
Maximum 150% of salary 200% for CEO Enables us to be competitive in the market particularly in the insurance industry to retain and incentivise key executives to deliver performance for shareholders Deferral mechanism for awards in excess of 100% of salary reinforces alignment with longterm shareholder returns Long Term Incentive
Shares vest after three years based on the delivery of stretching EPS growth targets For 2018 awards the target will be 4%  12% per annum 12%  36% over 3 years Maximum award of 200% of salary 300% for the CEO
Objective to build a longterm shareholding of at least 200% of salary 300% of salary for the CEO through retaining ownership of vested shares OUR REMUNERATION FRAMEWORK Based on these principles the key elements of our remuneration framework for 2017 are provided below MAJOR ACTIVITIES AND DECISIONS IN 2017 INCENTIVE OUTTURNS IN RESPECT OF 2017 As reported last year the Committee agreed at the time of setting the 2016 annual bonus targets for the Executive Directors that the underlying Profit Before Tax PBT target would include the budgeted investment in the US Specialty business.
80% of the Executive Directors 2017 bonus was based on Group underlying PBT targets.
The underlying PBT delivered in the year of 191.5 million was significantly in excess of the target of 183.0 million such that a maximum award was earned.
The remaining 20% was based on the achievement of specific personal objectives.
The bonus awards which were made in respect of 2017 Group Chief Executive 200% of salary Deputy Group CEO and Group Finance Director both at 149% of salary are reflective of the strong results that the business has delivered this year.
The Committee considers that the strong financial performance of the Group warrants these awards.
PLANS FOR 2018 Salary As previously reported the Deputy Group CEO and Finance Director were both awarded salary increases in 2017 with an agreement that there would be no further review until 2019.
The Group Chief Executive will receive a salary increase of 3.5% in 2018 resulting in an annual base salary of 793000.
The all employee UK salary increase averaged 4% across 2017 with a similar increase anticipated for 2018.
Bonus The annual bonus will remain 80% based on Group results measured on underlying PBT and 20% based on the achievement of personal objectives.
The target bonus award for the Deputy Group CEO and Group Finance Director will remain 125% of salary and the maximum bonus 150% of salary.
For the Group Chief Executive the target and maximum bonus awards continue to be the same 150% and 200% of salary respectively.
Long Term Incentive Plan LTIP Award Earnings per share EPS has been used as the measure of performance for the LTIP for a number of years and continues to be an important and appropriate measure of the longterm success of JLT and is aligned to shareholder returns.
The Committee proposes no change to the EPS targets for the 2018 LTIP award which remain appropriately challenging in the current trading environment.
Accordingly EPS growth is set at a range of 4% per annum 12% over 3 years to 12% per annum 36% over 3 years.
The threshold level of vesting will remain at 20% of the maximum award.
75% of the maximum award will be payable on EPS growth of 8% per annum 24% over 3 years.
Full vesting of the award will as in prior years remain subject to the achievement of growth in EPS of 12% per annum 36% over 3 years.
The 2017 underlying basic EPS will be used as the base year for the purposes of this award and includes the costs of the US Specialty investment.
However from 2014 to 2016 inclusive as previously stated the costs of US investment were excluded in order to normalise the earnings profile of the Group during the startup phases of the investment cycle for the purposes of long term remuneration.
The investments in the US have resulted in an accumulation of losses which may result in the recognition of a deferred tax asset.
As this is likely to have a positive but distorting effect on the underlying EPS result when recognised the Committee has decided to exclude the benefit of the deferred tax asset for the purposes of any LTIP calculation.
OTHER KEY DECISIONS A review of NonExecutive Director fees in line with market has resulted in an increase to the basic fee to 65000 with effect from 1 April 2018.
The fees were last increased in April 2014.
Supplementary fees remain unchanged.
Richard Meddings Chairman Remuneration Committee 28 February 2018 80 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE SUMMARY OF REMUNERATION POLICY POLICY TABLE FOR EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS The Policy was approved at the 2017 AGM held on 27 April 2017 and was effective as of that date.
An extract of the policy table for Executive Directors contained in that Policy is reproduced below for information only.
The full Remuneration Policy is contained on pages 76 to 82 of the 2016 Annual Report which is available in the Investor Relations section of the Groups websitesite Component and purposelink to strategy Operation Maximum Performance framework BASE SALARY To provide a base salary as a major component of fixed remuneration which is competitive in the markets in which the Company operates and in which the Executive Director is based.
Contractual fixed cash amount paid monthly.
Salaries are normally set in the home currency and reviewed annually.
Any changes are normally made effective from 1 April.
Salaries are set by the Committee taking into account all relevant factors which include the scale and complexity of the Group andor business unit the scope and responsibilities of the role the skills and experience of the individual performance in role the level of increase within the business and the Committees assessment of the competitive environment including consideration of appropriate market data.
This includes salary levels and total remuneration of global insurance brokers and other top US and UK multinational businesses.
There is no prescribed maximum salary.
Any increases will be at the discretion of the Committee taking into account factors such as changes in the size and complexity of the business scope of the role competitive positioning against the market and the level of salary increase within the business.
NA
BENEFITS
To provide benefits as an element of fixed remuneration which are competitive in the markets in which the Company operates.
Benefits reflect home country norms of the Executive Director.
Incorporates various cashnoncash benefits which are competitive in the relevant market and which may include a company car or equivalent cash allowance subscriptions life assurance deathinservice pension private medical annual medical checkup permanent health cover reimbursed business expenses including any associated tax liability incurred when travelling in performance of duties and where necessary other benefits to reflect specific individual circumstances such as housing relocation travel or other expatriate allowances.
Executive Directors may also participate in the Save As You Earn SAYE and Share Incentive Plan SIP on the same basis as other employees.
Benefit provision for which there is no prescribed monetary maximum is set at an appropriate level for the specific nature and location of the role.
Benefit plans are reviewed periodically to ensure they remain competitive in the market in which the company operates provide appropriate value to and remain appropriate for our employee population.
Participation in all employee share plans is subject to statutory limits.
NA
PENSION
To provide an element of tax efficient savings where possible within the tax framework of the Executive Directors home country.
Executive Directors will participate in the company pension schemes that apply to their home country.
In the UK this is provided via contributions to the Defined Contribution DC section of the JLT UK Pension Scheme or as a cash salary supplement.
Contributions in line with the Scheme Rules are made by reference to pensionable earnings currently a maximum of 140000 but reviewed annually.
Members of the Defined Benefit DB section of the scheme will continue to receive benefits in accordance with the terms of this plan although it is closed to further accrual or to new members.
Since the closure of the DB scheme in 2006 affected employees including some Executive Directors receive a fixed salary supplement which was determined at the time the scheme was closed based on each individuals circumstances.
Current UK Executive Directors receive a maximum DCcash supplement of 15% of pensionable earnings.
The maximum additional annual fixed salary supplement for current Executive Directors impacted by the closure of the DB scheme are 79000 for Dominic Burke 24000 for Mark Drummond Brady.
NA
Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION Component and purposelink to strategy Operation Maximum Performance framework ANNUAL BONUS A variable pay opportunity competitive in the markets in which the Company operates which motivates and rewards performance against objectives and is aligned with the culture of the organisation.
Deferral aligns reward with longterm value of JLT shares.
Total overall bonus before any deferral provides an opportunity for additional reward up to a target and maximum specified as a percentage of salary based on annual performance against objectives set and assessed by the Committee.
Paid in cash except that any bonus in excess of a limit normally 100% of salary is deferred into Company shares in accordance with the terms of the Deferred Bonus Share Plan DBSP.
Under the DBSP  participants are granted a conditional award of shares which normally vest over three years subject to continued employment.
Dividend equivalent provisions apply.
Malus and clawback provisions apply in relation to annual bonuses.
Bonus payments are not pensionable.
Maximum awards under the annual bonus plans are 200% of salary for the Chief Executive and 150% for other Executive Directors Payment is determined by reference to performance assessed over one financial year.
Performance may be assessed using a combination of financial strategic and personal performance measures normally weighted towards the financial measures.
Importance is placed on promoting the culture of the organisation and mitigating risk.
Target bonus is set at 150% of salary for the Chief Executive and 125% of salary for the other Executive Directors.
LONGTERM
INCENTIVE PLAN
A variable pay opportunity competitive in the markets in which the Company operates which motivates and rewards longterm performance and is aligned with the value created for shareholders.
Awards are made under the terms of the JLT Long Term Incentive Plan 2013 approved by shareholders at the 2013 Annual General Meeting.
Awards are normally in the form of a right to acquire shares in the Company for a zero or nominal amount.
The vesting of the award is subject to the satisfaction of performance conditions reviewed and agreed by the Committee each year.
Malus clawback and dividend equivalent provisions apply.
Maximum annual awards are 300% of salary for the Chief Executive 200% of salary for other Executive Directors Vesting is determined by reference to performance assessed over a period of three years against key measures aligned to the strategy and creation of shareholder value.
Performance measures currently include EPS and may also include other financial or strategic measures aligned to strategy and shareholder value.
The threshold level of vesting is 20% of the maximum award.
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE The remuneration in respect of the year ending 31 December 2017 of the Chairman and NonExecutive Directors who served during the year is shown in the table below with the prior year comparative
Fees
Benefits
Total teltel 2016 Geoffrey Howe Annette Court 63 60   63 60 Andrew Didham Adam Keswick Richard Meddings Lord Sassoon Nicholas Walsh Bruce CarnegieBrown Jonathan Dawson Benefits include club subscription and medical insurance Andrew Didham and Richard Meddings were appointed to the Board on 2 October 2017 Adam Keswick and Lord Sassoon waived their fees in favour of Matheson and Co.
Nicholas Walsh received 88600 in respect of the work he carried out to support the Board and Audit and Risk Committee ARC of the US Specialty business and the Executive Committee and ARC of the US Reinsurance business Bruce CarnegieBrown retired from the Board on 14 June 2017 Jonathan Dawson retired from the Board on 3 October 2017
ANNUAL REPORT ON REMUNERATION
The table below summarises the remuneration for the Directors in respect of 2017.
Further discussion of each of the components including the intended operation of the Policy for 2018 is set out on the pages which follow.
Some of the disclosures in these sections where indicated have been audited by PwC.
Single Total Figure of Remuneration Table audited The remuneration in respect of the year ended 31 December 2017 of the Executive Directors who served during the year is shown in the table below with the prior year comparative
Salary
Benefits
Pension
Annual Bonus
Total teltelteltel 2016 Dominic Burke 76tel95 95 1532 1093 841 525 3361 2554 Mark Drummond Brady  3tel137 1444 1051 Charles Rozes 1167 872   1662 1321 The 2017 and 2016 Annual Bonus columns includes the annual bonus and the tranches of signon bonus cash and value of vested shares the details of which were disclosed in the 2015 Directors Remuneration Report.
Benefits include a company car driver or equivalent cash allowance IT and communications subscriptions life assurance private medical and permanent health cover.
Pension includes all forms of cash contribution paid in respect of pension entitlements including contributions to the Defined Contribution section of the JLT UK Pension Scheme or a cash salary supplement and where relevant the fixed cash salary supplement paid to those Directors impacted by the closure of the DB Scheme in 2006.
Further details are set out in the Pensions section on page 86.
Annual bonus includes the full value of the annual bonus awarded in respect of the relevant financial year.
For each of the three Directors a portion of the Annual Bonus will be deferred under the terms of the DBSP .
In respect of 2017 for Dominic Burke it will be 766000 for Mark Drummond Brady 219600 and for Charles Rozes 223405.
The 2017 LTIP column includes the value of the 2015 LTIP award which is based on performance measured to 31 December 2017 and will vest on 1 April 2018.
The value is calculated using the average share price over the final quarter of 2017 of 1310.62p and includes the value of the dividends on the shares which will vest.
The 2016 LTIP column shows the value of the 2014 LTIP which was based on performance to 2016.
The numbers have been updated from those shown last year to reflect the actual share price on the date of vesting.
Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION KEY COMPONENTS OF REMUNERATION The following sections describe how the Committee implemented key elements of the Policy in the year ended 31 December 2017 and how it is intended to operate in the year ending 31 December 2018.
Salary
In setting salaries the Committee takes into account the scale and complexity of the Group the scope and responsibilities of the role the skills and experience of the individual performance in role the level of salary increase within the business and the Committees assessment of the competitive environment including consideration of appropriate market data.
The Committee also takes into account appropriate remuneration data relevant to UK public companies of a similar size and complexity but also recognises that there are no directly comparable UK companies and that the Companys principal international competitors are businesses which are part of much larger groups primarily in the US.
The base salaries of the Executive Directors effective 1 April 2018 are set out in the table below together with the prior year comparative.
The Committee proposes to increase the Group Chief Executives salary by 3.5% from 1 April 2018 with the next review in April 2019.
The all employee UK salary increase averaged 4% across 2017 with a similar increase anticipated for 2018.
As noted last year the Committee recognises the concerns of investors around executive salary inflation which is why it committed that the salaries of the Deputy Chief Executive and Group Finance Director will remain unchanged until at least 1 April 2019.
Directors 2018 2017 Change Dominic Burke 793000 766000 3.5% Mark Drummond Brady 450000 450000 Charles Rozes 455000 455000 ANNUAL BONUS In 2017 the Executive Directors had a target bonus opportunity of 125% salary 150% of salary for the Group Chief Executive and a maximum of 150% 200% for the Group Chief Executive.
In 2017 the bonus was based on a combination of both financial and personal performance measures requiring the achievement of stretching performance targets as follows 80% on JLT Group underlying PBT performance.
As described in more detail on page 79 2017 saw a Group underlying PBT of 191.5 million.
This significantly exceeded the Target of 183.0 million such that the maximum award was due and 20% on the achievement of personal objectives.
Each of the Executive Directors set their objectives with the Group Chief Executive or in the case of the Group Chief Executive with the Remuneration Committee.
These are documented and reviewed midyear to ensure that they continue to be relevant to the business with an overall assessment being made at the end of the performance year.
Personal objectives align to the Groups strategic priorities.
Dominic Burkes personal objectives during 2017 have focused on the Group strategy and its delivery including delivering the Group Strategic Review and implementation plan including a new target operating model and transformation programme to deliver sustained Group performance and the corresponding talent management and development review of the senior leadership population.
Charles Rozes objectives have focused on efficiency and continued effective governance including delivering the Group capital funding structure in support of the Group strategic review delivering substantive efficiency and productivity gains across the Finance function globally and implementation of revised and enhanced risk and governance structures internationally.
Following his change of role at the start of 2017 Mark Drummond Bradys objectives focused on JLTs Latin American and Canadian businesses as well as his Deputy CEO responsibilities.
His objectives included delivering on the strategic alignment of the Canadian and Latin American businesses as part of the Group strategic review and leading on the postBrexit plan for JLT Group in Europe.
Based on the performance against the targets set the Committee determined that the Executive Directors would receive the bonus for the year as shown in the Single Total Figure of Remuneration Table 133% of Target bonus for the Group Chief Executive and 119% of Target for each of Charles Rozes and Mark Drummond Brady.
This has been based on the underlying PBT results and the achievement of personal objectives.
For 2018 the annual bonus will operate on the same basis as 2017.
The Committee and Board of JLT believe the specific performance targets are commercially sensitive and therefore it is inappropriate to publish further detail here.
It is the current intention that they will be disclosed next year to the extent that the Committee is comfortable that they are no longer sensitive.
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE The calculation of EPS is underlying basic EPS excluding exceptional items and impairment charges and measured on actual achieved exchange rates and will be verified by the Companys auditor.
As noted earlier the 2017 underlying basic EPS will be used as the base year for the purposes of this award and includes the costs of the US Specialty investment.
However from 2014 to 2016 inclusive as previously stated the costs of US investment were excluded in order to normalise the earnings profile of the Group during the startup phases of the investment cycle for the purposes of long term remuneration.
The investments in the US have resulted in an accumulation of losses which may result in the recognition of a deferred tax asset.
As this is likely to have a positive but distorting effect on the underlying EPS result when recognised the Committee has decided to exclude the benefit of the deferred tax asset for the purposes of any LTIP calculation.
Awards will be made at the same level as in 2017 as set out in the Policy.
SHARE INTERESTS AWARDED TABLE AUDITED The following table sets out details of LTIP awards made during the year ending 31 December 2017 for Executive Directors who served during the year.
Executive
Director
Type of
Basis of award
Threshold vesting End of performance period
Burke
LTIP 300% of salary 2298.0 20% 31 December
Drummond
Brady
LTIP 150% of salary 675.0 20% 31 December
Rozes
LTIP 150% of salary 682.5 20% 31 December SHAREHOLDER GUIDELINES AND SHARE INTERESTS Executive Directors are required to build up longterm share interests equivalent to 200% of base salary 300% of base salary for the Group Chief Executive.
In summary the guidelines are for Executive Directors to retain 50% of shares acquired on the vesting of share awards after the payment of income tax and national insurance until such time as the guideline has been met.
Deferred shares count towards the guideline on a net of tax basis.
The Chairman and NonExecutive Directors are not subject to the share ownership guidelines.
LTIP  2015 AWARD VESTING IN RESPECT OF 2017 The 2015 LTIP was based on basic EPS growth excluding exceptional items and impairment charges and measured on actual exchange rates in the three financial years to 31 December 2017 in accordance with the targets laid out below determined by the Committee at the time of grant.
Following the announcement of the expansion into the US the Committee considered the impact of the significant expected investment costs on LTIP awards i.
2013 to 2016 awards inclusive.
The Committee determined that it was appropriate to adopt the following approach in respect of a financial year in which US investment costs occur that such cost will be added back to the EPS for that year for the purposes of measuring LTIP performance and the Committee retains discretion over whether to apply such an approach in respect of any financial year and on the proportion of the cost which is added back.
Any adjustment will be verified by the Companys auditor prior to the vesting date and clearly disclosed in the relevant Remuneration
The Committee believes that although the costs are not exceptional costs from a technical accounting perspective and therefore will not be excluded from Underlying EPS they are exceptional for the purposes of LTIP measurement.
The approach is consistent with the rules of the LTIP and with the Policy.
Per the award criteria after removing the impact of the US investment costs the LTIP will vest at 28.44% of the maximum on 1 April 2018.
EPS growth over a 3 year period
Below 6% per annum 18% over 3 years 0% 6% per annum 18% over 3 years 20% 12% per annum or above 36% over 3 years 100% Vesting is on a pro rata basis between these points.
LTIP 2018 AWARD WILL VEST IN 2021 The Committee reviewed the performance targets for the LTIP and believes the current target range as shown in the table below continues to be appropriately stretching in the context of the current environment.
Therefore this target range will apply to the 2018 LTIP award.
EPS growth over a 3 year period Vesting % of maximum Below 4% per annum 12% over 3 years 0% 4% per annum 12% over 3 years 20% 8% per annum 24% over 3 years 75% 12% per annum 36% over 3 years 100% Vesting is on a pro rata basis between these points.
Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION The table below provides details of the interests of the Executive Directors in longterm incentives during the year.
Plan Grant date Number of shares 1 Jan 2017
During 2017
Number of shares 31 Dec Share price on grant pence Date from which exercisable Dominic Burke 2014 DBSP 07.04.14 32600 32600   1029.00 07.04.17 2015 DBSP 25.03.15 26000   26000 1047.33 25.03.18 2017 DBSP 05.04.17  31200  31200 1134.33 05.04.20 2013 LTIP 08.05.13 29609 29609   850.00 08.05.16 2014 LTIP 07.04.14 205100 44035 161065  1029.00 07.04.17 2015 LTIP 01.04.15 210600   210600 1054.00 01.04.18 2016 LTIP 31.03.16 258500   258500 858.83 31.03.19 2017 LTIP 05.04.17  202600  202600 1134.33 05.04.20
Drummond
Brady
2013 LTIP 08.05.13 7737 7737   850.00 08.05.16 2014 LTIP 07.04.14 53600 11508 42092  1029.00 07.04.17 2015 LTIP 01.04.15 59800   59800 1054.00 01.04.18 2016 LTIP 31.03.16 73400   73400 858.83 31.03.19 2017 LTIP 05.04.17  59500  59500 1134.33 05.04.20 Charles Rozes PSP 9.4.2 21.09.15 33573 22382  11191 1041.00 2016 LTIP 31.03.16 74300   74300 858.83 31.03.19 2017 LTIP 05.04.17  60200  60200 1134.33 05.04.20 DBSP Awards under the Deferred Bonus Share Plan are made in the form of conditional shares and are not subject to any further performance conditions.
LTIP Awards under the Long Term Incentive Plan made in the form of nilcost options 2013 2014 and 2015 awards or conditional share awards 2016 and 2017 awards subject to EPS growth performance conditions.
For the 2013 2014 and 2015 LTIP awards the performance condition requires EPS growth over a three year period of 6% pa 18% over 3 years for 20% vesting to 12% pa 36% over 3 years for full vesting.
For the 2016 and 2017 LTIP awards the performance condition requires EPS growth over a three year period of 4% pa 12% over 3 years for 20% vesting to 12% pa 36% over 3 years for full vesting.
STATEMENT OF SHAREHOLDINGS AND SHARE INTERESTS AUDITED The following table sets out for Directors who served during the year their shareholding including connected persons in the Company as at 31 December 2017 and current interests in longterm incentives.
Shareholding Current share interests Number of shares Shareholding as a % of salary
Executive Directors Dominic Burke 406311 738% Yes 671700 57200 Mark Drummond Brady 150574 465% Yes 192700 Charles Rozes 23682 72% No 134500 11191 NonExecutive Directors Geoffrey Howe 25709 Annette Court 1000 Andrew Didham Adam Keswick Richard Meddings Lord Sassoon Nicholas Walsh 1000 Bruce CarnegieBrown 2000 Jonathan Dawson The shareholding as a percentage of salary is calculated using the shareholding and base salary as at 31 December 2017 and the closing midmarket price on 29 December 2017.
With the exception of the Directors interests disclosed in the table above no Director had any additional interest in the share capital of the Company during the year.
Between 1 January 2018 and 22 February 2018 being the latest practicable date prior to the posting of this report the trustees of the Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc All Employee Share Plan have acquired 21 shares on behalf of Dominic Burke.
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE Chairman and NonExecutive Director fees The fees were reviewed during 2017 and no changes were made.
However they have now been reviewed in line with market and therefore for 2018 the basic fee for NonExecutive Directors will increase to 65000 a year from 1 April 2018.
All other fees will remain the same.
2018 2017 Change Group NonExecutive Chairman 300000 300000 0% Basic fee for NonExecutive Director 65000 60000 8% Supplementary fees for Chairman of Group Audit and Risk Committee Chairman 22500 22500 0% Chairman of Group Remuneration Committee 20000 20000 0% Group Senior Independent Director 10000 10000 0% Nicholas Walsh is a member of the Board and ARC of the US Specialty business and of the ARC of the US Reinsurance business.
He also attends meetings of the Executive Committee of the US Reinsurance business.
He is paid an annual fee of 88600 in respect of these commitments.
PENSION
Pension benefits are provided to Executive Directors via the Defined Contribution DC section of the JLT UK Pension Scheme or as a cash salary supplement.
Member contributions are matched by a Company contribution equivalent to 2.5 times the amount paid by the member subject to a maximum of 5% to 15% of pensionable earnings for the Scheme currently 140000 but reviewed annually.
Contributions in respect of 2017 are included in the Single Total Figure of Remuneration Table on page 82.
To reflect the closure of the DB scheme in 2006 affected employees including some Executive Directors also receive a fixed cash supplement which was calculated as a percentage of salary determined at the time the scheme was closed based on each individuals circumstances.
These cash supplements are included in the Single Total Figure of Remuneration Table on page 82.
SERVICE CONTRACT It is the Companys standard policy that Executive Directors should have service contracts with an indefinite term which can be terminated by the Company or the Director by giving notice not exceeding 12 months.
This applies to all current Executive Directors and would normally be applied to future appointments.
The Committee retains discretion to offer service agreements with notice periods which exceed 12 months up to a maximum of 24 months.
If such a contract were offered the notice period would normally be reduced during the first year of employment to the standard 12 month notice period.
Under all the current Executive Director service contracts the Company may terminate employment by making a payment in lieu of notice which would not exceed 12 months salary benefits and pension contributions.
This policy would be applied to future appointments.
NonExecutive Directors are appointed for a three year term which is renewable with three months notice on either side.
The contract for the Chairman is subject to a six month notice provision on either side.
For both NonExecutive Directors and the Chairman no contractual termination payments would be due and both are subject to election pursuant to the Articles of Association at the Annual General Meeting.
SUPPORTING DISCLOSURES AND ADDITIONAL
Percentage change in remuneration of Group Chief
The table below compares the percentage change in salary benefits and annual bonus of the Group Chief Executive and the average percentage change in salary benefits and annual bonus of all JLT UK employees paid in respect of the year ended 31 December 2017.
Group Chief Executive All JLT UK employees Salary 3% 4% Benefits 32% 11% Annual Bonus 40% 10% Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION FTSE All Share Index Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group Performance graph and table The chart shows the TSR of JLT in the nine year period to 31 December 2017 against the TSR of the FTSE 100 250 and All Share Indices.
TSR refers to share price growth and assumes dividends are reinvested over the relevant period.
The Committee believes the FTSE 100 250 and All Share Indices are the most appropriate indices against which the TSR of JLT should be measured as there is no directly comparable quoted peer group for the Company in the UK.
1tel FTSE 250 index FTSE 100 index Data taken at December 31 The table below provides remuneration data for the Group Chief Executive for each of the nine financial years over the equivalent period.
Single Total Figure of Remuneration 2836 3728 3831 3821 3969 3322 2896 2554 3361 Bonus % of Maximum 75% 75% 73% 75% 75% 69% 41% 74% 100% LTIP vesting % of Maximum 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 72% 62% 21% 28% Relative importance of spend on pay The chart below shows total employee remuneration and distributions to shareholders in respect of the years ending 31 December 2016 and 2017 and the difference between the two.
2017 2016 Change % Total employee remuneration 861.2m 794.4m 8% Distributions to shareholders 74.6m 70.5m 6% Total employee remuneration represents amounts included in note 6 to the financial statements in respect of wages social security pension and incentive costs for all Group employees.
Distributions to shareholders include the total dividend in respect of each financial year see note 10 to the financial statements.
External nonexecutive directorships held by Executive Directors Dominic Burke is nonexecutive chairman of Newbury Racecourse plc.
He retained the fee of 20000 paid by Newbury Racecourse in respect of 2017.
No other Executive Directors hold outside paid posts.
Dilution
The Company continues to operate its share schemes in line with the Investment Association guidelines on dilution.
The Company follows a conservative approach to hedging for share awards made under LTIP  DBSP and other sharebased schemes whereby shares to satisfy such awards are normally purchased in the market and held in an employee trust.
The Company seeks to be fully hedged as far as possible against awards made.
At 31 December 2017 the total awards outstanding in respect of the LTIP  DBSP and other sharebased schemes totalled 9833701 shares representing 4.47% of the Companys issued share capital.
This comprised 0.23% in respect of awards which were fully vested and 4.24% in respect of awards which had not yet vested.
Votes For Votes Against Total votes cast Votes withheld Resolutions No. of shares % No.
Annual remuneration for year ending 31 December 2016 178263656 97.52 4534004 2.48 182797660 36307 Remuneration Policy 174734097 95.59 8066837 4.41 182800934 Votes For include votes registered as Discretion.
Statement of voting at Annual General Meeting The Committee is directly accountable to shareholders and in this context is committed to an open and transparent dialogue with shareholders on the issue of executive remuneration.
The Remuneration Committee Chairman is available to answer questions from shareholders regarding remuneration at the AGM.
At the Annual General Meeting held on 27 April 2017 votes were cast by proxy and at the meeting in respect of Directors remuneration are shown in the table below.
Total Shareholder Return from 2008 to 2017 88 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE THE COMMITTEE Committee Membership and Attendance The table below shows the Committee members during the year and their attendance at Committee meetings Eligible to attend Attended Richard Meddings Chairman 2 2 Bruce CarnegieBrown Annette Court 5 5 Jonathan Dawson Andrew Didham Adam Keswick 5 5 Lord Sassoon 5 5 Nicholas Walsh 5 5 Bruce CarnegieBrown retired on 14 June 2017 Jonathan Dawson retired on 3 October 2017 Richard Meddings and Andrew Didham were appointed on 2 October 2017 The Committee comprises the six NonExecutive Directors.
The Chairman Group Chief Executive Group Finance Director and Group HR Director may attend the Committee by invitation except when their own remuneration is being discussed.
No Director is involved in determining his or her own remuneration.
None of the Committee members have any personal financial interest except as shareholders.
The Group Company Secretary acts as Secretary to the Committee.
INDUCTIONS
On appointment new Committee members receive an appropriate induction consisting of the review of the Terms of Reference previous Committee meeting papers and meetings with senior personnel and advisers.
DIRECTORS SERVICE AGREEMENTS AND LETTERS OF APPOINTMENT The dates on which Directors service agreements or letters of appointment commenced and the current expiry dates are as follows Date of
Expiry date of current service agreement or letter of appointment Notice Period by the
Notice Period by the Company Chairman and Executive Directors Geoffrey Howe 11 January 2006 NA 6 months 6 months Dominic Burke 14 December 2001 NA 12 months 12 months Charles Rozes 1 September 2015 NA 12 months 12 months Mark Drummond Brady 1 April 2005 NA 12 months 12 months NonExecutive Directors Annette Court 1 August 2012 31 July 2018 Andrew Didham 2 October 2017 1 October 2020 Adam Keswick 1 September 2016 31 August 2019 Richard Meddings 2 October 2017 1 October 2020 Lord Sassoon 30 April 2013 30 April 2019 Nicholas Walsh 1 October 2014 30 September 2020 Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION Roles and Responsibilities of the Remuneration Committee Remuneration and Policy
To determine and agree with the Board the framework and policy for the remuneration of the Group Chief Executive Chairman the Executive Directors and other members of the Group Executive Committee GEC In determining such policy to take into account information about remuneration in other relevant companies and trends in remuneration across the Group.
Annual bonus plans To approve the design of and determine targets and vesting schedule for any annual bonus plans for the Executive Directors and other members of the GEC.
Share incentive plans To review the design of all share incentive plans for approval by the Board and where applicable shareholders.
To determine whether awards will be made and if so the overall amount of such awards and the performance targets to be used.
Individual remuneration packages Within the terms of the agreed Policy to determine the total individual remuneration package of each Executive Director and other members of the GEC and the terms of any compensation payable for loss of office or employment.
Significant remuneration proposals for below GEC level To be informed of and be consulted by the Group Chief Executive on any significant proposals relating to remuneration for executives below the GEC level including significant new hirings.
Disclosure requirements To ensure that all disclosure requirements in relation to remuneration are fulfilled.
Remuneration consultants To appoint and manage the engagement of any remuneration consultants who advise the Committee.
THE ROLE OF THE COMMITTEE The principal purpose of the Committee is to determine the Companys policy on the remuneration of the Chairman Executive Directors and other members of the Group Executive Committee as well as to approve specific remuneration packages for each of them.
The Remuneration Policy was voted on and approved at the 2017 Annual General Meeting.
The voting figures can be found on page 87.
The full terms of reference of the Committee have been approved by the Board and are available on the Groups websitesite Key Responsibilities Effectiveness of the Remuneration Committee A review of the Committees effectiveness was carried out in respect of 2017.
All members and regular attendees of the Committee were asked to complete a questionnaire and the feedback was discussed by the Committee.
The results of the review were positive acknowledging the smooth transition to a new Chairman who was seen to promote effective and efficient meetings.
Discussions were seen as high quality focusing on the appropriate areas with a good level of constructive debate and robust challenge.
There was seen to be good interaction between members and management.
Opportunities for further improvements were identified including in relation to the provision of more concise papers and the provision of additional market insights to the Committee.
Committee Advisers The Remuneration Committee advisers are appointed by the Committee and their roles are kept under review.
During the year Deloitte LLP have been retained by the Committee in their capacity as Remuneration Committee advisers.
Deloitte LLP were originally appointed in 2011 following a selection process undertaken by the Committee.
Deloitte LLP is a member of the Remuneration Consultants Group and as such voluntarily operates under the Code of Conduct in relation to executive remuneration consulting in the UK.
The Committee is comfortable that the Deloitte LLP engagement partner and team that provide remuneration advice to the Committee do not have connections with Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc that may impair their objectivity and independence.
The fees charged by Deloitte LLP for the provision of independent advice to the Committee during 2017 were 7000.
Deloitte LLP also provide services to the Group in respect of corporate tax advice internal audit assistance regulatory reporting and Company share schemes.
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE Remuneration Committee Activities in 2017 The following table provides a summary of the key areas of focus at each of the Committees meetings during the year 19 Jan 23 Feb 16 May 3 Oct 12 Dec Strategy and policy Discussion of the Directors Remuneration Report Revised Remuneration Policy Consideration of remuneration strategy and approach Annual Salary Review of salaries for Executive Directors and GEC Annual Bonus Review of executives personal objectives Review of executive performance Determination of bonus outcomes Setting of measures and targets
Determination of vesting levels Setting of measures and targets
Senior management reward arrangements Committee Effectiveness Engagement with Shareholders Legal and Governance Developments Gender Pay Gap
In carrying out its duties the Committee gives full consideration to best practice.
The Committee was constituted and operated throughout the period in accordance with the principles outlined in the FCAs Listing Rules derived from the Code.
The auditors report set out on pages 100 to 106 covers the disclosures referred to in this report that are specified by the FCA.
This report has been prepared by the Committee in accordance with the Code Schedule 8 of the Large and Medium sized Companies and Groups Accounts and Reports Amendment Regulations 2013 and the Listing Rules.
For and on behalf of the Board.
Richard Meddings Chairman Remuneration Committee 28 February 2018 Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION DIRECTORS REPORT The Directors present their report and audited consolidated financial statements of the Group for the year ended 31 December 2017.
COMPLIANCE WITH THE UK CORPORATE GOVERNANCE CODE 2016 As a company with a premium listing on the London Stock Exchange we are committed to complying with the UK Corporate Governance Code 2016 the Code which is available on the FRC website at frc.
Provision Requirement Noncompliance B.1.2 At least half the Board excluding the Chairman should comprise nonexecutive directors determined by the Board to be independent.
Between 1 January and 14 June 2017 excluding the Chairman the Board comprised six NonExecutive Directors four Independent and two NonIndependent and three Executive Directors.
On 14 June 2017 Bruce CarnegieBrown retired from the Board.
The Company became compliant with the Code on 2 October 2017 following the appointment of two Independent NonExecutive Directors Andrew Didham and Richard Meddings.
Following Jonathan Dawsons resignation on 3 October 2017 excluding the Chairman there were six NonExecutive Directors four Independent and two NonIndependent and three Executive Directors.
Lynne Peacock has been appointed as an additional Independent Non Executive Director with effect from 1 May 2018 from which date the Company expects to be compliant with Code provision B.1.2.
B.2.1 A majority of members of the nomination committee should be independent nonexecutive directors.
Between 1 January 2017 and 14 June 2017 the Committees composition met the requirements of the Code.
Following Bruce CarnegieBrowns resignation on 14 June 2017 the Committee was comprised of the Chairman three Independent NonExecutive Directors and two NonIndependent Non Executive Directors.
The Company became compliant with the Code on 2 October 2017 following the appointment of two Independent NonExecutive Directors Andrew Didham and Richard Meddings.
C.3.1 The Board should establish an audit committee of at least three independent nonexecutive directors.
Throughout the year the Committee was comprised of at least three Independent NonExecutive Directors in addition to Lord Sassoon a NonIndependent NonExecutive Director.
D.2.1 The Board should establish a remuneration committee of at least three independent non executive directors.
Throughout the year the Committee was comprised of at least three Independent NonExecutive Directors in addition to Lord Sassoon and Adam Keswick both of whom are NonIndependent NonExecutive Directors.
The Nominations Committee has led a formal and rigorous process to replace outgoing members of the Board.
Every effort has been made to search for individuals with the talent and experience to complement the existing Board.
As a result of that process Andrew Didham and Richard Meddings were appointed as Independent NonExecutive Director on 2 October 2017.
Lynne Peacock has also been appointed as an Independent NonExecutive Director with effect from 1 May 2018 and therefore the Board balance will comply with Code provision B.1.2 from that date.
Since 1997 other than for three months in 2016 JLT has had two representatives of Jardine Matheson on the Board.
Jardine
Matheson has a 40.16% interest in the Company.
As a result the Jardine Mathesonappointed Directors are considered to be NonIndependent NonExecutive Directors.
The relationship with Jardine Matheson is maintained on an arms length basis as detailed on page 66 and in note 32 on page 160.
The Jardine Mathesonappointed Directors Lord Sassoon and Adam Keswick will be standing for reelection at the Companys AGM.
In addition to their Board roles the Jardine Mathesonappointed Directors hold Committee memberships.
Lord Sassoon is a member of the Audit and Risk Nominations and Remuneration Committees and Adam Keswick is a member of the Nominations and Remuneration Committees.
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE JLT has always sought to satisfy shareholders with an appropriate explanation of any areas where it does not comply with the Code and to provide a full explanation for retaining the Jardine Matheson Directors on the Board and relevant Committees.
The Board strongly believes that the continuation of these arrangements is in the best interests of the Companys shareholders for the following reasons we believe our Board functions very well and has an appropriate combination of Independent and Non Independent NonExecutive Directors in line with the Codes principle that no individual or small group of individuals should be able to dominate the Boards decisionmaking there are at least three currently four Independent NonExecutive Directors on each Committee and each Committee comprises a majority of Independent
Committee effectiveness reviews confirm that each Committee is considered to operate and discharge its duties and responsibilities effectively as currently constituted the business and profits of JLT have grown significantly in recent years and we believe the overall contribution of Jardine Matheson and its nominated Directors has been material to this Jardine Matheson has clearly demonstrated that it is a committed longterm shareholder.
We believe that its interests are fundamentally aligned to the interest of other shareholders.
In the Boards experience over many years conflicts of interest between Jardine Matheson and the other shareholders of JLT rarely occur but if they do for example where Jardine Matheson has sought to increase its shareholding in JLT the Jardine Mathesonappointed Directors recuse themselves from any relevant discussions we believe that the continuing support of Jardine Matheson has been and will continue to be of great importance to the success of JLT especially in Asia a key growth market for the Company where Jardine Mathesons reputation and connections are of great value to us and as individuals Lord Sassoon and Adam Keswick bring skills and experience that complement the balance of the Board and its Committees supporting an effective decisionmaking process and providing appropriate levels of challenge to the Executive management.
The following table describes in more detail how we have complied with the respective provisions of the Code.
A1 The role of the Board The Board is responsible for setting the Companys strategy and monitoring the performance of the Company as a whole.
Details of matters discussed by the Board are set out on page 64.
A.
LEADERSHIP
B1 The composition of the Board The Nominations Committee annually reviews the balance and experience of the Board.
The Nominations Committee has also considered the issue of director independence and knowledge and confirmed that the Directors have the right level of experience to promote the longterm performance of the
Details of the Directors experience are shown in the chart on page 62.
B2 Appointments to the Board The process for the appointment of new Directors to the Board is led by the Nominations Committee.
Further details of the appointments made during the year and succession planning activities can be found in the Nominations Committee Report on pages 75 to 77.
B3 Commitment NonExecutive Directors are advised on appointment of the time commitment expected of them and this is reviewed regularly.
External appointments which might impact on existing time commitments must be agreed with the Chairman.
B.
EFFECTIVENESS
A2 Division of Responsibilities The roles of the Chairman and Group Chief Executive are distinctly separate and are clearly defined.
The Chairman Geoffrey Howe is responsible for the leadership and governance of the Board.
The Group Chief Executive Dominic Burke is responsible for the daytoday operation of the business in line with the strategy and commercial objectives agreed by the Board.
He is also responsible for promoting and conducting the affairs of the Company with the highest standards of ethics integrity and corporate governance.
A3 The Chairman The Chairman Geoffrey Howe is responsible for the leadership and governance of the Board ensuring its effectiveness setting agendas ensuring that the Directors receive accurate timely and clear information and that there is effective communication with shareholders.
He facilitates the effective contribution to the Board of the NonExecutive Directors in particular ensuring constructive relationships between the Executive and Non Executive Directors.
A4 NonExecutive Directors The NonExecutive Directors provide strong and robust independent oversight to the proceedings of the Board.
In addition they bring external experience from other financial services companies and international businesses.
The letters of appointment for the NonExecutive Directors are available for inspection at the AGM of the Company.
All NonExecutive Directors confirm on appointment they have sufficient time to fulfil their commitments.
Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION B4 Development All new Directors are invited to take part in a comprehensive induction programme.
Details of the programme undertaken by Andrew Didham and Richard Meddings who were appointed during the year are set out on page 65.
B5 Information and Support The Chairman and Group Company Secretary work together to ensure that all Directors receive full and accurate information in a timely manner.
B6 Evaluation The Board and Committees undertake evaluations every year.
Internal evaluations were performed in 2017 following an externally led review in 2016.
B7 Reelection All Directors were subject to shareholder election or reelection at the 2017 AGM and the same process will apply at the 2018 AGM.
C1 Financial and Business Reporting The Strategic Report which can be found on pages 2 to 55 sets out details of the Companys performance business model and strategy and the risks and uncertainties relating to the Companys future prospects.
C2 Risk Management and Internal Control The Board is responsible for the Groups risk management and internal control systems and for regularly reviewing their effectiveness.
The activities of the Audit and Risk Committee which supports the Board on this matter are described on pages 67 to 74 and the Risk Management Report is included on pages 41 to 45.
C3 Audit and Risk Committee and auditor The Board has delegated a number of responsibilities to the Audit and Risk Committee which is responsible for overseeing the Companys financial reporting processes internal controls and risk management framework and the work undertaken by the external auditor.
E1 Dialogue with shareholders The Board seeks to engage actively with all shareholders.
Details of activity undertaken in this area can be found on page 66.
E2 Constructive use of the AGM The AGM provides the Board with an important opportunity to meet with shareholders.
All of the Directors are expected to attend and will be available to answer questions from shareholders attending the meeting.
C.
ACCOUNTABILITY
D1 The level and components of remuneration.
The Remuneration Committee is responsible for setting the Companys remuneration policy.
The key principles and framework adopted by the Committee are set out in the Directors Remuneration Report on pages 80 to 81.
D2 Procedure The Remuneration Committee is responsible for setting the remuneration of all Executive Directors.
Details of the composition and the activities of the Committee are set out in the Directors Remuneration Report on pages 78 to 90.
D.
REMUNERATION
E.
RELATIONSHIP WITH SHAREHOLDERS
The biographical details of the currently serving Directors are set out on pages 58 to 59.
The Directors who served during the year were Geoffrey Howe Dominic Burke Mark Drummond Brady Charles Rozes Bruce CarnegieBrown retired from the Board on 14 June 2017 Annette Court Jonathan Dawson retired from the Board on 3 October 2017 Adam Keswick Lord Sassoon Nicholas Walsh Richard Meddings appointed to the Board on 2 October 2017 and Andrew Didham appointed to the Board on 2 October 2017.
The interests of current Directors and their immediate families in the shares of the Company along with details of Directors share options are contained in the Directors Remuneration Report set out on pages 78 to 90.
At no time during the year did any of the Directors have a material interest in any significant contract with the Company or any of its subsidiaries.
PRINCIPAL ACTIVITIES AND STRATEGIC REPORT Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc is a holding company domiciled and incorporated in the UK with Registered Number as an international group of insurance brokers risk specialists and employee benefits consultants.
The Strategic Report on pages 2 to 55 covers the activities of the Group its performance during the year and likely future developments.
RESULTS AND DIVIDENDS The financial statements for the Company for the year to 31 December 2017 are detailed on pages 171 to 175.
The Directors recommend that a final dividend of 21.8 pence per share be paid on 8 May 2018 to shareholders on the register on 3 April 2018.
This brings the total dividend for the year to 34.0 pence per share an overall increase of 5.6% over the previous year.
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE POST BALANCE SHEET EVENTS On 14 February 2018 the Group acquired subject to FCA approval a 100% ownership interest in Chartwell Healthcare Ltd one of the leading Private Medical Insurance brokers in the SME market in the UK.
On 28 February 2018 the Group announced the acquisition of a 100% ownership interest in International Risk Consultants brokers in the US with operations in Hong Kong and Brazil.
EMPLOYMENT POLICIES The Group aims to provide an environment where individuals can excel.
Wide share ownership share option schemes and the Share Incentive Plan encourage employee engagement.
Regular briefings and consultation using the JLT intranet where possible keeps colleagues informed about the Groups performance and matters that affect them as employees.
Additionally we offer a wide range of benefits for colleagues including health and lifestyle benefits.
During 2017 JLT refreshed the Employee Handbook bringing together a number of inforce policies and ensuring that current employees and new joiners have valid information on their contractual terms and related JLT policies to hand.
JLT operates a strict regulatory framework under which all colleagues are required to undertake and complete a number of training modules on an annual or biannual basis.
The purpose of the regulatory training is to refresh employees understanding and awareness of a number of core risks and the actions needed to manage them for the benefit of clients and JLT help protect employees from breaching JLT Policy and for UK employees aid them to comply with legal and regulatory requirements including those of the Financial Conduct Authority and the UK Information Commissioner.
Further information about the Groups employment practices can be found in the Corporate Responsibility Report on pages JLT is an equal opportunities employer and engages in programmes to attract greater diversity of talent.
Programmes include increasing the number of apprenticeships in the business broadening the intake of graduates and establishing targeted management programmes to support inclusive leadership at all levels of the organisation.
Our recruitment and selection policy supports this as we focus on a candidates skills experiences and potential within the business.
Everyone is judged fairly on their merits.
We promote fair and consistent treatment and ensure that colleagues are promoted and developed on the basis of their ability.
We are committed to ensuring that disabled people are afforded equality of opportunity in respect of entering and continuing employment with us.
If existing colleagues become disabled every effort is made to ensure that their employment with the Group continues.
If such colleagues are unable to continue to work every effort is made to safeguard their financial interest.
The Group aims to provide recruitment training development and promotion opportunities that are identical as far as possible for disabled and nondisabled colleagues.
For further information about our Diversity and Inclusion initiativessite or refer to the Corporate Responsibility Report on pages 50 to 51.
POLITICAL DONATIONS It is JLT Group policy not to make donations to any political party.
SUBSTANTIAL SHAREHOLDINGS At 31 December 2017 and 22 February 2018 the latest practicable date prior to the date of this Report the Company had been notified of the following significant holdings of voting rights in its shares 31 December 22 February Shareholder % of voting rights % of voting rights JMH Investments Limited 40.16 40.16 MFS Investment Management 7.01 7.00 Royal Bank of Canada EBT Trustee STATEMENT OF DIRECTORS RESPONSIBILITIES The Directors are responsible for preparing the Annual Report the Directors Remuneration Report and the financial statements in accordance with applicable law and regulations.
Company law requires the Directors to prepare financial statements for each financial year.
Under that law the Directors have prepared the Group financial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and the parent Company financial statements in accordance with United Kingdom Generally Accepted Accounting Practice United Kingdom Accounting Standards and applicable law.
Under company law the Directors must not approve the financial statements unless they are satisfied that they give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Group and the Company and of the profit or loss of the Group and the Company for that period.
Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION In preparing these financial statements the Directors are required to select suitable accounting policies and then apply them consistently make judgements and accounting estimates that are reasonable and prudent state whether applicable IFRSs as adopted by the European Union have been followed for the group financial statements and United Kingdom Accounting Standards comprising FRS 101 have been followed for the Company financial statements subject to any material departures disclosed and explained in the financial statements and prepare the financial statements on a going concern basis unless it is inappropriate to presume that the Company will continue in business.
The Directors are responsible for keeping adequate accounting records that are sufficient to show and explain the Companys transactions and disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the financial position of the Company and the Group and enable them to ensure that the financial statements and the Directors Remuneration Report comply with the Companies Act 2006 and as regards the Group financial statements Article 4 of the IAS Regulation.
They are also responsible for safeguarding the assets of the Company and the Group and hence for taking reasonable steps for the prevention and detection of fraud and other irregularities.
The Directors are responsible for the maintenance and integrity of the corporate and financial information included on the Companys website.
Legislation in the United Kingdom governing the preparation and dissemination of financial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
The Directors consider that the Annual Report and Financial Statements taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Companys position performance business model and strategy.
Each of the Directors whose names and functions are listed on pages 58 and 59 confirms that to the best of their knowledge the Company financial statements which have been prepared in accordance with United Kingdom Generally Accepted Accounting Practice United Kingdom Accounting Standards comprising FRS 101 Reduced Disclosure Framework and applicable law give a true and fair view of the assets liabilities financial position and profit of the Company the Group financial statements which have been prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the EU give a true and fair view of the assets liabilities financial position and profit of the Group and the Strategic Report contained in pages 2 to 55 of the Annual Report includes a fair review of the development and performance of the business and the position of the Group together with a description of the principal risks and uncertainties that it faces.
Each Director as at the date of this Report further confirms that so far as the Director is aware there is no relevant audit information of which the Companys auditor is unaware and the Director has taken all the steps that he ought to have taken as a Director in order to make himself aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that the Companys auditor is aware of that information.
This confirmation is given and should be interpreted in accordance with the provisions of Section 418 of the Companies Act 2006.
JLT VIABILITY STATEMENT As prescribed by provision C.2.2 of the UK Corporate Governance Code the UK Code the Board has conducted a detailed assessment of those risk events that could threaten JLTs ability to continue to operate and meet its liabilities as they fall due over a threeyear period.
This time scale is believed to be appropriate for the following reasons a threeyear period aligns with JLTs business and strategic planning process and the short business cycles associated with general insurance given the environment JLT operates in the use of any time period greater than three years means increasing the level of uncertainty over key assumptions used within the assessment the stress and scenario tests are considered over a three year period as applicable a period which provides management with the opportunity to implement mitigations to return the business to normal trading conditions and difficulty or inability to accurately predict the nature and impact of environmental factors that could have a bearing on the Group with a crystallisation period in excess of three years.
The Companys principal risks are at the heart of this rigorous assessment which included the following core components Financial sensitivity testing  A series of key financial metrics are stressed including levels of planned revenue the development of key strategic operations changes in foreign exchange and interest rates and cash flow Key risk testing  Assessing the impact of a combination of principal risks crystallising during the viability period.
Risks captured within the scenario testing include Litigation Non EandO Information SecurityCyber Privacy Loss of Revenue Bribery and Corruption and Competition 96 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE Reverse stress testing  Estimating the quantum of a loss which may ultimately threaten the Companys viability if not effectively managed.
This is then reviewed in the context of two of the key principal risks facing JLT EandO risk and Cyber risk and Principal risks and environmental factors  Reviewing the Companys principal risks in the context of the key environmental factors and considerations over the next three years.
These included key trends issues uncertainties such as the regulatory environment and disruptive technology known potentially impactful events and emerging risks for example geopolitical risk.
The financial model incorporates the Groups 2018 budget and a series of projections for 2019 to 2020.
This model is the basis on which the results of stressing the firms cash flow and balance sheet are derived.
As a result of this assessment the Directors can confirm it is their reasonable expectation that over the next three years the Company will continue to operate and meet its ongoing liabilities as they fall due.
This statement is underpinned by various mitigating factors including the Companys control environment capital requirements and resources together with the quality and accessibility of its funding facilities.
GOING CONCERN The Strategic Report on pages 2 to 55 includes information on the Group structure the performance of our businesses the markets in which we operate and the principal risks and uncertainties faced by the business.
The Financial Statements on pages 100 to 169 include information on our Group financial results cash flow and balance sheet position.
The Directors have also considered the Groups cash flow projections presented in the review of the budget for the full year to 31 December 2018 as well as work undertaken for the Viability Statement.
The Directors are satisfied that these cash flow projections taking into account reasonably possible risk sensitivities associated with these forecasts and the Groups current funding and facilities alongside the Groups funding strategy show that the Group will continue to operate and meet its liabilities for a period of at least 12 months from the date of approval of the financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017.
The Directors therefore consider it appropriate to continue to adopt the going concern basis of accounting in accordance with Guidance on Risk Management Internal Control and Related Financial and Business Reporting issued by the FRC in September 2014 in preparing the financial statements.
There has been no significant change in the financial or trading position of the Group since 31 December 2017.
OTHER STATUTORY INFORMATION Directors Indemnity and Insurance The Company provides the appropriate level of Directors and Officers Liability Insurance in respect of any legal actions brought against its Directors in addition to the indemnity included in the Companys Articles of Association.
Neither the insurance nor the indemnity provides cover where the relevant Director or Officer acted fraudulently or dishonestly.
SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION SHARE CAPITAL The issued share capital of the Company and details of movements in the share capital are shown in note 24 to the financial statements.
As at 31 December 2017 the issued share capital consisted of 220181007 ordinary shares of 5 pence each of which 1143131 shares were held as treasury shares for which voting rights are not exercised.
The Company has one class of share capital being ordinary shares of 5 pence each and all the shares rank pari passu.
The holders of ordinary shares on the record date are entitled to receive dividends.
No person holds securities carrying special rights with regard to control of the Company.
The shares are admitted to trading on the London Stock Exchange and may be traded through the CREST system.
The Board has the power to implement the purchase by the Company of its own shares in accordance with the power granted at the AGM each year and will be seeking renewal of that power at the forthcoming AGM within the limits set out in the notice of that meeting.
The Company did not purchase any of its own shares during the year.
All the Companys share schemes contain provisions relating to a change of control.
Outstanding options and awards would normally vest and become exercisable on a change of control subject to the satisfaction of any performance conditions as may be appropriate at that time.
SHARES HELD IN TRUST As at 31 December 2017 the Jardine Lloyd Thompson Employee Benefit Trust the Trust held 7557229 shares in the Company representing 3.45% of the issued capital excluding treasury shares.
As of 22 February 2018 being the latest practicable date prior to the date of this Report the Trust held 7492791 shares representing 3.42% of the issued capital excluding treasury shares.
In relation to LR 9.8.4R12 and 13 the Trustees of the JLT Employee Benefit Trust agree to waive dividends on the shares held by the Trust to meet the awards under the long term incentive plans and the Senior Executive Share Scheme.
Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION DIVIDENDS AND DISTRIBUTIONS Shareholders can declare final dividends by passing an ordinary resolution but the amount of the dividend cannot exceed the amount recommended by the Board.
The Board can pay interim dividends whenever the financial position of the Company in the opinion of the Board justifies such payment.
The Board can withhold payment of all or any part of any dividend or other monies payable in respect of the Companys shares from any person with a 0.25% interest as set out in the Articles if that person has been served with a notice after failure to provide the Company with information concerning interests in those shares required to be provided under the Companies Act .
The Directors may also retain any dividends payable on shares on which the Company has a lien and may apply the same in or towards satisfaction of the debts liabilities or engagements in respect of which the lien exists.
VOTING RIGHTS On a show of hands at a general meeting every member present in person has one vote and on a poll every member who is present in person or by proxy has one vote for each share held.
In the case of joint holders of a share the vote of the senior holder who tenders a vote whether in person or by proxy will be accepted to the exclusion of the votes of the other joint holders and for this purpose seniority will be determined by the order in which the names stand in the Register of Members in respect of the share.
Voting rights in relation to treasury shares are suspended and the voting rights are not normally exercised in respect of the shares held in the Employee Benefit Trust which are used to satisfy awards made under the Companys share plans.
RESTRICTIONS ON VOTING No member unless the Directors otherwise determine is entitled to vote either in person or by proxy at any general meeting in respect of any shares held by the member if any call or other sum then payable by the member in respect of that share remains unpaid.
In addition no member is entitled to vote if the member has been served with a notice after failure to provide the Company with information concerning interests in those shares required to be provided under the Companies Act.
DEADLINES FOR VOTING Votes may be exercised in person by proxy or in relation to corporate members by corporate representative.
The Articles provide a deadline for submission of proxy forms of not less than 48 hours before the time appointed for the holding of the meeting or adjourned meeting and the notice of AGM will specify the deadline for exercising voting rights.
A member that is a corporation may appoint an individual to act on its behalf at a general meeting or class meetings as a corporate representative.
The person so authorised shall be entitled to exercise the same powers on behalf of such corporation as the corporation could exercise if it were an individual member of the Company.
VARIATION OF RIGHTS If at any time the capital of the Company is divided into different classes of shares then subject to statute the Articles specify that rights attached to any class of shares may be varied with the written consent of the holders of at least 75% in nominal value of the issued shares of that class or with the sanction of a special resolution passed at a separate general meeting of the holders of those shares.
At every such separate general meeting the quorum is two persons holding or representing by proxy at least one third in nominal value of the issued shares of the class calculated excluding any shares held as treasury shares.
PURCHASE OF OWN SHARES Shareholders approved the authority for the Company to buy back up to 10% of its own ordinary shares by market purchase until the conclusion of the AGM to be held this year.
We will not be seeking shareholder approval for a Rule 9 dispensation in relation to this authority pursuant to the Takeover Code.
This means that in the event that the directors were to initiate a buyback in order to avoid triggering a mandatory offer obligation upon Jardine Matheson Holdings Limited JMH under Rule 37 of the Takeover Code JMH would need to participate in any such buyback so that its overall percentage holding which at 22 February 2018 was 40.16% did not increase following the buyback.
Although the Company has not utilised the authority to buy back shares since 2008 the Board believes that it would be in the interests of all shareholders for the Company to continue to have the right to purchase its own shares in the market in appropriate circumstances.
We would only exercise this authority if we believe that it is in the best interest of shareholders and would result in an improvement in earnings per share.
ARTICLES OF ASSOCIATION The powers of the Directors are determined by UK legislation and the Articles of Association.
The Directors are authorised to issue and allot shares and to undertake purchases of Company shares subject to shareholder approval at the AGM.
Any amendment of the Articles requires shareholder approval in accordance with legislation in force from time to time.
Copies will be available at the Companys AGM and can also be accessed on the Groups websitesite ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING The 2018 AGM will be held at 12.00 noon on 1 May 2018 at the St Botolph Building 138 Houndsditch London EC3A 7AW.
Full details will be included in the Notice of Meeting.
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE INDEPENDENT AUDITOR Following review the Board proposes that PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP are reappointed as the Company auditor.
A resolution proposing this will be put to the AGM.
CAUTIONARY STATEMENT REGARDING FORWARDLOOKING INFORMATION Where this document contains forwardlooking statements these are made by the Directors in good faith based on the information available to them at the time of their approval of this Annual Report and Financial Statements.
These statements should be treated with caution due to the inherent risks and uncertainties underlying any such forwardlooking information.
The Group cautions investors that a number of factors including matters referred to in this document could cause actual results to differ materially from those contained in any forwardlooking statement.
Such factors include but are not limited to the principal risks and financial risks discussed in the Risk Management Report on pages 41 to 45.
Neither the Group nor any of the Directors provides any representation assurance or guarantee that the occurrence of the events expressed or implied in any forwardlooking statements in this document will actually occur.
Undue reliance should not be placed on these forwardlooking statements.
The Group undertakes no obligation to publicly update or revise any forwardlooking statement whether as a result of new information future events or otherwise.
ADDITIONAL DISCLOSURES The Company has chosen in accordance with Section 414 c11 of the Companies Act 2006 to include certain matters in its Strategic Report that would otherwise be required to be disclosed in this Directors Report.
The Strategic Report on pages 2 to 55 provides an overview of the Companys business its position and performance during the year ended 31 December 2017.
It also includes the following information information about greenhouse gas emissions page 47 and 48 an indication of likely future developments in the business of the Company page 2 to 55 and use of financial instruments information on the Groups financial risk management objectives and policies its exposure to credit risk and foreign currency risk and its use of financial instruments page 41 to 45.
For compliance with Rules 4.1.5 R 2 and DTR 4.1.8 R of the FCAs Disclosure Guidance and Transparency Rules the content of the Management Report can be found in the Strategic Report and the Directors Report on pages 2 to 55 and pages 91 to 98 respectively.
Disclosures required by Listing Rule 9.8.4 C R can be found at the locations provided in the table below Section Subject Location 1 Interest capitalised Not applicable 2 Publication of unaudited financial information Not applicable 3 NA Section 3 removed from the FCA handbook Not applicable 4 Longterm incentive schemes Page 124 5 Director waiver of emoluments Not applicable 6 Director waiver of future emoluments Not applicable 7 Non preemptive issues of shares for cash Not applicable 8 Non preemptive issues by a major subsidiary undertaking Not applicable 9 Any participation in a placing by a listed subsidiary undertaking Not applicable 10 Contracts of significance Not applicable 11 Provision of services by a controlling shareholder Not applicable 12 Shareholder waivers of dividend Page 96 13 Shareholder waiver of future dividend Page 96 14 Agreements with controlling shareholders Page 66 By Order of the Board Darren Lennark Group Company Secretary 28 February 2018 Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 99 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION
Independent Auditors Report
Consolidated Income Statement Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income Consolidated Balance Sheet Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows
Accounting
Policies
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Contains the supporting notes to the financial statements which provide further detail and analysis Alternative income statement Segment information
Investment income Finance income and costs Employee information Services provided by the Companys auditor and its associates Income tax expense Earnings per share
Goodwill
Other intangible assets
Investments in associates
Derivative financial instruments Trade and other receivables Cash and cash equivalents Trade and other payables Financial instruments by category
Deferred income taxes
Share capital and premium Noncontrolling interests Other reserves Qualifying Employee Share Ownership Trust Cash generated from operations Business combinations Business disposals
Relatedparty transactions
Subsequent events Subsidiaries and associated companies COMP ANY
ST A TEMENTS Includes UK GAAP accounts of the company Income Statement Balance Sheet Statement of Changes in Equity
Accounting
Policies
Notes to the Company Financial Statements FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Includes the report of the Independent Auditor and the primary reporting statements as well as the accounting policies under which the financial statements have been prepared.
100 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS REPOR T
THE AUDIT OF THE FINANCIAL ST A TEMENTS
In our opinion Jar dine
Thompson Gr oup plc s gr oup financial statements and company financial statements the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the groups and of the companys affairs as at 31 December and of the gr oup s and the company s pr ofit and the gr oup s cash flows for the year then ended the gr oup financial statements have been pr operly prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the Eur opean
Accepted Accounting Practice United Kingdom Accounting Standar ds comprising
Reduced
Disclosur e
Article 4 of the IAS Regulation.
W e have audited the financial statements included within the Annual Report which comprise the gr oup and par ent company Balance Sheet as at 31 December 2017 the gr oup and parent company Income Statements and Statements of Compr ehensive Income the gr oup Statement of Cash Flows and the group and parent company Statements of Changes in accounting policies.
Our opinion is consistent with our reporting to the Audit Committee.
Basis for opinion We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standar ds on Auditing UK ISAs UK and applicable law .
Our r esponsibilities under ISAs UK ar e further described in the Auditors r esponsibilities for the audit of the financial statements section of our report.
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is suf ficient and appr opriate to pr ovide a basis for our opinion.
Independence
We remained independent of the group in accordance with the ethical requirements that are relevant to our audit of the financial statements in the UK which includes the FRC s Ethical Standar d as applicable to listed public inter est entities and we have fulfilled our other ethical r esponsibilities in accor dance with these requirements.
T o the best of our knowledge and belief we declar e that non audit services prohibited by the FRCs Ethical Standard were not provided to the group or the company.
Other
31 December 2017.
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS
Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 101 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION The scope of our audit statements.
In particular we looked at wher e the dir ectors made subjective judgements for example in r espect of significant accounting estimates that involved making assumptions and considering future events that are inherently uncertain.
We gained an understanding of the legal and regulatory framework applicable to the group and the industries in which it operates and consider ed the risk of acts by the gr oup which wer e contrary to applicable laws and r egulations including fraud.
W e designed audit pr ocedur es at gr oup and significant component level to r espond to the risk r ecognising that the risk of not detecting a material misstatement due to fraud is higher than the risk of not detecting one r esulting fr om err or as fraud may involve deliberate concealment by for example forgery or intentional misr epr esentations or thr ough collusion.
W e focused on laws and regulations that could give rise to a material misstatement in the gr oup and company financial statements including but not limited to the Companies Act the Listing Rules Pensions legislation UK tax legislation and equivalent local laws and r egulations applicable to significant component teams.
Our tests included but wer e not limited to r eview of the financial statement disclosur es to underlying supporting documentation r eview of corr espondence with and r eports to the r egulators r eview of corr espondence with legal advisors enquiries of management r eview of significant component auditors work and review of internal audit reports in so far as they r elated to the financial statements.
Ther e ar e inherent limitations in the audit procedures described above and the further removed noncompliance with laws and regulations is fr om the events and transactions r eflected in the financial statements the less likely we would become awar e of it.
We did not identify any key audit matters relating to irr egularities including fraud.
As in all of our audits we also addr essed the risk of management override of inter nal contr ols including testing journals and evaluating whether there was evidence of bias by the directors that represented a risk of material misstatement due to fraud.
Materiality
Audit scope Area of focus exceptional items.
Overall
W e scoped the audit based on entities that significantly contribute to underlying pr ofit befor e tax gr eater than 15% ther eafter based on material components in or der to obtain suf ficient coverage of the gr oup.
W e conducted full scope audits of the financial information of 14 r eporting entities across six countries.
W e conducted specified pr ocedur e r eviews of financial information of two r eporting entities across two countries.
Certain gr oup functions and entities including those covering tr easury taxation and pensions were also subject to full scope audits.
T aken together these territories and functions wher e we performed our pr ocedur es accounted for 73% of gr oup r evenue and 77% of underlying pr ofit befor e tax.
We focused on the following key audit matters Complex and judgemental areas of revenue recognition.
Completeness and valuation of litigation provisions.
Valuation and impairment of intangible assets.
V aluation of pension deficit.
OUR AUDIT APPROACH
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT CONTINUED 102 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Key audit matters team.
These matters and any comments we make on the r esults of our pr ocedur es ther eon wer e addr essed in the context of our audit of the financial statements as a whole and in forming our opinion ther eon and we do not pr ovide a separate opinion on these matters.
This is not a complete list of all risks identified by our audit.
Key audit matter How our audit addressed the key audit matter Complex and judgemental areas of revenue recognition The significant accounting policies section of the financial statements discloses JL T s r evenue accounting policy r efer to page Revenue is the largest balance in the group financial statements.
The group has a number of revenue streams for which the timing and extent of revenue recognition is considered to be more complex or judgemental for example r evenue str eams with ongoing performance conditions long term r evenue str eams which generate significant accrued income balances and third party revenue sharing arrangements.
We have performed walkthroughs of key controls relevant to material revenue streams and performed testing over these controls in order to obtain comfort over the cut of f occurr ence and accuracy of r evenue around the group.
We substantively tested the timing of recognising revenue in material revenue streams by reviewing and assessing contractual terms and performance obligations to customers.
We substantively tested accrued and deferred revenue by evaluating the appropriateness of the key assumptions and considering the accuracy of prior year estimates against the current year realisation which did not identify unusual or irregular items.
W e r eviewed unusual or complex contracts for example thir d party pay away arrangements and assessed them to ensur e ther e is appropriate revenue recognition in line with the terms of the contract.
Based on the results of our testing we did not identify any areas where we deemed revenue recognition was inappropriate.
Completeness and valuation of litigation provisions As at 31 December 2017 the Gr oup had litigation pr ovision of 2016 7.4m.
The significant accounting policies section of the financial statements discloses JL T s accounting policy in r elation to litigation pr ovisions r efer to page 115 and Note 23 outlines the detailed provision disclosures.
There is an inherent level of uncertainty that surrounds litigation provisions in relation to potential and actual claims where clients or third parties believe there has been fault in the services provided.
Consequently a high degree of management judgement is involved in determining the level of provision required.
We updated our understanding of managements process to identify and evaluate provisions for potential and outstanding litigation for the group.
We met with management to discuss new significant legal provisions as well as changes to significant existing potential and actual legal provisions.
We reviewed the EandO register maintained by the Group Legal department as well as minutes of committee meetings.
In instances wher e exter nal legal counsel was engaged we obtained external confirmations.
We substantively tested legal expenses across the Group to identify any other potential areas of unrecorded potential and actual claims.
W e understood the underlying assumptions rationale and sensitivities having regard to the potential for bias.
We considered the appropriateness of the judgements and sensitivities management have adopted to determine any significant legal pr ovisions as well as the r esulting disclosur es.
We have reviewed the accuracy of managements estimates in the prior years against actual settlements or current estimates.
Based on the work performed we found that the assumptions used were supported by the evidence we obtained.
The natur e of the pr ovisions being determined on an assessment of legal outcomes means any final settlement is subject to significant uncertainty.
The r esults could dif fer possibly materially fr om the amounts pr ovided.
Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 103 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT CONTINUED
Area of focus How our audit addressed the key audit matter Valuation and impairment of intangible assets As at 31
2017 the gr oup had goodwill of 577.8m 2016 543.0m and intangible assets of 109.0m 2016 102.0m.
The significant accounting policies section of the financial statements discloses JLTs accounting policy in relation to goodwill and intangibles r efer to page 113 and Notes 11 and outline the detailed goodwill and intangible disclosures.
Based on the r esults of their impairment analysis management determined there was headroom of the recoverable amount above the net asset value in each of the gr oup s Cash Generating Units and therefore there was no impairment.
We focused on this area because the determination of whether or not certain elements of goodwill and intangible assets were impaired involves complex and subjective judgements by the Directors about the future results of the relevant parts of the business.
Management calculates the r ecoverable amount by using value in use
W ACC by
W e evaluated the r esults of management s impairment assessment including an assessment of the appropriateness of the methodology used to perform this and performed substantive testing of all inputs into their valuation such as agreeing to the approved budgets and checking historical performance against the budget.
We considered the appropriateness of the following key assumptions within managements valuation Terminal growth rates in the for ecasts by comparing them to economic and industry for ecasts and WACC by assessing the cost of capital for the company and comparable organisations.
We performed sensitivity analysis around the key assumptions set out above to ascertain the extent of change in those assumptions that either individually or collectively would be required for goodwill to be impaired.
Based on our testing we determined that the impairment assessment performed is reasonable based on the current business plans and historical performance for both goodwill and significant intangible assets.
Valuation of pension deficit As at 31
2017 the net pension liability is 169.3m 2016 The significant accounting policies section of the financial statements discloses JLTs accounting policy in relation to the various pension arrangements r efer to page and Note 31 outlines the detailed pension disclosures.
We focus on this area as the pension scheme obligation is highly sensitive to changes in the assumptions used within the model to calculate the valuation and subsequent charge or credit to the
Other
Compr ehensive
OCI.
Those assumptions to which the liability is most sensitive are as follows Discount rate Under IAS the discount rate should be set with reference to the yield on high quality corporate bonds of term appropriate to the duration of the liabilities.
Future rates of price inflation the level of future pension payments is linked to price inflation indices.
Various investment market statistics are used to form a view on the long term average rates of price retail and consumer price inflation.
Post r etir ement mortality projections.
These projections will depend on future expectations of improvements in life expectancy and are therefore uncertain.
We tested the controls over the completeness and accuracy of pension scheme data on which the pension liability assumptions are based.
We assessed the appropriateness of the methodology used by management including the key assumptions used to value the UK pension liabilities Discount rate we consider ed the appr opriateness of the 2.45% discount rate assumption used by reference to the iBoxx AA 15 corporate bond index.
We reviewed the adjustment made by management to match the duration of the liabilities and compared this to assumptions adopted by other schemes with a similar duration.
Inflation rate we agreed the rates used by management for each of these elements to the Bank of England inflation curve.
Mortality we considered the appropriateness of the base tables selected for use by management by reference to the mortality experience analysis completed by the
Pension Scheme T rustees as part of the 2014 funding valuation.
From the evidence obtained we found the assumptions and methodology used to be appropriate.
We determined that there were no key audit matters applicable to the company to communicate in our report.
How we tailored the audit scope We tailored the scope of our audit to ensure that we performed enough work to be able to give an opinion on the financial statements as a whole taking into account the structur e of the gr oup and the company the accounting pr ocesses and contr ols and the industry in which they operate.
The group is organised on a worldwide basis into three main segments based on the services and pr oducts of fer ed Risk and Insurance Employee Benefits and Head Of fice and Other operations.
The Risk and Insurance business comprises JLTs global specialist and reinsurance broking activities.
The Employee healthcare and wealth management activities.
The Head Of fice and Other segment consists mainly of holding companies central administration functions the Gr oups captive insurance companies and the Groups investments in associates.
Ther e wer e thr ee financially significant components made up of JL T Specialty Limited Risk and Insurance JL T Reinsurance Br okers
Risk and Insurance and Jar dine
Thompson
Australia
Pty
Limited and its contr olled entities Risk and Insurance.
In addition we selected 11 further reporting entities based on their size and risk characteristics for full scope audits of their financial information and two further r eporting entities for specified pr ocedur es.
104 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS T aken together the territories and functions wher e we performed our audit work accounted for 73% of gr oup r evenue and 77% of underlying pr ofit befor e tax.
In establishing the overall approach to the group audit we determined the type of work that needed to be performed at the r eporting units by us the gr oup engagement team and component auditors fr om other under our instruction.
Where the work was performed by component auditors we determined the level of involvement we needed to have in the audit work at those reporting units to be able to conclude whether suf ficient appr opriate audit evidence had been obtained as a basis for our opinion on the group financial statements as a whole.
We issued instructions to each component engagement team.
As part of the supervision process the group engagement team visited JL T operations in Hong Kong Colombia Brazil the and the shared service operations in Mumbai.
We have held regular planning and coordination calls with our component audit teams.
During our half year review and year end audit we held weekly calls with each component audit team to ensure significant audit and accounting issues wer e discussed and insights are shared in a timely manner.
We have attended half year and year end results calls with local management and our component audit teams to understand the local businesses.
W e have r eviewed all inter of fice r eporting submissions fr om component audit teams.
We have continued to undertake r emote r eviews of significant component work papers this year reviewing Australia and the US.
Materiality
The scope of our audit was influenced by our application of materiality.
W e set certain quantitative thr esholds for materiality.
These together with qualitative considerations helped us to determine the scope of our audit and the natur e timing and extent of our audit pr ocedur es on the individual financial statement line items and disclosur es and in evaluating the ef fect of misstatements both individually and in aggr egate on the financial statements as a whole.
Based on our pr ofessional judgement we determined materiality for the financial statements as a whole as follows less than our overall gr oup materiality.
The range of materiality allocated across components was between 0.5m and 7.0m.
Certain components were audited to a local statutory audit materiality that was also less than our overall group materiality.
W e agr eed with the
Committee that we would r eport to them misstatements identified during our audit above 470000 Gr oup audit 2016 438000 and r easons.
Going concern In accor dance with ISAs UK we r eport as follows Group financial statements Company financial statements Overall materiality 9.5m 2016 8.6m.
How we determined it 5% of underlying pr ofit befor e tax which comprises pr ofit before tax adjusted for nonrecurring exceptional items.
0.5% of net assets.
Rationale for benchmark applied When reviewing financial performance management focus on underlying pr ofit that is pr ofit befor e tax excluding nonrecurring exceptional items.
It is this measure that is used both to discuss performance of the group with investors and in calculating employee bonuses and therefore we have concluded it is the most appropriate measure of performance against which to set our materiality benchmark.
As the company is the ultimate parent for the group and does not actively trade pr ofit is not seen as a key indicator .
Consequently net assets has been deemed as an appropriate benchmark given the nature of the company being that of a holding company.
Reporting obligation Outcome We are required to report if we have anything material to add or draw attention to in respect of the directors statement in the financial statements about whether the directors considered it appropriate to adopt the going concern basis of accounting in preparing the financial statements and the directors identification of any material uncertainties to the groups and the companys ability to continue as a going concern over a period of at least twelve months from the date of approval of the financial statements.
We have nothing material to add or to draw attention to.
However  because not all futur e events or conditions can be pr edicted this statement is not a guarantee as to the groups and companys ability to continue as a going concern.
We are required to report if the directors statement relating to Going Concer n in accor dance with Listing Rule is materially inconsistent with our knowledge obtained in the audit.
We have nothing to report.
Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 105 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT CONTINUED
REPOR TING ON OTHER INFORMA TION The other information comprises all of the information in the Annual Report other than the financial statements and our auditors report thereon.
The directors are responsible for the other information.
Our
In connection with our audit of the financial statements our r esponsibility is to r ead the other information and in doing so consider whether the other information is materially inconsistent with the financial statements or our knowledge obtained in the audit or otherwise appears to be materially misstated.
If we identify an apparent material inconsistency or material misstatement we ar e r equir ed to perform pr ocedur es to conclude whether there is a material misstatement of the financial statements or a material misstatement of the other information.
If based on the work we have performed we conclude that there is a material misstatement of this other information we ar e r equir ed to r eport that fact.
W e have nothing to report based on these responsibilities.
W ith r espect to the Strategic Report and Dir ectors Report we also considered whether the disclosures required by the UK Companies Act 2006 have been included.
Based on the responsibilities described above and our work undertaken in the course of the audit the Companies Act 2006 CA06 ISAs UK and the Listing Rules of the Financial
Authority
FCA r equir e us also to r eport certain opinions and matters as described below r equir ed by ISAs UK unless otherwise stated.
Strategic Report and Directors Report In our opinion based on the work undertaken in the course of the audit the information given in the Strategic Report and Directors Report for the year ended 31 December 2017 is consistent with the financial statements and has been pr epar ed in accor dance with applicable legal r equir ements.
CA06
In light of the knowledge and understanding of the group and company and their environment obtained in the course of the audit we did not identify any material misstatements in the
Report and Dir ectors
CA06
The directors assessment of the prospects of the group and of the principal risks that would threaten the solvency or liquidity of the group We have nothing material to add or draw attention to regarding
Annual Report that they have carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the gr oup including those that would thr eaten its business model futur e performance solvency or liquidity.
The disclosures in the Annual Report that describe those risks and explain how they are being managed or mitigated.
The directors explanation on pages 95 and 96 of the Annual Report as to how they have assessed the prospects of the gr oup over what period they have done so and why they consider that period to be appr opriate and their statement as to whether they have a reasonable expectation that the group will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the period of their assessment including any related disclosures drawing attention to any necessary qualifications or assumptions.
We have nothing to report having performed a review of the directors statement that they have carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the group and statement in relation to the longerterm viability of the group.
Our review was substantially less in scope than an audit and only consisted of making inquiries and considering the directors process supporting their statements checking that the statements ar e in alignment with the relevant provisions of the UK Corporate Gover nance the audit.
Listing
Rules
Other Code Provisions We have nothing to report in respect of our responsibility to report when
Annual
Report taken as whole to be fair balanced and understandable and pr ovides the information necessary for the members to assess the group s and company s position and performance business model and strategy is materially inconsistent with our knowledge of the group and company obtained in the course of performing our audit.
The section of the Annual Report on pages 69 and 70 describing the work of the Audit Committee does not appropriately address matters communicated by us to the Audit Committee.
The directors statement relating to the companys compliance with the Code does not properly disclose a departur e fr om a r elevant pr ovision of the
Listing
Rules for r eview by the auditors.
Directors Remuneration In our opinion the part of the Dir ectors Remuneration Report to be audited has been properly prepared in accordance with the
Act 2006.
CA06 106 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS RESPONSIBILITIES FOR THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND THE AUDIT Responsibilities of the directors for the financial statements As explained more fully in the Statement of Directors view .
The dir ectors ar e also responsible for such internal control as they determine is necessary to enable the pr eparation of financial statements that ar e fr ee fr om material misstatement whether due to fraud or error.
In pr eparing the financial statements the dir ectors ar e responsible for assessing the groups and the companys ability to continue as a going concer n disclosing as applicable matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless the directors either intend to liquidate the gr oup or the company or to cease operations or have no realistic alternative but to do so.
Auditors responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a whole ar e fr ee fr om material misstatement whether due to fraud or err or and to issue an auditors report that includes our opinion.
Reasonable assurance is high level of assurance but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accor dance with ISAs UK will always detect a material misstatement when it exists.
Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if individually or in the aggr egate they could r easonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these financial statements.
A further description of our responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements is located on the FRC s website at www . frc. iteauditorsresponsibilities.
This description forms part of our auditors report.
Use of this report
Chapter of
Companies
Act and for no other purpose.
W e do not in giving these opinions accept or assume responsibility for any other purpose or to any other person to whom this report is shown or into whose hands it may come save where expressly agreed by our prior consent in writing.
OTHER REQUIRED REPORTING Companies Act 2006 exception reporting Under the Companies Act 2006 we are required to report to you if in our opinion we have not received all the information and explanations we r equir e for our audit or adequate accounting records have not been kept by the company or r etur ns adequate for our audit have not been r eceived fr om branches not visited by us or certain disclosur es of dir ectors r emuneration specified by law ar e not made or the company financial statements and the part of the Directors Remuneration Report to be audited are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns.
We have no exceptions to report arising from this responsibility.
Appointment
Based on the r ecor ds available we wer e first appointed by the dir ectors in 1997 to audit the financial statements for the year ended 31 December 1997 and have been annually r eappointed by the members at the Annual General Meeting for subsequent financial periods.
The period of total uninterrupted engagement is 21 years covering the years ended 31 December to 31 December 2017.
Nick Wilks Senior Statutory Auditor for and on behalf of PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP Chartered Accountants and Statutory Auditors
28 February 2018 Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 107 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION CONSOLIDATED INCOME STATEMENT for the year ended 31 December 2017
Fees and commissions 2 1378554 1256556 Investment income 24 7474 4730 Total revenue 2 1386028 1261286 Salaries and associated expenses 6 861189 794363 Pr emises 70625 66849 Other operating costs 213862 209518 Depr eciation amortisation and impairment charges 3 36491 34951 Operating profit 123 203861 155605 Analysed as Operating profit before exceptional items 12 213743 Acquisition and integration costs 3 2605 Restructuring costs 3 Net litigation costs 3 9067 Net gainslosses on disposals 3 1835 Other exceptional items 3 45 Operating profit 123 203861 Finance costs 5 27327 24225 Finance income 5 2978 2147 Finance costs  net 5 24349 22078 Share of results of associates 2149 1353 Profit before taxation 12 181661 134880 Income tax expense 8 52980 44018 Profit for the year 128681 90862 Profit attributable to Owners of the parent 2 118378 81466 Noncontrolling interests 10303 9396 128681 90862 Earnings per share attributable to the owners of the parent during the year expressed in pence per share 9 Basic earnings per share 56.1p 38.6p Diluted earnings per share 54.7p 37.8p The notes on pages 112 to 169 form an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
108 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME for the year ended 31 December 2017
Profit for the year 128681 90862 Other comprehensive incomeexpense Items that will not be reclassified to profit or loss Remeasurement of postemployment benefit obligations 31 17985 71642 Taxation thereon 2599 11850 Total items that will not be reclassified to profit or loss 15386 59792 Items that may be reclassified subsequently to profit or loss Fair value gains net of tax availableforsale financial assets 86 42 availableforsale financial assets reclassified to the income statement  181 cash flow hedges 63657 41487 Currency translation differences 36829 105369 Total items that may be reclassified subsequently to profit or loss 26914 63743 Other comprehensive income net of tax 42300 3951 Total comprehensive income for the year 170981 94813 Attributable to Owners of the parent 162550 80889 Noncontrolling interests 8431 13924 170981 94813 The notes on pages 112 to 169 form an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 109 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEET as at 31 December 2017
NET ASSETS Noncurrent assets Goodwill 11 577778 543013 Other intangible assets 12 108954 101963 Pr operty plant and equipment 13 68645 64330 Investments in associates 14 53055 50928 Availableforsale financial assets 1520 16858 23805 Derivative financial instruments 1620 82569 117043 Retirement benefit surpluses 31 92 509 Deferred tax assets 22 54266 70088 962217 971679 Current assets Trade and other receivables 17 610506 588640 Derivative financial instruments 1620 5545 7930 Availableforsale financial assets 1520 115080 116933 Heldforsale financial assets 1520 189 Cash and cash equivalents 1820 1015087 939945 1746407 1653448 Current liabilities Borrowings 2021 19226 Trade and other payables 19 1256074 Derivative financial instruments 1620 10265 Current tax liabilities 10290 Pr ovisions for liabilities and charges 23 6865 Net current assets 443687 Noncurrent liabilities Borrowings 2021 690872 Trade and other payables 19 49475 Derivative financial instruments 1620 85516 Deferred tax liabilities 22 11411 Retirement benefit obligations 31 169376 Pr ovisions for liabilities and charges 23 1549 TOT AL EQUITY Capital and reserves attributable to the owners of the parent Ordinary shares 24 11008 11008 Share premium 2426 104111 104111 Fair value and hedging reserves 26 9290 54453 Exchange reserves 26 48604 83561 Retained earnings 204781 183919 Shareholders equity 377794 328146 Noncontrolling interests 25 19911 22764 397705 350910 The notes on pages 112 to 169 form an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
The consolidated financial statements on pages 107 to 169 were approved by the Board on 28 February 2018 and signed on its behalf by Charles Rozes Finance Director 110 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY for the year ended 31 December 2017
Ordinary
Other
Retained earnings
Non controlling interests
Balance at 1 January 2017 11008 Pr ofit for the year Other compr ehensive incomeexpense for the year 1872 42300 Total comprehensive income for the year Dividends 10 71593 71593 12004 83597 Amounts in respect of share based payments reversal of amortisation net of tax 29784  29784 shares acquired 16502 16502  16502 Acquisitions 29 Disposals 30 Transactions with noncontrolling interests 54591 54591 Balance at 31 December 2017 11008
Ordinary
Other
Retained earnings
Non controlling interests
Balance at 1 January 2016 11008 73967 227362 312337 18465 330802 Pr ofit for the year   81466 81466 9396 90862 Other compr ehensive incomeexpense for the year  59215 59792 577 4528 3951 Total comprehensive income for the year  59215 21674 80889 13924 94813 Dividends 10   67962 67962 8435 76397 Amounts in respect of share based payments reversal of amortisation net of tax   24952 24952  24952 shares acquired   17809 17809  17809 Acquisitions     1159 1159 Disposals     31 31 Transactions with noncontrolling interests   4298 4298  4298 Issue of share capital 24  37 Balance at 31 December 2016 11008 133219 183919 328146 22764 350910 The notes on pages 112 to 169 form an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 111 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS for the year ended 31 December 2017
Cash flows from operating activities Cash generated from operations 28 217357 166712 Interest paid 16835 17403 Interest received 9973 6639 Taxation paid 48993 46241 Increase in net insurance broking payables 41525 137510 203027 247217 Dividend received from associates 1084 935 Net cash generated from operating activities 204111 248152 Cash flows from investing activities Pur chase of pr operty plant and equipment 13 19127 Pur chase of other intangible assets 12 38676 Pr oceeds fr om disposal of pr operty plant and equipment 1049
Acquisition of associates 89 Pr oceeds fr om disposal of businesses net of cash disposed 30 1557 Pur chase of availablefor sale financial assets 15 115258 Pr oceeds fr om disposal of availablefor sale investments and deposits 15 121855 Pr oceeds fr om disposal of availablefor sale other investments 2244 303 Net cash used in investing activities 90767 147409 Cash flows from financing activities Dividends paid to owners of the parent 71161 66388 Pur chase of shar es 16502 17809 Pr oceeds fr om issuance of or dinary shar es 24  37 Pr oceeds fr om borr owings 110064 355 Repayments of borrowings 28232 5056 Dividends paid to noncontrolling interests 12004 8435 Net cash used in financing activities 17835 97296 Net increase in cash and cash equivalents 95509 3447 Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of year 939945 901087
Cash and cash equivalents at end of year 18 1015087 939945 The notes on pages 112 to 169 form an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
112 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES for the year ended 31 December 2017
OF PREP ARA TION Compliance with IFRS
Gr oup have been pr epar ed in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as adopted by the Eur opean
FRSs as adopted by the
IFRS
Interpr etations
IFRS
C and the Companies Act 2006 applicable to Companies reporting under IFRSs.
The financial statements comply with
Inter national
Standar ds Boar d
Historical cost convention at fair value.
ST ANDARDS AMENDMENTS AND INTERPRET A TIONS EFFECTIVE IN
January have had a material impact on the Group.
BASIS OF CONSOLIDATION
Subsidiaries ar e all entities including structur ed entities over which the Group has control.
The
Gr oup contr ols an entity when the Gr oup is exposed to or has rights to variable r etur ns fr om its involvement with the entity and has the ability to affect those returns through its power over the entity.
Subsidiaries are fully consolidated from the date on which control is transferred to the Group.
They are deconsolidated from the date that control ceases.
The Group uses the acquisition method of accounting to account for business combinations.
The consideration transferred for the acquisition of subsidiary is the fair values of the assets transferr ed the liabilities incurred and the equity interests issued by the Group.
The consideration transferred includes the fair value of any asset or liability resulting from a contingent consideration arrangement.
Identifiable
On an acquisitionbyacquisition basis the Gr oup r ecognises any noncontr olling interest in the acquiree either at fair value or at the noncontrolling interests proportionate share of the acquirees net assets.
Acquisitionrelated costs are expensed as incurred.
If
Groups previously held equity interest in the acquiree is remeasured to fair value at the acquisition date thr ough pr ofit or loss.
Any contingent consideration to be transferred by the Group is recognised at fair value at the acquisition date.
Subsequent changes to the fair value of the contingent consideration that is deemed to be an asset or liability is r ecognised in accor dance with charge to other comprehensive income.
Contingent consideration that is classified as equity is not r emeasur ed and its subsequent settlement is accounted for within equity.
The excess of the consideration transferr ed the amount of any non controlling interest in the acquiree and the acquisitiondate fair value of any pr evious equity inter est in the acquir ee over the fair value of the identifiable net assets acquired is recorded as goodwill.
If the total of consideration transferr ed noncontr olling inter est r ecognised and pr eviously held inter est measured is less than the fair value of the net assets of the subsidiary acquir ed in the case of bargain pur chase the dif fer ence is r ecognised directly in the income statement.
Inter company transactions balances income and expenses on transactions between Group companies are eliminated.
Accounting policies of subsidiaries have been changed where necessary to ensure consistency with the policies adopted by the Group.
Transactions with noncontrolling interests Transactions with noncontrolling interests that do not result in loss of contr ol ar e accounted for as equity transactions that is as transactions with the owners in their capacity as owners.
The difference between the fair value of any consideration paid and the relevant share acquired of the carrying value of net assets of the subsidiary is recorded in equity.
Gains or losses on disposals to noncontrolling interests are also recorded in equity.
Disposal of subsidiaries
Gr oup ceases to have contr ol any r etained inter est in the entity is r emeasur ed to its fair value at the date when contr ol is lost with the change in carrying amount r ecognised in pr ofit or loss.
The fair value is the initial carrying amount for the purposes of subsequently accounting for the r etained inter est as an associate joint ventur e or financial asset.
In addition any amounts pr eviously r ecognised in other comprehensive income in respect of that entity are accounted for as if the Group had directly disposed of the related assets or liabilities.
This may mean that amounts previously recognised in other compr ehensive income ar e r eclassified to pr ofit or loss.
Associates
Associates ar e entities over which the Gr oup has significant influence but not contr ol generally accompanying shar eholding of between 20% and 50% of the voting rights.
Investments
Under the equity method the investment is initially r ecognised at cost and the carrying amount is increased or decreased to recognise the investors shar e of the pr ofit or loss of the investee after the date of acquisition.
The
Gr oup s investment in associates includes goodwill identified on acquisition.
If
The
Gr oup s shar e of postacquisition pr ofit or loss is r ecognised in the income statement and its shar e of postacquisition movements in other comprehensive income is recognised in other comprehensive income with a corresponding adjustment to the carrying amount of the investment.
When the Groups share of losses in an associate equals or exceeds its inter est in the associate including any other unsecur ed r eceivables the Gr oup does not r ecognise further losses unless it has incurr ed legal or constructive obligations or made payments on behalf of the associate.
Unrealised gains on transactions between the Group and its associates are eliminated to the extent of the Groups interest in the associates.
Unrealised losses are also eliminated unless the transaction provides evidence of an impairment of the asset transferred.
Accounting policies of the associates have been modified wher e necessary to ensur e consistency with the policies adopted by the Group.
Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 113 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION SEGMENT REPOR TING Operating segments are reported in a manner consistent with the internal reporting provided to the chief operating decisionmaker.
The chief operating decisionmaker who is r esponsible for allocating r esour ces and assessing performance of the operating segments has been identified as the
Executive
Of ficer .
FOREIGN CURRENCIES Functional and presentation currency
Gr oup s entities are measured using the currency of the primary economic environment in which the entity operates the functional curr ency.
The consolidated financial statements ar e pr esented in the Groups functional and presentational currency.
Transactions and balances Foreign currency transactions are translated into the functional currency using the exchange rates prevailing at the dates of the transactions.
Foreign exchange gains and losses resulting from the settlement of such transactions and from the translation at yearend exchange rates of monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are r ecognised in the income statement except when deferr ed in equity as qualifying cash flow hedges and qualifying net investment hedges.
T ranslation dif fer ences on nonmonetary items such as equities held at fair value thr ough pr ofit or loss ar e r eported as part of the fair value gain or loss.
T ranslation dif fer ences on nonmonetary items such as equities classified as availablefor sale financial assets ar e included in other comprehensive income.
Group companies
Gr oup entities none of which has the curr ency of hyperinflationary economy that have functional currency different from the presentational currency are translated into the presentational currency as follows assets and liabilities for each balance sheet presented are translated at the closing rate at the date of that balance sheet ii income and expenses for each income statement are translated at average exchange rates unless this average is not r easonable approximation of the cumulative effect of the rates prevailing on the transaction dates in which case income and expenses ar e translated at the rate on the dates of the transactions and iii all resulting exchange differences are recognised in other comprehensive income.
On consolidation exchange differences arising from the translation of net investment in for eign entities and of borr owings and other curr ency instruments designated as hedges of such investments ar e taken to other compr ehensive income.
When for eign operation is sold such exchange dif fer ences ar e r eclassified to the income statement as part of the gain or loss on sale.
Goodwill and fair value adjustments arising on the acquisition of a foreign entity are treated as assets and liabilities of the foreign entity and translated at the closing rate.
Exchange differences arising are recognised in other comprehensive income.
GOODWILL ARISING ON CONSOLIDATION Goodwill represents the excess of the cost of an acquisition over the fair value of the Gr oup s shar e of the identifiable net assets of the acquir ed subsidiaryassociate at the date of acquisition.
Goodwill on acquisitions of subsidiaries is shown separately on the Balance Sheet.
Goodwill on acquisitions of associates is included in investments in associates.
Goodwill is not amortised but it is tested for impairment annually or mor e frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that it might be impair ed and is carried at cost less accumulated impairment losses.
Gains and losses on the disposal of an entity include the carrying amount of goodwill relating to the entity sold.
Goodwill is allocated to cash generating units or gr oups of cash generating units for the purpose of impairment testing.
Cash generating units represent the lowest level of geographical and business segment combinations that the Group uses for internal reporting purposes.
OTHER INTANGIBLE ASSETS Computer software Acquired computer software licenses are capitalised on the basis of the costs incurred to acquire them and bring them to use.
These costs are amortised over their estimated useful lives.
Costs associated with maintaining computer software programmes are recognised as an expense as incurred.
Development costs that are directly associated with the production of identifiable and unique softwar e pr oducts contr olled by the Gr oup and that will generate economic benefits exceeding costs beyond one year are recognised as intangible assets.
Direct costs include the software development employee costs and an appropriate portion of relevant overheads.
Capitalised development costs are amortised over their estimated useful lives from the point when the asset is ready to use.
The rates of amortisation ar e between 14% and 100% per annum.
Capitalised employment contract payments The Group makes payments to certain key employees in recognition of them signing longterm employment contract usually thr ee to five years.
These payments are capitalised as intangible assets since legal rights pr otect the expected benefits that the Gr oup will derive fr om the contracts.
The asset recognised is then amortised over the duration of the underlying contract within salaries and associated expenses.
Other
For acquisitions completed after 1st
IAS
Examples of such assets include customer contracts expectations of business renewal and contract related customer relationships.
These assets are valued on the basis of the present value of futur e cash flows and ar e amortised to the income statement over the life of the contract or their estimated economic life.
The current maximum estimated economic life is fifteen years.
IMP AIRMENT OF ASSETS not subject to amortisation and are tested annually for impairment.
Assets that are subject to amortisation are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable.
An impairment loss is recognised for the amount by which the assets carrying amount exceeds its recoverable amount.
The recoverable amount is the higher of an assets fair value less costs to sell and valueinuse.
For the purposes of assessing impairment assets ar e gr ouped at the lowest levels for which ther e ar e separately identifiable cash flows cashgenerating units.
PROPER TY PLANT AND EQUIPMENT accumulated depreciation.
Cost includes the original purchase price of the asset and the costs attributable to bringing the asset to its working condition for its intended use.
SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED 114 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED Depreciation is calculated to write off the cost of such assets over their estimated useful lives.
The principal rates of depreciation are as follows Fr eehold land and buildings between 0% and 2% per annum.
Leasehold impr ovements between 10% and 20% per annum or over the life of the lease.
Fur nitur e and of fice equipment between 10% and 20% per annum.
Computer har dwar e between 20% and 100% per annum.
Motor vehicles between 25% and 13% per annum.
The depreciation rates are reviewed on an annual basis.
FINANCIAL ASSETS
Gr oup classifies its financial assets as loans and r eceivables and availablefor sale assets.
The classification depends upon the purpose for which the financial assets wer e acquir ed.
Management determines the classification of its financial assets at initial r ecognition.
Loans and receivables determinable payments that are not quoted in an active market.
They are included in curr ent assets except for maturities gr eater than months after the balance sheet date.
The Groups loans and receivables comprise trade and other receivables and cash and cash equivalents in the balance sheet.
Loans and receivables are carried at amortised cost.
Availableforsale financial assets A vailablefor sale financial assets ar e categorised into one of two categories deposit.
These investments ar e held at fair value and ar e classified as curr ent or noncurr ent assets depending on the maturity date.
2 Other investments include securities and other investments held for strategic purposes.
These investments are held at fair value unless a fair value cannot be accurately determined in which case they are carried at cost less any provision for impairment.
Interest on deposits and interestbearing investments is credited in the income statement as it is earned.
Regular pur chases and sales of financial assets ar e r ecognised on the trade date  the date on which the Group commits to purchase or sell the asset.
Investments are initially recognised at fair value plus transaction costs.
Financial assets are derecognised when the rights to receive cash flows have expir ed or have been transferr ed and the Gr oup has transferred substantially all risks and rewards of ownership.
Availablefor sale assets are subsequently carried at fair value.
The fair values of quoted investments are determined based upon current bid price.
When securities classified as availablefor sale ar e sold or impair ed the accumulated fair value adjustments recognised in equity are included in the income statement.
Interest on availableforsale securities calculated using the effective inter est method is r ecognised in the income statement as part of finance income.
Dividends on availableforsale equity instruments are recognised in the income statement as part of finance income when the Gr oup s right to receive payments is established.
Heldforsale financial assets Noncurr ent assets ar e classified as heldfor sale if their carrying amount will be recovered through a sale transaction rather than through continuing use.
This condition is regarded as met only when the sale is highly probable and the asset is available for sale in its immediate condition.
Immediately
Ther eafter the assets or disposal gr oup ar e r ecognised at the lower of their carrying amount and fair value less costs to sell.
Assets classified as heldfor sale ar e not depr eciated.
Impairment
Offsetting financial instruments Financial assets and liabilities are offset and the net amount reported in the balance sheet when there is a legally enforceable right to offset the recognised amounts and there is an intention to settle on a net basis or realise the asset and settle the liability simultaneously.
The legally enforceable right must not be contingent on future events and must be enfor ceable in the normal course of business and in the event of default insolvency or bankruptcy of the company or the counterparty.
INSURANCE BROKING RECEIVABLES AND P A Y ABLES Insurance brokers act as agents in placing the insurable risks of their clients with insur ers and as such ar e not liable as principals for amounts arising fr om such transactions.
In r ecognition of this r elationship debtors from insurance broking transactions are not included as an asset of the
Other than the receivable for fees and commissions earned on a transaction no r ecognition of the insurance transaction occurs until the Gr oup r eceives cash in r espect of pr emiums or claims at which time corresponding liability is established in favour of the insurer or the client.
In certain cir cumstances the Gr oup advances pr emiums r efunds or claims to insurance underwriters or clients prior to collection.
These advances ar e r eflected in the consolidated balance sheet as part of trade receivables.
TRADE RECEIVABLES Trade receivables are recognised initially at fair value and subsequently at amortised cost less pr ovision for impairment.
A provision for impairment of trade receivables is established when there is objective evidence that the Group will not be able to collect all amounts due accor ding to the original terms of the r eceivables.
Significant financial dif ficulties of the debtor dispute default or delinquency in payments ar e considered indicators that the receivable is impaired.
The carrying amount of the asset is reduced through the use of an allowance account and the amount of the loss is r ecognised in the income statement.
When trade r eceivable is uncollectible it is written of f against the allowance account for trade receivables.
CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTS maturities of three months or less.
Bank overdrafts are shown within borrowings in current liabilities on the balance sheet.
Whilst held in the Groups nonstatutory trust accounts under appropriate client money r egulation fiduciary funds held ar e contr olled by the Gr oup and economic benefits ar e derived fr om them.
As such these funds ar e recognised as an asset on the Groups balance sheet.
TRADE P A Y ABLES Trade payables are initially recognised at fair value and subsequently measur ed at amortised cost except for contingent considerations which is always measured at fair value based on the underlying criteria of each transaction.
Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 115 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION
Borr owings ar e classified as curr ent liabilities unless the Gr oup has an unconditional right to defer settlement of the liability for at least 12 months after the balance sheet date.
Borrowings are recognised initially at fair value net of transaction costs incurr ed.
They ar e subsequently stated at amortised cost using the effective interest rate method.
DEFERRED INCOME TAX The charge for taxation is based on the result for the year at current rates of tax and takes into account deferred tax.
Deferr ed income tax is pr ovided in full using the liability method on temporary differences arising between the tax bases of assets and liabilities and their carrying amounts in the consolidated financial statements.
However if the deferr ed income tax arises fr om initial recognition of an asset or liability in a transaction other than a business combination that at the time of the transaction affects neither accounting nor taxable pr ofit or loss it is not r ecognised.
Deferr ed income tax is determined using tax rates and laws that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the balance sheet date and are expected to apply when the related deferred income tax asset is realised or the deferred income tax liability is settled.
Deferred income tax is charged or credited to equity in respect of any items which is itself either charged or cr edited dir ectly to equity.
Any subsequent recognition of the deferred gain or loss in the consolidated income statement is accompanied by the corresponding deferred income tax.
Deferred income tax assets are recognised to the extent that it is probable that futur e taxable pr ofit will be available against which the temporary differences can be utilised.
Deferred income tax is provided on temporary differences arising on investments in subsidiaries and associates except wher e the Gr oup controls the timing of the reversal of the temporary difference and it is probable that the temporary difference will not reverse in the foreseeable future.
EMPLOYEE BENEFITS Pension obligations
Gr oup operates number of defined benefit pension schemes and number of employees ar e members of defined contribution pension schemes.
Full actuarial valuations of the Gr oup s defined benefit schemes ar e carried out at least every three years.
December each year .
For the purposes of these annual updates scheme assets ar e included at market value and scheme liabilities are measured on an actuarial basis using the pr ojected unit cr edit method these liabilities ar e discounted at the current rate of return of a high quality corporate bond of equivalent curr ency and term.
The defined benefit surplus or deficit is calculated as the pr esent value of defined benefit obligations less the fair value of the plan assets and is included on the Groups balance sheet.
Surpluses are included only to the extent that they are recoverable through reduced contributions in the future or through refunds from the schemes.
The net inter est on the defined benefit surplusdeficit is included within finance costs.
Actuarial gains and losses including dif fer ences between the expected and actual r etur n on scheme assets ar e r ecognised thr ough the consolidated statement of comprehensive income.
Gr oup pays fixed contributions into separate entity.
The
Gr oup has no legal or constructive obligations to pay further contributions if the fund does not hold suf ficient assets to pay all employees the benefits r elating to employee service in the current and prior periods.
The costs of the Gr oup s defined contribution pension schemes ar e charged to the income statement in the period in which they fall due.
Sharebased compensation
Gr oup operates number of equitysettled shar ebased compensation plans.
The fair value of the employee services received in exchange for the grant of the options is recognised as an expense.
The total amount to be expensed over the vesting period is determined by r efer ence to the fair value of the options granted excluding the impact of any nonmarket vesting conditions for example pr ofitability and sales growth targets.
Nonmarket vesting conditions are included in assumptions about the number of options that are expected to become exer cisable.
At each balance sheet date the entity r evises its estimates of the number of options that are expected to become exercisable.
It r ecognises the impact of the r evision of original estimates if any in the income statement and corr esponding adjustment to equity.
The proceeds received net of any directly attributable transaction costs ar e cr edited to shar e capital at nominal value and shar e pr emium excess over nominal value when the options are exercised.
PROVISIONS FOR LIABILITIES AND CHARGES pr ovision is r ecognised wher e ther e is pr esent obligation whether legal or constructive as r esult of past event for which it is pr obable that transfer of economic benefits will be r equir ed to settle the obligation and a reasonable estimate can be made of the amount of the obligation.
Where appropriate the Group discounts provisions to their present value.
The unwinding of the provision discounting is included as an interest expense within finance costs in the income statement.
REVENUE
Fees and commissions Fees and commissions are derived from three principal sources Insurance broking Income relating to insurance broking is accounted for at the later of policy inception date or when the policy placement has been completed and confirmed.
Where there is an expectation of future servicing requirements an element of income relating to the policy is deferred to cover the associated contractual obligation.
Employee benefits commissions.
Fees ar e charged on timecost or fixedfee basis and are recognised in line with the performance of the underlying service.
Commission is r ecognised upon confirmation of the underlying policy or product.
Other services Fees and other income receivable are recognised in the period to which they relate and when they can be measured with reasonable certainty.
Investment income Investment income arises from the holding of cash and investments r elating to fiduciary funds and is r ecognised on an accruals basis.
EXCEPTIONAL ITEMS
Gr oup s underlying performance.
Items
Items of a nonrecurring SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED 116 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED and material natur e ar e charged or cr edited to operating pr ofit and ar e classified to the appr opriate income statement headings.
To assist in the analysis and understanding of the underlying trading position of the Group these items are summarised within the operating pr ofit note on page under the heading items.
LEASES
Assets held under leasing agr eements which transfer substantially all the risks and r ewar ds of ownership to the Gr oup ar e included in pr operty plant and equipment.
The capital elements of the related lease obligations are included in liabilities.
The interest elements of the lease obligations are charged to the income statement over the period of the lease term.
The pr operty plant and equipment acquir ed under finance leases is depreciated over the shorter of the useful life of the asset and the lease term.
Leases in which significant portion of the risks and r ewar ds of ownership ar e r etained by the lessor ar e classified as operating leases.
Payments made under operating leases net of any incentives r eceived fr om the lessor are charged to the income statement on a straightline basis over the period of the lease.
DERIVATIVE FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
Gr oup only enters into derivative financial instruments in or der to hedge underlying financial and commer cial exposur es.
Derivative financial instruments ar e initially r ecognised at fair value on the date a derivative contract is entered into and are subsequently re measured at their fair value.
The method of recognising the resulting gain or loss is dependent on the nature of the item being hedged.
The Group designates derivatives as either a hedge of the fair value of r ecognised asset or liability fair value hedge hedge of for ecasted transaction or of the for eign curr ency risk on firm commitment cash flow hedge or hedge of net investment in for eign entity net investment hedges.
Changes in the fair value of derivatives that are designated and qualify as fair value hedges and that ar e highly ef fective ar e r ecor ded in the income statement along with any changes in the fair value of the hedged asset or liability that is attributable to the hedged risk.
Changes in the fair value of derivatives that are designated and qualify as cash flow hedges and that ar e highly ef fective ar e r ecognised in equity.
Wher e the for ecasted transaction or firm commitment r esults in the r ecognition of nonfinancial asset or of nonfinancial liability the gains and losses previously deferred in equity are transferred from equity and included in the initial measurement of the cost of the asset or liability.
Otherwise
The gain or loss relating to the ineffective portion is recognised immediately in the income statement.
When hedging instrument expir es or is sold any cumulative gain or loss existing in equity at that time remains in the hedging reserves and is r eclassified to the income statement when hedge no longer meets the criteria for hedge accounting or when the committed or forecasted transaction ultimately occurs.
When a committed or forecasted transaction is no longer expected to occur the cumulative gain or loss that was reported in equity is immediately recognised in the income statement.
DIVIDEND DISTRIBUTION Dividends proposed or declared after the balance sheet date are not recognised as a liability at the balance sheet date.
Final dividends are recognised as a charge to equity once approved and interim dividends are charged once paid.
FINANCIAL AND CAPIT AL
MANAGEMENT
The
Gr oup s exposur e to financial risks and its financial and capital management policies are detailed in the Finance Directors Review and the Risk Management Report on pages 38 to 45.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES AND
Estimates and judgments used in pr eparing the financial statements ar e continually evaluated and are based on historical experience and other factors including expectations of futur e events that ar e believed to be r easonable.
The r esulting accounting estimates will by definition seldom equal the related actual results.
The estimates and assumptions that have significant ef fect on the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities are discussed below.
The fair value of financial instruments traded in active markets such as availableforsale is based upon quoted market prices at the balance sheet date.
The quoted market price used for financial assets held by the Group is the current bid price.
The carrying value less impairment provision of trade receivables and payables are assumed to approximate their fair values.
The fair values of financial liabilities ar e estimated by discounting the futur e contractual cash flows at the curr ent market inter est rate that is available to the Gr oup for similar financial instruments.
The fair value of acquired intangible assets is estimated based upon the pr esent value of modelled r elated expected futur e cash flows.
Judgement may be applied in the determination of the gr owth rates discount rates and the expected cash flows.
The Group tests annually whether goodwill and other assets that have indefinite useful lives suf fer ed any impairment.
Other
The recoverable amount of an asset or a cash generating unit is determined based on valueinuse calculations prepared on the basis of managements assumptions and estimates.
This determination requires significant judgment.
In making this judgment the Gr oup evaluates among other factors the duration and extent to which the fair value of an investment is less than its cost and the financial health of and near term business outlook for the investment including factors such as industry and sector performance changes in r egional economies and operational and financing cash flow .
The Group is subject to income taxes in numerous jurisdictions.
Significant judgement is r equir ed in determining the worldwide pr ovision for income taxes.
There are many transactions and calculations for which the ultimate tax determination is uncertain during the ordinary course of business.
Wher e the final tax outcome of these matters is dif fer ent fr om the amounts that wer e initially r ecor ded such dif fer ences will impact the income tax and deferred tax provisions in the period in which such determination is made.
The present value of pension obligations depends on a number of factors that are determined on an actuarial basis using a number of assumptions.
The assumption used in determining the net cost or income for pension obligations is a discount rate based upon high quality corporate bonds.
Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 117 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION Any changes in the assumptions may impact the carrying amount of pension obligations the charge in the income statement or statement of comprehensive income.
The Group determines the appropriate discount rate at the end of each year.
This is the interest rate that should be used to determine the present value of estimated futur e cash outflows expected to be r equir ed to settle the pension obligations.
In determining the appr opriate discount rate the Gr oup considers the interest rates of highquality corporate bonds that are denominated in the curr ency in which the benefits will be paid and that have terms to maturity approximating the terms of the related pension liability.
Other
As well as the discount rate the inflation rates and life expectancy are also key assumptions.
T o set the price inflation assumptions the Gr oup considers market expectations of inflation at the appr opriate durations.
Adjustments ar e made to these rates wher e necessary to r eflect an inflation risk pr emium.
In determining the life expectancy assumptions the Group considers the mortality assumptions used by the Trustees of the pension schemes in their latest actuarial valuations and also mortality guidance laid out by legislation.
This enables the Group to determine a best estimate of life expectancy that is appropriate for accounting purposes.
During the ordinary course of business the Group can be subject to claims for errors and omissions made in connection with its broking activities.
A balance sheet provision is established in respect of such claims when it is probable that the liability has been incurred and the amount of the liability can be reasonably estimated.
The
Gr oup analyses its litigation exposur es based on available information including exter nal legal consultation wher e appr opriate to assess its potential liability.
The outcome of the currently pending and future proceedings cannot be pr edicted with certainty.
Thus an adverse decision in curr ent or futur e lawsuit could r esult in additional costs that ar e not cover ed either wholly or partially under insurance policies and ar e in excess of the pr esently established pr ovisions.
It is possible ther efor e that the financial position r esults of operations or cash flows of the Gr oup could be materially af fected by the unfavourable outcome of litigation.
FUTURE
DEVELOPMENTS
The following standards have been published but are not mandatory for 31 December 2017 reporting period and the Group has not adopted them early.
IFRS 9 Financial instruments liabilities.
The standar d is ef fective for annual periods beginning on or after 1 January 2018.
It replaces the guidance in instruments.
FRS r etains but simplifies the mixed measur ement model and establishes thr ee primary measur ement categories for financial assets amortised cost fair value thr ough other compr ehensive income loss.
The basis of classification depends on the entity s business model and the contractual cash flow characteristics of the financial asset.
Investments
The Group does not expect any material change in the measur ement of its financial assets and liabilities.
There is now a new expected credit losses model that replaces the incurred loss impairment model used in
Under
FRS it is not necessary for a credit event to have occurred before credit losses are recognised.
The new impairment model will mainly affect the Groups trade receivables and contract assets.
The
Gr oup expects to apply the simplified appr oach to recognise lifetime expected credit losses for its trade receivables and contract assets.
The impact on 2017 opening retained earnings and on the 2017 results is not expected to be material.
For financial liabilities ther e wer e no changes to classification and measurement except for the recognition of changes in own credit risk in loss.
On initial application of of the hedge accounting requirements of the new standard.
IFRS 9 relaxes the requirements for hedge effectiveness by replacing the bright line hedge effectiveness tests.
It requires an economic relationship between the hedged item and hedging instrument and for the hedged ratio to be the same as the one management actually use for risk management purposes.
Contemporaneous documentation is still required but is different to that currently prepared under IAS 39.
The changes to the hedge accounting requirements are not expected to have a material impact on the Group.
IFRS 15 Revenue from contracts with customers distinct performance obligations to the customer.
The standard replaces
Revenue and
Construction
Contracts and r elated interpr etations.
FRS includes pr escriptive guidance to deal with specific scenarios and requires more extensive disclosures.
IFRS 15 is effective for annual periods beginning on or after 1 January 2018.
The
Gr oup will r eport its financial r esults on this basis for the half year period ending
December as well as restated comparative results for these periods.
The new standard requires that revenue is only recognised when the performance obligation has been satisfied and the customer obtains contr ol of the asset.
Under existing accounting policies the primary trigger for revenue recognition in the Groups Risk and Insurance business is the later of policy inception date or the date on which the placement is completed and confirmed to the customer .
This r emains the same under the new standard.
In certain service agreements this will defer the recognition of r evenue compar ed to the Gr oup s curr ent policy but the Gr oup will r ecognise fulfilment cost asset for work performed wher e such cost is expected to be recovered.
The
Gr oup defers some elements of r evenue curr ently primarily to r eflect anticipated claims handling activity.
This will continue under the new standar d but will be r emeasur ed.
In addition the Gr oup will now r ecognise deferral against cancellation which under the Gr oup s curr ent policy is recognised at the point of cancellation.
The Group will also defer revenue in respect of other performance obligations that are separate and distinct which is not expected to be significant.
The new standard introduces the recognition of those costs that are dir ectly attributable to obtaining the contract wher e these ar e expected to be recovered.
This is a new requirement for the Group and will create the r ecognition of new set of assets which will then be amortised to match the recognition of revenue.
Under the Groups current policy these costs have been expensed as incurred.
The
Balance
Sheet will intr oduce new classifications being contract assets and liabilities.
W ork continues on the r efinement of the Gr oup s policy but it is expected that the change will result in a reduction of the Groups 2017 opening r etained ear nings in the range of to million r eduction in the pr ofit befor e tax of appr oximately million and r eduction in pr ofit after tax of appr oximately million.
Cash flows will be unalter ed.
IFRS 16  Leases contracts.
This dif fers fr om
Leases wher e distinction between finance lease on balance sheet and an operating lease of f balance sheet was r equir ed.
The standard is effective for annual periods beginning on or after 1 January 2019 and earlier application is permitted.
The Group is in the process of assessing IFRS 16s full impact.
SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED 118 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS for the year ended 31 December 2017 ALTERNATIVE INCOME STATEMENT The format of the consolidated income statement on page 107 conforms to the requirements of IFRS.
The alternative income statement set out below  which is pr ovided by way of additional information has been pr epar ed on basis that conforms mor e closely to the appr oach adopted by the Group in assessing its performance.
The statement provides a reconciliation between the underlying results used by the Group to assess performance and the IFRS income statement.
Year ended 31 December 2017
Exceptional items
Fees and commissions 1378554 Investment income 7474 Salaries and associated expenses 860054 1135 861189 Pr emises 70590 35 70625 Other operating costs 208587 5275 213862 Depr eciation amortisation and impairment charges 33054 3437 36491 Trading profit 213743 9882 203861 Finance costs  net 24349 Share of results of associates 2149 Profit before taxation 191543 9882 181661 Y ear ended 31 December
Exceptional items
Fees and commissions 1256556  1256556 Investment income 4730  4730 Salaries and associated expenses 784664 9699 794363 Pr emises 64307 2542 66849 Other operating costs 184173 25345 209518 Depr eciation amortisation and impairment charges 34470 481 34951 Trading profit 193672 38067 155605 Finance costs  net 22078  22078 Share of results of associates 975 378 1353 Pr ofit befor e taxation 172569 37689 134880 Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 119 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION SEGMENT INFORMATION Management has determined its operating segments based on the analysis used to make strategic decisions.
BUSINESS SEGMENT ANALYSIS The Group is organised on a worldwide basis into three main segments Risk and Insurance Employee Benefits and Head Office and Other operations.
These segments are consistent with the internal reporting structure of the Group.
The Risk and Insurance segment comprises JLTs global specialist and reinsurance broking activities.
The Employee Benefits segment consists of pension administration outsourcing and employee benefits consultancy healthcare and wealth management activities.
Certain Risk and Insurance and Employee Benefits operating segments have been disclosed within the reporting segments given their individual size.
The Head Office and Other segment consists mainly of holding companies central administration functions the Groups captive insurance companies and the Groups investments in associates.
Following the disposal of Thistle in 2016 the majority of what was classified as JLT Insurance Services plus Northern Europe which was previously in JLT Europe Middle East and Africa both included in Other Risk and Insurance in the 2016 financial year now together with JLT Specialty form the business group JLT Europe.
Prior period numbers have been restated to reflect this change.
JLT Re principal locations include North America the United Kingdom and Asia.
SEGMENT RESULTS Management assesses the performance of the operating segments based upon a measure of underlying trading profit.
Segment results include the net income or expense derived from the trading activities of the segment together with the investment income earned on fiduciary funds.
Interest
Income tax expense and the charge in respect of noncontrolling interests are excluded from the segmental allocation.
SEGMENT ASSETS AND LIABILITIES Assets and liabilities are not allocated to individual segments and are therefore all reported within Head Office and Other.
INVESTMENTS IN ASSOCIATES The Group owns the following stakes in its principal associates 20% of GrECo which operates mainly in Austria and Eastern Europe 25% of MAG JLT which operates mainly in Italy and 25% of MarchJLT which operates mainly in Spain.
The investment and the Groups share of the net results of these associates are included in the Head Office and Other segment together with the investment and results of the Groups other associates Sterling Re Intermediaro de Reaseguro SA de CV JLT Insurance Management Malta JLT Energy France SAS and JLT Independent Insurance Brokers Private Ltd.
Subject to local regulations the Group agreed to the disposal of its Mexican associate Sterling Re Intermediaro de Reaseguro SA de CV in December 2017.
Details of the transactions are provided on page 134.
OTHER SEGMENT ITEMS Capital expenditure comprises additions to property plant and equipment and other intangible assets.
120 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Risk and Insurance Employee Benefits Year ended 31 December 2017
Europe
JLT Re
Australia and New
JLT
USA
Other
Risk and
UK and
Asia
Other
Employee
Benefits
Head
Office
Total
Fees and commissions 395766 Investment income 3529 Total revenue 399295 Underlying trading profitloss 90615 16361 45727 34161 213743 Operating profitloss 84625 25999 48939 33931 203861 Finance costs  net 24349 24349 Share of results of associates Profitloss before taxation 84625 25999 48939 56131 181661 Income tax expense 52980 52980 Noncontrolling interests 10303 10303 Net profitloss attributable to the owners of the parent 84625 25999 48939 119414 118378 Segment assets 2655569 Investments in associates 53055 Total assets 2708624 Segment liabilities 2310919 2310919 Total liabilities 2310919 2310919 Other segment items Capital expenditure 5449 4196 2487 3344 6036 17278 2668 181 16164 Depreciation amortisation and impairment charges including amounts in salaries and associated expenses 10466 4302 2107 4637 5906 7843 1835 1561 13463 52120 Risk and Insurance Employee Benefits Year ended 31 December 2016
Europe
JLT Re
Australia and New
JLT
USA
Other
Risk and
UK and
Asia
Other
Employee
Benefits
Head Office and Other
Fees and commissions 391918 195065 115950 41313 211993 160016 87260 53041 Investment income 1861 Total revenue 393779 Underlying trading profitloss 79743 26981 39158 22380 193672 Operating profitloss 60945 40589 34135 26981 41373 2390 23290 9851 25207 155605 Finance costs  net 22078 22078 Share of results of associates Profitloss before taxation 60945 26981 41373 2390 23290 45932 134880 Income tax expense 44018 44018 Noncontrolling interests 9396 9396 Net profitloss attributable to the owners of the parent 60945 26981 41373 2390 23290 99346 81466 Segment assets 2574199 Investments in associates 50928 Total assets Segment liabilities 2274217 2274217 Total liabilities 2274217 2274217 Other segment items Capital expenditure 3693 7406 2821 3204 5464 11338 314 391 5140 Depreciation amortisation and impairment charges including amounts in salaries and associated expenses 11169 3141 2274 3434 5621 7583 1262 1109 14310 49903 SEGMENT INFORMATION CONTINUED Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 121 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION SEGMENT INFORMATION CONTINUED GEOGRAPHICAL SEGMENT ANALYSIS Although the Groups two business segments are managed on a worldwide basis they operate in five principal geographical areas of the world.
The United Kingdom is the home country of the parent company Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc.
The Risk and Insurance segment operates in the United Kingdom the Groups home country.
In the Americas the Risk and Insurance segment operates in Argentina Bermuda the Caribbean Brazil Canada Colombia Peru Chile and the United States.
The Australian segment includes operations in Australia and New Zealand.
In Europe it operates in the Republic of Ireland Sweden Finland Norway Denmark Germany Guernsey Belgium France The Netherlands Spain Switzerland and Russia.
The Asian segment includes operations in Singapore Hong Kong Taiwan Indonesia Japan Thailand South Korea Philippines Malaysia China Vietnam Dubai Qatar Bahrain and Turkey.
In Rest of the World it operates in South Africa.
The Employee Benefits segment operates in the United Kingdom.
In the Americas the Employee Benefits segment operates in Brazil Canada Colombia and Peru.
The Australian segment includes operations in Australia and New Zealand.
In Europe it operates in the Republic of Ireland and Switzerland.
The Asian segment includes operations in Singapore Hong Kong Taiwan Indonesia Japan Thailand South Korea Philippines Malaysia China and Vietnam.
In Rest of the World it operates in South Africa.
The Head Office and Other activities segment is mainly based in the United Kingdom with minor operations in the Americas Europe and Asia.
The Groups captive operations are included in the United Kingdom segment.
Fees and commissions are disclosed by 1 the country in which the office is located and 2 the country in which the customer is located.
Segment noncurrent assets segment assets and segment liabilities are disclosed based on the country in which they are located or occur.
Interest
Interest bearing liabilities eg borrowings and current and deferred tax liabilities are excluded from segment liabilities.
Items excluded from segmental allocation are referred to as unallocated.
Fees and commissions Fees and commissions
Segment assets
Year ended 31 December 2017 000 000 000 000 000 UK 608958 Americas 337336 Australia 157297 Asia 218740 Europe 47878 Rest of the World 8345 Investments in associates 53055 Unallocated assetsliabilities 270666 Total assetsliabilities 2708624 Fees and commissions Fees and commissions
Segment assets
Year ended 31 December 2016 000 000 000 000 000 UK 600837 Americas 259226 Australia 146958 Asia 204504 Europe 37717 Rest of the World 7314 2298513 1561230 Investments in associates 50928 Unallocated assetsliabilities 275686 Total assetsliabilities 2625127 2274217 122 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OPERATING PROFIT The following items have been chargedcredited in arriving at operating profit Foreign exchange lossesgains fees and commissions 25899 22056 other operating costs 185 10838 26084 11218 Amortisation of other intangible assets software costs 17360 other intangible assets 2966 Impairment of goodwill included in exceptional items below 1099 Depreciation on property plant and equipment owned assets 12370 leased assets under finance leases Impairment of availableforsale other investments included in exceptional items below 1801 Impairment of associates included in exceptional items below 537 Total depreciation amortisation and impairment charges 36491 34951 Amortisation of capitalised employment contract payments included in salaries and associated expenses 15629 14952 Lossesgains on disposal of property plant and equipment 90 10 Operating lease rentals payable minimum lease payments land and buildings 46816 41233 furniture equipment and motor vehicles 1443 792 computer equipment and software 486 543 subleases receipts land and buildings 443 426 48302 42142 Fair value gains on derivative financial instruments 401 87 Gainslosses on disposal of availableforsale other investments 2101 8 Exceptional items Acquisition and integration costs of which included in salaries and associated expenses 751 228 included in premises 7 70 included in other operating costs 1847 248 2605 546 Restructuring costs of which included in salaries and associated expenses  9355 included in premises  1689 included in other operating costs  2856 Net gainslosses on disposal of businesses of which included in salaries and associated expenses 384 included in premises included in other operating costs 719 391 included in depreciation amortisation and impairment charges Net gainslosses on disposal of investment and associates of which included in other operating costs 2065 included in depreciation amortisation and impairment charges 537 Revision in considerations recognised in prior years included in other operating costs 419 included in depreciation amortisation and impairment charges 1801 Impairment of goodwill included in depreciation amortisation and impairment charges 1099 Included in other operating costs Net litigation costs 9067 Costs associated with regulatory reviews 1659 Net gains on release of deferred and contingent considerations 2958 324 Fair value gainslosses on put options 1137 699 Pension curtailment gain Total exceptional items included within operating profit 9882 38067 Profit on sale of associates subsidiary  included in share of results of associates  378 Total exceptional items 9882 37689 We identified that the foreign exchange gain on fees and commissions of 5841000 disclosed in 2016 should have been a loss of 22056000.
This does not result in a change to the consolidated income statement.
Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION INVESTMENT INCOME Interest receivable  fiduciary funds 7474 4730 Prior year investment income 4730 3689 Effect of average cash balance variance 100 190 interest yield variance 2268 799 foreign exchange variance 376 432 7474 4730 The Groups investment income arises from its holdings of cash and investments relating to fiduciary funds.
Equivalent average cash and investment balances during the year amounted to 801 million 2016 797 million denominated principally in US dollars 57% Sterling 13% and Australian dollars 12%.
The average return for 2017 was 0.93% 2016 0.60%.
Based upon average invested balances each 1% movement in the average achieved rate of return would impact anticipated interest income by approximately 8 million.
FINANCE INCOME AND COSTS Interest receivable  own funds 2607 Investment income from availableforsale other investments 371 Interest expense bank and other borrowings 16667 17434 finance leases 71 57 interest in respect of liability discounting 5141 1862 Pension financing expected return on retirement benefits scheme assets 15020 19065 interest on retirement benefits scheme liabilities 20468 23937 Net pension financing expense 5448 4872 Finance costs  net 24349 22078 Finance costs 27327 24225 Finance income 2978 Finance costs  net 24349 22078 INTEREST RATE RISK The Group has both interest bearing assets explained in note 4 and interest bearing liabilities that give rise to net exposures to changes in interest rates primarily in US dollars and Sterling.
Where appropriate the Group uses interest rate swaps to hedge or match these interest rate exposures.
The Groups policy is to continue to manage net interest rate exposures arising from the Groups cash including fiduciary funds and borrowings.
Each 1% movement in the average achieved interest rate impacts interest expense by approximately 5.9 million based on average net borrowings in 2017.
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS EMPLOYEE INFORMATION a Salaries and associated expenses Wages and salaries 671356 619422 Social security costs 58589 51881 Pension costs 43541 41385 Equity settled sharebased payments  incentive schemes LTIP  SESS ESOS 26804 25174 Other staff costs 60899 56501 861189 794tel b Analysis of employees Monthly average number of persons employed by the Group during the year Geographical segment UK 3618 3878 Americas 2001 1813 Australasia 1115 1130 Asia 3413 3292 Europe 291 253 Rest of the world 137 133 10575 10499 Business segment Risk and Insurance 6254 6174 Employee Benefits 3428 3475 Head Office and Other 893 850 10575 10499 c Key management compensation Salaries and shortterm employee benefits 17280 13792 Post employment benefits 414 406 Other longterm benefits 448 333 Sharebased payments 2702 2812 20844 17343 The remuneration of the Directors is disclosed on pages 78 to 90.
Key management personnel are defined as persons having authority and responsibility for planning directing and controlling the activities of the Group directly or indirectly including any director of the Group.
This represents the Group Board of Directors and the Group Executive Committee only.
The Groups equitysettled sharebased payments comprise the JLT Long Term Incentive Plan 20042013 Senior Executive Share Scheme and the Executive Share Option Scheme.
JLT LONG TERM INCENTIVE PLAN The Group operates the Long Term Incentive Plan LTIP for Executive Directors and persons discharging managerial responsibility PDMRs.
The scheme was renewed in 2013.
Awards under the scheme are granted in the form of nilpriced options and are satisfied using marketpurchased shares.
The awards vest in full or in part depending on satisfaction of the performance conditions which are set out on page 84 of the Directors
Remuneration Report.
The awards have a 3 year performance period and have a 10 year life from the date of grant.
Options attract discretionary dividend equivalents DDEs that are rolled up and paid in cash on vesting.
DDEs are paid to option holders only on the options that have vested.
Forfeited or lapsed options are not eligible to DDEs and the DDEs that have accrued on the balance sheet are released to equity at the date of forfeiture.
Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION EMPLOYEE INFORMATION CONTINUED SENIOR EXECUTIVE SHARE SCHEME The Group operates a Senior Executive Share Scheme for senior management and employees.
Awards under the scheme are granted in the form of nilpriced options and are satisfied using marketpurchased shares.
The majority of awards have no specific performance criteria attached other than the requirement that employees remain in employment with the Group.
Certain awards have been granted with specific performance targets defined for the individual executives.
In general these require targets for revenue and profit growth to be met over the vesting period.
The awards have a 10 year life from the date of grant.
Options granted prior to 1 January 2014 attract unconditional DDEs throughout the vesting period this means that DDEs are paid to the option holders as and when dividends are paid to ordinary shareholders there is no clawback on the dividends in the event of a forfeiture of the options.
The options granted post 1 January 2014 attract DDEs that are rolled up and paid in cash on vesting.
The Group amended the plan rules on the 8 June 2016.
From that date all vested options are no longer eligible to DDEs.
EXECUTIVE SHARE OPTION SCHEME Options were granted at a fixed price usually market price and are exercisable after the vesting period usually 3 years.
Options are satisfied by the issue of new shares or marketpurchased shares.
Some options carry performance conditions where they are only exercisable when earnings per share is in excess of RPI for the three consecutive financial accounting periods preceding the date of exercise.
The awards have a 10 year life from the date of grant.
This scheme is now closed for new grants and options were last granted under this scheme on 29 September 2006.
FAIR VALUE OF AWARDS Under IFRS 2 the fair value of awards granted during the year calculated using a BlackScholes model is set out below BlackScholes model assumptions
Performance period Share price on grant date pence
Dividend yield %
Risk free Interest rate % Fair value of one award pence JL T Long T erm Incentive Plan Senior Executive Share Scheme 2017 05 April  201720 1133.00 22.02  2  3 0.23 1133.00 2017 12 April  201720 1128.00 22.04  1  3 0.18 1128.00 2017 29 September  201721 1224.00 20.53  1  4 0.59 1224.00 The option holders who have awards under the JLT Long Term Incentive Plan 20042013 and the Senior Executive Share Scheme also receive payments equating to the dividends payable on their shares subject to meeting the performance criteria.
Assuming that the dividend yield is zero and that the options are issued with no cost to the employees then the fair value will equal the share price at date of grant.
The volatility has been calculated based on the historical share price of the Company using a 3 year term.
All options granted under the share option schemes are conditional upon the employees remaining in the Groups employment during the vesting period of the option the actual period varies according to the scheme in which the employee participates.
In calculating the cost of options granted a factor is included to take account of anticipated lapse rates.
For Executive Share Option this is 20%.
For the JLT Long Term Incentive Plan 20042013 and the Senior Executive Share Scheme it is nil as both are issued with no cost to the employee.
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Movement in number of options
Granted number
Exercised number
Weighted average exercise sale price p
Remaining contractual life years JLT Long Term Incentive Plan  1986535 314462 194921 2243952 1125.41 Senior Executive Share Scheme 7926992 140938 2414935 7589749 1134.97 Total 9913527 455400 2609856 9833701 1134.25 Movement in number of options
Granted number
Exercised number
Weighted average exercise sale price p
Remaining contractual life years JLT Long Term Incentive Plan 20042013 1927782 925700 492737 374210 1986535 873.22  8.42 Senior Executive Share Scheme 7167782 2527139 128558 1639371 7926992 882.69 681113 7.96 Executive Share Option Scheme 64800  18800 46000  963.70 Total 9160364 3452839 640095 2059581 9913527 882.78 681113 8.05 SERVICES PROVIDED BY THE COMPANYS AUDITOR AND ITS ASSOCIATES During the year the Group including its overseas subsidiaries obtained the following services from the Groups auditor and its associates Fees payable to the Groups auditor for the audit of the parent Company and consolidated financial statements 211 200 Fees payable to the Groups auditor and its associates for other services the audit of the Companys subsidiaries 3176 2449 audit related assurance services 274 254 tax compliance services 160 130 tax advisory services 91 46 other assurance services  190 other nonaudit services 435 135 4347 3404 In addition to the above fees payable to the Companys auditor and its associates for audit services supplied to the Companys associated pension schemes amounted to nil 2016 18700.
The Audit and Risk Committee has a policy on the use of the external auditors for nonaudit services to ensure that the auditors independence is maintained and that appropriate approvals are sought for nonaudit services depending upon their nature and value.
Each year a limit is set on the total fees that can be paid to the external auditor in relation to nonaudit services.
As in prior years the limit set by the Audit and Risk Committee of 1 million remained applicable in the year.
The audit fees increased as a result of the imminent implementation of IFRS 9 and 15 as referred to in the Significant Accounting Policies and certain component auditor scope changes.
EMPLOYEE INFORMATION CONTINUED Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION INCOME TAX EXPENSE Current tax expense Current year 57609 51499 Adjustments in respect of prior years 2568 7129 55041 44370 Deferred tax creditexpense Origination and reversal of temporary differences 3569 4912 Reduction in tax rate 174 Adjustments in respect of prior years 1334 4320 2061 352 Total income tax expense 52980 44018 The total income tax expense in the income statement of 52980000 2016 44018000 includes a tax credit on exceptional items of 422000 2016 8245000.
There were no nonrecurring tax credits in the year.
The headline rate of UK corporation tax is currently 19% this will reduce to 17% from 1 April 2020.
As at 31 December 2017 the rate reduction to 17% from April 2020 has been enacted.
The impact of the rate reduction to 17% has been incorporated into the income tax charge for the year ended 31 December 2017 taking into consideration when temporary differences are expected to reverse.
The tax on the Groups profit before tax differs from the theoretical amount that would arise using the tax rate of the home country of the Company as follows Profit before taxation 181661 134880 Tax calculated at UK Corporation Tax rate of 19.25% 2016 20% 34970 26976 Nondeductible expenses 4387 4214 Non recognition of tax losses 3657 4538 Other 1192 595 Adjustments in respect of prior years 1234 2809 Effect of difference between UK and nonUK tax rates 12632 11725 Effect of reduction in tax rate 174 240 Tax on associates 414 271 Total income tax expense 52980 44018 Other includes the nontaxable gain on disposal of subsidiaries 128 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS EARNINGS PER SHARE Basic earnings per share EPS is calculated by dividing the profit attributable to shareholders by the sum of the weighted average number of ordinary shares in issue during the year and the vested share options eligible to discretionary dividends equivalents excluding unallocated shares held by the Trustees of the Employees Share Ownership Plan Trust which are treated as treasury shares.
The profit attributable to shareholders is the profit attributable to the owners of the parent adjusted for the dividends equivalents and undistributed earnings attributable to the unvested share options carrying unconditional dividends equivalents rights.
Diluted EPS is calculated by adjusting the weighted average number of ordinary shares in issue to take account for the potential dilutive effect of outstanding share options.
Basic and diluted EPS are also calculated based on underlying earnings attributable to shareholders which exclude any exceptional items.
A reconciliation of earnings is set out below
No. of shares Weighted average number of shares 211009657 210455334 Effect of outstanding share options 5588334 5210752 Adjusted weighted average number of shares 216597991 215666086 000 000 000 Pence Pence Earnings Adjustments
Basic earnings per share
Underlying profit after taxation and noncontrolling interests Exceptional items before tax 9882 Taxation thereon 422 Noncontrolling interests 8332 5 8327 3.9 3.8 Profit attributable to the owners of the parent 118378 79 118299 000 000 000 Pence Pence Earnings Adjustments
Basic earnings per share
Underlying profit after taxation and noncontrolling interests Exceptional items before tax 37689 Taxation thereon 8245 29444 45 29399 14.0 13.6 Profit attributable to the owners of the parent 81466 130 81336 38.6 37.8 Underlying excludes exceptional items Adjustments related to the dividends and undistributed earnings on unvested share options carrying unconditional dividends equivalent rights.
Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION
2017 2016 Final dividend in respect of 2016 of 20.6p per share 2015 19.5p 45087 Less adjustment 352 200 Interim dividend in respect of 2017 of 12.2p per share 2016 11.6p 26858 Adjustment relating to dividend equivalents accrued in respect of various performance related share awards and longterm incentive plans not currently anticipated to fully vest.
A final dividend in respect of 2017 of 21.8p per share 2016 20.6p amounting to a total of 47700000 2016 45100000 is proposed by the
The dividend proposed will not be accounted for until it has been approved at the Annual General Meeting on 1 May 2018.
GOODWILL
Gross amount
Net carrying amount At 31 December 2017 Opening net book value 548117 5104 543013 Exchange differences 17942 282
1099 1099 Acquisitions 53524 Closing net book value 583699 5921 577778 At 31 December 2016 Opening net book value 500434 4268 496166 Exchange differences 47380 355 47025 Impairment  481 481 Acquisitions 17854  17854 Disposals 17551  17551 Closing net book value 548117 5104 543013 130 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOODWILL CONTINUED IMPAIRMENT TESTS FOR GOODWILL Goodwill is allocated to the Groups cash generating units CGUs identified according to country of operation and business segment.
A summary of the goodwill allocation is presented below.
The recoverable amount of a CGU is determined based on valueinuse calculations.
These calculations use cash flow projections based on financial budgets approved by management covering a five year period and are discounted using the weighted average cost of capital.
Cash flows beyond the five year period are extrapolated using the estimated growth rates stated below Key assumptions Net carrying amount
Discount rate 2 000 % % At 31 December 2017 JLT Re 179774 1.83% 6.13% JLT Europe 145913 1.75% 5.54% UK and Ireland Employee Benefits 80486 1.75% 5.51% JLT USA 46794 1.68% 8.96% Latin America 40668 3.73% 10.59% Australia and New Zealand 37708 2.65% 7.65% Asia 28252 2.79% 4.45% Other 18183 2.59% 5.95% 577778 2.31% 5.73% At 31 December 2016 JLT Re 188236 2.10% 7.06% JLT Europe 126088 2.01% 6.05% UK and Ireland Employee Benefits 80336 2.00% 6.05% JLT USA 18346 2.34% 9.66% Latin America 42262 3.39% 11.16% Australia and New Zealand 38455 2.50% 8.26% Asia 29912 2.41% 6.48% Other 19379 3.08% 7.86% 543013 2.28% 6.98% 1 Average growth rate used to extrapolate cash flows beyond five years.
2 Pretax discount rate applied to the cash flow projections.
The key assumptions used in valueinuse calculations were The budgeted trading profit growth Management determines budgeted trading profit based on past experience and its expectation for market development.
The budgeted investment income growth is based on past experience and longterm interest rates projections.
The discount rates used are pretax and reflect specific risks relating to the relevant segment and country of operation.
The weighted average growth rates used are consistent with longterm economic forecasts in the countries of operation.
The valueinuse is compared to an adjusted goodwill.
The adjusted goodwill is the goodwill grossed up to reflect a 100% ownership by the Group.
The key sensitivity analysis are A decrease of 1% in the growth rate resulted in a reduction of 30% in the excess between the value in use and the adjusted carrying value of goodwill.
An increase of 2% in the discount rate resulted in a reduction of 50% in the excess between the value in use and the adjusted carrying value of goodwill.
A combined decrease of 1% in the growth rate and an increase of 2% in the discount rate resulted in a reduction of 58% in the excess between the value in use and the adjusted carrying value of goodwill.
Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION OTHER INTANGIBLE ASSETS
Capitalised employment contract payments Other Total At 31 December 2017 Opening net book value 60059 Exchange differences 501 548 611 1660
Additions 22543 15381 752 38676 Companies acquired 14 Companies disposed 474 Amortisation charge 17360 15629 2966 35955 Closing net book value 64281 18989 25684 108954 At 31 December 2017 Cost 167882 60602 39353 267837 Accumulated amortisation and impairment 103601 41613 13669 158883 Closing net book value 64281 18989 25684 At 31 December 2016 Opening net book value 61883 Exchange differences 1234 Reclassification  455 455 Additions 20342 7682 2191 30215 Companies acquired 3 Companies disposed 3590 187 3777 Amortisation charge 19813 14952 2131 36896 Closing net book value 60059 19334 22570 At 31 December 2016 Cost 175155 Accumulated amortisation and impairment 115096 42090 11003 168189 Closing net book value 60059 At 31 December 2015 Cost 159357 54892 25846 240095 Accumulated amortisation and impairment 97474 28990 9308 135772 Closing net book value 61883 25902 16538 104323 Additions to computer software during 2017 include 19863000 of capitalised costs in respect of internal developments 2016 18097000.
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS PROPERTY PLANT AND EQUIPMENT Land and buildings
Furniture and equipment
At 31 December 2017 Opening net book value 20 Exchange differences 1 860 542 58 1461
Companies acquired 6telCompanies disposed
Depreciation charge 6075 5846 807 12728 Closing net book value 19 At 31 December 2017 Cost 70 Accumulated depreciation 51 34216 41529 3861 79657 Closing net book value 19 At 31 December 2016 Opening net book value 18 Exchange differences 2
Companies acquired Companies disposed
Depreciation charge  6161 5360 1005 12526 Closing net book value 20 At 31 December 2016 Cost 74 Accumulated depreciation 54 46416 80788 3799 131057 Closing net book value 20 At 31 December 2015 Cost 63 88093 88076 5769 182001 Accumulated depreciation 45 42058 73458 3273 118834 Closing net book value 18 46035 14618 2496 63167 The net book value of property plant and equipment held under finance leases is as follows 2017 2016 Furniture equipment and motor vehicles 405 777 Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION INVESTMENTS IN ASSOCIATES None of the associates are considered individually material to the Group.
A reconciliation of the summarised financial information of the associates is presented in aggregate below.
2017 2016 Opening net assets 39327 35072 Profit for the year 10454 1330 Other comprehensive income 62 Dividends 5349 4592 Change in noncontrolling interests 1490 Capital increase  2854 Exchange differences 1181 4663 Closing net assets 44185 39327 Carrying value 53055 50928 Subject to local regulations the Group disposed of its Mexican associate Sterling Re Intermediaro de Reaseguro SA de CV in December 2017.
Details of the transactions are provided on page 134.
There are no contingent liabilities relating to the Groups interest in any of its associates.
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AVAILABLEFORSALE AND HELDFORSALE FINANCIAL ASSETS Availableforsale financial assets are categorised into one of two categories Investments and deposits consist mainly of fixed term deposits bonds and certificates of deposit.
These investments are held at fair value and are classified between current and noncurrent assets according to the maturity date.
Other investments include securities and other investments held for strategic purposes and some debt instruments.
The investments are held at fair value unless a fair value cannot be accurately determined in which case they are held at cost less any provision for impairment.
On 20 December 2017 the Group disposed of its 35.5% stake in its Mexican associate Sterling Re Intermediaro de Reaseguro SA de CV.
The disposal is subject to certain conditions to be satisfied in the early part of 2018.
The carrying value of the associate was reduced to 189000 which resulted in an impairment charge of 537000.
The balance was then reclassified to heldforsale financial assets.
Together with costs on disposal the net loss was 640000.
On 20 December 2017 the Group disposed of its investment in Lorant Martinez Salas y Compaia Agentes de Seguros y de Fianzas S. de C.
Together with costs on disposal of 22000 the net gain was 2168000.
Other
Investments
At 1 January 2017 13079 Exchange differences 498 176 674
Disposalsmaturities 54 121855 121909 Revaluation deficit included within equity 58 Interest income 312 Amounts written off 1890 At 31 December 2017 11007 Analysis of availableforsale financial assets
Noncurrent 11007 At 31 December 2017 11007 Analysis of availableforsale investments and deposits Fiduciary funds 120637 Own funds 294 At 31 December 2017 120931 At 1 January 2016 6436 Exchange differences 984 Additions  107636 Companies disposed 6301  6301 Disposalsmaturities 311 20 331 Revaluation deficit included within equity  11 Amounts written off 331 At 31 December 2016 13079 Analysis of availableforsale financial assets
Noncurrent 13079 10726 At 31 December 2016 13079 Analysis of availableforsale investments and deposits Fiduciary funds 127358 Own funds 301 At 31 December 2016 127659 The credit quality of availableforsale investments and deposits is assessed by reference to external credit ratings where available and other current and historical credit data including counterparty default rates.
This is summarised as follows 2017 2016
AAA 37828 A 24074 BBB 19319 Other 1445 Total 120931 127659 Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION DERIVATIVE FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS At 31 December 2017 At 31 December 2016 Assets Liabilities Assets Liabilities Interest rate swaps  fair value hedges 14366 6772 32740 3477 Forward foreign exchange contracts  cash flow hedges 73748 12565 92233 69674 Redemption liabilities  option contracts Total 88114 95781 124973 Current 5545 10265 7930 Noncurrent 82569 85516 117043 Total 88114 95781 124973 The credit quality of counterparties with whom derivative financial assets are held is assessed by reference to external credit ratings where available and other current and historical credit data including counterparty default rates.
This is summarised as follows 2017 2016 AA 43249 AAA 12591 BBB 32274 Total 88114 Maturity analysis The table below analyses the Groups derivative financial instruments which will be settled on a gross basis into relevant maturity groupings based upon the remaining period at the balance sheet date to contractual maturity.
The amounts disclosed are the contractual undiscounted cash flows.
Less than 1 year Greater than 1 year At 31 December 2017 000 000 Forward foreign exchange contracts Outflow 419163 687604 Inflow 412414 Less than 1 year Greater than 1 year At 31 December 2016 000 000 Forward foreign exchange contracts Outflow 477260 719936 Inflow 443578 The Groups treasury policies are approved by the Board and are implemented by a centralised treasury department.
The treasury department operates within a framework of policies and procedures that establish specific guidelines to manage currency risk liquidity risk and interest rate risk and the use of counterparties and financial instruments to manage these risks.
The treasury department is subject to periodic review by internal audit.
The Group uses various derivative instruments including forward foreign exchange contracts interest rate swaps and from time to time foreign currency collars and options to manage the risks arising from variations in currency and interest rates.
Derivative instruments purchased are primarily denominated in the currencies of the Groups main markets.
Where forward foreign exchange contracts have been entered into to manage currency risk they are designated as hedges of currency risk on specific future cash flows and qualify as highly probable transactions for which hedge accounting is applied.
The Group anticipates that hedge accounting requirements will continue to be met on its foreign currency and interest rate hedging activities and that no material ineffectiveness will arise which will result in gains or losses being recognised through the income statement.
The fair value of financial derivatives based upon market values as at 31 December 2017 and designated as effective cash flow hedges was a net asset of 61.2 million and has been deferred in equity 2016 net asset of 22.6 million.
Gains and losses arising on derivative instruments outstanding as at 31 December 2017 will be released to the income statement at various dates up to i 38 months in respect of cash flow hedges on currency denominated UK earnings.
Groups USD private placement programme.
Groups private placement programme.
No material amounts were transferred to the income statement during the year in respect of the fair value of financial derivatives.
Transactions maturing within 12 months of the balance sheet date are classified in current maturities.
Transactions maturing in a period in excess of 12 months of the balance sheet date are classified in non current maturities.
The Groups major currency transaction exposure arises in USD and the Group continues to adopt a prudent approach in actively managing this exposure.
As at 31 December 2017 the Group had outstanding foreign exchange contracts principally in USD amounting to a principal value of 1158701000 2016 1199325000.
As a guide each USD 1 cent movement in the achieved rate taking into account the hedges in place currently translates into a change of approximately 1.8 million in revenue with a corresponding impact on trading profit equal to approximately 70% of the revenue change.
The Group uses interest rate hedges principally interest rate swaps to mitigate the impact of changes in interest rates.
The notional principal amount of outstanding cross currency interest rate swaps as at 31 December 2017 was USD458000000 and 75000000 2016 USD500000000 and 75000000.
A net gain of 7.6 million 2016 net gain 29.3 million on these instruments was offset by a fair value loss of 7.6 million 2016 loss 29.3 million on the private placement loans both of which were recognised in the income statement in the year.
The redemption liabilities represent the valuation of the put options provided in the shareholders agreements of JLT Specialty Insurance Services Inc.
JLT Sigorta ve Reasurans Brokerligi Ltd Sirketi JLT SCK Corretora e Administradora de Seguros Ltda and Construction Risk Partners LLC.
Fair value of these liabilities resulted in a gain of 1.1 million which was recognised in the income statement in the year.
The redemption liability increased in the year following the recognition of put option liabilities.
These are detailed as follows options provided in the operating agreement of CRP Holding Company LLC for 47941000.
Specialty Insurance Services Inc. for 284000.
The recognition of those liabilities resulted in a reduction in equity related to transactions with noncontrolling interest of 48225000.
The Group does not have a material exposure to commodity price risk.
The maximum exposure to credit risk at the reporting date is the fair value of the derivatives on the balance sheet.
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS TRADE AND OTHER RECEIVABLES 2017 2016 Trade receivables 438178 Less provision for impairment of trade receivables 18175 20961 Trade receivables  net 420003 Other receivables 163336 Prepayments 27167 As at 31 December 2017 the Group had exposures to individual trade counterparties within trade receivables.
In accordance with Group policy Group operating companies continually monitor exposures against credit limits and concentrations of risk.
No individual trade counterparty credit exposure is considered significant in the ordinary course of trading activity.
Management does not expect any significant losses from nonpayment by trade counterparties that have not been provided for.
Movements on the Groups provision for impairment of trade receivables are as follows 2017 2016 At 1 January 20961 15018 Currency translation adjustments 1038 1483 Companies acquired 102 243 Provisions for impairment of trade receivables 4402 8355 Receivables written off during the year as uncollectible 2160 2980 Unused amounts reversed 4092 1158 At 31 December 18175 20961 The creation and release of provisions for impaired trade receivables have been included in Other operating costs in the income statement.
The other classes within trade and other receivables do not contain impaired assets.
The maximum exposure to credit risk at the reporting date is the carrying value of each class of receivables mentioned above.
The Group does not hold any collateral as security.
The following table sets out details of the age of trade receivables that are not overdue as well as an analysis of overdue amounts impaired and provided for.
Trade receivables Provision for impairment Net trade receivables At 31 December 2017 000 000 000 Not overdue 309691 Past due not more than three months 88220 53 88167 Past due more than three months and not more than six months 21668 2514 19154 Past due more than six months and not more than one year 7916 4925 2991 Past due more than one year 10683 18175 420003
Provision for impairment Net trade receivables At 31 December 2016 000 000 000 Not overdue 324227 Past due not more than three months 75419 805 74614 Past due more than three months and not more than six months 16797 2377 14420 Past due more than six months and not more than one year 12684 5965 6719 Past due more than one year 11814 440941 20961 419980 Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTS 2017 2016 Cash at bank and in hand 563691 Shortterm bank deposits 451396 Fiduciary funds 811247 Own funds 203840 Fiduciary funds represent client money held in the form of premiums due to underwriters claims paid by insurers and due to policyholders and funds held to defray commissions and other income.
Fiduciary funds are not available for general corporate purposes.
The credit quality of cash at bank and in hand and shortterm deposits is assessed by reference to external credit ratings where available and other current and historical credit data including counterparty default rates.
This is summarised as follows 2017 2016 AAA 12739 AA 373163 AAA 129869 A 129577 BBB 346761 Other 22978 Total 1015087 The effective interest rate in respect of shortterm deposits was 1.20% 2016 0.94%.
These deposits have an average maturity of 14 days 2016 16 days.
TRADE AND OTHER PAYABLES 2017 2016 Current 000 000 Insurance payables 931884 Social security and other taxes 20706 Other payables 89165 Accruals and deferred income 208321 Deferred and contingent consideration 5998 1200tel Noncurrent 000 000 Other payables 35352 Deferred and contingent consideration 14123 We have reclassified 53772000 of accruals from other payables to accruals and deferred income in 2016.
In 2017 the rent free accrual within other payables and deferred and contingent consideration has been split between current and noncurrent liabilities.
The trade and other payables include 147675000 of nonfinancial liabilities 2016 134587000.
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS BY CATEGORY The accounting policies for financial instruments have been applied to the line items below At 31 December 2017 Loans and receivables
Available forsale Total Assets per balance sheet 000 000 000 000 Availableforsale financial assets 131938 131938 Heldforsale financial assets Derivative financial instruments Trade and other receivables a 583339 Cash and cash equivalents 1015087 Total 1598426 132127 1818667
Other
Liabilities per balance sheet 000 000 000
710098 710098 Trade and other payables b 1157874 1157874 Redemption liabilities  option contracts Derivative financial instruments Total 95781 1867972 1963753 At 31 December 2016 Loans and receivables
Available forsale Total Assets per balance sheet 000 000 000 000 Availableforsale financial assets Derivative financial instruments Trade and other receivables a 563683 Cash and cash equivalents 939945 Total 1503628
Other
Liabilities per balance sheet 000 000 000
687832 687832 Trade and other payables b 1123195 1123195 Redemption liabilities  option contracts Derivative financial instruments Total 102788 1811027 1913815 Prepayments are excluded from the trade and other receivables balance as this analysis is required only for financial instruments.
Nonfinancial liabilities are excluded from the trade and other payables balance as this analysis is required only for financial instruments.
Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS BY CATEGORY CONTINUED The following table presents the Groups financial assets and liabilities that are measured at fair value at 31 December 2017.
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total At 31 December 2017 000 000 000 000
Derivatives used for hedging Availableforsale financial assets equity securities debt investments fixed deposits 120931 Heldforsale financial assets   189 189 Total 120931
Contingent consideration 13280 13280 Redemption liabilities  option contracts 76444 76444 Derivatives used for hedging
19337 89724 109061 Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total At 31 December 2016 000 000 000 000
Derivatives used for hedging  124973  124973 Availableforsale financial assets equity securities   1115 1115 debt investments   11964 11964 fixed deposits 127659   127659 Total 127659 124973 13079 265711
Contingent consideration 18898 18898 Redemption liabilities  option contracts 29637 29637 Derivatives used for hedging
73151 48535 121686 Apart from where disclosed there are no differences between the fair value and the carrying value of financial assets and liabilities.
Instruments included in level 1 are financial instruments traded in active markets for which the fair value is based upon quoted market prices at the balance sheet date.
A market is regarded as active if quoted prices are readily and regularly available from an exchange dealer broker industry group pricing service or regulatory agency and those prices represent actual and regularly occurring market transactions on an armslength basis.
Instruments included in level 2 are financial instruments that are not traded in an active market for example overthecounter derivatives and for which the fair value is determined by using internal and external models.
These models maximise the use of observable market data where it is available and rely as little as possible on entity specific estimates.
If all significant inputs required to measure the fair value of an instrument are observable the instrument is included in level 2.
Level 2 includes derivatives used for hedging which are valued using a discounted cash flow methodology incorporating observable market forward foreign exchange and interest rates.
During the year there were no transfers between level 1 and level 2.
There were no changes in valuation techniques during the year.
Instruments included in level 3 are financial instruments for which one or more of the significant inputs is not based on observable market data.
In respect of deferred and contingent consideration and redemption liabilities  option contracts unobservable inputs include managements assessment of the expected future performance of relevant acquired businesses and are valued using a discounted cash flow methodology.
A 1% movement in the discount rate applied in the calculation of the redemption liability in respect of Construction Risk Partners LLC the largest item within the redemption liability would result in a change of the overall redemption liability of 6%.
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS BY CATEGORY CONTINUED A reconciliation of the movements in level 3 is provided below
Level 3
Level 3 At 1 January 2017 13079 Exchange differences 498 5645 Companies acquired Utilised in the year 54 3969 Reclassification from associates to heldforsale 189 Revaluation gain included within equity 58 Charged to income statement 1578 1046 At 31 December 2017 11196 Of the 1578000 charged to the income statement 312000 is credited in net finance costs and 1890000 is charged to other operating costs.
Of the 1046000 charged to the income statement 4967000 is charged to net finance costs and 3921000 is credited to other operating costs Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION
Current
Bank overdraft 19055 Unsecured loan notes Bank borrowings Finance lease liabilities 171
Unsecured loan notes 420472 Bank borrowing 270142 Finance lease liabilities 258 Total borrowings 710098 The borrowings include secured liabilities finance leases of 429000 2016 782000.
Borrowings are discussed in the Finance Directors Review on page 37.
The exposure of the borrowings of the Group to interest rate changes and the periods in which the borrowings reprice are as follows 6 months or less months years
5 years Fixed rate
At 31 December 2017 660339    49759 At 31 December 2016 632035 243   55554 687832 The effective interest rates at the balance sheet date were as follows Bank overdraft Unsecured loan notes  private placement 2.61% 2.69% Bank borrowings 1.54% 1.34% Finance lease liabilities 5.06% 9.96% During 2017 and 2016 there was no interest charge on bank overdrafts.
Interest is charged only to the extent that overdraft balances exceed the deposits held with the bank.
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS BORROWINGS CONTINUED Maturity of noncurrent borrowings excluding finance lease liabilities Between 1 and 2 years Between 2 and 3 years 61816 Between 3 and 4 years Between 4 and 5 years 300962 Over 5 years 327836 Finance lease liabilities  minimum lease payments No later than 1 year 193 Later than 1 year and no later than 2 years 93 Later than 2 years and no later than 3 years 54 Later than 3 years and no later than 4 years 48 Later than 4 years and no later than 5 years 36 Later than 5 years 52 Future finance charges on finance leases 47 106 Present value of finance lease liabilities 429 The present value of finance lease liabilities is as follows No later than 1 year 171 Later than 1 year and no later than 2 years 85 Later than 2 years and no later than 3 years 47 Later than 3 years and no later than 4 years 43 Later than 4 years and no later than 5 years 33 Later than 5 years 50 Lease liabilities are effectively secured as the rights to the leased assets revert to the lessor in the event of default.
Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION BORROWINGS CONTINUED The carrying amount of the Groups borrowings are denominated in the following currencies Sterling 372866 US Dollar 335829 Other currencies 1403 Borrowing facilities The Group has undrawn committed borrowing facilities of Floating rate expiring beyond one year 229000 337000 Facilities expiring beyond one year relate to a The committed unsecured 500 million revolving credit facilities in the name of JIB Group Limited which matures in February 2022.
As at the balance sheet date drawings under the revolving credit facilities are subject to a margin and fees of 115 basis points above the relevant LIBOR interest rate and additional commitment fees on the undrawn facility. a coupon of 5.69%.
Drawings under the Groups private placement programme are swapped into Sterling floating and are subject to an equivalent spread over LIBOR of between 227 and 238 basis points. a coupon of 3.78% and USD 70 million 51.7 million in January 2025 with a coupon of 3.93%.
The proceeds of this placement have been swapped into Sterling at fixed and LIBOR based floating rates and are subject to an equivalent spread over LIBOR of between 205 and 220 basis points. maturing in April 2026 with a coupon of 4.27%.
The proceeds of this placement have been swapped into LIBOR based floating rates and are subject to an equivalent spread over LIBOR of 150 basis points. with a coupon of 4.13%.
The proceeds of this private placement in October 2014 have been swapped into Sterling at LIBOR based floating rates and are subject to an equivalent spread over LIBOR of between 146 and 157 basis points.
The terms and conditions of the Groups facilities include common debt and interest cover covenants with which the Group expects to continue to comply.
Liquidity risk Liquidity risk arises from an inability to maintain an optimal cost of capital or meet the short term financial demands of the business.
The Group has implemented the following steps to mitigate the risk Management reviews of business unit balance sheets and cash flows Maintenance of committed credit facilities Compliance with regulatory minimum capital requirements and regular stress testing Maintenance of a conservative funding profile.
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS DEFERRED INCOME TAXES Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are offset when there is a legally enforceable right to set off current tax assets against current tax liabilities and when the deferred income taxes relate to the same fiscal authority.
The following amounts determined after appropriate offsetting are shown in the consolidated balance sheet.
Assets Liabilities Net Property plant and equipment 2095 374 554 1721 Provisions 10652 990 5273 9662 Losses 2123 Deferred income 421 5770 5386 5349 4507 Other intangibles 3740 1150 616 2590 Goodwill 560 3182 3046 2622 2748 Other 1809 1660 1826 149 Pensions 27709 23 131 27686 Share based payments 8785 Fair values 1890 11166 Tax assetsliabilities 57894 15039 16832 42855 Setoff of tax 3628 5454 3628 Net tax assetsliabilities 54266 11411 11378 42855 The majority of the deferred tax is not expected to reverse within 12 months.
The reconciliation in movements of net tax assets is provided below At 1
Exchange differences
Credit charge to equity
At 31
Accelerated tax depreciation 1001 3 1721 Provisions 10664 Losses 1858 Deferred income 4507 442 407 Other intangibles 2436 294 2590 Goodwill 2748 21 Other 1581 1310 122 Pensions 32401 5857 215 Share based payments 4858 Fair values 11166 Net tax assets 58710 1384 2061 16457 75 42855 The total current and deferred income tax charged to equity during the year is as follows At 1 January
At 31 December Pensions 46201 2599 43602 Share based payments 11811 Foreign Exchange  2929 2929 Fair values foreign exchange 13180 13039 141 availableforsale 169 13056 293 15604 55757 Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION DEFERRED INCOME TAXES CONTINUED Deferred tax assets are recognised to the extent that the realisation of the related tax benefits through the future taxable profits is considered probable.
A deferred tax asset relating to tax losses of 14030000 2016 14340000 has not been recognised in the balance sheet in respect of certain of the Groups operations principally US China Singapore and Japan where it is considered likely that the losses will expire before use or are unlikely to be realised in the short term.
A deferred tax asset relating to other deferred tax balances of 6853000 2016 7473000 has not been recognised in the balance sheet in respect of certain of the Groups overseas operations principally the US where it is considered that the asset is unlikely to be realised in the short term.
Following the recent US tax reform the federal tax rate has reduced from 35% to 21% the non recognised deferred tax assets in relation to the US have been calculated using the reduced rate of 21%.
Deferred tax liabilities have not been recognised on temporary differences of 136 million 2016 124 million representing the unremitted earnings of subsidiaries and joint ventures.
Such amounts are permanently reinvested.
Deferred tax liabilities have not been recognised on temporary differences of nil 2016 nil representing unremitted earnings of associates.
PROVISIONS FOR LIABILITIES AND CHARGES
Litigation provisions
Total
At 1 January 2017 2919 Exchange adjustment 57 69 Utilised in the year 970 9208 Creditedcharged to the income statement 124 7794 Interest charge 56 Reclassification 250 Companies acquired 30 At 31 December 2017 2104 At 1 January 2016 1300 Exchange differences 94 Utilised in the year 349 16328 Chargedcredited to the income statement 1984 78 7232 Companies disposed 110 9 At 31 December 2016 2919 Analysis of total provisions Current  to be utilised within one year 6865 Noncurrent  to be utilised in more than one year 1549 Property related provisions The Group recognises a provision for onerous contracts when the expected benefits to be derived from a contract are less than the unavoidable costs of meeting the obligations under the contract.
Provision is made for the future rental cost of vacant property and expected dilapidation expenses.
In calculating the provision required account is taken of the duration of the lease and any recovery of cost achievable from subletting.
Property provisions occur principally in the US and UK and relate to a variety of lease commitments.
The longest lease term expires in 2026.
Litigation provisions At any point in time the Group can be involved in a variety of litigation regulatory and other government authorities investigations and disputes around the world.
A provision is established in respect of such issues when it is probable that the liability has been incurred and the amount of the liability can be reasonably estimated.
The Group analyses its litigation exposures based on available information including external legal consultation where appropriate to assess its potential liability.
Where appropriate the Group also provides for the cost of defending or initiating such matters.
However the final outcome could differ materially from the amount provided.
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS PROVISIONS FOR LIABILITIES AND CHARGES CONTINUED Where a litigation provision has been made it is stated gross of any third party recovery.
All such recoveries are included as Other receivables within trade and other receivables.
At 31 December 2017 in connection with certain litigation matters the Groups litigation provisions include an amount of 0.1million 2016 0.1million to reflect this gross basis and the corresponding insurance recovery has been included within trade and other receivables.
This presentation has had no effect on the consolidated income statement for the year ended 31 December 2017 2016 nil.
Other
Other provisions include provisions for clawback of commission which arises on certain types of Employee Benefits contracts.
SHARE CAPITAL AND PREMIUM Number of shares
Share premium
Allotted called up and fully paid At 1 January 2016 220171007 Issued during the year 10000 At 31 December 2016 220181007 Issued during the year At 31 December 2017 220181007 Ordinary shares carry rights to dividends voting and proceeds on winding up and have a par value of 0.05.
During the year the Company issued nil 2016 10000 ordinary shares for a consideration of nil 2016 38250 following exercises by executives of options held under the Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Executive Share Option Scheme.
As at 31 December 2017 the Employee Benefit Trust holds 7557229 ordinary shares 2016 8715895 acquired to settle employee share based payments.
Acquisitions of such shares are booked directly to equity.
NONCONTROLLING INTERESTS The Groups total noncontrolling interest for the year is 19911000 of which 6308000 is attributed to JLTs Private Client Services group of businesses PCS.
PCS is defined as a material noncontrolling interest to the Group.
The noncontrolling interests in respect of other entities are not individually material.
Set out below is the summarised financial information for PCS.
Summarised Balance Sheet
Assets 53740 Liabilities 31122 34218 Total 22618
Assets 4212 Liabilities 149 316 Total 4063 Net assets 26681 30912 Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION NONCONTROLLING INTERESTS CONTINUED Summarised Statement of Comprehensive Income Revenue 63552 64018 Profit for the year 16498 20663 Other comprehensive income  550 Total comprehensive income for the year 16498 21213 Total comprehensive income attributable to noncontrolling interests 4116 5166 Dividends paid to noncontrolling interests 5043 2229 Summarised Statement of Cash Flows Net cash generated from operating activities 20092 19897 Net cash used in investing activities 2060 291 Net cash used in financing activities 20083 18348 Net decreaseincrease in cash and cash equivalents 2051 1258 The information above is the amount before intercompany eliminations.
OTHER RESERVES
Fair value and hedging
Total
At 1 January 2017 104111 54453 83561 Fair value gains net of tax availableforsale financial assets cash flow hedges Currency translation differences 34957 34957 Net gainslosses recognised directly in equity 34957 28786 Issue of share capital At 31 December 2017 104111
Fair value and hedging
Total
At 1 January 2016 104074 12827 17280 73967 Fair value lossesgains net of tax availableforsale financial assets availableforsale reclassified to the income statement  181  181 cash flow hedges Currency translation differences Net lossesgains recognised directly in equity 41626 100841 Issue of share capital 37 At 31 December 2016 104111 54453 83561 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS QUALIFYING EMPLOYEE SHARE OWNERSHIP TRUST During the year the Qualifying Employee Share Ownership Trust QUEST allocated nil ordinary shares to employees in satisfaction of options that have been exercised under the Sharesave schemes 2016 nil.
CASH GENERATED FROM OPERATIONS Profit before taxation 181661 Investment and finance income 10452 6877 Interest payable on bank loans and finance leases 16738 Fair value gains on financial instruments 401 87 Net pension financing expenses 5448 Unwinding of liability discounting 5141 Depreciation 12728 Amortisation of other intangible assets 35955 Amortisation of share based payments 26804 Share of results of associates undertakings 2149 1353 Non cash exceptional items 893 Gainslosses on disposal of businesses 910 1660 Lossesgains on disposal of property plant and equipment 90 Gainslosses on disposal of fixed asset investments 2101 8 Increase in trade and other receivables 19655 67160 Decreaseincrease in trade and other payables  excluding insurance broking balances 12436 24788 Decrease in provisions for liabilities and charges 3823 12440 Decrease in retirement benefit obligation 16174 10530 Net cash inflow from operations 217357 166712 Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION BUSINESS COMBINATIONS 2016 Acquisitions During the year the process of finalising the provisional fair values in respect of acquisitions carried out during 2016 has resulted in the following changes Revised fair value acquired
31 Dec 2016 Change in fair value AssetVal Pty Ltd 573 Stonehill Reinsurance Partners LLC 2122 Risk and Reinsurance Solutions Corporation 590 Others 181 186 These changes in fair value affected the following balance sheet classes Revised fair value acquired
31 Dec 2016 Change in fair value Property plant and equipment 151 Other intangible assets 3310 Trade and other receivables 862 Cash and cash equivalents own cash 1051 fiduciary cash 1353 Insurance payables 1353 1388 35 Trade and other payables 1380 1004 376 Current taxation 27 27 Deferred taxation 410 116 294 Noncontrolling interests 91  91 Goodwill calculation
31 Dec 2017
31 Dec 2016
Purchase consideration cash paid 7255 contingent consideration 8119 deferred consideration 2098 Total purchase consideration 17472 Less fair value of net assets acquired 3466 Goodwill 14006
31 Dec 2017
31 Dec 2016
Purchase consideration settled in cash 7255 Cash and cash equivalents  own cash in subsidiaries acquired 1051 1121 70 Cash and cash equivalents  fiduciary cash in subsidiaries acquired 1353 1388 35 Cash outflow on acquisition 4851 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Current year acquisitions During the year the following new business acquisitions and additional investments were completed
Acquisition date
Cost
Construction Risk Partners LLC CRP i Jan 2017 50.1% 38650 Belgibo NV ii Aug 2017 100.0% 21001 Acquisition of other new business completed during the year iii JanDec 2017 100.0% 1581 Additional investments in existing businesses iii JanDec 2017 various 7685 i Acquisition of Construction Risk Partners LLC CRP On 27 January 2017 the Group completed the acquisition of CRP Holding Company LLC the holding company of Construction Risk Partners LLC CRP one of the leading construction Risk and Surety specialty brokers in the USA providing risk consulting and broking services.
The acquired business contributed revenue of 18325000 and net profit including acquisition and integration costs incurred to date of 1940000 to the Group for the period since acquisition.
If the acquisition had taken place on 1 January 2017 we estimate the contribution to Group revenue would have been 20436000 and net profit including acquisition and integration costs incurred to date would have been 2413000.
Goodwill calculation 000 Purchase consideration cash paid 38650 Total purchase consideration 38650 Less fair value of net assets acquired 7244 Goodwill 31406 The assets and liabilities arising from the acquisition were as follows
Fair value Property plant and equipment 374 Other intangible assets 2 Trade and other receivables 280 Cash and cash equivalents own cash 8717 fiduciary cash 3197 Insurance payables 3197 3197 Trade and other payables 4120 4120 Noncontrolling interests Purchase consideration settled in cash 38650 Cash and cash equivalents  own cash in subsidiary acquired 8717 Cash and cash equivalents  fiduciary cash in subsidiary acquired 3197 Cash outflow on acquisition 26736 As at 31 December 2017 the process of reviewing the fair values of assets acquired had not been completed consequently the fair values stated above are provisional.
Goodwill recognised is expected to be deductible for income tax purposes.
BUSINESS COMBINATIONS CONTINUED Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION BUSINESS COMBINATIONS CONTINUED ii Acquisition of Belgibo NV On 31 August 2017 the Group acquired Belgibo NV in Belgium a long established highly regarded Specialty broker with marketleading expertise in Marine Aviation and Credit and Political risks.
The acquired business contributed revenue of 2162000 and net loss including acquisition and integration costs incurred to date of 220000 to the Group for the year since acquisition.
If the acquisition had taken place on 1 January 2017 we estimate the contribution to Group revenue would have been 7871000 and net loss including acquisition and integration costs incurred to date would have been 85000.
Goodwill calculation 000 Purchase consideration cash paid 18691 contingent consideration 833 deferred consideration 1477 Total purchase consideration 21001 Less fair value of net assets acquired 775 Goodwill 20226 The assets and liabilities arising from the acquisition were as follows
Fair value Property plant and equipment 165 Other intangible assets 12 Trade and other receivables 1291 Cash and cash equivalents fiduciary cash 11211 Insurance creditors 11211 11211 Trade and other payables 1040 1040 Current taxation 247 247 Deferred taxation 215 Borrowings 1434 1434 Provisions for liabilities and charges 411 411 Retirement benefit obligations 634 634 2083 775 Purchase consideration settled in cash 18691 Borrowings 1434 Cash and cash equivalents  fiduciary cash in subsidiary acquired 11211 Cash outflow on acquisition 8914 As at 31 December 2017 the process of reviewing the fair values of assets acquired had not been completed consequently the fair values stated above are provisional.
Deferred consideration of 1477000 is based upon net assets shown in the completion accounts.
Contingent consideration of 833000 is based upon expected revenue of future years.
The maximum contingent consideration is capped at 10000000.
None of the goodwill recognised is expected to be deductible for income tax purposes.
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS iii Other acquisitions and additional investments in existing businesses Goodwill calculation 000 Purchase consideration cash paid 8567 contingent consideration 699 Total purchase consideration 9266 Less fair value of net assets acquired 1314 Less equity movement on transactions with noncontrolling interests 6529 Goodwill 1423 The assets and liabilities arising from acquisitions were as follows
Fair value Other intangible assets 158 Noncontrolling interests 1156 Purchase consideration settled in cash 8567 Cash outflow on acquisition 8567 As at 31 December 2017 the process of reviewing the fair values of assets acquired had not been completed consequently the fair values stated above are provisional.
Group summary of the net assets acquired and goodwill The assets and liabilities arising from acquisitions were as follows
Belgibo
Others
Total
Purchase consideration cash paid 38650 contingent consideration deferred consideration Total purchase consideration 38650 Less fair value of net assets acquired 7244 Less equity movement on transactions with noncontrolling interests Goodwill on acquisitions occurring during the year 31406 Impact of revision to fair value adjustment in relation to acquisitions completed in 2016 469 Net increase in goodwill 53524 Impact of additional investments 6529 Net decrease in equity 6529 Group summary of cash flows
Belgibo
Others
Total
Purchase consideration settled in cash 38650 Cash and cash equivalents  own cash in subsidiary acquired 8717 Borrowings  1434 Cash and cash equivalents  fiduciary cash in subsidiary acquired 3197 11211 Net cash outflow 26736 Impact of revision to fair value adjustment on cash in relation to acquisitions completed in prior years 105 Net cash outflow on acquisitions during the year 44322 BUSINESS COMBINATIONS CONTINUED Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION BUSINESS DISPOSALS On 31 May 2017 the Group disposed its shareholdings in Expacare Limited.
Net assets and proceeds of disposal Fair value Other intangible assets 8 Trade and other receivables 538 Cash and cash equivalents  own cash 235 Trade and other payables 239 Current taxation 48 Deferred taxation 3 Net assets at disposal 497 Gain on disposal 675 Proceeds on disposal 1172
Disposal consideration settled in cash 1172 Cash and cash equivalents  own cash in subsidiary disposed 235 Cash inflow on disposal during the year 937 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS BUSINESS DISPOSALS CONTINUED Other disposals During the year the Group completed other disposals none of which were individually significant.
Net assets and proceeds of disposal
Property plant and equipment 22 Other intangible assets 466 Trade and other receivables 1741 Cash and cash equivalents own cash 35 Trade and other payables 67 Current taxation 22 Deferred taxation 5 Noncontrolling interests 544 Net assets at disposal 2714 Exchange loss recycled from exchange reserves 69 Equity movement on transactions with noncontrolling interests 163 Gain on disposals 235 Proceeds on disposals 3043
Deferred proceeds 2388 Cash inflow on disposals during the year 655 Total consideration 3043
Disposal consideration settled in cash 655 Cash and cash equivalents  own cash in subsidiaries disposed own cash in subsidiary disposed 35 Cash inflow on disposals during the year 620 Group summary of cash flows
Others
Total
Disposal consideration settled in cash 1172 Cash and cash equivalents  own cash in subsidiaries disposed own cash in subsidiary disposed 235 35 270 Cash inflow on disposals during the year 937 The gain on disposal of businesses in the year of 910000 together with costs on disposal of 603000 result in a net gain on disposal of 307000.
Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION RETIREMENT BENEFIT OBLIGATIONS The Group operates a number of pension schemes throughout the world the most significant of which are of the defined benefit type and operate on a funded basis.
The principal pension schemes are the Jardine Lloyd Thompson UK Pension Scheme the JLT USA Incentive Savings Plan the JLT USA Employee Retirement Plan the JLT USA Stable Value Plan the Pension Plan for Employees of Jardine Lloyd Thompson Canada Inc and the Jardine Lloyd Thompson Ireland Limited Pension Fund and the Belgibo DB and DC Plans.
The pension service costs accrued for the year are as follows UK Schemes Overseas Schemes Total Defined benefit schemes Defined contribution schemes 20485 The Jardine Lloyd Thompson UK Pension Scheme has two sections one providing defined benefits and the other providing benefits on a defined contribution basis.
The assets of the scheme are held in a trustee administered fund separate from the Company.
With effect from 1 December 2006 the defined benefit section of the Scheme was amended to cease future benefits accruals.
Under the Scheme as amended a participants normal retirement benefit will be determined based on their service and compensation prior to 1 December 2006.
The latest finalised triennial actuarial funding valuation of the Jardine Lloyd Thompson UK Pension Scheme was undertaken as at 31 March 2014 and showed a deficit of 134.2 million.
The company agreed with the Trustees that annual contributions of 10.5 million would be paid each July for 14 years from 2015 and to 2018 to fund the scheme deficit.
This valuation was updated to 31 December 2017 by a qualified actuary employed by the Group.
An updated triennial actuarial valuation as at 31 March 2017 is currently being carried out but results are not yet available.
The weighted average duration of the defined benefit obligation is 18 years 2016 18 years.
The principal overseas schemes are The JLT USA Incentive Savings Plan which is a defined contribution scheme.
Employees may contribute up to 50% of their salary subject to an IRS maximum each year of USD 18000 in 2017 and the Group contributes at a rate of 100% of each 1% contributed by the employee up to a maximum employee contribution of 4% up to a maximum of USD 10600.
Employees aged over 50 may make catchup contributions subject to an IRS maximum each year of USD 6000 in 2017.
The JLT USA Employee Retirement Plan which is a defined benefit scheme.
The latest actuarial valuation was undertaken at 1 January 2017 by independent actuaries.
With effect from 31 July 2005 the plan was amended to eliminate future benefit accruals.
Under the plan as amended a participants normal retirement benefit will be determined based on their service and compensation prior to 31 July 2005.
The average compensation and length of service will be determined as at 31 July 2005.
The Group had made a settlement gain of 127000 in 2016 relating to nonroutine lump sum payments and it is disclosed under the curtailment gain.
The JLT USA Stable Value Plan.
The latest actuarial valuation was undertaken as at 1 January 2017 by independent actuaries.
With effect from 31 March 2016 the Plan was amended to eliminate future benefit accruals.
Under the Plan as amended a participants normal retirement benefit will be determined based on their service and compensation prior to 31 March 2016.
The average compensation and length of service was determined as at 31 March 2016.
The plan closed in 2016.
The Pension Plan for Employees of Jardine Lloyd Thompson Canada Inc. on the 2007 pensionable salary and the other providing benefits on a defined contribution basis.
The JLT pension contribution for the defined contribution plan ranges from 3% to 13% based on age and service.
The company makes additional contribution to defined contribution plans not exceeding 2% of pensionable earnings if the member makes a matching voluntary contributions.
The Defined Benefit Pension Plan was amended on 1 January 2009 in order to close the plan to new entrants and eliminate future benefit accruals from this date forward.
The JLT Canada Defined Pension Plans last formal valuation was undertaken as at 31 December 2016 by a qualified third party actuary.
The Jardine Lloyd Thompson Ireland Limited Pension Fund which is a defined benefit pension scheme has its assets held in a separately administered fund.
The contributions to it are agreed between the Trustees and the Company based on the advice of an appropriately qualified independent actuary.
The most recent triennial actuarial valuation for funding purposes was carried out by the appropriately qualified independent actuary as at 1 January 2014.
With effect from 30 November 2008 the scheme was closed to new entrants and future service accrual ceased.
The company also operates a defined contribution scheme namely The Jardine Lloyd Thompson 2004 Retirement Benefits Scheme which is held and administered under a separate trust.
The most recent triennial actuarial valuation for funding purposes was carried out by an appropriately qualified independent actuary as at 1 January 2017. two pension plans providing benefits on a defined contribution basis subject to certain guaranteed minimum asset returns.
The employer pension contribution for the defined contribution plan ranges from 2% to 6% based on category and service.
The defined benefit scheme was amended on 1 January 2007 in order to close the plan to new entrants.
The defined benefit schemes last formal valuation was undertaken as at 31 December 2017 by a qualified third party actuary.
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS RETIREMENT BENEFIT OBLIGATIONS CONTINUED The principal actuarial assumptions used were as follows At 31 December 2017
Scheme
US
Scheme
Canadian
Scheme
Irish
Scheme
US Stable Value Plan
Schemes
Rate of increase in salaries na na na na na 2.50% Rate of increase of pensions in payment a 3.16% na 2.00% 3.00% na na Discount rate b 2.45% 3.35% 3.30% 1.90% 3.053.20% 1.001.75% Inflation rate 3.26% 2.00% 2.00% 1.50% 2.00% 2.00% Revaluation rate for deferred pensioners 2.26% na na 1.50% na na Mortality  life expectancy at age 65 for male members c Aged 65 at 31 December years 21.7 21.1 22.0 22.8 22.0 20.4 At 31 December 2016
Scheme
US
Scheme
Canadian
Scheme
Irish
Scheme
US Stable Value Plan
Schemes
Rate of increase in salaries na na na na na na Rate of increase of pensions in payment a 3.24% na 2.25% 3.00% na na Discount rate b 2.80% 4.00% 3.90% 1.90% 3.353.40% na Inflation rate 3.34% 2.00% 2.25% 1.50% 2.00% na Revaluation rate for deferred pensioners 2.34% na na 1.50% na na Mortality  life expectancy at age 65 for male members c Aged 65 at 31 December years 21.8 21.3 22.0 22.8 21.3 na In respect of the UK scheme where there are inflation linked benefits the inflation increases are limited to a maximum of 5% per annum some are limited to 3% per annum. b In line with IAS 19 Revised the expected return on scheme assets assumption is the same as the discount rate assumed for the liabilities.
Mortality assumptions for the UK scheme are based on 105% of the S2PxA tables with improvements based on CMI 2016 tables with a 1.25% per annum longterm rate of improvement.
Mortality assumptions for the US Scheme and US Stable Value Plan are based on the RP2014 Mortality Table with MP2017 projections.
Mortality assumptions for the Canadian Scheme are based on the CPM2014 Private Table with generational projection using scale CPMB.
Mortality assumptions for the Irish Scheme assume that deaths after retirement will be in accordance with standard mortality tables 90% PxA92C2004 with allowance for expected future mortality improvements.
There is assumed to be no preretirement mortality.
Mortality assumptions for the Belgian Schemes are based on the Belgian mortality table MR3FR3.
The sensitivity of the defined benefit obligation to changes in the weighted principal assumptions is Impact on defined benefit obligation Change in assumptions Change to obligation Discount rate decrease of 0.1% increase of 2.0% Inflation rate increase of 0.1% increase of 1.0% Life expectancy increase of 1 year increase of 4.0% The above sensitivity analysis is based on a change in an assumption while holding all other assumptions constant.
In practice this is unlikely to occur and changes in some of the assumptions may be correlated.
When calculating the sensitivity of the defined benefit obligation to significant actuarial assumptions the same method present value of the defined benefit obligation calculated with the projected unit credit method at the end of the reporting period has been applied as when calculating the pension liability recognised within the balance sheet.
Note this sensitivity is for defined benefit obligations only and does not consider the impact that changes in assumptions may have on the assets in particular the assets held in respect of the insured pensioners.
The methods and types of assumptions used in preparing the sensitivity analysis did not change compared to the previous year.
Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION RETIREMENT BENEFIT OBLIGATIONS CONTINUED Defined benefit obligation UK Schemes Overseas Schemes Total Present value of funded obligations 652028 674029 72553 72315 724581 746344 Fair value of plan assets 495616 Net liability recognised in the balance sheet 156412 184496 12872 13916 169284 198412 Reconciliation of net defined benefit liability UK Schemes Overseas Schemes Total Opening defined benefit liability 184496 118947 13916 11440 198412 130387 Exchange differences 1049 2169 1049 2169 Pension expense 5346 4778 1155 1274 6501 6052 Employer contributions 16273 Assets acquired in a business combination Total gainloss recognised in reserves 17157 71723 828 Net liability recognised in the balance sheet 156412 184496 12872 13916 169284 198412 Reconciliation of defined benefit obligation UK Schemes Overseas Schemes Total Opening defined benefit obligation 674029 576343 72315 61940 746344 638283 Exchange differences 11626 4186 Service cost Interest cost 18063 21435 2405 2502 20468 23937 Curtailment gain Settlement amount Loss on defined benefit obligation 18002 121841 3722 1120 21724 122961 Actual benefit payments 58066 Liabilities assumed in a business combination 2857  2857 Closing defined benefit obligation 652028 674029 72553 72315 724581 746344 Reconciliation of fair value of assets UK Schemes Overseas Schemes Total Opening value of assets 489533 Exchange differences 3137 9457 3137 9457 Expected return on assets 13119 Actuarial gain 35159 Employer contributions 16273 Actual benefit payments 58066 45590 4560 3918 62626 49508 Settlement amount Expenses 402 377 651 443 1053 820 Assets acquired in a business combination 2223  2223 Closing value of assets 495616 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS RETIREMENT BENEFIT OBLIGATIONS CONTINUED The analysis of the fair value of the scheme assets is as follows UK Schemes Overseas Schemes At 31 December 2017
Value %
Value % Equities 106480 21% 33406 56% Equitylinked liability driven investments LDI 95436 19%
14038 24% Investment funds 85993 17% Qualifying insurance policies 204992 42% Other assets 6367 10% Cash 2715 1% 5870 10% Total market value 495616 100% 59681 100% UK Schemes Overseas Schemes At 31 December 2016
Value %
Value % Equities 186674 38% 34795 60% Bonds   10454 18% Investment funds 95360 19% Qualifying insurance policies 205719 42% Other assets   3827 6% Cash 1780 1% 9323 16% Total market value 489533 100% 58399 100% Other assets include hedge funds and property.
The schemes do not hold cash as a strategic investment and cash balances at 31 December represent working balances.
Reconciliation of return on assets UK Schemes Overseas Schemes Total Expected return on assets 13119 Actuarial gain 35159 1201 39709 Actual return on assets 48278 The amounts recognised in the consolidated income statement are as follows UK Schemes Overseas Schemes Total Service cost    487  487 Settlement and curtailment gain    127  127 Expenses 402 377 651 443 1053 820 Total included within salaries and associated expenses 402 377 651 803 1053 1180 Interest cost 18063 21435 2405 2502 20468 23937 Expected return on assets 13119 Total included within finance costs 4944 4401 504 471 5448 4872 Expenses before taxation 5346 4778 1155 1274 6501 6052 Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION RETIREMENT BENEFIT OBLIGATIONS CONTINUED The amounts included in the consolidated statement of comprehensive income are as follows UK Schemes Overseas Schemes Total Actuarial loss on defined benefit obligation 18002 121841 3722 1120 21724 122961 Actuarial gain 35159 Total actuarial gainloss recognised 17157 71723 828 Cumulative actuarial loss recognised 260005 277162 31928 32756 291933 309918 The five year history of experience adjustments is as follows UK Schemes Defined benefit obligation at end of year 652028 674029 576343 641759 583745 Fair value of plan assets 495616 489533 457396 479139 458727 Deficit in the schemes 156412 184496 118947 162620 125018 Difference between the actual and expected return on plan assets amount 000 35159 50118 11593 16437 22217 expressed as a percentage of the plan assets 7.09% 10.24% 2.53% 3.43% 4.84% Experience gainloss on plan liabilities amount 000 5793 7009 8840 1592 1364 expressed as a percentage of the present value of the plan liabilities 0.89% 1.04% 1.53% 0.25% 0.23% Overseas Schemes Defined benefit obligation at end of year 72553 72315 61940 78044 60566 Fair value of plan assets 59681 58399 50500 61629 54957 Deficit in the schemes 12872 13916 11440 16415 5609 Difference between the actual and expected return on plan assets amount 000 4550 1201 762 2450 6863 expressed as a percentage of the plan assets 7.62% 2.06% 1.51% 3.98% 12.49% Experience gainloss on plan liabilities amount 000 233 4450 1427 1265 377 expressed as a percentage of the present value of the plan liabilities 0.32% 6.15% 2.30% 1.62% 0.62% The expected employer contributions in respect of the year ending 31 December 2018 are as follows
UK Scheme 10500 US Scheme 991 Canadian Scheme 42 Irish Scheme 946 Belgian Schemes 42 Total expected contributions 12521 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS RELATEDPARTY TRANSACTIONS Transactions with the Jardine Matheson Group As at 22 February 2018 the Jardine Matheson Group owns 40.16% of the Companys shares via its whollyowned subsidiary JMH Investments
The remaining 59.84% of the shares are widely held.
In the normal course of business a number of the Groups subsidiaries undertake on an armslength basis a variety of transactions with the Jardine Matheson Group JMG and its associates JMA.
The following transactions were carried out during the year 2017 2016
JMA
Total
JMG
JMA
Total
Income
Fees and commissions 4673 6918 3999 1941 5940
Administrative expenses 1420 1420 1598  1598 Yearend balances arising from these transactions Trade and other receivables 1199 1565 962 642 1604 Trade and other payables 17 1548 880 642 1522 Transactions with associates The following transactions were carried out with associates during the year
Fees and commissions 2791 3238 Finance income Interest receivable  own funds 65 8
Administrative expenses 27 19 Yearend balances arising from these transactions Trade and other receivables 3096 4966 Trade and other payables 3096 4965 Transactions with key management The relatedparty disclosure regarding key management is detailed in note 6 on page 124.
Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION
Capital commitments Capital expenditure contracted for 2018 at the balance sheet date amounts to 1916000 2017 1293000.
Operating lease commitments  where a Group company is the lessee The future aggregate minimum lease payments under a noncancellable operating leases are as follows No later than 1 year 42787 42981 Later than 1 year and no later than 5 years 141390 146090 Later than 5 years 271554 300912 455731 489983 The Group leases various offices under noncancellable operating lease agreements.
The principal lease term on the Groups headquarters at The St Botolph Building is for 21 years from the balance sheet date.
Rents will be reviewed on 1 October 2018 and every 5 years thereafter and will be calculated by reference to the prevailing market rate.
Subleases
Operating lease commitments  where a Group company is the lessor The future aggregate minimum lease payments under noncancellable operating subleases are as follows No later than 1 year 165 151 Later than 1 year and no later than 5 years 15telLegal and other loss contingencies Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc and its subsidiaries are subject to various claims legal proceedings investigations by regulatory and other government authorities and disputes around the world including alleged errors and omissions in connection with the placement of insurance and reinsurance risks and consulting services.
IFRS requires that liabilities for contingencies be recorded when it is probable that a liability has been incurred before the balance sheet date and the amount can be reasonably estimated.
Significant management judgement is required to comply with this guidance.
The Group analyses its litigation exposure based on available information including external legal consultation where appropriate to assess its potential liability.
On the basis of present information amounts already provided availability of insurance coverages and legal advice received it is the opinion of management that the disposition or ultimate determination of such claims will not have a material adverse effect on the consolidated financial position of the Group.
However it is possible that future results of operations or cash flows for any annual period could be materially affected by an unfavourable resolution of these matters.
As at 31 December 2017 the Group has contingent liabilities in respect of guarantees and letters of credit given on behalf of Group companies amounting to 14385000 2016 12024000.
In the UK the Group is working with the UK Financial Conduct Authority following a marketwide thematic review of financial advice provided to customers who were offered enhanced transfer value products ETVs.
Pending the outcome of the UK Financial Conduct Authoritys review a provision has been created for the estimated administration costs of completing the work for this review.
It is too early to determine whether any further liability exists.
SUBSEQUENT EVENTS On 14 February 2018 the Group acquired subject to FCA approval 100% of the issued share capital of Chartwell Healthcare Limited for a maximum consideration of 7.1 million payable in cash in tranches from completion to 2020.
On 28 February 2018 the Group acquired 100% of the issued share capital of International Risk Consultants Inc.
USD 25.0 million payable at completion.
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
100% Registered Office address Notes United Kingdom Agnew Higgins Pickering and Company Limited BDO LLP  55 Baker Street London W1U 7EU England Aldgate Trustees Ltd The St Botolph Building 138 Houndsditch London EC3A 7AW England Aviary Limited The St Botolph Building 138 Houndsditch London EC3A 7AW England Burke Ford Trustees Leicester Limited The St Botolph Building 138 Houndsditch London EC3A 7AW England CPRM Limited Lochside House 7 Lochside Avenue Edinburgh EH12 9DJ Scotland Fly Fizzi Limited 33.00 Pyers Croft Compton Chichester West Sussex PO18 9EX England GCube Underwriting Limited 155 Fenchurch Street London EC3M 6AL England Gracechurch Trustees Limited The St Botolph Building 138 Houndsditch London EC3A 7AW England Gresham Pension Trustees Limited The St Botolph Building 138 Houndsditch London EC3A 7AW England Hayward Aviation Limited The St Botolph Building 138 Houndsditch London EC3A 7AW England iimia Holdings Limited The St Botolph Building 138 Houndsditch London EC3A 7AW England Independent Trustee Services Limited The St Botolph Building 138 Houndsditch London EC3A 7AW England JIB Group Holdings Limited The St Botolph Building 138 Houndsditch London EC3A 7AW England JIB Group Limited The St Botolph Building 138 Houndsditch London EC3A 7AW England JIB Overseas Holdings Limited The St Botolph Building 138 Houndsditch London EC3A 7AW England JIB UK Holdings Limited The St Botolph Building 138 Houndsditch London EC3A 7AW England JLT Actuaries and Consultants Limited The St Botolph Building 138 Houndsditch London EC3A 7AW England JLT Advisory Limited The St Botolph Building 138 Houndsditch London EC3A 7AW England JLT Benefit Consultants Limited The St Botolph Building 138 Houndsditch London EC3A 7AW England JLT Benefit Solutions Limited The St Botolph Building 138 Houndsditch London EC3A 7AW England JLT Colombia Retail Limited The St Botolph Building 138 Houndsditch London EC3A 7AW England JLT Colombia Wholesale Limited 94.37 The St Botolph Building 138 Houndsditch London EC3A 7AW England JLT Consultants and Actuaries Limited The St Botolph Building 138 Houndsditch London EC3A 7AW England JLT Corporate Services Limited The St Botolph Building 138 Houndsditch London EC3A 7AW England JLT EB Holdings Limited The St Botolph Building 138 Houndsditch London EC3A 7AW England JLT EB Services Limited The St Botolph Building 138 Houndsditch London EC3A 7AW England JLT Financial Consultants Ltd The St Botolph Building 138 Houndsditch London EC3A 7AW England JLT Insurance Group Holdings Ltd The St Botolph Building 138 Houndsditch London EC3A 7AW England JLT Investment Management Limited The St Botolph Building 138 Houndsditch London EC3A 7AW England JLT LATAM Southern Cone Wholesale Limited 53.00 The St Botolph Building 138 Houndsditch London EC3A 7AW England JLT Latin American Holdings Limited The St Botolph Building 138 Houndsditch London EC3A 7AW England JLT Management Services Limited The St Botolph Building 138 Houndsditch London EC3A 7AW England JLT Mexico Holdings Limited The St Botolph Building 138 Houndsditch London EC3A 7AW England JLT Nominees Limited The St Botolph Building 138 Houndsditch London EC3A 7AW England JLT Pension Trustees Limited The St Botolph Building 138 Houndsditch London EC3A 7AW England JLT Pensions Administration Holdings Limited The St Botolph Building 138 Houndsditch London EC3A 7AW England JLT Pensions Administration Limited The St Botolph Building 138 Houndsditch London EC3A 7AW England JLT Peru Reinsurance Solutions Limited 80.07 The St Botolph Building 138 Houndsditch London EC3A 7AW England SUBSIDIARIES AND ASSOCIATED COMPANIES The following were the subsidiaries and associated undertakings at 31 December 2017.
Unless otherwise shown the capital of each company is whollyowned is in ordinary shares and the principal country of operation is the country of incorporationregistration.
Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION
100% Registered Office address Notes JLT Peru Retail Limited The St Botolph Building 138 Houndsditch London EC3A 7AW England JLT Peru Wholesale Limited The St Botolph Building 138 Houndsditch London EC3A 7AW England JLT Re Limited The St Botolph Building 138 Houndsditch London EC3A 7AW England JLT Reinsurance Brokers Limited The St Botolph Building 138 Houndsditch London EC3A 7AW England JLT Secretaries Limited The St Botolph Building 138 Houndsditch London EC3A 7AW England JLT Specialty Limited The St Botolph Building 138 Houndsditch London EC3A 7AW England JLT Trustees Southern Limited The St Botolph Building 138 Houndsditch London EC3A 7AW England JLT Trustees Limited The St Botolph Building 138 Houndsditch London EC3A 7AW England JLT UK Investment Holdings Limited The St Botolph Building 138 Houndsditch London EC3A 7AW England JLT Wealth Management Limited The St Botolph Building 138 Houndsditch London EC3A 7AW England Leadenhall Independent Trustees Ltd The St Botolph Building 138 Houndsditch London EC3A 7AW England Lloyd and Partners Limited The St Botolph Building 138 Houndsditch London EC3A 7AW England
Bolshaw and Company Limited The St Botolph Building 138 Houndsditch London EC3A 7AW England Marine Aviation and General London Limited 25.00 10 Eastcheap London EC3M 1AJ England Pavilion Insurance Management Limited BDO LLP  55 Baker Street London W1U 7EU England Pavilion Insurance Network Limited BDO LLP  55 Baker Street London W1U 7EU England Pension Capital Strategies Limited The St Botolph Building 138 Houndsditch London EC3A 7AW England Personal Pension Trustees Limited The St Botolph Building 138 Houndsditch London EC3A 7AW England Pet Animal Welfare Scheme Limited The St Botolph Building 138 Houndsditch London EC3A 7AW England Portland Pensions Limited The St Botolph Building 138 Houndsditch London EC3A 7AW England Portsoken Trustees No.
2 Limited The St Botolph Building 138 Houndsditch London EC3A 7AW England Portsoken Trustees Limited The St Botolph Building 138 Houndsditch London EC3A 7AW England Premier Pension Trustees Limited The St Botolph Building 138 Houndsditch London EC3A 7AW England Profund Solutions Limited The St Botolph Building 138 Houndsditch London EC3A 7AW England Renewable Energy Loss Adjusters Limited The St Botolph Building 138 Houndsditch London EC3A 7AW England
Jardines PF  Consultoria Em Gestao de Risco Lda Rua Kuamme Knrumah Numero 31 Ingombota Luanda Angola
JLT Towner Insurance Management Anguilla
Babrows Commercial Complex The Valley AI2640 Anguilla
JLT Re Argentina Corredores de Reaseguros S.
53.00 Della Paolera 265 Torre Boston 24th Floor Retiro C.
Argentina
JLT Insurance Brokers S.
74.50 co Estudio Beccar Varela Tucuman 1 4th Floor Beunos Aires Argentina
AssetVal Pty Ltd Grosvenor Place Level 37 225 George Street Sydney NSW 2000 Australia Australian Insurance Brokers Pty Ltd Grosvenor Place Level 37 225 George Street Sydney NSW 2000 Australia Broderick Piller Pty Ltd Grosvenor Place Level 37 225 George Street Sydney NSW 2000 Australia Echelon Australia Pty Limited Grosvenor Place Level 37 225 George Street Sydney NSW 2000 Australia Group Promoters Pty Limited Grosvenor Place Level 37 225 George Street Sydney NSW 2000 Australia Jardine Lloyd Thompson Australia Pty Limited Grosvenor Place Level 37 225 George Street Sydney NSW 2000 Australia JLT Group Services Pty Limited Grosvenor Place Level 37 225 George Street Sydney NSW 2000 Australia SUBSIDIARIES AND ASSOCIATED COMPANIES CONTINUED 164 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
100% Registered Office address Notes Jardine Lloyd Thompson Pty Limited Grosvenor Place Level 37 225 George Street Sydney NSW 2000 Australia JLT Re Pty Ltd Grosvenor Place Level 37 225 George Street Sydney NSW 2000 Australia Key Underwriting Pty Limited Grosvenor Place Level 37 225 George Street Sydney NSW 2000 Australia Premium Services Australia Pty Limited Grosvenor Place Level 37 225 George Street Sydney NSW 2000 Australia The Recovre Group Pty Ltd Grosvenor Place Level 37 225 George Street Sydney NSW 2000 Australia Risk Management Australia Pty Limited Grosvenor Place Level 37 225 George Street Sydney NSW 2000 Australia Local Government Insurance Brokers Pty Limited Grosvenor Place Level 37 225 George Street Sydney NSW 2000 Australia
GrECo International Holding AG 20.00 1190 Vienna Elmargasse 24 Postfach 299 Vienna Austria
Isosceles Insurance Barbados Limited 90.91 1st Floor Limegrove Centre Holetown St James Barbados JLT Holdings Barbados Ltd 90.91 1st Floor Limegrove Centre Holetown St James Barbados JLT Insurance Management Barbados Ltd 90.91 1st Floor Limegrove Centre Holetown St James Barbados JLT Management Barbados Ltd 90.91 1st Floor Limegrove Centre Holetown St James Barbados JLT Trust Services Barbados Limited 90.91 1st Floor Limegrove Centre Holetown St James Barbados
Belgibo N.
De Gerlachekaai 20 2000 Antwerp Belgium CMCBelgibo De Gerlachekaai 20 2000 Antwerp Belgium
Agnew Higgins Pickering and Co.
Bermuda Ltd Clarendon House 2 Church Street Hamilton HM11 Bermuda Eagle and Crown Limited Cedar House 41 Cedar Avenue Hamilton HM12 Bermuda Evolution Management Ltd Crawford House 50 Cedar Avenue Hamilton HM11 Bermuda Isosceles Insurance Ltd 98.36 Crawford House 50 Cedar Avenue Hamilton HM11 Bermuda JLT Holdings Bermuda Ltd.
Crawford House 50 Cedar Avenue Hamilton HM11 Bermuda JLT Bermuda Ltd Crawford House 50 Cedar Avenue Hamilton HM11 Bermuda JLT Insurance Management Bermuda Limited Crawford House 50 Cedar Avenue Hamilton HM11 Bermuda Sail Insurance Company Limited Cedar House 41 Cedar Avenue Hamilton HM12 Bermuda Secure Limited Jardine House 3335 Reid Street Hamilton Bermuda JLT Re Limited Cedar House 41 Cedar Avenue Hamilton HM12 Bermuda
JLT Brasil Holdings Participacoes Ltd 75.72 Avenida Beira Mar no.
8 andar parte Centro Rio de Janeiro Brazil JLT do Brasil Corretagem de Seguros Ltda 75.72 Avenida Engenheiro Luis Carlos Berrini no.
105 Condomino Thera One Sao Paulo Brazil JLT RE Brasil Administracao e Corretagem de Resseguros Ltda 75.72 Avenida Beira Mar no.
8 andar parte Centro Rio de Janeiro Brazil JLT SCK Affinity Administracao e Corretora de Seguros Ltda.
Ave.
Presidente Wilson 231 74.107.483000164 Centro Rio de Janeiro
JLT SCK Corretora e Administradora de Seguros 56.79
Presidente Wilson 231 74.107.483000164 Centro Rio de Janeiro
Canada
Jardine Lloyd Thompson Canada Inc Suite 2900 550 Burrard Street Vancouver BC V6C 0A3 Canada Cayman Islands Colombian Insurance Broking Wholesale Limited 74.50 Wallkers Corporate Ltd Cayman Corporate Centre 27 Hospital Road George Town Grand Cayman KY1 9008 Cayman Islands SUBSIDIARIES AND ASSOCIATED COMPANIES CONTINUED Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION
100% Registered Office address Notes
JLT Chile Corredores de Reaseguro Limitada 50.10 Costanera Sur 2730 Piso 14 Las Condes Santiago Chile Alta SA 50.10 Costanera Sur 2730 Piso 14 Las Condes Santiago Chile JLT Asesorias Ltda 50.10 Costanera Sur 2730 Piso 14 Las Condes Santiago Chile JLT Chile Holdings SpA Miraflores 222 piso 28 Santiago Chile JLTOrbital Corredores de Seguros Limitada 50.10 Costanera Sur 2730 Piso 14 Las Condes Santiago Chile
JLT Insurance Brokers Co.
Limited
The Pinnacle 17 Zhu Jiang Road West Tianhe District Guangzhou  China JLT Essential Benefit Solutions Corporation Limited 51.00 6F Building 2 Pudong Harvest Park 3601 Dongfang Road Pudong Shanghai  China
JLT Affinity Colombia Solutions SAS 82.65 Carrera 7  71 21  Torre B Bogota Colombia Beneficios Integrales Oportunos SA 82.65 Calle 72 N 10  07 Of.
1004.
Bogota Colombia JLT Re Colombia Corredores Colombianos de
94.34 Calle 742 No.
1051 PH Bogota Colombia Jardine Lloyd Thompson Valencia y Iragorri Corredores de Seguros SA 82.65 Calle 72 N 10  07 Of.
1004.
Bogota Colombia
JLT Specialty Insurance Broker AS Hellerupgardvej 18 2900 Hellerup Denmark
JLT France Holdings 94 Rue de la Victoire 75009 Paris France JLT Specialty France 94 Rue de la Victoire 75009 Paris France JLT Energy France SAS 35.40 18 Rue de Courcelles 75008 Paris France JLT PLA 94 Rue de la Victoire 75009 Paris France
JLT Reinsurance Brokers GmbH Arnulfstrabe 19 80335 Munchen Germany
Isosceles PCC Limited Mill Court La Charroterie St Peter Port GY1 4ET Guernsey JLT Insurance Management Guernsey Limited Mill Court La Charroterie St Peter Port GY1 4ET Guernsey Hong Kong JLT Agencies Limited 25th Floor Devon House Taikoo Place 979 Kings Road Quarry Bay Hong Kong JLT Essential Holdings Limited 51.00 25th Floor Devon House Taikoo Place 979 Kings Road Quarry Bay Hong Kong Jardine ShunTak Insurance Brokers Limited 50.00 25th Floor Devon House Taikoo Place 979 Kings Road Quarry Bay Hong Kong Jardine Lloyd Thompson PCS Limited 75.00 20th Floor Cityplaza Four 12 Taikoo Wan Road Taikoo Shing Island East Hong Kong Jardine Lloyd Thompson Limited 25th Floor Devon House Taikoo Place 979 Kings Road Quarry Bay Hong Kong Lambert Brothers Holdings Limited 25th Floor Devon House Taikoo Place 979 Kings Road Quarry Bay Hong Kong Lambert Brothers Insurance Brokers Employee Benefits Ltd 25th Floor Devon House Taikoo Place 979 Kings Road Quarry Bay Hong Kong Lambert Brothers Insurance Brokers Hong Kong Ltd 25th Floor Devon House Taikoo Place 979 Kings Road Quarry Bay Hong Kong JLT Insurance Agencies Limited 25th Floor Devon House Taikoo Place 979 Kings Road Quarry Bay Hong Kong SUBSIDIARIES AND ASSOCIATED COMPANIES CONTINUED 166 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
100% Registered Office address Notes
JLT Independent Insurance Brokers Private Limited 49.00 Peninsula Corporate Park Ganpat Rao Kadam Marg Off Senapati Bapat Marg Mumbai  India JLT Vantage Risk and Benefit Consulting Private
49.00 C6.2 Dr Herekar Park Nehru Park Pune Maharashtra  India Jardine Lloyd Thompson Insurance Consultants
E216 2nd Floor White House Ansari Road Darya Ganj New Dehli
Jardine Lloyd Thompson India Private Limited 1001A Supreme Business Park Supreme City Hiranandani Gardens Powai Mumbai Maharashtra  India
PT Jardine Lloyd Thompson 80.00 World Trade Center 10th Floor Jl.
Jendral Sudirman Kav.
2931 Jakarta 12920 Indonesia PT Nexus Asia Pacific World Trade Center 10th Floor Jl.
Jendral Sudirman Kav.
2931 Jakarta 12920 Indonesia PT JLT Reinsurance Brokers 75.00 World Trade Center 10th Floor Jl.
Jendral Sudirman Kav.
2931 Jakarta 12920 Indonesia
JLT Risk Management Limited Cherrywood Business Park Loughlinstown Dublin 18 Ireland Freedom Trust Services Limited Cherrywood Business Park Loughlinstown Dublin 18 Ireland JLT Intellectual Property Limited Cherrywood Business Park Loughlinstown Dublin 18 Ireland International Loss Control Services Limited Cherrywood Business Park Loughlinstown Dublin 18 Ireland Jardine Pension Trustees Ireland Limited Cherrywood Business Park Loughlinstown Dublin 18 Ireland Jardine Lloyd Thompson Ireland Holdings Limited Cherrywood Business Park Loughlinstown Dublin 18 Ireland Jardine Lloyd Thompson Ireland Unlimited Company Cherrywood Business Park Loughlinstown Dublin 18 Ireland JLT Financial Planning Limited Cherrywood Business Park Loughlinstown Dublin 18 Ireland JLT Insurance Brokers Ireland Limited Cherrywood Business Park Loughlinstown Dublin 18 Ireland JLT QFM Services Limited Cherrywood Business Park Loughlinstown Dublin 18 Ireland
MAG JLT SpA 25.00 Francesco Crispi 74 Naples Italy 4
JLT Holdings Japan Limited Halifax Bldg.
4F 1626 Roppoongi 3chome Minatoku Tokyo Japan JLT Risk Services Japan Limited Halifax Bldg.
4F 1626 Roppoongi 3chome Minatoku Tokyo Japan JLT Japan Limited Halifax Bldg.
4F 1626 Roppoongi 3chome Minatoku Tokyo Japan Republic of Korea Jardine Lloyd Thompson Korea Limited Gongpyeongdong 16th Floor 47 Jongnogu Seoul Republic of Korea
Echelon Claims Consultants Sdn Bhd Faber Imperial Court 21A Jalan Sultan Ismail 50250 Kuala Lumpur
JLT Asia Shared Services Sdn Bhd Menara Shell No 211 Jalan Tun Sambathan 50470 Kuala Lumpur Malaysia JLT Re Labuan Limited Saguking Commercial Building Jalan PatauPatau 87000 Labuan FT
Jardine Lloyd Thompson Sdn Bhd 49.00 Faber Imperial Court 21A Jalan Sultan Ismail 50250 Kuala Lumpur Malaysia
JLT Insurance Management Malta Limited 34.00 Abate Rigord Street TaXbiex XBX 1111 Malta Manoel Management Services Ltd 34.00 Abate Rigord Street TaXbiex XBX 1111 Malta
JI Holdings Limited co SGG Corporate Services Mauritius Ltd Les Cascades Edith Cavell Street Port Louis Republic of Mauritius SUBSIDIARIES AND ASSOCIATED COMPANIES CONTINUED Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION
100% Registered Office address Notes
JLT Mexico Intermediario de Reaseguro S.
C.
Avenida Insurgentes Sur 1898 Piso 19 Colonia Florida CP 01030 Mxico City Sterling Re Intermediario de Reaseguro SA de CV 35.50 Insurgentes Colonia Torre 01030 Mexico DF
JLT Netherlands BV Schouwburgplein 3034 3012 CL Rotterdam Netherlands JLT Asia Holdings BV Atrium Building Strawinskylaan 3007 1077 ZX Amsterdam Netherlands JMIB Holdings BV Atrium Building Strawinskylaan 3007 1077 ZX Amsterdam Netherlands New Zealand Alpha Consultants Limited Level 5 Tower Centre 45 Queen Street Auckland New Zealand Client Provide Limited 90.10 Level 5 Tower Centre 45 Queen Street Auckland New Zealand Echelon New Zealand Limited Level 5 Tower Centre 45 Queen Street Auckland New Zealand JLT Holdings NZ Limited Level 5 Tower Centre 45 Queen Street Auckland New Zealand Jardine Lloyd Thompson Limited Level 5 Tower Centre 45 Queen Street Auckland New Zealand Wellnz Limited 90.10 Level 5 Tower Centre 45 Queen Street Auckland New Zealand
JLT Norway AS Strandveien 13 1366 Lysaker Baerum Norway
JLT Corredores de Reaseguros SA 80.10 Avda Santa Maria 110140 oficina 202.
Miraflores Lima Peru JLT Peru Corredores de Seguros SA 91.62 Av Santo Toribio 173 San Isidro Lima Peru
Jardine Lloyd Thompson Insurance and Reinsurance Brokers Inc.
111 Paseo de Roxas Building Legaspi Village Makati City 1229 Philippines Russian Federation Jardine IBR Limited Office 226 Building 14 39 Leningradskiy Prospect Moscow Russia JLT Insurance Brokers Limited Office 226 Building 14 39 Leningradskiy Prospect Moscow Russia
Anda Insurance Agencies Pte Ltd 239 Alexandra Road Singapore Jardine Lloyd Thompson Private Limited 239 Alexandra Road Singapore Jardine Lloyd Thompson Asia Pte Ltd 239 Alexandra Road Singapore JLT Interactive Pte Ltd 239 Alexandra Road Singapore JLTPCS Holdings Pte.
Ltd 75.00 239 Alexandra Road Singapore Jardine Lloyd Thompson PCS Pte Ltd 75.00 239 Alexandra Road Singapore JLT Specialty Pte Ltd 239 Alexandra Road Singapore JLT Singapore Holdings Pte Ltd 239 Alexandra Road Singapore South Africa Eikos Risk Applications Pty Ltd Block D Nicol Main Office Park 2 Burton Road Bryanston 2191 South Africa JLT Employee Benefits SA Pty Ltd Block D Nicol Main Office Park 2 Burton Road Bryanston 2191 South Africa Jardine Lloyd Thompson Proprietary Limited 63.00 Block D Nicol Main Office Park 2 Burton Road Bryanston 2191 South Africa JLT Benefit Solutions SA Pty Ltd Block D Nicol Main Office Park 2 Burton Road Bryanston 2191 South Africa JLT Employee Benefits Holding Company Pty LTD Block D Nicol Main Office Park 2 Burton Road Bryanston 2191 South Africa Jardine Lloyd Thompson South Africa IB Holding Company Proprietary Limited Block D Nicol Main Office Park 2 Burton Road Bryanston 2191 South Africa SUBSIDIARIES AND ASSOCIATED COMPANIES CONTINUED 168 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
100% Registered Office address Notes
MarchJLT Correduria de Seguros y Reaseguros
25.00 Calle de Lagasca 88 Madrid Spain
JLT Re Northern Europe AB Jakobsbergsgatan 7 11144 Stockholm Sweden JLT Risk Solutions AB 65.00 Jakobsbergsgatan 7 11144 Stockholm Sweden Lavaretus Underwriting AB Jakobsbergsgatan 7 11144 Stockholm Sweden
Jardine Lloyd Thompson PCS SA 75.00 Rue de Chantepoulet 13 1201 Geneva Switzerland
Jardine Lloyd Thompson Limited 13F 50 Hsin Sheng S.
Road Sec 1 Taipei Taiwan
Jardine Lloyd Thompson Limited 49.00 The 9th Towers 31st Floor Rama 9 Road Huay Khwang Bangkok 10310 Thailand JLT Life Assurance Brokers Limited The 9th Towers 31st Floor Rama 9 Road Huay Khwang Bangkok 10310 Thailand
JLT Sigorta ve Reasrans Brokerlii A.
Kavak Sok Smart Plaza No 311 B Blok Kat 4 34805 Beykoz Instanbul Turkey United Arab Emirates Insure Direct Brokers LLC 49.00 Burj Al Salam  World Trade Centre Roundabout Sheikh Zayed Road Dubai P .
OX 57006 UAE Insure Direct  Jardine Lloyd Thompson Limited 61.30 P .
Box 9731 Dubai UAE Jardine Lloyd Thompson PCS Dubai Limited 75.00 Gate Village Building 10 Dubai International Financial Centre Dubai PO BOX  UAE United States 1763 Enterprises LLC Corporation Service Company 2711 Centerville Road Suite 400 Wilmington Delaware 19808 Charter Risk Management Services LLC 35.70 141 Weston Street 1981 Hartford Connecticut 06144 Construction Risk Partners LLC 45.74 Campus View Plaza 1250 Route 28 Suite 201 Branchburg NJ 08876 Core Risks Ltd.
LLC
Corporation Service Company 2711 Centerville Road Suite 400 Wilmington Delaware 19808 CRP Holding Company LLC 45.74 Campus View Plaza 1250 Route 28 Suite 201 Branchburg NJ 08876 GCube Insurance Services Inc CSC Lawyers Indorporating Service 2710 Gateway Oaks Drive Suite 150N Sacramento CA95833 Isosceles Insurance Company Limited 148 College Street Suite 204 Burlington Vermont 05401 Jardine Lloyd Thompson Capital Markets Inc.
Corporation Service Company 2711 Centerville Road Suite 400 Wilmington Delaware 19808 Jardine Lloyd Thompson Insurance Services Inc Corporation Service Company 2711 Centerville Road Suite 400 Wilmington Delaware 19808 JLT Facilities Inc.
Corporation Service Company 2711 Centerville Road Suite 400 Wilmington Delaware 19808 JLT Aerospace North America Inc Corporation Service Company 2711 Centerville Road Suite 400 Wilmington Delaware 19808 JLT Holdings Inc Corporation Service Company 2711 Centerville Road Suite 400 Wilmington Delaware 19808 JLT Re Consultants Inc Corporation Service Company 1201 Hays Street Tallahassee FL 32301 JLT Re North America Inc Corporation Service Company 2711 Centerville Road Suite 400 Wilmington Delaware 19808 SUBSIDIARIES AND ASSOCIATED COMPANIES CONTINUED Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION
100% Registered Office address Notes JLT Re Solutions Inc Corporation Service Company 2711 Centerville Road Suite 400 Wilmington Delaware 19808 JLT Specialty Insurance Services Inc 91.30 Corporation Service Company 2711 Centerville Road Suite 400 Wilmington Delaware 19808 JLT Towner Insurance Management USA LLC 70.00 100 Main Street Suite 2 Barre VT 0541 Risk and Reinsurance Solutions Corporation 9150 S Dadeland Blvd Suite 1008 Miami FL 33156 Weston Preference LLC Corporation Service Company 2711 Centerville Road Suite 400 Wilmington Delaware 19808 Worldlink Specialty Insurance Services Inc 22 Century Hill Drive Suite 102 Latham NY 12110
Jardine Lloyd Thompson Limited 5th Floor CJ Building 6 Le Thanh Ton Street District 1 Ho Chi Minh City Vietnam Virgin Islands British JIB Holdings Pacific Limited Skelton Building Main Street Road Town Tortola British Virgin Islands
1  Quotas 2  Preference shares 3  Ordinary and Preference shares 4  Associates as at 31 December 2017 Shares held in all companies are Ordinary shares unless where stated.
The proportion of voting rights held corresponds to the aggregate interest percentage held by the holding company and its subsidiary undertakings.
SUBSIDIARIES AND ASSOCIATED COMPANIES CONTINUED 171 Income Statement 171 Balance Sheet 172 Statement of Changes in Equity Significant Accounting Policies Notes to the Company Financial Statements a Finance income and expense b Income tax c Investment in subsidiaries d Trade and other receivables e Creditors COMPANY FINANCIAL
Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report BALANCE SHEET as at 31 December 2017
Fixed assets Investment in subsidiaries c 73284 68995 73284 68995 Current assets Trade and other receivables d 145788 387548 Cash and cash equivalents 662 561 146450 388109 Creditors e 5686 219001 Net current assets 140764 169108 Net assets 214048 238103
Ordinary shares 11008 11008 Share premium 104111 104111 Merger reserve 9604 9604 Retained ear nings 89325 113380 Total shareholders funds 214048 238103 The notes on pages 173 to form an integral part of these financial statements.
The financial statements on pages 171 to wer e authorised for the issue by the Boar d on 28 February 2018 and wer e signed on its behalf by Charles Rozes Finance Director
Administrative expenses 27377 9765 Other incomeexpense 29 3 Operating profit 27348 9768 Income from subsidiary 63000 88000 Profit on ordinary activities before interest and taxation 35652 78232 Finance income a 2973 9085 Finance expense a 487 5547 Finance income  net a 2486 3538 Profit on ordinary activities before income tax 38138 81770 Income tax expense on ordinary activities b 902 5112 Profit for the year 37236 76658 INCOME STATEMENT for the year ended 31 December 2017 172 FINANCIAL ST A TEMENTS STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY for the year ended 31 December 2017
Share premium
Retained earnings
Balance at 1 January 2017 11008 Pr ofit for the year Total comprehensive income for the year
71593 71593 Amounts in r espect of shar e based payments capital contribution to subsidiaries shares acquired 16502 16502 Balance at 31 December 2017 11008
Share premium
Retained earnings
Balance at 1January 2016 11008 104074 9604 97319 222005 Pr ofit for the year    76658 76658 Total comprehensive income for the year    76658 76658 Dividends    67962 67962 Issue of share capital  37   37 Amounts in r espect of shar e based payments capital contribution to subsidiaries    25174 25174 shares acquired    17809 17809 Balance at 31 December 2016 11008 104111 9604 113380 238103 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES for the year ended 31 December 2017 The significant accounting policies applied in the pr eparation of these financial statements ar e set out below .
These policies have been consistently applied to all the years pr esented unless otherwise stated.
Basis of preparation These financial statements have been pr epar ed in accor dance with
Reporting Standar d 101 Reduced Disclosur e Framework FRS 101.
The pr eparation of financial statements in conformity with the use of certain critical accounting estimates.
It also r equir es management to exercise its judgement in the process of applying the companys accounting policies.
These separate entity level financial statements have been pr oduced on going concern basis under the historical cost convention and in accordance with the
Act 2006 and applicable accounting standar ds.
The following exemptions fr om the r equir ements of IFRS have been applied in the pr eparation of these financial statements in accor dance with
IFRS
7 Financial Instruments disclosur es as the equivalent disclosur es ar e included in the consolidated financial statements of the Gr oup Paragraphs 91 to of IFRS 13 Fair value measur ement in r espect of disclosure of valuation techniques and inputs used for fair value measur ement of assets and liabilities Paragraph 30 and 31 of
8 Accounting policies changes in accounting estimates and err ors in r espect of the r equir ement for the disclosur e of information when an entity has not applied a new IFRS that has been issued but is not yet ef fective
24 Related party disclosur es in r espect of the disclosur e of r elated party transactions enter ed into between two or mor e members of a Gr oup
7 Statement of cash flows in r espect of the pr eparation of a statement of cash flow
IAS
1 Pr esentation of financial statements i.
Paragraph
79aiv of IAS 1 in r espect of the disclosur e of the number of shares outstanding at the beginning and at the end of the period ii.
Paragraph
10d in r espect of the disclosur e of Statement of
Flows iii.
Paragraph
10f in r espect of the Balance iv.
Paragraph 16 in r espect of the statement of compliance with all v.
Paragraph in r espect of the r equir ement for minimum of two primary statements including cash flow statements vi.
Paragraph 40AD in r espect of the r equir ement for thir d balance sheet when an accounting policy is applied r etr ospectively or makes r etr ospective r estatement of items in its financial statements or r eclassifies items in its financial statements vii.
Paragraph 111 in r espect of cash flow information which pr ovides users of financial statements with a basis to assess the ability of the entity to generate cash and cash equivalents and the needs of the entity to utilise those cash flows and viii.
Paragraph in r espect of capital management disclosur es.
Consolidated financial statements Consolidated financial statements have been pr epar ed and ar e pr esented on pages 107 to 169.
These financial statements ar e separate financial statements.
Foreign currency translation Foreign currency transactions are translated into Sterling using the exchange rates pr evailing at the date of transaction.
Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are translated into Sterling at rates of exchange ruling at the balance sheet date.
For eign exchange gains and losses resulting from the settlement of such transactions and from the translation at yearend exchange rates of monetary assets and liabilities denominated in for eign curr encies ar e r ecognised in the income statement except when deferr ed in other compr ehensive income as qualifying cash flow hedges.
All other for eign exchange gains and losses ar e pr esented in the income statement within Other operating income.
Investment in subsidiaries Investments in subsidiaries are held at cost less accumulated impairment losses.
35 on page Trade and other receivables T rade and other r eceivables includes amounts due fr om Gr oup undertakings.
They are recognised initially at fair value and subsequently measured at amortised cost using the ef fective inter est method less pr ovision for impairment.
Cash and cash equivalents over drafts.
Creditors
Creditors are obligations to pay for goods or services that have been acquired in the ordinary course of business from suppliers and include amounts due to Gr oup undertakings.
Cr editors ar e r ecognised initially at fair value and subsequently measur ed at amortised cost using the ef fective inter est method.
Income taxes T ax is r ecognised in the income statement except to the extent that it relates to items recognised in other comprehensive income or directly in shar eholders funds.
In this case the tax is also r ecognised in other compr ehensive income or dir ectly in shar eholders funds r espectively.
The curr ent income tax charge is calculated on the basis of the tax laws enacted or substantively enacted at the balance sheet date in the countries wher e the company operates and generates taxable income.
Management periodically evaluates positions taken in tax r etur ns with r espect to situations in which applicable tax r egulation is subject to interpr etation.
It establishes pr ovisions wher e appr opriate on the basis of amounts expected to be paid to the tax authorities.
Interest income Inter est income is r ecognised using the ef fective inter est method.
When a loan and r eceivable is impair ed the company r educes the carrying amount to its r ecoverable amount being the estimated futur e cash flow discounted at the original ef fective inter est rate of the instrument and continues unwinding the discount as inter est income.
Inter est income on impair ed loan and r eceivables is r ecognised using the original ef fective inter est rate.
Dividend income established.
Dividend distribution Dividends proposed or declared after the balance sheet date are not r ecognised as a liability at the balance sheet date.
Dividend distributions to the companys shareholders are recognised as a liability in the companys financial statements in the period in which the dividends ar e appr oved by the company s shar eholders.
FINANCIAL ST A TEMENTS a.
Finance income and expense Finance income Inter est on amounts due fr om Gr oup undertakings 2973 9085 Finance expense Inter est on amounts due to Gr oup undertakings 487 5547 Finance income 2973 9085 Finance expense 487 5547 Finance income  net 2486 3538 b.
Income tax Current tax creditexpense UK Corporation tax on profits for the year 4827 5729 Adjustment in r espect of prior year 5729 Total income tax expense 902 5112 The tax for the year is lower than the standar d rate of corporation tax in the
31 December 2017 of 19.25% 2016 20%.
The dif fer ences ar e explained below Profit before taxation 38138 81770 T ax calculated at UK Corporation T ax rate of 19.25% 2016 20% 7342
Non taxable income 12169 22083 Total income tax expense 902 5112 The headline rate of
19% this will r educe to 17% fr om
2020.
As at 31 December 2017 the rate r eduction to 17% fr om enacted.
The impact of the rate r eduction to 17% has been incorporated into the income tax charge for the year ended 31
2017 taking into consideration when temporary dif fer ences ar e expected to r everse.
NOTES TO THE COMPANY FINANCIAL STATEMENTS for the year ended 31 December 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report c.
Investment in subsidiaries At 1 January 68995 68916 Increase 4289 79 At 31 December 73284 68995 Investment comprise equity shar es in
Gr oup Ltd and JL T Insurance Br okers
Limited neither of which ar e publically traded.
The company owns 100% of the or dinary shar e capital of
Gr oup Ltd 2016 100%.
JIB Gr oup Ltd is incorporated in the
During the year dividends of wer e r eceived fr om
Gr oup
The company owns 100% of the or dinary shar e capital of JL T Insurance Br okers
Limited incorporated in China 2016100%.
The investment in subsidiaries incr eases due to the capital contributions towar ds the subsidiaries of the Gr oup as a r esult of awar ds of shar e options made to employees on of the shar es. d.
Trade and other receivables Amounts due fr om Gr oup undertakings 142160 383018 Corporation tax 3628 4530 145788 387548 Amounts due fr om Gr oup undertakings ar e unsecur ed have no fixed date of r epayment and ar e r epayable on demand. e.
Creditors
Amounts due to Gr oup undertakings  213834 Dividends payable 5226 4794 Other creditors 460 373 5686 219001 Amounts due to Gr oup undertakings ar e unsecur ed have no fixed date of r epayment and ar e r epayable on demand.
ADVISERS and SHAREHOLDER INFORMA TION Gr oup Five Y ear Review Advisers and Shar eholder
Principal JL T Of fices
INFORMATION
Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION GROUP FIVE YEAR REVIEW Fees and commissions 974623 1099728 1151392 Investment income 4529 4398 3689 Total revenue 979152 1104126 1155081 Salaries and associated expenses 580968 671758 727334 794363 861189 Pr emises 53638 57927 61167 66849 70625 Other operating costs 157386 172426 163685 209518 213862 Depr eciation amortisation and impairment charges 24667 28139 30538 34951 36491 Operating profit 162493 173876 172357 Finance costs  net 16035 21446 22861 22078 24349 Share of results of associates 8106 7306 5531 Profit before taxation 154564 159736 155027 Income tax expense 41789 42072 41586 44018 52980 Profit for the year 112775 117664 113441 Noncontrolling interests 10815 12373 10342 9396 10303 Profit attributable to the owners of the parent 101960 105291 103099 restated restated restated Diluted earnings per share 46.8p 48.7p 48.0p 37.8p 54.7p Underlying diluted earnings per share 55.0p 57.1p 52.2p 51.4p 58.5p Dividends per share in 2016.
ADVISERS and SHAREHOLDER INFORMA TION ADVISERS and SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION SHAREHOLDER ENQUIRIES
Equiniti our r egistrars using the contact details found below .
REGISTRARS
Equiniti
Equiniti
Aspect House
Road
Lancing
W est Sussex BN99 6DA
UKtel outside the UK 4telCall costs in the UK ar e 10p per minute.
Call costs outside the UK are dependent on pr ovider and location.
Lines ar e open Monday  Friday 8.30am to 5.30pm excluding UK
Holidays. or visitsite ELECTRONIC SHAREHOLDER
Shar eholders who would pr efer to view documentation electronically can elect to r eceive automatic notifications by email each time the company distributes documents.
Registering for electr onic communication can be done by updating My Detailssite There is no fee for using this service and you will be advised that your r equest has been r egister ed.
Should you wish to change your mind or request a paper version of any documents in the futur e you can do this by contacting Equiniti by telephone or by post.
DIVIDEND MANDATES Shar eholders who would like their dividends to be paid dir ectly to a bank account can arrange to do so via their Shar eview Portfolio by selecting
Election. iteinfodir ectdividends or contact
SHARE PRICE INFORMATION Information on the Companysite
If you have a small holding that is uneconomical to sell you may wish to consider donating it to Shar eGift.
The Orr Mackintosh Foundation operates this charity shar e donation scheme.
Details of the scheme are available via Shar eGift at shar egift.
BROKERS
JPMorgan Securities plc 25 Bank Str eet
E14 5JP T eltelBarclays 5 The North Colonnade London E14 4BB T eltelAUDITORS PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP 7 Mor e London
London
SE1 2R T T eltelFINANCIAL CALENDAR Financial Year End 31 December 2017 Ex Dividend Date 29 Mar ch 2018 Record Date 3 April 2018 Annual General Meeting 1 May 2018 Final Dividend Payable 8 May 2018 Interim Results Announced 26 July 2018 Interim Dividend Payable 3 October Q3 Interim Management Statement 6 November all future dates are indicative and subject to change COMPANY SECRETARY AND REGISTERED OFFICE Darr en
Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc The St Botolph Building 138 Houndsditch London EC3A 7A W T elsite Register ed
London Stock
FTSE 250 Symbol JL T ISIN GBtel Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc Annual Report STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION PRINCIPAL JLT OFFICES HEAD OFFICE
Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group plc 44tel
China
JL T Insurance Br okers Co
JL T Essential Benefit
Coporations Limited 86tel Hong Kong Jardine Lloyd Thompson Limited tel
Jardine Lloyd Thompson India
Limited
91tel JL T Independent Insurance Br okers
Limited
91tel
PT Jar dine Lloyd Thompson tel
JL T Risk Services Japan Limited tel South Korea Jardine Lloyd Thompson Korea Limited
Jardine Lloyd Thompson Limited tel Jar dine ShunT ak
Br okers
Malaysia
Jardine Lloyd Thompson Sdn Bhd
Jardine Lloyd Thompson Limited tel
Jardine Lloyd Thompson Insurance Br okers Inc tel
Jar dine Lloyd Thompson Pte Limited tel JL T Risk Solutions Asia Pte Limited tel JL T Specialty Pte
JL T Re Asia tel
Jardine Lloyd Thompson Limited
Jardine Lloyd Thompson Limited tel
Jardine Lloyd Thompson Limited tel AUSTRALIA and NEW ZEALAND
Jar dine Lloyd Thompson Australia Pty Limited tel JL T Re Ltd New Zealand Jardine Lloyd Thompson Limited tel
Belgium
JLT Belgibo
JL T Specialty Insurance Br oker
Finland
JL T Risk
AB tel
JL T Reinsurance Br okers
Paris Branch
JL T Risk
AB
35tel
JLT Insurance Management Guernsey UK 44 telIreland JL T Insurance Br okers Ir eland
Netherlands
JL T Netherlands BV tel5
JL T Norway AS tel
JL T Risk
AB
JL T Re Norther n Eur ope
Switzerland
JL T Reinsurance Br okers
Basel Branch
For a full list of JL T s worldwide of fices and JL T Inter national Network partnerssite PRINCIPAL JLT OFFICES CONTINUED EUROPE CONTINUED
JLT Specialty Limited 44tel JL T Reinsurance Br okers
44tel JL T Employee Benefits 44tel LATIN AMERICA and THE CARIBBEAN
JL T Re Argentina telBarbados JLT Insurance Management Barbados
1tel
JLT do Brasil Corretagem de Seguros
55tel JL T Re Brasil
Corr etagem de Reassegur os Ltda 55tel
JLT Orbital Corredores de Seguros
Limitada telColombia Jar dine
Thompson
V alencia y
Corr edor es de Segur os SA tel JL T Re
Corr edor es
Reasegur os SA tel
JL T Peru Corr edor es de Segur os SA tel JL T Corr edor es de Reasegur os
MIDDLE EAST and AFRICA
Insur e Dir ect Br okers
South Africa Jar dine
Thompson
Pr oprietary
27tel
JL T T urkey tel UAE Dubai Insur e Dir ect Br okers LLC JL T Specialty DIFC Br okers NORTH AMERICA
JLT Insurance Management Bermuda 1tel
Jardine Lloyd Thompson Canada Inc 1tel
JL T Re North America Inc.
1tel JL T Specialty Insurance Services Inc.
1tel pdf.
This
Annual
Report is printed on 100% r ecycled paper made fr om postconsumer waste.
It was printed by
Colour using vegetable based inks.
Both the paper and printer ar e Envir onmental Standar d ISO 14001 and For est Stewar dship
FSC r egister ed.
CPI Colour is also a CarbonNeutral printing company.
CORPORATE SPONSORSHIP As specialists we partner with specialists who deliver winning results.
This is why we are proud to partner with the Great Britain Skeleton team and professional British cycling team JLT Condor triple Olympic goldmedal winning cyclist Ed Clancy OBE the UKs leading racecourses Cricket Australia and Spruce Meadows.
GREAT BRITAIN SKELETON JLT has been principal partner to British Skeleton since 2012.
This specialist team cele brated gold at the 2018 PyeongChang Winter Olympics as well as at the
W inter
Games wher e
Y ar nold became the first
Winter Olympian to win backtoback Gold medals.
In 2017 the squad won a further medals featur ed on the wider podium times and r ecor ded top ten finishes across four international circuits.
JLT CONDOR JLT has supported the UKs longeststanding UCI Continental cycling team JLT Condor since 2013.
In 2017 JLT Condor recorded their most successful season to date winning the Australian Michelton Bay Series in January the UK national Tour Series the HSBC Spring Cup Series and the HSBC Grand Prix Series.
This year the team look to build on their success by increasing their global presence by competing in races in Australia Asia and Northern Europe.
ED CLANCY OBE Thr eetime
Gold
Medallist
Br onze
Ed Clancy OBE is an unrivalled specialist when it comes to cycling track racing.
In 2016 Ed Clancy was not only crowned Olympic track cycling champion for the third time in a row in Rio in August but was also awarded an OBE for his sporting achieve ments in the 2016 Queens New Year Honours List.
JLT is looking forward to supporting Ed in his pursuit for gold in the 2020 Olympics.
JLT AND HORSE RACING JLT has been a proud supporter of the UK horse racing industry and partners with renowned racecourses such as Cheltenham Aintree Ascot and Newbury as well as popular jump races The JLT Novices Chase and the JLT Melling Chase.
In 2017 JLT supported the Grand Womens Summit at Aintree Racecourse which celebrates women in horse racing sport and business.
CRICKET AUSTRALIA In 2017 JLT Australia continued with their tradition of bringing sport to the community by becoming the Of ficial
Partner of
Australia and the naming rights sponsor for domestic firstclass competitions the JL T Shef field
JL T
Cup.
As the of ficial longstanding risk partner of
Australia
JL T working tirelessly to grow cricket at the elite and grass roots level for many years.
SPRUCE MEADOWS For the third year running JLT Canada was a proud sponsor of The JLT Cup held at the Spruce Meadows Masters Tournament in September 2017.
Showcasing the worlds best athletes in the exhilarating sport of show jumping Spruce Meadows 350 acre facility offers an incredible experience for fans and riders alike.
Like JLT they are committed to their vision of providing the best customer services to a global clien tele and putting their Clients First.
Company registration No.
Ref
