CONTENTS
YEARS OF
INNOVATION
BUSINESS SUPPORT
RESPONSIBILITY 01 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Strategic Report
Financial statements Independent auditors report 163 Separate statement of financial position 164 Separate statement of changes in equity 165 Separate statement of cash flows 166 Consolidated statement of financial position 167 Consolidated statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income 168 Consolidated statement of changes in equity 169 Consolidated statement of cash flows 170 Notes to the consolidated financial statements Additional information 255 Shareholder information 256 Glossary 257 Abbreviations Strategic report
2 Financial highlights 3 Operational highlights 4 At a glance 8 Investment case 10 Chairmans statement 12 CEO letter Strategy and performance 16 Georgia 20 Business model and strategy 30 Divisional review 56 Principal risks and uncertainties 60 Risk management 74 Corporate responsibility 82 Financial review
104 Directors governance statement 109 Directors report 114 Board biographies 118 The Banks Management Board biographies 121 Corporate governance and nomination committee report 123 Risk ethics and compliance committee report 126 Directors remuneration report 148 Audit committee report
TBC Bank TBC Bank Georgias largest banking group celebrates its 25th anniversary of growth innovation customer support and corporate responsibility.
Built from scratch in 1992 soon after the countrys independence in 1991 TBC Banks substantial growth mirrors the countrys fastpaced development over the last 25 years Today TBC Bank is a FTSE 250 constituent with a listing on the London Stock Exchanges premium segment.
For more information visit our website site 1 TBC Bank Group PLC the Company the UKincorporated parent company of JSC TBC Bank the Bank and its subsidiaries together TBC Bank or the Group 2 Source Geostat 02 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017
FINANCIAL HIGHLIGHTS
Underlying net profit GEL million 2017 369.2 2016 273.3 2015 218.7 35.1% growth 2017 21.4% 2016 20.6% 2015 20.1% Underlying return on average equity 0.8pp growth 2017 3.2% 3.6% 2015 3.4% Underlying return on average assets 0.4pp reduction Reported net profit GEL million 2017 359.9 2016 298.3 2015 218.7 20.7% growth 2017 1.2% 2016 1.0% 2015 1.7% Cost of risk 0.2pp growth 2017 8553.2 2016 7358.7 2015 4639.0 Gross loans GEL million 16.2% growth 2017 12965.9 2016 10769.0 2015 6935.0 Total assets GEL million 20.4% growth 2017 3.3% 2016 3.5% 2015 4.8% Nonperforming loans 0.2pp reduction 2017 7816.8 2016 6454.9 2015 4177.9 Total deposits GEL million 21.1% growth 2017 40.5% 2016 42.9% 2015 43.9% Underlying cost to income ratio 2.4pp reduction 03 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Strategic Report
OPERATIONAL HIGHLIGHTS
21.4% UNDERLYING RETURN ON EQUITY
Employees
Selfservice terminals P O S t er mi n al s Offloading ratio 88.3% 84.1% Mobile banking penetration ratio 31.4% 24.2%
ATMs
531  04 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 TBC Bank has affirmed its leading position as Georgias largest banking group with its outstanding financial performance superior customer experience strong brand and bestinclass digital banking channels.
We continue to innovate and develop unique digital solutions in line with our strategy of becoming the best digital financial services company in the region while customer satisfaction remains at the heart of everything we do.
We acknowledge responsibility towards all our stakeholders and are focused on achieving strong financial results and maximising our shareholders returns as well as creating value for our customers employees community and environment.
Retail banking TBC Bank is the undisputed leader in the retail segment which it has been serving since 2006.
We work diligently to offer our clients the best products and services in the market.
We are committed to building trusted mutually beneficial relationships with our customers by concentrating on their financial needs and offering them wellsuited banking solutions.
Customer satisfaction is a vital part of our success and we are dedicated to delivering a unique experience in all our channels.
We also pride ourselves on having advanced private banking offerings for our affluent and highnetworth individuals which include dedicated multichannel full life cycle management tailormade products and valueadded services.
What we do TBC Bank is the number one banking group in Georgia by all key metrics including total assets total loans and total deposits While our main business activities include retail micro small and medium enterprises MSME and corporate banking we also offer other financial services through our subsidiaries including leasing insurance brokerage and corporate advisory products.
TBC Bank has strong coverage across the country through its welldeveloped multichannel network serving around 75% of Georgias adult population.
Our vision To be the best digital financial services company in the region Strategic priorities Deepen our relationship with customers and deliver sustainable growth Further enhance the digital capabilities of our bestinclass multichannel platform Further improve customer experience Increase operational efficiency and automation Proactively manage net interest margin Find out more about our strategy on pages 2427 Corporate and investment banking CIB TBC Bank has a welldeserved leading position in the corporate segment due to its advisory model focus on longterm partnership topquality financial products and services and highly experienced and professional team.
We have a strong presence and a diversified portfolio across all major sectors of Georgias economy divided among dedicated coverage teams with strong sector knowledge.
We have strong positions in traditional lending and trade finance products and have also started introducing brokerage and advisory services through our subsidiary TBC Capital.
Thanks to our broad product offering and operational excellence an increasing number of leading industry players are choosing TBC Bank as their core bank.
49% in total loan book 56% in total deposits 29% in total loan book 31% in total deposits 1 Region in this context comprises Armenia Azerbaijan and Georgia AT A GLANCE 05 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Strategic Report
MSME banking TBC Bank is the bank of first choice for most MSME clients with 63% of new companies registered in Georgia in 2017 opening accounts with TBC Bank.
We do not find this surprising since we put a lot of effort into developing the most convenient and innovative solutions for our clients.
In addition we differentiate ourselves by offering extensive nonfinancial services through our business support programme which features various opportunities for training sessions individual consultations useful business tools and a renowned annual business award ceremony.
This year  we have also undertaken an initiative to support the new generation of businesses in Georgia by launching a unique programme focused on startups that provides financial and nonfinancial services to earlystage companies.
Corporate responsibility We strive to make a difference for Georgia not only by contributing to economic development but also by faithfully serving our customers protecting our countrys cultural heritage promoting national sports supporting the young generation through various projects and initiatives and caring for the environment.
Our people are key to our success We consider our people to be one of our most valuable assets and the key to our success.
We employ more than 7000 highly skilled loyal and motivated people who together form a big TBC family.
Find out more about our people on pages 7578 22% in total loan book 13% in total deposits Engagement index of 91% Find out more about our segments on pages 3053 2 Based on data published by the National Bank of Georgia as of 31 December 2017 3 Data is for FY 2017 source www . apr. ov.
Total assets Total loans Total deposits Loans to individuals Loans to legal entities Deposits to individuals Deposits to legal entities 36.4% 40.2% 38.2% 36.0% 39.8% 41.3% 37.9% Number one market position by all key metrics MARKET SHARES Find out more about our corporate responsibility on pages 7481 YEARS OF
INFOCUS TOT AL ASSETS tel 13.0 bn 08 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Focus on financial services TBC Bank is focused on financial services activities and 99.7% of our total assets relate to banking insurance leasing brokerage and corporate advisory services.
We have several small subsidiaries including card processing and a selfservice terminal operating company which play a supporting role to strengthen our core business.
Over the past 25 years we have built a sound straightforward and resilient operating model as well as gained strong business expertise and market knowledge.
Our clear strategic focus and experience provides a significant advantage and solid basis for our future growth and development and clearly differentiates us from our peers.
Bestinclass digital channels We continue to leverage our leading digital capabilities to achieve business growth and operating efficiency.
TBC Bank has world class digital banking channels which include the awardwinning internet and mobile banking applications a call centre and a vast network of ATMs POS terminals and selfservice terminals.
Due to our continued efforts the number of retail transactions conducted via digital channels continues to grow resulting in a retail offloading ratio as high as 88.3% in December 2017.
At the same time we continue to innovate and enhance our digital product offerings.
This year we have developed and introduced the first Georgianspeaking chatbot Ti Bot using Facebook
It can understand questions and provide helpful answers about currency exchange rates various product offerings branch and ATM locations as well as conduct P2P transactions and purchase cinema tickets.
We are also proud that our digital capabilities gained global recognition and Global Finance magazine named TBC Bank the worlds Best Integrated Corporate Bank Site in 2017 in addition to receiving multiple regional CEE and country awards in many digital banking categories.
Financial service activities account for 99.7% of TBC Banks total assets Global Finance named TBC Bank the worlds Best Integrated Corporate Bank Site in 2017 INVESTMENT CASE WHY INVEST IN TBC BANK We base our strategy on understanding our customers evolving preferences for using digital channels instead of branches and aim to become the best digital financial services company in the region by developing the most intuitive userfriendly and innovative digital solutions in the market.
1 Region in this context comprises Armenia Azerbaijan and Georgia Our four main competitive advantages are 09 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Strategic Report
Superior customer experience We pride ourselves on having the highest customer satisfaction score in the Georgian banking sector including the NPS and CSAT scores We achieved this by fostering a customerfocused culture where every employee strives to create maximum comfort and value for our customers.
We base our customer satisfaction on four main principles i simplicity and comfort ii professionalism and stability iii individual approach and iv care.
We are dedicated to providing the best customer experience in Georgia by constantly improving our service proposition and offering the most competitive and innovative solutions in the market.
Our goal is to be able to anticipate our customers preferences to offer them the right products and services at the right time.
We also continuously work to simplify customer service processes and eliminate unnecessary procedures in order to create a pleasant experience for our clients.
Our customers feedback is very important to us and we listen carefully to our clients and value their opinions.
2 Based on surveys conducted by independent research companies ACT and IPM in December 2017 Strong brand For 25 years we have been supporting the growth and prosperity of our customers colleagues partners and the community at large.
We have always acted with integrity and transparency in all our undertakings acknowledging our responsibility towards all our stakeholders.
We strive to generate added value for our customers by creating straightforward and flexible products and services.
We aspire to foster the best working environment for our employees and build longterm relationships with our partners as well as make a positive contribution to society by supporting business culture sports and the young generation.
As a result TBC Bank today is one of the most wellknown and trusted brands in the country.
We are associated with creating opportunities for young people and businesses supporting innovation and progress.
TBC Bank has also gained international recognition and among other things received country regional and global awards including Best Bank in Georgia awards from Global Finance EMEA Finance Euromoney and the Banker magazines for many years in a row Find out more about our awards at site.
NPS gap with peer Bank16.7% CSAT gap with peer Bank16.6% TBC Bank has been awarded Best Bank in Georgia 14 times in the last 16 years 10 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017
CHAIRMANS STATEMENT
We established TBC Bank in 1992 shortly after Georgia had restored its independence following the collapse of the Soviet
We have since grown sidebyside with our country throughout its economic and political development.
As Georgia lacked a functioning financial system at the time of TBC Banks inception we became true pioneers in establishing a wellrun banking institution with a longterm perspective.
We set ourselves a challenging task to build a banking business that would earn trust and credibility with our customers.
For that reason from the outset we adopted a customercentric approach in our business.
To help achieve our goal we have sought to employ people who share our mindset and have created a strong committed team with common values.
Over the past 25 years TBC Bank has been growing together with its customers supporting them in meeting their financial needs helping them to achieve success and contributing to the entire countrys development.
Today we take pride in being the largest privatelyowned bank in the region In addition to our strong team spirit we attribute our continued success to having one of the most recognised brands in Georgia a superior customer experience the best multichannel network and a full range of innovative services and products.
Strategy
We believe that TBC Banks future success depends on its digital competence as customers are increasingly shifting towards digital banking.
The banking industry is entering a digital era and we need to stay abreast of upcoming changes.
Last year  we announced an updated strategy to become the best digital financial services company in the region We remain committed to this strategy.
We are also focused on our customer experience.
We have made significant efforts to anticipate our customers needs and offer them the best products and services.
We measure customer satisfaction regularly to identify areas that need improvement and we work diligently to enhance our offerings.
We pride ourselves on having the highest customer satisfaction scores in the Georgian banking sector as well as on holding leading positions in the countrys broader retail industry.
We will continue to use our strengths to keep growing with the market and more actively engage with our customers by creating innovative valueadded solutions for them.
At the same time we will remain focused on operating efficiency and automation to become more agile in our fastchanging environment.
Key achievements In May we successfully completed the integration of Bank Republic well ahead of schedule.
As a result we have expanded our distribution network and increased our client base by around 380000 customers all of whom now have full access to our innovative range of products and services.
Another significant development in 2017 was the inclusion of our shares into the FTSE 250 Index reflecting the improved liquidity of our shares and the increased valuation of our business.
Since then we have begun to benefit from a more diversified shareholder base and are seeing greater interest from potential investors.
Dear shareholders It is with great pleasure that I present our 2017 annual report.
As the year also marks our 25th anniversary I would like to reflect on where we started and how far we have come over this past quarter of a century.
1 Region in this context comprises Armenia Azerbaijan and Georgia 2 Based on surveys conducted by independent research companies IPM and ACT 3 According to data as of 31 December 2017 published by the National Bank of Georgia Mamuka Khazaradze Chairman 11 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Strategic Report
Strategic Rreport Strategy and Performance Over the past year  we made good progress towards our updated strategy of becoming the best digital financial services company in the region The number of transactions and sales conducted in remote channels continue to grow rapidly as do internet and mobile banking penetration levels.
We also launched the first Georgian speaking chatbotTi Bot which allows customers to conduct simple banking transactions via Facebook Messenger .
It also provides useful information about our products as well as entertainment events and weather forecasts.
The chatbot has been well received by our customers and has become a highly popular channel attracting more than 124000 users since its launch in March 2017.
Our strong operating performance during 2017 translated into robust financial results.
For 2017 TBC Bank recorded an underlying net profit of GEL 369.2 million up 35.1% yearonyear .
In addition our underlying return on equity and return on assets stood at a respective 21.4% and 3.2%.
In terms of our loan book our loan portfolio grew by 16.2% yearonyear  leading to a market share of 38.2% Operating environment 2017 was another remarkable year in Georgias continued development.
The countrys citizens were granted visafree access to the Schengen zone which is a significant advancement and will support our deeper integration with the EU countries.
Visa liberalisation would also have a positive impact on tourism leading to increased awareness about Georgia and greater tourist inflow from the EU.
The country is already being promoted as one of the best places to visit including by many reputable magazines which have named it in their lists of the top 10 tourist destinations.
In 2017 Georgia recorded strong economic growth with GDP reaching 5.0% which is one of the largest increases among countries in the CIS and Eastern Europe.
This improvement was mainly driven by high tourism income and an increase in net exports.
Another positive factor was the improvement in the current account deficit which decreased to 7.1% of GDP for 9M 2017 compared with 11.2% a year earlier  indicating that the country is experiencing more sustainable economic development.
Other important developments in 2017 included the official opening of the longawaited BakuTbilisiKars railway and the beginning of a new phase of development at Anaklia Deep Sea Port where construction work started in December .
These projects will strengthen Georgias position as a regional tourism and transportation hub as it offers the shortest route to connect the economies of China and countries in Central Asia to those of European countries.
These transportation links coupled with free trade agreements with the EU China and all major economic powers in the broader region will further support the growth of Georgias economy and diversify trade exports.
Finally Georgia regained its position among the top 10 countries in the World Banks Doing Business 2018 ranking moving up by seven positions to ninth place to become the best performer in Europe and Central Asia.
This outstanding performance in these rankings highlights the governments continued efforts to improve the business environment and to make Georgia one of the worlds most attractive places to do business.
Governance
TBC Bank is committed to the highest standards of corporate governance and business transparency.
Our experienced Board of Directors takes the leading role in framing our strategy overseeing our risk management and challenging our performance.
With their diverse and unique skillsets our Directors help to guide our strategic development and create sustainable value for our stakeholders.
I would like to thank all our Directors for their active involvement and valuable contribution towards our achievements in 2017.
I firmly believe that together we are well positioned to realise our strategy of becoming the best digital financial services company in the region As already announced two nonexecutive Directors Stefano Marsaglia and Stephan Wilcke will be leaving TBC Bank and stepping down from the Board as and when suitable replacements are found during 2018.
I would like to extend the Boards thanks to both Stefano and Stephan for their important contributions to TBC Bank and we wish them every success in the future.
Acting responsibly Corporate responsibility has always been one of our overriding values.
During the past 25 years TBC Bank has actively supported culture sports young talent and other important social projects.
We continue to hold a firm belief and commitment to supporting the community the environment the human rights and our wider stakeholders including our shareholders employees and customers.
We also aspire to conduct business in a way that promotes high ethical standards values and encourages our employees to act with integrity and responsibility towards each other and our customers partners and community.
This year we launched an innovative platform statusdonates. and support.
We remain longterm partners with the Georgian Rugby Union and are the title sponsor of the national rugby team.
In 2017 Georgia hosted the World Rugby Under20 Championship and we actively promoted the games using our social and media channels helping to attract many fans to the stadiums.
This championship put Georgia on the international sports map and introduced world rugby fans to the country from a different angle.
Outlook
While we have achieved significant success over the past 25 years we continuously seek ways to improve our business.
We remain eager to go further after achieving each new accomplishment.
We will continue to innovate and offer unbeatable digital solutions a superior customer experience and tailormade financial products.
In 2018 we will progress towards our strategy of becoming the best digital financial services company in the region On behalf of the Board I would like to express my deep gratitude to our management team employees and partners for their continued hard work and dedication.
I am confident that our joint efforts will enable us to achieve success in all our undertakings and create maximum value for all our stakeholders over the next 25 years.
Mamuka Khazaradze
28 March 2018 4 Conde Nast Traveller Vogue and Lonely Planet 5 Source Geostat 6 Source NBG Geostat 12 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 CEO LETTER The driving force behind our success has always been a strong commitment to our goals the dedication of our team and our clear longterm vision.
The shareholders have entrusted me with the leadership of TBC Bank since 1998 and I am extremely proud of our accomplishments throughout these years.
While TBC Bank has mostly grown organically it has also strengthened its position through the acquisitions of Bank Constanta in 2011 and Bank Republic in 2016.
Today TBC Bank is the leading bank in Georgia and is well positioned to become the best digital financial services company in the region due to our outstanding digital capabilities.
Highlights of 2017 TBC Bank delivered another strong financial performance in 2017 posting a record high net underlying profit of GEL 369.2 million up by 35.1% yearonyear.
Our strong profitability was underpinned by the integration of Bank Republic which we completed well ahead of schedule in the second quarter of the year.
We are using the merger to drive cost synergies and significantly improve our efficiency delivering an underlying cost to income ratio of 40.5% in 2017.
The integration has also increased our distribution network and expanded our customer base allowing us to crosssell our products to the newly acquired customers.
As a result our product per customer ratio in the retail segment increased to 3.9 in 2017 compared with 3.7 a year earlier.
In 2017 we recorded strong balance sheet growth increasing our loan and deposit portfolios by a respective 16.2% and 21.1% yearonyear.
As a result we had market shares of 38.2% of total loans and 39.8% of deposits in Georgia.
In line with our strategy we also increased our net fee and commission income by 39.5% in 2017 mainly driven by settlement card and trade finance operations.
Robust growth paired with a significant increase in net fee and commission income and improved efficiency offset the expected reduction in the net interest margin and led to strong profitability.
Our underlying return on equity was 21.4% and our underlying return on assets was 3.2%.
At the same time we continue to maintain sound asset quality and our ratio of non performing loans was low at 3.3%.
I am pleased to report that we are on track towards achieving our strategic goal of becoming the best digital financial services company in the region Our customers benefit from our reliable and userfriendly internet and mobile banking applications as well as from our wide network of selfservice terminals allowing them to conduct most banking transactions remotely.
As a result our offloading ratio in retail segment reached 88.3% while our mobile banking penetration ratio increased by 7.2 percentage points yearonyear to 31.4%.
In 2017 we also introduced the first Georgianspeaking chatbot on Facebook Messenger Ti Bot which gained popularity in a very short time and attracted around 124000 customers and received 6.5 million messages since launch in March.
Ti Bot serves as an efficient new sales channel and can also be used to conduct simple banking transactions.
In December  we also deployed a biometric voice recognition system in our call centre to simplify customer identification and improve the safety of our customers personal and account data.
We are the first bank in the region to have implemented such a system.
We continue to deliver a superior customer experience by carefully analysing feedback received and continuously improving our products and service levels.
Over the past year  we introduced a fully digital onboarding system for our business clients allowing them to open a current account online and perform their transactions without delay.
The usage of this service is increasing rapidly and in December  around 20% of new legal entities registered online.
We also launched a loyalty programme called Ertguli for our retail customers.
Ertguli is a credit Vakhtang Butskhrikidze
1 Region in this context comprises Armenia Azerbaijan and Georgia 2 Based on data published by the National Bank of Georgia as of 31 December 2017 Dear shareholders In 2017 TBC Bank celebrated its 25th anniversary.
The Bank was established during one of the most challenging periods in Georgias recent history and our story today is an outstanding example of how to build a sustainable business.
13 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Strategic Report
Strategic Rreport Strategy and Performance card with a preapproved instalment limit which also allows customers to gather loyalty points and take advantage of special offers and discounts.
This programme has proven extremely successful helping to increase the use of our credit cards by 79.4% yearonyear .
On the corporate side we continue to enhance our product offerings.
To better serve our customers we are currently developing comprehensive brokerage and corporate advisory services aiming to offer corporate clients a onestop shop.
On the MSME side we launched a new financing programme called Startuperi for earlystage companies.
The programme aims to support startups not only financially but also by providing nonfinancial services including training sessions master classes and special discounts with TBC Banks partners.
I am delighted with the firstyear results of our newly acquired business TBC Insurance which grew rapidly in 2017.
The number of customers increased to around 277000 from just 3000 at the time of the acquisition in October 2016.
Our market share excluding health insurance reached 13.3% as of 31 December 2017 compared with 3.5% as of 31 December 2016 making us the thirdlargest player on the market and the secondlargest player in retail segment with market share of 28.9% Macroeconomic overview 2017 was quite a successful year for Georgias economy.
The countrys GDP growth rate almost doubled from the levels seen over the past two years reflecting improvements in the external environment and continued domestic reform efforts which helped to strengthen the confidence of consumers and businesses in the country.
In 2017 Georgias GDP grew by around 5.0% placing the country among the fastestgrowing economies in CEE as well as in the CIS region.
Improved macroeconomic performance across all directions was reflected in the sovereign credit rating of the country.
In September  2017 Moodys upgraded Georgias credit rating to Ba2 from Ba3 previously with the stable outlook.
An improved trade and investment relationships together with strengthened banking supervision framework were named as underlying factors of the improved credit rating.
Fitch also revised Georgias credit rating outlook from stable to positive in March 2018 to reflect accelerating growth and improved resilience of the economy.
Georgia continues to benefit from its open trade policies with all major economic players in the region.
Exports of goods went up by a solid 29.1% yearonyear in 2017 reflecting the recovery witnessed among the countrys major trading partners.
Starting from 2018 a freetrade agreement with China has entered into force which should give additional impetus to Georgias growing exports.
Tourism remained a source of strength for Georgias economy as the number of visitors exceeded 7.5 million in 2017 which represented a significant increase on previous years.
Tourism revenue surged by 26.9% yearonyear in 2017 and remained one of the countrys most important sources of foreign currency inflows.
Georgias growing image as an attractive yearround tourist destination is expected to continue to drive its economy.
Growth in lending and the broader economy were reinforcing each other throughout 2017.
Banking sector lending to the economy increased by 17.8% yearonyear  while loans to legal entities rose by 10.4% yearonyear .
After the subdued growth seen in 2015 and 2016 this suggests a revival of investment activity by local companies.
The continuing trend of growing employment and household disposable income contributed to the 25.7% yearonyear growth of loans to individuals.
Another positive development in 2017 was the reduction of dollarisation of the banking sector  reflecting joint efforts of the public and financial sectors.
At the yearend the share of deposits denominated in foreign currency was down by 5.9 percentage points yearonyear at 65.3% while the share of loans denominated in foreign currency was down by 8.3 percentage points yearonyear at 57.1%.
Lower dollarisation together with a proven track record of sound macro and micro risk management have further supported the resilience of the banking sector  which traditionally positioned itself with high capital liquidity and profitability ratios low levels of nonperforming loans as well as a prudent regulatory framework.
Strategic priorities Our strategic priorities for the coming years include deepening our relationships with customers and delivering sustainable growth further developing the digital capabilities of our multichannel platform continuing to improve our customer experience increasing operating efficiency and automation proactively managing our net interest margin in the context of market maturity competition and regulatory initiatives.
To strengthen our relationships with customers we actively engage with them and offer an innovative range of products and services to maintain our leading positions.
Currently our retail customer base is more than 2 million people which is around 75% of Georgias adult population providing us with vast opportunities to crosssell and move clients further along our value chain.
In parallel to deepening our relationships with clients we consistently provide a superior customer experience as measured by the net promoter and customer satisfaction scores.
On these metrics TBC Bank ranks the highest in the Georgian banking industry.
Moreover we have one of the top net promoter scores among the leading service industries in the country.
As digital channels are vital to our longterm success our team strives to further enhance our digital multichannel capabilities and offer reliable solutions to our customers.
The number of transactions conducted via digital channels continues to grow especially in mobile banking and selfservice terminals indicating customers preferred digital channels.
I am confident that we are well positioned to implement our strategy.
For the medium term we maintain our guidance as follows annual loan book growth of around 15% return on equity target of 20% or more cost to income ratio of below 40% dividend payout ratio of 2535% of consolidated net profit.
Acknowledgement
In 2017 we made significant progress towards achieving our goals.
I would like to thank all my colleagues for their dedicated hard work and commitment.
Over the past 25 years we as a team have worked hard to build a success story.
I am confident that we will continue to develop and set new standards for the regions banking industry in 2018 and beyond.
The Strategic Report as set out on pages 2 to 103 was approved by the Board and signed on behalf of the Board by Vakhtang Butskhrikidze
Chief Executive Officer
28 March 2018 3 Based on data provided by Georgias State Insurance Supervision Service 4 Source Geostat 5 Without foreign currency effect the decrease was 5.4pp for deposits and 7.8pp for loans 6 Based on survey conducted by independent research companies ACT and IPM TI Bot IN FOCUS YEARS OF INNOVATION DIGIT AL SERVICE OUR FIRST INTERNET BANKING SERVICES THE FIRST
CHATBOT 16 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 MARKET OVERVIEW Our operations are primarily based in Georgia and are focused on providing a full range of financial services to both retail and business customers.
Georgias growing role as a regional hub for tourism trade transport and logistics supports its position as one of the fastestgrowing economies in CEE as well as in the CIS.
External inflows and exchange rate Given the positive trend in external inflows Georgias current account balance improved markedly.
In 9M 2017 the current account deficit stood at 7.1% of GDP compared with 11.2% a year earlier .
From the perspective of the savinginvestment gap the lower current account deficit was primarily due to the increased saving level in the country which sets the stage for even more sustainable growth and a reduced current account deficit going forward.
Chart 1.
Current account deficit and net foreign direct investment % of GDPtel 9M 2016 9M 2017 Current account
11.7% 3.9% 5.8% 5.1% 10.7% 8.2% 12.0% 9.1% 12.8% 8.2% 11.2% 9.1% 7.1% 10.5% Source National Bank of Georgia National Statistics Office of Georgia Geostat Chart 2.
Exports tourism and remittances YoY Economic growth and employment In 2017 Georgias real GDP growth accelerated to 5.0% well above the 2.8% reported in 2016 amid a favourable external environment.
Continued reform efforts and improved domestic business and consumer sentiment added more thrust to economic growth.
The economy benefitted from considerable positive spillover from the higher than expected growth in the EU Georgias largest trading partner .
Most CIS countries started to recover from the slowdown experienced in 201416.
This translated into a sharp increase in exports of goods as well as higher tourism and remittance inflows from these countries.
Growth was synchronised across a broad range of economic sectors mostly driven by services.
In 2017 acceleration of growth was mostly on the back of the transport and communications and trade sectors.
Transport and communications expanded by 6.2% YoY compared with a contraction of 3.1% YoY in 2016 while the trade and repairs sector posted 6.6% YoY growth in 2017 up from 2.4% a year earlier .
Growth remained in double digits in the construction sector up 11.2% YoY and hotels and restaurants up 11.2% YoY the former supported by higher public investments and the latter by a sharp increase of tourism inflows.
This solid macroeconomic performance was reflected in Moodys decision in September 2017 to upgrade Georgias Sovereign credit rating from Ba3 to Ba2 maintaining the outlook at stable due to the improved trade and investment relationship and the strengthened banking supervision framework.
Fitch also revised Georgias credit rating outlook from stable to positive in March 2018 to reflect accelerating growth and improved resilience of the economy.
The existing dynamics of decreasing unemployment and pickup in jobs in business sector continued in 2017 as well.
In 2017 employment in the business sector went up by 5.6% YoY.
GEORGIA .5% 21.9% 10.7% 3.9% 8.3% 11.9% 6.6% 29.1% 26.9% 19.8% 1.7% 2.5% 22.9% 25.0% 4.2%tel 2016 2017
Tourism
Remittances 17 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance In 2017 exports of goods surged by 29.1% YoY with diversified growth across different regions.
Exports to CIS countries increased the most up 60.0% YoY due to the recovery seen in these economies albeit from the low base of the previous year as exports to the CIS had halved from 2013 to 2016.
Exports continued to grow to the EU up 13.0% YoY and other countries up 12.2% YoY as well.
Notable export growth to China continued up 23.4% YoY making it the fifthlargest destination for Georgian goods.
The free trade agreement with China that came into effect from the beginning of 2018 should further boost Georgian exports to one of the worlds largest markets.
Imports of goods increased by 9.4% YoY amid a domestic demand recovery and higher oil prices.
Imports went up by 18.4% for petroleum products by 10.6% for consumer goods and by 5.0% for capital and intermediate goods.
The balance of trade in goods worsened slightly edging down by 1.4% or roughly US 70 million in absolute terms.
Tourism revenue grew by an estimated 26.9% YoY with the total number of visitors exceeding 7.5 million as Georgia is becoming an increasingly popular tourist destination for visitors from ever more countries.
While its immediate neighbours still account for most incoming visitors tourism inflows from the EU and Middle East have been on an upward trend.
Remittances climbed by 19.8% YoY including by 15.1% YoY from the EU and by 15.6% YoY from the CIS.
Growth of remittances from other countries stood at a sizeable 31.3% YoY.
Among the latter group of countries Israel and Turkey made the highest contributions with respective YoY increases of 96.1% and 25.6%.
The real effective exchange rate supported the competitiveness of Georgian goods and services exports as it remained somewhat below its longterm trend depreciating by 4.5% QoQ and 2.2% YoY in Q4 2017.
As of the yearend the USDGEL exchange rate appreciated by 2.1% YoY while the EURGEL rate depreciated by 11.1% reflecting the EUR strengthening against the USD.
As expected the stronger EUR coincided with improved growth in the EU as well as higher commodity prices which had an overall positive impact on the Georgian economy.
Inflation and monetary policy Annual inflation as measured in terms of CPI was relatively high throughout 2017 reaching 6.7% by the yearend.
Inflation
In 2H 2017 higher oil prices and a weaker nominal effective exchange rate added to the inflationary pressure.
To curb secondround effects on inflation the National Bank of Georgia raised its policy rate by 0.25 pp to 7.25% in December 2017 where it remained at the yearend as the pressure on prices from the exchange rate eased along with the appreciation of the GEL s nominal effective exchange rate.
In its latest guidance the National Bank of Georgia reported that inflation should align closer to the 3% target in 2018 when the oneoff effects of the increased import taxes on petroleum automobiles and tobacco will drop out of the CPI inflation figures.
This is confirmed by the deceleration of annual inflation to 4.3% and 2.7% in January and February 2018 respectively.
The National Bank of Georgia continues to follow its inflation targeting framework which calls for a flexible exchange rate to support economic growth and the GEL s longterm stability.
For 2018 the inflation target was decreased to 3% which should support a stronger nominal exchange rate for the GEL going forward.
Fiscal policy The Ministry of Finance delivered on its commitment to maintain a sustainable budget deficit in 2017 while accelerating the pace of investment in public infrastructure.
The budget deficit came in at 3.8% of GDP down from 3.9% in 2016.
As a percent of GDP capital spending edged up from 4.1% in 2016 to 4.8% in 2017 while social expenditures declined from 10.0% to 9.3% and government consumption fell from 9.2% to 8.4%.
The ratio of government consumption to GDP reached the lowest level of the past 10 years reflecting the successful attempts to optimise government spending on salaries and the purchase of goods and services.
Further steps were taken to enhance the cost efficiency of public institutions.
Starting from 2018 the number of ministries was reduced from 18 to 14.
This initiative is a welcome development from the perspective of reducing the bureaucratic burden.
The public debt level remains comfortable at around 44.0% of GDP as of the yearend well below the upper limit of 60%.
In addition the government has continued its efforts to increase the transparency of public finances.
According to the 2017 assessment by the International Budget Partnership Georgia ranked fifth among the 102 countries surveyed indicating its high levels of transparency oversight and public participation in the budgeting process.
In the Open Budget Index ranking Georgia outscored all EU countries except for Sweden and Norway.
Financial sector The financial sector dominated by banks continues to grow under a prudent regulatory framework.
In 2017 the banking sectors total assets increased by 14.7% YoY to GEL 34.6 billion.
The total loan portfolio increased by 17.8% YoY to GEL 22.3 billion or 58.6% of GDP while the growth excluding FX effect was 19.3%.
The loan portfolio growth was primarily driven by loans in the national currency up 46.3% YoY while foreign currency loans increased by 5.0% excluding foreign exchange effect.
In 2017 the National Bank of Georgia and the government introduced measures to reduce the economys dependence on foreign currency bringing down the share of the loan portfolio denominated in foreign currency.
Additionally new liquidity 1 Budget spending on salaries and goods and services 18 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 management instruments and an expanded collateral base allowed banks to promote lending in GEL more actively.
The share of foreign currency deposits declined by 5.9 pp YoY 5.4 pp without the FX effect to 65.3% while the share of loans in foreign currency declined by 8.3 pp YoY 7.8 pp without the FX effect to 57.1%.
The National Bank of Georgia has enhanced the capital adequacy framework according to the Basel III requirements.
The new regulatory requirements are aimed at further increasing the banking sectors capacity to absorb any possible shocks in the future.
The updates envisage the introduction of additional capital requirements for systemically important banks as well as a countercyclical capital buffer.
These requirements will be phased in gradually and will further increase the banking sectors resilience.
The quality of the financial sectors credit portfolio remains robust.
In Q4 2017 the share of nonperforming loans in the total loan portfolio stood at 2.8% down 0.3 pp QoQ and 0.7 pp YoY.
Going forward In 2018 the International Monetary Fund IMF expects the momentum of global growth to remain high in advanced emerging and developing market economies.
Georgias economy should continue to benefit from the healthy growth of its main trading partners buoyed by the further expansion of inflows from exports tourism and remittances.
Aside from the favourable external environment ongoing structural reforms improved trade and investment relationships and a strengthened banking supervision framework further improve the countrys investment environment.
For 2018 the IMF expects growth of 4.2% of GDP while the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development EBRD the government and the National Bank of Georgia project a slightly higher rate of 4.5%.
As for 2022 IMF forecasts GDP growth rate of 5.5%.
Growth at these levels should allow Georgia to remain one of the fastestgrowing economies in CEE and the CIS.
1 90 days past due loans 19 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance 20 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 OUR KEY STRENGTHS Our key strengths underpin our strategy and business model.
As we live and operate in the era of digitalisation our ambition has been translated into a clear vision to be the best digital financial services company in the region 1 Region in this context comprises Armenia Azerbaijan and Georgia.
Leading position in the market with a track record of growth and profitability TBC Bank is the largest bank in Georgia by all key metrics with market shares of 38.2% and 39.8% in total loans and total deposits respectively.
We continue to record strong organic growth and strengthen our positions by the acquisition and subsequent integration of Bank Republic in 2016 and 2017.
As a result we recorded respective compound annual growth rates of 32.1% and 33.0% for loans and deposits over 201417 26.2% and 30.2% respectively excluding Bank Republic.
Over the same period return on equity ROE for the full year stood above 20% supported by strong interest and noninterest income as well as improving cost efficiency.
Superior customer experience We offer a superior customer experience in all our channels by caring about our customers needs and constantly seeking to improve our service levels.
We strive to create maximum value for our customers and eliminate unnecessary barriers in our communication.
We have the highest customer satisfaction scores in the Georgian banking sector and hold a leading position across the countrys entire retail industry.
Straightforward business model focused on financial service activities We have a straightforward business model focused on financial service activities.
This allows us to fully concentrate on our strategy and execution as well as to build trusted relationships with our business clients.
We invest in subsidiaries that operate in financial services and related fields and support the expansion of our business.
Leading partner for businesses in Georgia Our business model is based on building longterm partnerships with businesses guiding and supporting them at every stage of their development.
We have been growing together with our business customers from the very beginning of Georgias independence.
Over the past 25 years we have gained strong market expertise and a solid understanding of our customers financial needs.
This allows us to offer them the right solutions at the right time.
To further support our business customers we offer addedvalue freeofcharge nonfinancial services including various training courses individual consultations and conferences.
BUSINESS MODEL AND STRATEGY 2 Based on data published by the National Bank of Georgia as of 31 December 2017 3 Based on surveys conducted by independent research companies IPM and ATC 21 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Strong brand TBC Bank is one of the most trusted and reputable brands in Georgia.
We are not only the first bank of choice for customers but are also widely recognised as one of the most desirable employers and the leading company in the country in terms of corporate responsibility.
We are proud to have been named Best Bank in Georgia for many years in a row by leading international financial magazines including Global Finance EMEA Finance Euromoney and the Banker .
Our listing on the London Stock Exchanges premium segment and inclusion in the FTSE 250 Index have further strengthened our brand in both local and international markets.
Skillful and engaged team Our people play a vital role in our success and we are committed to building the best team by coaching engaging and motivating them to excel in their areas of responsibility and beyond.
We have a strong team of more than 7000 people who are dedicated to achieving the companys strategic objectives and are proud to be members of our big TBC family.
Our staff engagement score stands as high as 91% and we continuously strive to create the best working environment for our people.
Powerful multichannel capabilities with a strong focus on digital We operate a wide distribution channel platform which allows our customers to choose their preferred way of interacting with us.
As the usage of our digital channels is growing rapidly especially mobile banking we continue to invest in smart remote solutions offering our customers such innovative services as chatbot mobile wallet and a voice biometric recognition system.
At the same time we continue to expand our network of selfservice terminals which offer both cash and cashless payment functionality.
By the end of 2017 the number of these terminals reached 2790.
Experienced management team and highquality corporate governance We pride ourselves on having one of the most experienced and wellbalanced boards in the region with a firm commitment to the highest standards of corporate governance.
The Board consists of nine members with two founding shareholders being among the most successful businesspeople in the county five independent nonexecutives with vast experience and established reputations in the worlds financial centres and two highly skilled and experienced executives.
Our management team is comprised of eight members with a unique mix of international experience and strong local expertise.
The CEO and first deputy CEO have been with the bank for almost 25 years.
1 91% of all employees feel involved in and committed to TBC Bank 22 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 BUSINESS MODEL AND STRATEGY
Retail which serves around 75% of Georgias adult population Mass retail Affluent customers TBC Status High net worth individuals Corporate and investment banking which serves all major sectors of the economy Large corporates Midsized corporates Micro small and medium enterprise MSME which serves 63% of newly registered businesses in Georgia Micro and small businesses Mediumsized businesses
Read more on page 2021 Read more on page 3053 Data is for FY 2017 source www . apr. ov.
Leading position in the market with a track record of growth and profitability Straightforward business model focused on financial service activities Strong brand Powerful multichannel capabilities with a strong focus on digital Superior customer experience Leading partner for businesses in
Skillful and engaged team Experienced management team and highquality corporate governance OUR MODEL IS DESIGNED TO CREATE VALUE FOR ALL OF OUR STAKEHOLDERS Our key strengths What we do We offer a full range of banking services to retail and business customers structuring our business into three segments 23 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Interest income mainly from lending activities Fee and commission income primary related to card operations settlement transactions trade finance and insurance Additional source of income from brokerage investment banking and asset management Prudent risk management resulting in low cost of risk Cost savings from streamlining internal processes and increasing automation Read about our KPIs on pages 2627 and our strategy on pages 2425 Sustainable returns for our shareholders Wellsuited solutions and superior service to enable our customers to succeed Challenging and rewarding careers for our people Supporting young generation sports and culture How we generate profit How we share value 24 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 BUSINESS MODEL AND STRATEGY
STRATEGY
TBC Banks main source of income is interest income and fee and commission income generated by the core banking business and other related financial activities.
In the long term we aim to continue offsetting the decreasing trend in net interest margins through increasing fee and commission income and operational efficiency.
We see significant opportunities in the insurance business through our recently acquired subsidiary TBC Insurance with the ambition to become a market leader in the medium term.
Our payment business including its card business also offers tremendous growth potential and we are actively utilising this by developing new products.
With Georgias increasing trade flows we see rising demand for trade finance products which gives us a great opportunity to leverage our strong trade finance capabilities.
Our brokerage investment banking and asset management businesses will become an increasingly important source of income in the future especially with upcoming pension reforms and the development of capital markets in Georgia.
At the same time we are focused on streamlining our internal processes and increasing automation levels within the Group in order to improve efficiency and flexibility as well as to lower operating costs.
Our strategic priorities 1 Based on data published by the National Bank of Georgia as of 31 December 2017 2 Based on survey conducted by independent research company ACT 3 Based on surveys conducted by independent research companies ACT and IPM Deepen relationship with customers and deliver sustainable growth As the market leader and holding 38.2% of total loans and 39.8% of total deposits we aim to continue to grow in line with the market and to maintain our leadership position.
At the same time we seek to engage with our clients more by offering them new products and services and creating various ecosystems.
Further improve our customer experience We take customer experience very seriously and are committed to exceeding our clients expectations rather than just meeting their needs.
Our front office staff are more than just sales people they listen carefully to clients and try to find the most suitable solutions for them acting as consultants.
Further enhance digital capabilities of our multichannel platform As more and more customers are moving to digital channels we strive to respond to the changing preferences of our clients by continually developing and enhancing our digital value propositions.
We are continuously working on adding new features and capabilities to our awardwinning internet and mobile banking applications as well as by introducing additional innovative solutions.
Increase operating efficiency and automation We continue to simplify and streamline our business process in the front and back offices by eliminating unnecessary bureaucratic procedures.
We also continue to upgrade our banking systems and capabilities to keep in line with the newest technological developments.
Progress in 2017 Product per customer ratio in retail segment increased to 3.9 from 3.7 Noninterest income grew by 34.8% yearonyear Progress in 2017 Offloading ratio increased by 4.2pp to 88.3% Mobile banking penetration ratio increased by 7.2pp to 31.4% Progress in 2017 Net promoter score NPSin mass retail  the gap with our peer bank improved by 2.8 pp Customer satisfaction score in mass retail the gap with our peer bank improved by 0.9 pp Progress in 2017 Underlying cost to income ratio decreased by 2.4pp to 40.5% Cost per asset ratio decreased by 1.0pp to 3.1% Progress 25 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Last year we observed an accelerated pressure on net interest margin NIM due to competition in loans and regulatory changes.
As these factors will remain in the future we have added a new strategic priority to proactively manage our NIM.
Our goal is to ensure that our NIM remains stable in the short to medium term.
We will be working on various initiatives both internally and with one of the worlds leading consulting firms.
This will include introducing appropriate customer segmentation and pricing methodologies conducting a proper product and segment profitability analysis and targeting the right portfolio mix.
As discussed above we aim to offset the decrease in NIM by increasing other operating income through our initiatives including increasing fees from the insurance business card operations trade finance and brokerage and asset management products and services.
Mediumterm financial targets Loan book growth rate at c.15% per year Return on equity target of above 20% Cost to income ratio below 40% Dividend payout ratio 2535% of consolidated net profit Mediumterm targets 26 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 BUSINESS MODEL AND STRATEGY
KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS 2017 359.9 2016 298.3 2015 218.7 2017 369.2 2016 273.3 2015 218.7 Reported net profit GEL million Underlying net profit GEL million 20.7% growth 35.1% growth 2017 6.5% 2016 7.6% 2015 7.8% 2017 21.4% 2016 20.6% 2015 20.1% Underlying net interest margin
Underlying return on average equity ROE % 1.1pp reduction 0.8pp growth 2017 40.5% 2016 42.9% 2015 43.9% 2017 257.0 2016 190.6 2015 164.8 Underlying cost to income ratio Reported noninterest income GEL million 2.4pp reduction 34.8% growth We closely monitor the progress against our strategy and have developed key performance indicators KPIs that measure our financial and operational performance.
These KPIs are closely aligned with our strategy and ensure that we deliver on our goals and achieve sustainable growth.
In 2017 we have recorded strong underlying and reported net profit which was up by 35.1% and 20.7% yearonyear respectively.
Our
Underlying NIM decreased by 1.1pp due to increased competition and more stringent liquidity requirements but still remained solid.
The decrease in NIM was offset by the increased noninterest income which grew by 34.8% yearonyear improved cost efficiency which resulted in underlying cost to income ratio of 40.5% as well as prudent cost of risk management leading to 1.2% cost of risk.
Over the same period our loan book grew by 16.2% while the asset quality remained solid with our nonperforming loans ratio standing at 3.3%.
We also achieved strong performance in digitalisation our offloading ratio increased by 4.2pp and our mobile banking penetration ratio increased by 7.2pp.
Furthermore our customer and employee satisfaction scores remain exceptionally high.
27 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance 2017 1.2% 2016 1.0% 2015 1.7% Cost of risk % 0.2pp growth 2017 38.2% 2016 38.9% 2015 28.7% Loan book market share % 0.7pp reduction 2017 88.3% 2016 84.1% 2015 79.1% Retail transactions offloading ratio 4.2pp growth 2017 31.4% 2016 24.2% 2015 15.4% Mobile banking penetration ratio % 7.2pp growth 2017 55% 2016 44% 2015 49% Employee satisfaction
11pp growth 2017 91% 2016 88% 2015 91% Employee satisfaction Engagement index 3pp growth 2017 16.7% 2016 13.9% 2015 4.7% Customer experience NPS in mass retail segment gap with peer bank 2.8pp growth 2017 16.6% 2016 15.7% 2015 5.5% Customer experience CSAT in mass retail segment gap with the peer bank 0.9pp growth 1 Based on data published by the National Bank of Georgia as of 31 December 2017 2016 market share includes Bank Republic 2 Employee Engagement Index and Employee Net Promoters Score were measured by an independent consultant 3 Based on survey conducted by independent research companies ACT and IPM 2015 figures are not directly comparable with 2016 and 2017 data as they are calculated per different methodology INFOCUS YEARS OF
SUPPORT NUMBER OF CLIENTS c.
2.2 m 30 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 DIVISIONAL REVIEW
Retail banking is our largest segment.
We serve more than 2 million customers which is around 75% of the adult Georgian population.
Our retail banking is differentiated by our outstanding customer experience worldclass digital channels strong brand advanced analytical capabilities as well as innovative products.
We are pioneers in Georgia following the launch of the first Georgian speaking chatbot available through facebook messenger and a voice biometric recognition system in our call center .
Our retail segment is comprised of three subsegments highnetworth individuals HNWI affluent customers TBC Status and mass retail.
Mass retail TBC Status HNWIs Number of clients 2.0 m 30052 2354 Loan book share 61.1% 36.9% 2.0% Deposit share 38.3% 28.8% 32.9% Crossselling ratio 3.8 9.0 6.3 RET AIL BANKING 2017 highlights 40.2% Retail loan market share 41.3% Retail deposit market share 49.5% Retail share in total loan book 56.0% Retail share in total deposits c.
2 million customers Around 75% of adult population in Georgia 88.3% Offloading ratio in mass retail 1 Based on data published by the National Bank of Georgia as of 31 December 2017 in this context retail refers to individual customers See our Case Studies starting from page 34 Further enhance our customer experience Continue to innovate and offer the most uptodate digital solutions on the market Improve customer engagement by increasing the products per customer ratio in mass retail Increase the number of customers in the affluent segment Increase assets under management in the highnetworth individuals segment Strategy 31 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Retail subsegments TBC Bank serves mass retail customers through a well developed multichannel network with a special focus on digital channels.
Most banking transactions can be carried out online via selfservice terminals or ATMs and clients need to come to branches only if they want to take out a mortgage or conduct nonstandard transactions.
Our TBC Status brand serves the affluent segment including individual clients with minimum monthly income of GEL 3000 or a loan or deposit amount of at least GEL 30000.
TBC Status differentiates itself with bestinclass personal bankers dedicated multichannel and tailored products and valueadded services.
Our personal bankers are highly qualified professionals who are committed to understanding the clients financial needs and offering them wellsuited solutions.
They strive to build lasting relationships with customers becoming trusted partners who can always be relied on and are easily accessible.
As our customers longterm wellbeing is of utmost importance to us we carefully analyse their personal circumstances and goals before coming up with solutions.
While we understand the importance of personal relationships we also realise that our affluent customers are busy and have less time for banking so we have modelled our TBC Status banking concept around this idea.
We have created dedicated multichannel services for our affluent customers with a special focus on digital channels.
We serve our TBC Status clients through a separate call centre with extended capabilities as well as internet and mobile banking offerings with enhanced functionality allowing most transactions to be conducted remotely.
In cases where our affluent customers still need to come to a branch they are seen in specially designed service areas that offer additional comfort.
We have around 70 TBC Status service areas in 27 branches.
In addition our affluent customers are entitled to a priority pass in all branches that allows them to skip any lines and be served first.
Other benefits of TBC Status include preferential rates on various TBC Bank products and services including higher interest rates on deposits and lower commissions on money transfers special offers discounts or cash back from certain retailers hotels restaurants and other partners and exclusive events for TBC Status customers and special discounts for main concerts such as our annual Jazz Festival.
In addition we offer a wide range of lifestyle products through our concierge service including holiday planning restaurant reservations flower delivery cleaning service and auto services.
The HNWI segment is comprised of resident and nonresident clients with deposit amounts equal to or above US 100000.
Our representative office in Israel TBC Invest allows us to attract nonresident clients more effectively from all over the world.
We serve our HNWI clients in our VIP service area which offers an impeccable combination of luxury comfort and privacy.
Our personal bankers are much more than just service managers they are consultants and wealth planners dedicated to maximising customers prosperity by offering them the best investment opportunities available on the market.
32 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Main achievements of 2017 In 2017 our retail loan book grew by 15.0% to GEL 4233.2 million while retail deposits increased by 16.8% to GEL 4378.3 million in 2017.
As a result the share of retail book in total loan portfolio stood at 49.5% and the share of retail deposits in the total deposit portfolio amounted to 56.0% as of 31 December 2017.
As the number one bank in Georgia we are constantly working to provide our customers with innovative addedvalue services and products tailored to their needs and interests.
We continue to invest our time and money to strengthen our multichannel platform and to reinforce our leadership in retail banking.
One innovative project implemented during the year was the first chatbot available via Facebook Messenger.
We developed and introduced the first Georgianspeaking chatbot Ti Bot which can not only understand typed messages but also understand voice messages and respond accordingly.
Ti Bot can perform simple transactions including P2P transfers and purchasing tickets as well as provide helpful information about subjects as diverse as the weather forecast currency exchange rates various entertainment offerings branch and ATM locations.
Ti Bot has proven very popular among our clients and we have received around 6.5 million messages from 124000 customers since launch.
We have also achieved outstanding results in terms of offloading our branches.
In 2017 88.3% of all retail transactions were conducted remotely.
The main drivers were increased transactions through our mobile banking and selfservice terminals.
In addition mobile banking penetration jumped from 24.2% to 31.4% YoY.
At the same time 44.5% of total sales were conducted digitally or through the call centre.
As an innovator in the card business we constantly develop new products and offerings to support cashless transactions.
In April 2017 we launched a new loyalty programme called Ertguli.
The literal Georgian meaning of the word is loyal but it can also be deconstructed into two separate words one and heart which is where the inspiration for our logo is drawn from.
All customers who own TBC Bank plastic cards automatically participate in the programme and can accumulate points on each purchase.
Furthermore within the Ertguli loyalty programme we have developed a new credit card that gives our customers an opportunity to collect more points at partner merchants as well as participate in special promotions and receive exclusive discounts.
In addition the card has a preapproved instalment limit and it is no longer necessary to fill out a special form and wait for approval at a branch desk.
As a result our credit card sales increased significantly in 2017 when we issued around 160000 new credit cards up 79.4%
Our priority for 2018 is to increase card transactions by fully automating and simplifying processes.
In addition in May 2017 we developed youth and student cards with distinctive benefits tailored to these clients interests.
The cards also have a unique design which can be changed based on owners wishes and interests.
For youth cards parents can set maximum daily expenditure limits to foster appropriate spending habits in their children.
DIVISIONAL REVIEW CONTINUED Key strengths Multichannel distribution platform
We have one of the most productive modern and visually appealing branch networks in Georgia with 77 branches in Tbilisi and 77 regional offices.
Following the merger with Bank Republic we have redesigned and rebranded its former branches.
ATMs
We have the largest ATM network in Georgia with about 1150 ATMs including partner banks.
Selfservice terminals As Georgia is still largely a cashbased society our selfservice terminals with cash payment functionality remain a very important channel for our customers.
It represents a strong substitution for the bank branches as it offers the majority of branch functionality.
We have 2790 selfservice terminals around Georgia.
Call centre Our bestinclass call centre operates 247 and is a particularly strong channel for sales and customer inquiries.
Around 21.6% of all products sold in remote channels are conducted in the call centre.
The call centre is integrated with our Siebel CRM system which allows us to deliver personalised services to our customers as well as achieve faster lead conversion.
Internet and mobile banking We pride ourselves on having the bestinclass internet and mobile banking applications with customer review ratings of 4.9 stars on Google Play 4.8 stars in the Apple App Store and the highest number of active online users in Georgia.
Since its launch in 2012 we have received many digital awards at the national and regional levels from Global Finance as well as three global awards the worlds Best Integrated Corporate Bank Site in 2017 the worlds Best Integrated Internet Bank Site in 2013 and the worlds Best Bill Payment and Presentment in 2013.
Strong brand and superior customer experience TBC Bank is one of the most trusted and wellknown brands in Georgia and is associated not only with the best financial services but also with an outstanding contribution to the country as a whole.
For 25 years we have been working diligently to build longstanding relationships and deliver a superior customer experience to strengthen our brand and gain the trust of prospective customers thus encouraging them to explore our services and become clients.
As customer satisfaction is a vital part of our success we are committed to continually improving our customer experience to further enhance our leading position.
Advanced analytical capabilities Since 2014 we have operated advanced data analytics that help us to better understand our customers needs and anticipate their behaviour.
This in turn enables us to increase sales efficiency and productivity as well as improve customer loyalty.
As a result this year we have increased our customer reactivation rate 1 by 22.8% and decreased our churn rate by 8.2%.
33 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Furthermore in December  we launched a mobile wallet application that allows customers to pay directly using the nearfield communication NFC technology built into their smartphones.
Another 2017 innovation was the addition of a new feature to our ATMs allowing our customers to withdraw money by means of contactless cards which reduces the time per transaction from around 40 seconds to 25 seconds.
Another breakthrough this year was the introduction of a voice biometrics recognition system.
In partnership with Verint Systems a global leader in actionable intelligence solutions we developed and implemented a voice biometrics recognition system in our call centre that helps us to identify a person based on their voice.
The main benefits are that customers can be verified quickly enabling us to deal with a greater number of calls and reduce fraud through identity theft.
We are the first bank in the region to have implemented such a system.
To serve our clients better  we constantly refine our IT infrastructure and analytical capabilities.
In 2017 we tested big data solutions and data architecture successfully developed a proof of concept and are currently working on implementing the big data cluster  which will allow us to generate new revenue streams deliver better customer service and improve operational efficiency.
In addition we developed spending analysis that enables us to accommodate customer needs and offer them products and services tailored to their interests.
As a result we have achieved strong results in crossselling and increased our products per customer ratio by to 3.9 in December 2017 from 3.7 in 2016.
Customers who were passive at the beginning of the period and became active at the end of the period  total number of active customers at the beginning of the period Customers who were active at the beginning of the period and became passive at the end of the period  total number of active customers at the beginning of the period For products that are being sold in remote channels 4 Region in this context comprises Armenia Azerbaijan and Georgia 34 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 RETAIL CASE STUDY TINATIN RUKHADZE Tinatin Rukhadze is a successful Georgian businesswoman.
In 2002 she founded ACT a leading research and consulting company with offices in Georgia Azerbaijan and Kazakhstan.
In addition in 2015 she established the first coaching company in Georgia GROWIN which provides a wide range of professional training courses and coaching sessions.
To support women and encourage their active participation in business she cofounded the Women for Tomorrow business federation.
Fifteen years ago Tinatin became a TBC Bank customer and began an enduring partnership with the Bank.
Since 2010 she has been a TBC Status client and benefited from the bespoke services that the Bank offers.
For Tinatin TBC Bank has been a consistently reliable partner that facilitates her financial needs and offers a superior customer experience.
Her personal banker anticipates her needs and always accommodates her requests offering tailormade solutions.
Tinatin highly values the flexibility of our digital channels and performs most of her transactions remotely and whenever necessary she can also easily contact her personal banker who is always ready to assist via Viber email or phone.
In addition Tinatin makes good use of spending analytics which is available via the internet and mobile banking to monitor monthly expenses and plan future finances.
LONGSTANDING
PARTNERSHIP
WITH TBC STATUS 35 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance TBC Bank is the perfect partner for businesspeople.
I often have to travel and can always rely on TBC Banks innovative digital channels to perform the transactions that I need.
In addition I acknowledge TBC Banks strong corporate responsibility towards the community.
During the years I have been a customer  I have witnessed many social projects that have been financed by the bank and I would like to especially highlight the innovative statusdonates. choose the project that they want to support.
Tinatin Rukhadze Successful Georgian businesswoman 36 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 TBC Bank is an undisputed leader in the digital segment.
I cant remember when I last visited a branch since I can conduct all my banking transactions online.
I am very excited about the new digital product TBC Wallet which was just launched and I started using from the first day.
It allows me to pay for items using a mobile device instead of a credit or debit card which is much faster and more convenient.
Giga Paitchadze Head of egovernance development at the Administration of the Government of Georgia 37 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance GIGA PAITCHADZE Giga Paitchadze has been with TBC Bank for more than 15 years.
He is head of egovernance development at the Administration of the Government of Georgia as well as a board member at JumpStart Georgia a lecturer at Georgian Institute of Public Affairs and a mentor for a project at International Black Sea University.
Due to his very busy schedule he has no time to visit branches and therefore actively uses our digital channels.
Mr Paitchadze is an active user of our internet and mobile banking services and performs most transactions online including opening deposit accounts ordering cards paying utilities transferring funds and exchanging currency.
He considers our callcentre services to be among the best in Georgia especially after implementing the voice biometric recognition system which allows for much faster customer authentication and reduces the possibility of fraud.
Mr Paitchadze is one of the most avid members of our loyal customers group on Facebook which helps us to test our newly introduced digital products and provides feedback and valuable customer insights.
As superior customer experience is such a crucial part of our business model we highly value our clients opinions and consider their suggestions to further develop our digital products and services.
A STRONG SUPPORTER OF OUR DIGITAL BANKING SOLUTIONS RETAIL CASE STUDY 38 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 DIVISIONAL REVIEW CONTINUED CORPORA TE AND INVESTMENT BANKING CIB
TBC Bank is a leading corporate bank in Georgia with a strong presence in all major economic sectors.
In recent years we have been transforming into a onestopshop bank that offers a full range of core and supplementary products including lending products trade finance and factoring treasury solutions cash management and digital banking services as well as corporate finance advisory debt and equity capital markets brokerage and research services through our whollyowned subsidiary TBC Capital.
We differentiate ourselves by creating a clientcentric advisory focused business model whereby our highly skilled bankers find a customised solution for each customer optimising their financial and capital structure.
We have dedicated coverage teams for each major sector of the economy comprised of professionals with an average experience of 10 years and strong sector expertise.
Our
2017 highlights 36.0% Corporate loan market share 37.9% Corporate deposit market share 28.9% Corporate share in total loan book 30.8% Corporate share in total deposits c.
2300 customers 1 Based on data published by the National Bank of Georgia as of 31 December 2017 in this context corporate refers to legal entities See our Case Studies starting from page 40 Further accelerate the development of the capital markets and investment banking business in Georgia and increase our footprint in this area in the region Further strengthen our coverage of Georgian regions and mid corporate segment Increase penetration of corporate clients through the TBC Banks services and products Strategy 39 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Main achievements in 2017 We had a strong performance in 2017 increasing our loan book by 20.0% YoY to GEL 2475.4 million while our trade finance portfolio grew by 38.6% YoY to GEL 1589 million.
At the same time our deposits expanded by 28.6% YoY to GEL 2410.9 million.
Consequently our market shares reached 36.0% and 37.9% in loans and deposits to legal entities respectively.
We supported our robust growth by becoming the core bank for leading industry players such as CocaCola McDonalds Nikora
Our performance was further strengthened by the contribution from the Bank Republic integration including the retention of key customers and employees.
As a result we gained a highquality pool of international customers together with a welldiversified midcorporate segment and advanced trade finance capabilities.
As the demand for capital markets products and corporate finance advisory services is increasing among large corporates in Georgia the need for sophisticated investment banking products and services is becoming increasingly prominent.
At the same time evolving legislation and regulation further supports the development of capital markets in Georgia which should in turn attract more international investors.
We aim to harness this opportunity by developing a strong suite of investment banking products and services to help our clients achieve their corporate goals and growth objectives.
In 2017 we further strengthened our investment banking subsidiary by appointing a new managing director Irakli Elashvili who has more than 15 years of experience in Georgia and in global universal and investment banks.
We broadened the deal team and revamped TBC Capitals strategy to position it to benefit from increased capital markets activity in Georgia and the region.
During the year we completed several notable transactions TBC Capital was the sole arranger of Silknet bonds via public and private placements.
TBC Capital also advised Tegeta Motors on obtaining a global credit rating.
2 Nikora is a leading food producer company in Georgia 3 Silknet is a leading telecommunication company in Georgia 4 Nova is a leading manufacturer and importer of building materials in Georgia 5 Imereti Greenery is an agricultural company operating a modern greenhouse facility in the Imereti region of Georgia 6 Tegeta is a leader in an automotive industry in Georgia Contribution to the economy TBC Bank plays an important role in the growth of Georgias economy by supporting leading players in all major economic sectors to access financing diversifying their source of funding and gaining expert advice.
Agriculture
Automotive
Communication
Construction
Energy and Utilities Financial Services Food Industry
Hospitality and Leisure Metals and Mining Real Estate
Trade
Transportation
Other
1.7% 0.8% 2.1% 1.8% 1.7% 28.0% 17.5% 3.3% 9.3% 13.3% 2.8% 4.4% 4.2% 4.3% 4.7% 40 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 CIB CASE STUDY LOPOTA LAKE RESORT AND SPA Lopota Lake Resort and Spa is a luxury resort located on a private lakeside surrounded by the Caucasus Mountains in the heart of the Kakheti region.
The breathtaking views cosy atmosphere and comfortable infrastructure makes it an ideal place for relaxation and peaceful rest.
The hotel features 103 beautifully decorated rooms three restaurants a night club outdoor and indoor swimming pools and a deluxe spa.
It also offers a wide range of activities including horse riding quadbike tours minigolf and fishing.
The hotel started its operations in 2008 with just seven rooms and TBC Bank actively assisted the company from a very early stage.
Since then the resort has been growing rapidly with our support with annual revenue expanding from GEL 280000 in 2008 to GEL 12 million in 2016 recording a compound annual growth rate of 60% over the eightyear period.
Alongside the provision of direct financing to the company we have also advised and assisted the hotel in raising equity for its future development.
In 2017 the company successfully closed a transaction with the Georgian Stateowned Equity Partnership Fund obtaining US 5.4 million.
These funds will be used to further expand the resort allowing it to almost double the number of rooms by the end of 2018.
This should result in a sharp increase in the number of guests from the current level of around 47000 local and international visitors per year.
SUPPORTING
GEORGIAN TOURISM 41 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance TBC Bank has been supporting us from the very beginning and played an important role in helping us to realise our ambition of building a magnificent resort on a wild plot of land which helps to promote and support Georgian tourism and hospitality.
George Maisuradze CEO and founder of Lopota Lake Resort and Spa 42 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Today Georgian Beer Company exports only a small portion of its products to neighbouring countries but we see great potential to increase the share of exports in the coming years due to our products unique qualities.
Our goal is to establish our brand in the region and become ambassadors of Georgian products.
We trust that TBC Bank will continue supporting us on our challenging journey.
Kakha Kotrikadze CEO of Georgian Beer Company 43 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance GEORGIAN BEER COMPANY Georgian Beer Company is a major domestic company that produces beer and nonalcoholic beverages.
It has a modern factory near Tbilisi in Saguramo village that is equipped with stateoftheart European equipment.
Its
Among the companys various brands Zedazeni is one of the most popular on the local market.
The company became TBC Banks customer in 2012 when it was starting its operations.
With our financial assistance it has significantly expanded its business and is now one of the leading players on Georgias beverage market.
In 2016 the company decided to enter a new segment and start producing natural juice.
We provided funding for this purpose and the company built a facility adjacent to the brewery for receiving and processing fruit from nearby farmers.
The new business line will contribute to economic development by producing new Georgian products and creating new jobs and will also support agriculture.
LEADING PRODUCER OF BEVERAGES IN GEORGIA CIB CASE STUDY 44 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 I am impressed with the professional attitude of TBC Banks team.
They not only provide loans for us but also advise on the most optimal financing structure as well as offer various useful products including payroll and treasury products.
In partnership with TBC Bank we are committed to further developing our business and delivering valuable services to our society.
Nugzar Abramishvili CEO of MediClubGeorgia 45 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance
MediClubGeorgia MCG is a leading provider of medical services in Georgia.
Its facilities are equipped with the latest technology from the worlds leading manufacturers.
MCG was established in 1999 and is part of an international holding that aims to provide highquality medical services in the South Caucasus.
The company consists of two strategic business units a multifunctional clinic and a learning resource centre.
MCGs clinic offers its customers a comprehensive range of services including general practitioner paediatrics therapy cardiology rehabilitation surgery and worldclass emergency aid.
The clinic is equipped with three surgical suites and features individual and common medical wards with 55 beds in total.
The learning resource centre a training unit was established in 2004 as part of MCG and provides CPRfirst aid and emergency care training programmes to MCG staff and outside contractors.
MCG has been accredited by Joint Commission International JCI an international organisation working in more than 100 countries to improve patient safety and quality of healthcare.
JCI accreditation is considered the gold standard in global healthcare.
MCG was the first clinic to be accredited by JCI in Georgia.
In 2011 TBC Bank became a partner of MCG and supported the companys expansion by providing a syndicated loan together with the EBRD European Bank for Reconstruction and Development to purchase and renovate a new building and to acquire highquality equipment for the clinic.
Since then we have been closely cooperating with the company and have provided a number of shortterm loans for working capital needs as well as other operating products.
PROVIDING HIGH QUALITY HEALTHCARE TO GEORGIANS CIB CASE STUDY 46 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 DIVISIONAL REVIEW CONTINUED MICRO SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES
Overview
The micro small and medium enterprises MSME segment serves TBC Banks business clients that are not included in our corporate portfolio.
We take pride in being the leading bank for MSME clients in Georgia not only by the size of loan and deposit portfolios but also by being the top choice for MSME companies.
Overall 63% of newly registered legal entities in Georgia choose to bank with us.
We achieve this position by placing our customers needs first.
TBC Bank distinguishes itself by superior customer experience innovative offerings and extensive nonfinancial services.
2017 highlights 63% of newly registered legal entities choose TBC Bank 21.6% MSME share in total loan book 13.1% MSME share in total deposit portfolio 92.0% Offloading ratio of MSME segment See our Case Studies starting from page 48 Continue to improve our superior customer experience Further develop our flagship business support programme Maintain our focus on digitalisation by further enhancing our multichannel platform Strategy 47 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Figure 1 Within this programme we offer three types of startup loans General startup loan Startup loan for hotels Startup loan for agro business Maximum amount GEL 100000 Maximum term  7 years grace period up to 1 year Individual payment schedule Maximum amount GEL 3500000 Maximum term  12 years Grace period  up to 2.5 years Individual payment schedule Ability to participate in government programme Produce in
Ability to participate in EBRD programme which allows 10  15% cashback for purchase of the equipment Maximum amount GEL 1500000 Maximum term 10 years Grace period  up to 5 years
Ability to participate in Preferential Agro Credit Project which is supported by Georgian Ministry of Agriculture 31 December 2017
Number of loans No overdue loans 31 December 2017
Number of loans No overdue loans 31 December 2017
Number of loans No overdue loans Main achievements in 2017 Our MSME loan portfolio grew by 14.2% during the last year to GEL 1844.7 million accounting for 21.6% of the total loan portfolio.
In 2017 the deposit portfolio increased by 23.6% and to GEL 1027.7 million representing 13.1% of the total deposit portfolio.
TBC Bank continues to attract and increase the number of MSME customers.
By the end of 2017 we served around 110000 MSME clients.
To make banking easier and more comfortable for MSMEs we offer fully digital onboarding so that a prospective client can fill in the application and open a current account without visiting our branch www. usinessregistration. e.
If the client prefers to receive hard copies all the necessary documents are delivered by our ecofriendly car .
In addition our awardwinning multichannel offering enables our clients to perform most transactions remotely  driving our offloading ratio as high as 92.0% by the end of 2017.
We also actively cooperate with the government programme Produce in Georgia which aims to support agriculture manufacturing and hospitality industries.
Within the programme borrowers can apply for a subsidy from the government to lower their interest expense during the grace period.
This year  we also launched an innovative programme named Startuperi giving earlystage companies access to financing from a bank.
The programme also involves extensive nonfinancial support such as training masterclasses individual consultations and media coverage for young companies.
In addition participant companies also receive special offers from TBC Bank and its partners.
The programme has proved to be very successful and by the end of 2017 13000 companies took part in Startuperi and we disbursed 168 loans totalling around GEL 21 million.
Please see figure 1 for more information.
The MSME segments strong performance is shaped by our continuous efforts to transform our customer experience via innovative offerings.
We are the sole bank in Georgia offering a business support programme to our clients including training workshops and individual consultations.
In 2017 around 4400 companies attended training in areas such as budgeting and analysis innovations management taxation digital marketing and simplified IFRS.
Through these training sessions we provide an essential business toolkit to our clients encouraging them to finetune their businesses and become even more successful.
We strive to make our clients confident that we are more than just a bank we are their partners.
In collaboration with Georgias Revenue Service we have created Business Map www. usinessmap. e a useful benchmarking tool for companies.
We have analysed public big data and built an online business map where companies can evaluate their performance against their competitors by district city  or nationwide.
Business Map presents the following metrics revenue costs number of employees and payroll.
In November 2017 we organised our second annual business awards ceremony  attracting up to 700 participants.
This year  we have announced winners in seven categories.
We try to find and promote successful Georgian businesses and encourage entrepreneurship in the country.
The event was a huge success and attracted 5.3 million views.
1 Data is for FY 2017 source www . apr . ov.
Registry
2 Excluding cash transactions 48 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 MSME CASE STUDY IB MTHIEBI IB Mthiebi is one of the pioneer private secondary schools in Georgia.
Since 1995 the school has distinguished itself by the high standards of its academic programme as well as by its qualified faculty and modern infrastructure.
The school was founded with the aspiration to set a new standard and create a positive learning environment.
When the school was set up very few parents entrusted a startup school with their children but today it is highly ranked and has more than 1200 students.
The schools founder is actively involved in continuously developing the educational programme.
In partnership with German shareholder IB the school faculty regularly participates in exchange training to enhance their qualifications and learn about new teaching practices.
As demand for the school has grown IB Mthiebi has decided to invest in its infrastructure to increase capacity and create classrooms equipped with modern technology.
For TBC Bank this was not just another commercial loan it was a chance to have a direct impact on developing an education system.
In 201216 with financing from the Bank IB Mthiebi renovated its existing premises and built a new 2000 m2 campus that is fully equipped with the latest laboratories and IT infrastructure.
IB Mthiebi is one of the few schools in Georgia that has implemented the highest safety and quality management standards receiving the OHSAS 1800120017 and ISO 90012015 certificates.
RAISING
NEW TALENT 49 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance We started our longterm relationship with TBC Bank in 2003.
We chose TBC Bank because we are confident that the TBC team understands the importance of education in Georgia and encourages us to succeed.
Nino Chikvaidze Founder and director of IB Mthiebi 50 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 TBC Bank had just launched its Startuperi programme which aims to financially support startups and promote entrepreneurship.
So when we came up with the business idea and needed financing we decided to apply for Startuperi.
One of XParks founders 51 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance MSME CASE STUDY
In recent years Georgia has entered the lists of top must see destinations from Cond Nast Traveler Vogue and Lonely Planet.
Once a hidden gem it is now under an international spotlight.
With growing numbers of tourists visiting the country every year hospitality and leisure services have developed to offer a wide variety of entertainment options.
Three experienced enthusiasts decided to set up the countrys only largescale adventure park in Dusheti regions Tvalivi village.
XPark offers its visitors an unforgettable experience full of excitement and adrenaline.
The park covers 7000 square metres and is equipped with outdoor adventure tracks in the air and on land.
Visitors can choose from four available routes with varying difficulty levels.
The park is suitable both for lovers of extreme outdoor sports and for teambuilding events.
The founders came up with the XPark idea after successfully operating another club for white water rafting.
The XPark required a significant upfront investment to purchase necessary safety and outdoor equipment.
TBC Bank disbursed a US100000 loan in March 2017 and XPark started operating in August 2017.
Since opening the park has become quite popular and has attracted many visitors.
A NEW FORM OF
52 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 MSME CASE STUDY NADIA KANDELAKI Agriculture is one of the oldest most widespread occupations in Georgia where a large share of the labour force is engaged in farming.
However  employment in the agricultural sector is mostly dominated by male farmers while female farmers are under represented.
Nadia Kandelaki is an example of a daring woman who decided to take up agriculture and start a farm.
In 2013 Nadia approached TBC Bank to finance her expansion plans.
At the time she had some land orchards vineyards beehives and livestock.
She decided to increase the number of beehives as natural honey was in high demand and quite profitable.
She also bought dairy cattle and expanded her dairy production.
Nadia is very hard working managing the farm on her own.
As her first expansion project was successful she decided to grow her business further.
In 2016 TBC Bank provided Nadia with the funds she needed to set up a vineyard and build a wine cellar.
This year she fermented her first harvest in her cellar.
Nadias successful business endeavours encourage women to be more active and entrepreneurial.
TBC Bank supports women in business and has a special programme aimed at financing womens startups.
SUCCESSFUL WOMAN IN AGRICULTURE 53 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance When I started to expand my farm in 2013 I chose TBC Bank to be my financial partner .
I could feel the banks caring attitude from the first day.
They genuinely tried to accommodate my financial needs and did their best in supporting my business to succeed.
Nadia Kandelaki Farmer 54 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 DIVISIONAL REVIEW CONTINUED
TBC Insurance TBC Insurance is a wholly owned subsidiary of TBC Bank and the main bancassurance partner of the Bank.
It was acquired by the Group in October 2016 and has been growing rapidly since then.
TBC Insurances product offerings comprise motor travel personal accident credit life and property business property liability and cargo insurance products.
The company uses a broad range of channels to sell its products including insurance agents auto dealerships and web platforms as well as TBC Banks market leading multichannel network.
In line with the Groups digitalisation strategy TBC Insurance actively uses digital channels to market and sell its products.
In
2017 TBC Insurance launched the first insurance chatbot B Bot on the local market which sells different types of insurance products.
B Bot is great fun to use and is quickly gaining popularity among our clients especially the younger generation.
Another popular sales channel is the wide network of TBC Banks selfservice terminals where customers can buy travel casualty and collision CASCO and motor thirdparty liability MTPL insurance in a very short time.
In addition travel insurance can be purchased through TBC Banks internet and mobile banking services and more products are planned to be added to this channel in 2018 including payment protection insurance PPI CASCO and MTPL.
Georgias insurance market is promising with high growth potential.
The penetration level measured as gross written premium to GDP stood at 0.62% for the property and casualty PandC insurance market as of 31 December 2017 which is the lowest among CEE countries.
The density which is measured as gross written premium per capita is also low compared with peer countries at US24.4 The insurance business is regulated by the Insurance State Supervision Service of Georgia which closely monitors insurance companies and sets the minimum and solvency capital requirements.
There are 16 insurance companies operating in the Georgian PandC insurance market.
The two largest players hold respective market shares of 37.4% and 17.2% followed by TBC Insurance in third place with 13.3%.
During the last five years the PandC insurance market in Georgia has grown at a significant compound annual growth rate of 11.7%.
The largest insurance product lines are motor 35.1% and property insurance 29.8% followed by credit life and personal accident 11.7% liability insurance 11.4% travel insurance 3.2% and other 8.8%.
We see particular growth potential in car insurance due to the introduction of mandatory MTPL insurance starting from March 2018.
Travel insurance is another promising segment as the number of outbound tourists has been growing significantly since the introduction of a visafree regime with EU countries in March 2017.
TBC Insurance has grown rapidly since our acquisition and has increased its market share to 13.3% as of 31 December 2017 compared with 3.5% in December 2016.
It has particularly strengthened its position in the retail segment by reaching 28.9% to become the secondlargest player.
Over the same period the number of clients reached 276848 compared to 2887 one year prior.
Gross insurance profit amounted to GEL 68 million in 2017.
At same time the company has significantly improved its efficiency and decreased the net combined ratio to 95.9% in 2017 from 110.3% one year prior.
As a result TBC Insurance recorded a net profit of GEL 935000 in 2017.
TBC Insurance aims to further strengthen its positions on the market and become the number one retail insurance company in Georgia in the medium term.
Our strategic priorities include increase the usage of digital channels diversify our product offerings and develop new products including agricultural insurance financial risks insurance and personal risks insurance offer a bestinclass customer experience to achieve the highest net promoter score among industry players and achieve a total market share of 2530% and retail market share of 3035% in the medium term.
TBC Leasing TBC Leasing is the leading leasing company in Georgia with a market share of over 74.3% The company was founded in 2003 by TBC Bank which currently holds a 99.6% interest.
By the end of 2017 TBC Leasings portfolio amounted to around GEL 145 million with approximately 2150 customers and up to 3450 active leasing agreements.
In 2017 the company had one of the most successful years in its history.
TBC Leasing launched two new products used car financing for the retail segment product named Starto and fullservice operational leasing for both corporate clients and individuals.
We also enhanced our value proposition by beginning to offer advisory services.
Additionally TBC Leasing strengthened its collaboration with the Bank by beginning to use banking channels to sell its products to TBC Banks MSME customer base.
As a result we disbursed record high leases in the amount of GEL125 million to MSME clients.
In 2017 TBC Leasing also enhanced its internal operations and processes by launching the first bespoke leasing core software system which was developed by a local IT company establishing an independent call centre separate from that of the Bank and enhancing operational risk management procedures.
Our mission is to contribute to Georgias economic development by providing comprehensive leasing solutions and premium advisory services to our customers making it easier for them to invest in capital assets.
55 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Our mediumterm strategy consists of the following main goals develop digital solutions and innovative products become more socially conscious by offering ecofriendly solutions financing electric cars solar systems etc develop premium advisory services for our customers and optimise sales channels by forming strategic alliance with vendors and dealers as well as by utilising the parent companys resources.
TBC Pay TBC Pay was founded in 2008 by TBC Bank and is its wholly owned subsidiary.
The company provides fast and easy payment options for individuals all over the country through its wide network of selfservice terminals on a 24hour basis.
Customers can conduct various transactions including paying for utilities or state services depositing money in their accounts repaying loans topping up their mobile balance and many more.
Starting from 2017 in addition to cash payments our selfservice terminals were equipped with card readers and pin pads allowing our customers to pay for their services both with cash and credit debit cards.
We also started using our terminals as a channel to originate fast preapproved loans for the Banks customers.
In 2017 TBC Pay updated its online payment platform www . bcpay. but offers a significantly improved user experience.
The company was also successful in increasing the number of transactions by improving the availability of services and adding 200 new self service terminals.
In addition we won an important tender process in 2017 allowing us to place our terminals in metro stations thus capturing more attractive locations.
As a result the number and volume of transactions increased by a respective 9.5% and 43.5% YoY in 2017.
In addition to the existing business TBC Pay started a cash management business for companies with a large volume of cash operations.
We placed our terminals at retailers sites allowing them to deposit money directly to their bank accounts which will be reflected instantly.
Customer interest in this service is tremendous and we plan to further expand this business in 2018.
The companys strategy in 2018 is to further develop and improve its online platform www. bcpay. the medium term.
1 Source Geostat and Insurance. ov.
2 Source Insurance. ov.
3 Based on internal estimates TBC Capital TBC Capital is TBC Banks wholly owned investment banking subsidiary.
In 2017 TBC Capital became an integral part of TBC Banks corporate and investment banking franchise.
Its main lines of business include corporate advisory debt and equity capital markets brokerage and research.
TBC Capital is also a shareholder in the Georgian Stock Exchange and plays an active role in the development of its infrastructure.
More information about TBC Capital can be found in the corporate and investment banking section on page 39.
International operations Most of TBC Banks operations are conducted in Georgia 99.7% of total assets.
However we have two international subsidiaries one in Azerbaijan and one in Israel.
TBC Invest TBC Invest is a representative office of TBC Bank in Israel that acts as an intermediary with Israeli clients offering information regarding products fees and interest rates on TBC Banks products.
TBC Kredit TBC Kredit is a nonbanking credit organisation that has operated in Azerbaijan since 1999.
It mainly focuses on the SME consumer and mortgage lending sectors.
TBC Bank has owned 75% of TBC Kredit since 2008.
TBC Kredits total loan portfolio stood at US16.3 million at 31 December 2017.
SME lending accounted for 49.3% while consumer and mortgage loans accounted for a respective 36.7% and 14.0%.
Other local subsidiaries The Group also includes the following subsidiaries United Financial Corporation is the largest cardprocessing centre in Georgia serving nine banks five financial institutions and one loyalty company.
It provides a full range of services according to VISA International and MasterCard Worldwide regulations as well as payment card industry data security standards.
Real Estate Management Fund and Mali manage property that TBC Bank has repossessed for future sale.
Banking Systems Service Company provides hardware and software maintenance of ATMs POS terminals and other electronic banking systems.
Breakdown of total assets Breakdown of net income The Bank 97.6% 94.4% International Operations 0.3% 0.3% Other local operations 2.1% 5.3% 56 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 PRINCIPAL RISKS AND UNCERTAINTIES Principal risks and uncertainties Risk management is a critical pillar of the Groups strategy.
To perform it effectively it is essential to identify emerging risks and uncertainties.
The principal risks that could adversely impact on the Groups performance financial condition and prospects are presented below.
Performance may be affected by additional risks and uncertainties other than those listed below and some asyet unknown risks that emerge in the future.
More details regarding risk management practices can be found on pages 6069.
The Board has undertaken a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Group in order to determine whether to adopt the going concern basis of accounting and during its assessment of the longterm viability of the Groups operations as set out in the Going Concern and Viability Statements on pages 111 to 112.
Principal risk The Group faces currencyinduced credit risk due to the high share of loans denominated in foreign currencies in the Groups portfolio.
The potential for further GEL depreciation is one of the most significant risks that could negatively impact on portfolio quality due to the large presence of foreign currencies on the Groups balance sheet.
Unhedged borrowers could suffer from increased debt burden when their liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are amplified.
Risk description A significant share of the Groups loans and a large share of the total banking sector loans in Georgia is denominated in currencies other than the GEL particularly the USD.
As of 31 December 2017 the National Bank of Georgia reported that 58.1% of total banking sector loans were denominated in foreign currencies.
As of the same date 59.7% of the Groups total gross loans and advances to customers before provision for loan impairment were denominated in foreign currencies.
The income of many customers is directly linked to USD via remittances or exports in case of business borrowers.
Nevertheless customers may not be protected against significant fluctuations in the GEL s exchange rate against the currency of the loan.
In 2017 the USDGEL exchange rate appreciated by 2.1% YoY supported by the relative stability of major trading partners currencies and the solid improvement in external inflows.
The USD GEL exchange rate remained volatile throughout the year due to the freefloating exchange rate regime and Georgias small forex market.
However the amplitude of volatility remained within the acceptable range.
The National Bank of Georgia operates effectively under its inflationtargeting framework.
However the GEL remains in free float and is exposed to many internal and external factors that in some circumstances could result in devaluation against the USD.
1 excluding Credo Bank effect which obtained banking licence in March 2017 Risk mitigation Specific attention is paid to currencyinduced credit risk due to the high share of loans denominated in foreign currencies in the portfolio.
The vulnerability to exchange rate depreciation is monitored on a frequent basis to be able to promptly implement an action plan when and as needed.
The ability to withstand certain exchange rate depreciation is incorporated into the credit underwriting standards which also include applying significant currency devaluation buffers for uncharged borrowers.
In addition the Group holds significant capital against currencyinduced credit risk.
Given the experience and knowledge built throughout the recent currency volatility the Group is in a good position to promptly mitigate emerging exchange rate depreciation risks.
In 2017 the government enacted a law aimed at reducing the economys dependence on foreign currency by requiring loans for amounts of less than GEL 100000 to be disbursed in local currency.
This and other initiatives have helped to reduce the share of loans denominated in foreign currencies in TBC Banks retail portfolio from 58.1% at the end of 2016 to 49.3% at the end of 2017.
Principal risk The Groups performance may be compromised by adverse developments in the economic environment.
A slowdown of economic growth in Georgia would have an adverse impact on the repayment capacity of the borrowers restraining their future investment and expansion plans.
These occurrences would be reflected in the Groups portfolio quality and profitability and would also impede the portfolio growth rates.
Negative macroeconomic developments could compromise the Groups performance through various parameters such as rising unemployment rates increasing retail sector default rates falling property values worsening loan collateralisation or falling debt service capabilities of companies suffering from decreasing sales.
Potential political and economic instability in the neighbouring and main trading partner countries could negatively impact the economic outlook of Georgia through a worsening current account eg decreased exports tourism inflows remittances and foreign direct investments.
Risk description As the Group operates primarily in and sources nearly all its revenue from Georgia its business financial condition and operating results are and will continue to be highly dependent on the general economic conditions in the country.
During 201117 the Georgian economy recorded average real GDP growth of 4.6% per annum.
In 2017 economic growth recovered significantly to 5.0% compared with 2.8% in 2016.
The sharp improvement was primarily driven by a recovery in exports tourism and remittance inflows.
Georgias economy is open liberal well diversified and reasonably reformed.
While it has shown resilience during international or regional crises it is still exposed to many internal and external developments.
These could result in lower growth or in some severe circumstances a contraction of the economy.
57 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Risk mitigation To decrease its vulnerability to economic cycles and adverse developments the Group identifies and limits its exposure to cyclical industries within its risk appetite framework.
The Group has in place a macroeconomic monitoring process that relies on close recurrent observations of the economic developments in Georgia as well as its neighbouring countries to identify early warning signals indicating imminent economic risks.
This system allows the Group to promptly assess significant economic and political occurrences and analyse their implications for the loan portfolio.
The identified implications are duly translated into specific action plans with regards to reviewing the underwriting standards risk appetite metrics or limits including the limits for each of the most vulnerable industries.
Additionally the stresstesting and scenario analysis applied during the credit review and portfolio monitoring processes enable the Group to have an advance evaluation of the impact of macroeconomic shocks on the business and the portfolio.
Resilience towards a changing macroeconomic environment is incorporated into the Groups credit underwriting standards.
As such borrowers are expected to withstand certain adverse economic developments through prudent financials debtservicing capabilities and conservative collateral coverage.
Principal risk The Group encounters the capital risk of not meeting the minimum regulatory requirements which may compromise growth and strategic targets.
The Bank is regulated by the National Bank of Georgia.
The regulations and various terms of its funding and other arrangements require compliance with certain capital adequacy and other ratios.
Local regulatory requirements are more conservative than the current Basel standards.
At the same time the local regulator has the right to impose additional regulations on a bank if it perceives excessive risks and uncertainties in that lender or in the market.
Risk description The National Bank of Georgia has introduced a new capital adequacy framework that came into force in December 2017.
The updated regulation divides the current capital requirement across Pillar 1 and Pillar 2 buffers that are introduced gradually over a fouryear period.
The Banks capitalisation as of December 2017 stood at 13.4% and 17.5% against the regulatory minimum requirement of 10.3% and 12.9% for Tier 1 and Total capital respectively.
The ratios are well above the respective regulatory minimums.
From January 2018 the National Bank of Georgia has fully phased out the Basel I and Basel IIIII capital adequacy standards and replaced them with the updated capital framework which is more compliant with the Basel III guidelines.
More information about the new regulation can be found in the Risks Ethics and Compliance Committee RECC report on pages 123125.
Risk mitigation The Group undertakes stresstesting and sensitivity analysis to quantify extra capital consumption under different scenarios.
Such analyses indicate that the Group holds sufficient capital to steadily meet the minimum regulatory requirements.
Capital forecasts as well as the results of the stresstesting and whatif scenarios are actively monitored with the involvement of the Banks Management Board and Risk Committee to ensure prudent management and timely actions when needed.
In addition under the new capital adequacy framework the Pillar 2 minimum capital requirements can be reduced by the amount equal to the additional capital needed as a result of the increased riskweighted assets due to the technical effect of GEL devaluation.
Principal risk The Group is exposed to regulatory risk.
The Groups activities are highly regulated and thus face regulatory risk.
The local regulator the National Bank of Georgia can increase the prudential requirements across the whole sector as well as for specific institutions within it.
Therefore the Groups profitability and performance may be compromised by an increased regulatory burden including higher capital requirements.
Risk description The Bank is regulated by the National Bank of Georgia.
In addition to mandatory capital adequacy ratios the regulator sets lending limits and other economic ratios including inter alia lending liquidity and investment ratios.
Under the Georgian banking regulations the Bank is required among other things to comply with minimum reserve requirements and mandatory financial ratios and regularly file periodic reports.
The Bank is also regulated by respective tax code or other relevant laws in Georgia.
Following the Companys listing on the London Stock Exchanges premium segment the Group became subject to increased regulations from the UK Financial Conduct Authority.
In addition to its banking operations the Group also offers other regulated financial services products including leasing insurance and brokerage services.
The Groups current operations in Azerbaijan through TBC Kredit are required to comply with the local regulations.
The Groups operations remain in full compliance with all relevant legislation and regulations.
The Group is also subject to financial covenants in its debt agreements.
For more information see page 242 in the Groups Audited Financial Statements.
Risk mitigation The Group has established systems and processes to ensure full regulatory compliance.
58 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 The dedicated compliance department reports directly to the Chief Executive Officer and bears the primary responsibility for regulatory compliance.
However compliance is embedded in all levels of the Banks operations.
The Groups RECC is responsible for regulatory compliance at the Board level.
In terms of banking regulations and Georgias taxation system the Group is closely engaged with the regulator to ensure that new procedures and requirements are discussed in detail before their implementation.
Although decisions made by regulators are beyond the Groups control significant regulatory changes are usually preceded by a consultation period that allows all lenders to provide feedback and adjust their business practice.
Principal risk The Group is exposed to concentration risk.
Banks operating in developing markets are typically exposed to both singlename and sector concentration risks.
The Group has large individual exposures to singlename borrowers whose potential default would entail increased credit losses and high impairment charges.
The Groups portfolio is well diversified across sectors resulting in only a moderate vulnerability to sector concentration risks.
However should exposure to common risk drivers increase the risks are expected to amplify correspondingly.
Risk description The Groups loan portfolio is diversified with maximum exposure to a single industry ie energy and utility standing at 8.4%.
Considering the macroeconomic outlook this figure is reasonable and demonstrates adequate credit portfolio diversification.
The exposure to the 20 largest borrowers stands at 12.4% which is in line with the Banks target of alleviating concentration risk.
Risk mitigation The Group constantly checks the concentrations of its exposure to single counterparties as well as sectors and common risk drivers and introduces limits for risk mitigation.
As part of its risk appetite framework the Group limits both singlename and sector concentrations.
Any considerable change in the economic or political environment in Georgia or neighbouring countries will trigger the Groups review of the risk appetite criteria to mitigate emerging risk concentrations.
Stringent monitoring tools are in place to ensure compliance with the established limits.
In addition the Bank has dedicated restructuring teams to manage weakened borrowers.
When it is deemed necessary clients are transferred to such teams for more efficient handling and ultimately to limit resulting credit risk losses.
The National Bank of Georgias new capital framework introduced a concentration buffer under Pillar 2 that helps to ensure that the Group remains adequately capitalised to mitigate concentration risks.
Principal risk Liquidity risk is inherent in the Groups operations.
While the Board believes that the Group currently has sufficient financial resources available to meet its obligations as they fall due liquidity risk is inherent in banking operations and can be heightened by numerous factors.
These include an overreliance on or an inability to access a particular source of funding as well as changes in credit ratings or marketwide phenomena such as the global financial crisis that commenced in 2007.
Access to credit for companies in emerging markets is significantly influenced by the level of investor confidence and as such any factors affecting investor confidence eg a downgrade in credit ratings central bank or state interventions or debt restructurings in a relevant industry could influence the price or availability of funding for companies operating in any of these markets.
Risk description Throughout 2017 the Group was in compliance with the risk appetite limits as well as the minimum liquidity requirements set by the National Bank of Georgia which introduced a liquidity coverage ratio in 2017.
This is in addition to the Basel III guidelines under which a conservative approach was applied to the weighting of mandatory reserves and to the deposit withdrawal rates depending on the concentration of client groups.
As of 31 December 2017 the net loan to deposits plus international financial institution funding ratio stood at 92.5% the liquidity coverage ratio at 112.7% and the net stable funding ratio at 124.4%.
All are comfortably above the National Bank of Georgias minimum requirements or guidance for such ratios.
Risk mitigation To mitigate this risk the Group holds a solid liquidity position and performs an outflow scenario analysis for both normal and stress circumstances to make sure that it has adequate liquid assets and cash inflows.
The Group maintains a diversified funding structure to manage respective liquidity risk.
The Board believes there is adequate liquidity to withstand significant withdrawals of customer deposits but the unexpected and rapid withdrawal of a substantial amount of deposits could have a material adverse impact on the Groups business financial condition results of operations andor prospects.
As part of its liquidity risk management framework the Group has a liquidity contingency plan in place outlining the risk indicators for different stress scenarios and respective action plans.
PRINCIPAL RISKS AND UNCERTAINTIES CONTINUED 59 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Principal risk Any decline in the Groups net interest income or net interest margin could lead to a reduction in profitability.
Net interest income accounts for the majority of the Groups total income.
Consequently fluctuations in its NIM affect the results of operations.
High competition on the local banking sector could drive interest rates down compromising the Groups profitability.
At the same time the cost of funding is largely exogenous to the Group and is derived based on both the national and international markets.
Risk description The majority of the Groups total income derives from net interest income.
Consequently the Groups results of operations are affected by fluctuations in its NIM.
In 2017 the NIM decreased by 1.3 pp YoY to 6.5% which the Bank had expected and included in the forecast that provides the basis for the Groups guidance.
The decrease in the net interest margin is mainly caused by the faster repricing of the assets than liabilities through the competition for newly disbursed loans and through prepayment of loans at times when market interest rates are falling.
Finally the Group limits its direct exposure to the LIBOR and local refinancing rates or where this is not feasible prices them appropriately between assets and liabilities.
As of 31 December 2017 GEL 2532 million in assets 19.5% and GEL 1308 million in liabilities 11.8% were floating related to the LIBORFEDECB deposit facility rates.
During the same period GEL 1786 million of assets 13.8% and GEL 2131 million of liabilities 19.2% were floating related to the National Bank of Georgias refinancing rate.
Risk mitigation The high current margin levels increase in fee and commission income and continuous cost optimisation efforts represent a safeguard against margin declines posing profitability concerns for the Group.
The Group has also launched an enhancement programme for margin management including an adequate pricing framework and profitability analysis to assist in decision making.
In cases where loans are extended on fixed rather than floating terms the interest rate risk is adequately translated into price premiums safeguarding against changes in the interest rates.
The Group expects margins to stabilise in the medium term.
The
Group expects that the decreasing margins will be compensated in practice by increased fee and commission income and decreased unit cost spent per transaction.
Principal risk The threat posed by cyberattacks has increased in recent years and continues to grow.
The risk of potential cyberattacks which have become more sophisticated may lead to significant security breaches.
Such risks change rapidly and require continued focus and investment.
Risk description No major cyberattack attempts have targeted Georgian commercial banks in recent years.
Nonetheless the Groups rising dependency on IT systems increases its exposure to potential cyberattacks.
Risk mitigation The Group actively monitors detects and prevents risks arising from cyberattacks.
Staff monitor the developments on both local and international markets to increase awareness of emerging forms of cyberattacks.
Intrusion prevention and Distributed Denial of Service DDoS protection systems are in place to protect the Group from external cyberthreats.
Security incident and event monitoring systems in conjunction with respective processes and procedures are in place to handle cyberincidents effectively.
Processes are continuously updated and enhanced to respond to new potential threats.
A data recovery policy is in place to ensure business continuity in case of serious cyberattacks.
Principal risk External and internal fraud risks are part of the operational risk inherent in the Groups business.
Considering the increased complexity and diversification of operations together with the digitalisation of the baking sector fraud risks are evolving.
Unless proactively managed fraud events may materially impact the Groups profitability and reputation.
Risk description External fraud events may arise from the actions of third parties against the Bank.
Most frequently this involved events related to banking cards and cash.
Internal fraud arises from actions committed by the Banks employees and such events happen less frequently.
During the reporting period the Group faced few instances of fraud events which had an immaterial impact on the Groups profit and loss statement the details on the largest case in 2017 are summarised on page 68.
Nonetheless fraudsters are adopting new techniques and approaches to exploit various possibilities to illegally obtain funds.
Therefore unless properly monitored and managed the potential impact can become material.
Risk mitigation The Group actively monitors detects and prevents risks arising from fraud events.
There are permanent monitoring processes in place for the timely detection of unusual activities.
The risk and control selfassessment exercise focuses on identifying residual risks in key processes subject to respective corrective actions.
Given our continuous efforts to monitor and mitigate fraud risks together with the high sophistication of our internal processes the Bank ensures timely identification and control of fraudrelated activities.
60 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017
RISK MANAGEMENT
Risk management
Overview
Risk management objectives and principles The Group operates a strong and independent businessminded risk management system.
Its main objective is to contribute to the sustainability of riskadjusted returns through the implementation of an efficient risk management system.
The Group has adopted four primary risk management principles to better accomplish its major objectives Govern risks transparently to obtain understanding and trust.
Consistency and transparency in riskrelated processes and policies are preconditions for gaining the trust of various stakeholders.
Communicating risk goals and strategic priorities to governing bodies and providing a comprehensive followup in an accountable manner are key priorities for staff responsible for risk management.
Manage risks prudently to promote sustainable growth and resiliency.
Risk management acts as a backstop against excessive risktaking.
Capital adequacy management and strong forwardlooking tools and decisionmaking ensure the Groups sustainability and resiliency.
Ensure that risk management underpins the implementation of strategy.
Staff responsible for risk management provide assurance on the feasibility of achieving objectives through risk identification and management.
Identifying and adequately pricing risks as well as taking risk mitigation actions support generating the desired returns and achieving planned targets.
Use risk management to gain a competitive advantage.
Comprehensive transparent and prudent risk governance facilitates understanding and trust from multiple stakeholders ensuring the sustainability and resilience of the business model and the positioning of risk management as the Groups competitive advantage and strategic enabler.
Risk management framework The Groups risk management framework incorporates all necessary components for comprehensive risk governance and is comprised of enterprise risk management credit financial and nonfinancial risk management risk reporting and supporting IT infrastructure crossrisk analytical tools and techniques such as capital adequacy management and stresstesting.
The following diagram depicts the risk management framework.
61 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Group risk management framework Credit risk Financial risk Nonfinancial risk Corporate MSME Retail Market Liquidity Operational Other Risk organisation and governance Risk reporting
Risk models methodologies and processes
Enterprise risk management Risk appetite Risk strategy Business planning
Risk reporting and analytics Infrastructure IT and systems Credit process Credit risk modelling Asset and Liability Management ALM and liquidity risk modelling and processes Operational risk modelling and processes Internal Capital Adequacy Assessment Process ICAAP and stresstests Three lines of defence Committees Policies
Risk culture 62 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017
The Group conducts its risk management activities within the framework of its unified risk management system.
The involvement of all governance levels in risk management clear segregation of authorities and effective communications between different entities facilitate clarity regarding the Groups strategic and risk objectives adherence to the established risk appetite and sound risk management.
The Groups governance structure ensures adequate oversight and accountability as well as clear segregation of duties.
The Board and the Supervisory Board have joint overall responsibility to set the tone at the top of the Group and monitor compliance with the established objectives while the Management Board governs and directs the Groups daily activities.
The risk governance structure consists of three board levels including the Board Supervisory Board and Management Board.
All three boards have dedicated risk committees.
The Board and Supervisory Board each have a Risk Ethics and Compliance Committee that supervises the risk profile and risk governance practice within the Group as well as an Audit Committee that is responsible for implementing key accounting policies and facilitating internal and external auditor activities.
The Management Boards Risk Committee was established to guide the Groupwide risk management activities and monitor major risk trends to ensure that the risk profile complies with the established risk appetite.
The Management Boards Operational Risk Committee makes decisions related to operational risk governance while the Assets and Liabilities Management Committee ALCO is responsible for the implementation of assetliability management policies.
The Board Supervisory Board and the Banks senior management govern risk objectives through the Risk Appetite Statement which establishes the desired risk profile and risk limits for different economic environments.
The statement also sets monitoring and reporting responsibilities as well as escalation paths for different trigger events and limits breaches which prompt risk teams to frame and implement established mitigation actions.
To effectively incorporate the Groups risk appetite into daytoday operations Risk Appetite Statement metrics are cascaded into more granular limits at the business unit level establishing risk allocation across different segments and activities.
The process of setting and cascading the risk appetite is undertaken in parallel with the business planning process.
The interactive development of business and risk plans aligns the plans by solving riskreturn tradeoffs in the process and increases the feasibility of achieving targets.
The
Board level oversight coupled with the permanent involvement of senior management in the Groups risk management and the exercise of topdown risk allocation by the enterprise risk management function ensures clarity regarding risk objectives intense monitoring of the risk profile against the risk appetite the prompt escalation of riskrelated concerns and the establishment of remediation actions.
RISK MANAGEMENT CONTINUED
Board
Supervisory
Board
Management
Board
Risk management structure
Supervisory Board Risk Committee
Committees
Risk Ethics and Compliance Committee Risk Ethics and Compliance Committee Operational Risk
Audit Committee Audit Committee
Enterprise risk
Financial risk
Loan approval committees Restructuring and Collections committees 63 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance The daily management of individual risks is based on the three lines of defence principle.
While business lines are the primary owners of risks risk teams act as the second line of defence by sanctioning transactions tools and techniques for risk identification analysis measurement monitoring and reporting.
The committees established at operational levels are charged with making transactionlevel decisions as part of a framework comprised of clear and sophisticated delegations of authority based on the foureyes principle.
All new products and projects pass through risk teams to ensure that risks are comprehensively analysed.
These control arrangements guarantee that the Group makes informed decisions that are adequately priced and that any risks exceeding the Groups established targets are not taken.
Credit liquidity market operational and other nonfinancial risks are each managed by dedicated teams.
The Groups strong and independent riskmanagement structure enables the fulfilment of all required risk management functions within the second line of defence by highly skilled professionals with a balanced mix of credentials in banking and real sectors in local and international markets.
In addition to the risk teams subordinated to the chief risk officer the compliance department reports directly to the CEO and is specifically in charge of antimoney laundering and compliance risk management.
As a third line of defence the internal audit department is responsible for providing independent and objective assurance and recommendations to the Group to promote the further improvement of operations and risk management.
Enterprise risk management The centralised enterprise risk management ERM function is in place to ensure the effective development communication and implementation of risk strategy and risk appetite across the Group.
The
ERM function facilitates crossrisk activities such as aggregation analytics and reporting and addresses issues that are not specific to a single type of risk.
Accordingly the ERM function complements the role of other risk functions to ensure the coverage of key risk activities and responsibilities and builds capabilities in a centralised team.
The major ERM functions can be summarised as follows Risk appetite development cascading and monitoring are essential elements of the Groups strategy.
A risk budget is allocated to individual business lines to ensure achievement of aggregated metrics.
Internal capital adequacy assessment is a continuous process within the Group to ensure adequate calculation of unexpected losses and prompt respective mitigation actions to assure solvency.
Economic capital is assessed for all material risks of the Group such as credit financial operational and market risks.
Additionally individual economic capital calculations are supplemented by enterprisewide stresstests.
Based on the selected stress scenarios the Group calculates losses and projects capital adequacy ratios.
This exercise helps the Group to define the capital buffers that are to be held to meet the regulatory requirements under predefined stress scenarios.
Stresstesting exercises are one of the crucial tools for effective risk identification measurement and mitigation.
In that regard the Group continuously advances its stresstesting capabilities and tools.
Stresstesting at both the transaction and portfolio levels forms part of the regular risk management activities.
Consistency of risk management practices within the Group is also an important task of the ERM.
A risk management function dedicated to promoting consistency ensures that the risks are identified measured and governed in an optimal manner within the Group and reported and understood on a consolidated basis.
The Groupwide approach to risk management was underpinned and enhanced further due to the recent acquisition of two significant financial institutions.
Generating adequate return on risk plays a crucial role in the sustainability of the business model.
Risk inputs for pricing are designed in a way to serve as a backdrop against excessive risk taking and guarantee that the Group takes adequately priced risks.
Credit risk management As a provider of banking services the Group is exposed to the risk of loss due to the failure of a customer or counterparty to meet its obligations to settle outstanding amounts in accordance with agreed terms.
Credit risk is the most material risk faced by the Group since it is engaged mainly in traditional lending activity with a simple balance sheet.
Thus the Group dedicates significant resources to its management.
Due to the significant reliance on foreign currencies in Georgias economy currencyinduced credit risk is a significant component of credit risk which relates to risks arising from foreign currency denominated loans to unhedged borrowers in the Groups portfolio.
Credit risk also includes concentration risk which is the risk related to credit portfolio quality deterioration due to large exposures provided to single borrowers or groups of connected borrowers or loan concentration in certain economic industries.
The major objectives of credit risk management are to put in place a sound credit approval process for informed risktaking and procedures for effective risk identification monitoring and measurement.
The Group adopts segment and productspecific approaches for prudent and efficient credit risk management.
Therefore the corporate MSME and retail portfolios are managed separately to address the specifics of individual segments.
Corporate and MSME except micro borrowers have larger exposures and are managed on an individual basis whereas micro and retail borrowers are managed on a portfolio basis.
Major credit risk functions can be summarised as follows.
Credit approval The Group strives to ensure a sound creditgranting process by establishing welldefined lending criteria and building up an efficient process for the assessment of a borrowers risk profile.
A comprehensive credit risk assessment framework is in place with clear segregation of duties among parties involved in the credit analysis and approval process.
The credit assessment process is distinct across segments being further differentiated across various product types to reflect the differing natures of these asset classes.
Corporate SME and larger retail and micro loans are assessed on an individual basis whereas the decisionmaking process for smaller retail and micro loans is largely automated.
64 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 After a thorough assessment of borrowers requirements credit analysts in the case of corporate and loan officers in the case of SME borrowers prepare a presentation containing certain key information in relation to the potential borrower and submit it for review to the business underwriting risk management unit.
An underwriting risk manager ensures that the project analysis provided by the credit analyst loan officer is complete all risks and mitigating factors are identified and adequately addressed and the loan is properly structured.
Business underwriting risk managers specialise in a particular sector to be aware of current industry trends and developments.
For exposures above GEL 5 million a risk report assessing the credit application and recommending a decision is issued for a loan approval committee to review.
A multitiered system of loan approval committees is in place with different approval levels to consider the borrowers overall indebtedness and risk profile.
These committees are responsible for reviewing credit applications and approving exposures with different committees based on the size and risk of the loan.
At the highest level the Chief Executive Officer corporate business director and chief risk officer are involved.
In addition loans to the 20 largest borrowers or for amounts exceeding 5% of the Banks regulatory capital would require review and approval of the RECC.
Loan officers submit the credit applications for retail and micro exposures to the respective underwriting risk management units.
Depending on the amount of the loan a loan approval committee will review the loan request based on specified limits as to the risk level of the customer.
Underwriting of unsecured retail loans pointofsale loans and credit cards is largely automated with decisions based on internal scorecard models and ratings provided by the credit bureau.
Different scorecard models are developed based on the type of product and the borrowers segment taking into consideration various internal and external data.
The performance of scorecard models is closely monitored to ensure that decisions are in line with predefined risk limits.
Currencyinduced credit risk The Group faces currencyinduced credit risk given that a large part of its exposure is denominated in foreign currency in line with the Georgian economys significant reliance on currencies other than the GEL.
However limits have been established within the risk appetite framework to ensure that the Group continues its efforts toward minimising the share of foreign currencies in the portfolio.
Various management tools and techniques are applied to mitigate the inherent currencyinduced credit risk in the loan book encompassing all phases of credit risk management.
In addition in the beginning of 2017 the government introduced a legislative initiative to support reducing the banking sectors reliance on foreign currencies.
As part of this initiative all loans to individual borrowers in amounts of less than GEL 100000 should be disbursed in GEL.
The Group applies conservative lending standards to unhedged borrowers with exposures denominated in foreign currencies to ensure that they can withstand a certain amount of forex depreciation without credit quality deterioration.
Apart from the measures in place throughout the underwriting process the Group actively monitors and assesses the quality of loans denominated in foreign currencies through stresstesting exercises and holds sufficient capital buffers against unexpected losses.
In the event of material currency depreciation the Group has tools in place to accelerate its monitoring efforts identify customers with potential weaknesses and introduce prompt mitigation.
Credit concentration risk The Group is exposed to concentration risk defined as potential deterioration in portfolio quality due to large exposures or individual industries.
It has established a set of tools to efficiently manage concentration risk and particularly concentrations of single names and sectors in the portfolio.
The Group is subject to concentration limits on single names and the largest 20 borrowers and is focused on optimising the structure and quality of the latter portfolio.
In addition the Group imposes limits on individual sectors with more conservative caps applied for highrisk sectors which are defined based on comprehensive analysis of industry cycles and outlook.
Credit concentrations are monitored monthly.
Trends in the risk positions are analysed in detail and corrective actions are recommended should new sources of risk or positive developments emerge.
Along with managing concentration levels in the portfolio the Group estimates unexpected losses and respective economic capital for concentrations of both single name borrower and sectors using the HerfindahlHirschman Index thus ensuring that sufficient capital is held against concentration risk.
Collateral policies Collateral represents the most significant credit risk mitigation tool for the Group making effective collateral management one of the key risk management components.
Collateral on loans extended by the Group may include but is not limited to real estate cash deposits vehicles equipment inventory precious metals securities and thirdparty guarantees.
The collateral accepted against a loan depends on the type of credit product and the borrowers credit risk.
The Group has a largely collateralised portfolio in all its segments with real estate representing a major share of collateral.
A centralised unit for collateral management governs the Groups view and strategy in relation to collateral management and ensures that collateral serves as an adequate mitigating factor for credit risk management purposes.
The collateral management framework consists of a sound independent appraisal process a haircut system throughout the underwriting process monitoring and revaluations.
Throughout the underwriting process provided collateral is appraised by the Groups internal appraisal function in accordance with internal policies.
In specific instances such as lending to related parties and material transactions external appraisers validate these appraisals.
The internal appraisal group is part of the collateral management unit and is independent from the loan RISK MANAGEMENT CONTINUED 65 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance granting process to ensure that adequate appraisals are obtained and proper procedures are followed.
When appraising collateral the Group applies haircuts to the assets market value based on the property type and its location.
Collateral of significant value is reevaluated annually through onsite visits by internal appraisers.
Statistical methods are used to monitor the value of collateral of nonsignificant value.
Credit monitoring The Groups risk management policies and processes are designed to identify and analyse risk in a timely manner and monitor adherence to predefined limits by means of reliable and timely data.
The Group dedicates considerable resources to gain a clear and accurate understanding of the credit risk faced across various business segments.
The Group uses a robust monitoring system to react promptly to macro and micro developments identify weaknesses in the credit portfolio and outline solutions to make informed risk management decisions.
Monitoring processes are tailored to the specifics of individual segments as well as encompassing individual credit exposures overall portfolio performance and external trends that may impact on the portfolios risk profile.
Early warning signals serve as an important advance alert system for the detection of credit deteriorations leading to mitigating actions.
The Boards RECC reviews reports relating to the credit quality of the loan portfolio quarterly.
By comparing current data with historical figures and analysing forecasts the management believes that it can identify risks and respond to them by amending its policies in a timely manner.
Restructuring and collections The Group uses a comprehensive portfolio supervision system to identify weakened credit exposures and promptly take early remedial actions when necessary.
The collection and recovery processes are initiated when the borrower does not meet the agreed payments or the borrowers financial standing is weakened potentially jeopardising the repayment of the credit.
Dedicated restructuring and recovery units manage weakened borrowers across all business segments with collection and recovery strategies tailored for business segments and individual exposure categories.
The restructuring units primary goal is to rehabilitate the borrower and transfer the exposure back to the performing category.
The sophistication and complexity of the rehabilitation process differs based on the type and size of the exposure.
Corporate and SME borrowers are transferred to the recovery unit when there is a strong probability that a material portion of the principal amount will not be paid and the main stream of recovery is no longer the borrowers cash flow.
Loan recovery plans may include all available sources of loan recovery such as selling the borrowers assets realising collateral or payments under guarantees.
The Groups goal in the recovery process is to negotiate a loan recovery strategy with the borrower and secure cash recoveries to the extent possible or to negotiate repayment through the sale or repossession of collateral.
Collection functions for retail and micro loans support customers who are experiencing difficulties in fulfilling their obligations.
Such customers may miss payments or notify the Group about their difficulty with loan repayments.
A centralised team monitors retail borrowers in delinquency which coupled with branches efforts aims to maximise collection.
The debt managed through FICO software is applied for early collection processes.
Collection strategies are defined based on the size and type of exposure.
Specific strategies are tailored to different subgroups of customers reflecting respective risk levels so that greater effort is dedicated to customers with a higher risk profile.
Retail and micro loans are generally transferred to the recovery unit at 6090 days past due.
Collateralised loans are transferred to the internal recovery unit whereas the Group collaborates with external collection agencies for unsecured loans.
To recover collateralised loans the recovery plan is outlined considering the individual borrowers specifics and may involve loan repayments under revised schedules or the sale of collateral.
Collection agencies generally negotiate with the borrowers so that the full repayment of the loan or loans can be rescheduled and repaid accordingly.
Once the exposure is transferred to the recovery unit if the Group is unable to negotiate acceptable terms with the borrower the Group may initiate collateral repossession which is usually a standard process with limited legal complications and may include court arbitration or notary procedures.
Restructuring and recovery units are supported by qualified incumbent lawyers for efficient accomplishment of litigation and repossession processes.
Provision assessment In assessing the credit risk and calculating provisions according to IAS 39 the Group takes into account three components i the probability of default by the counterparty on its contractual obligations ii current exposures to the counterparty and potential utilisation of undrawn credit liabilities from which the Group assessed the exposure at default and iii the likely loss ratio on the defaulted obligations the loss given default.
According to the Groups policy asset and contingent liability loss reserves must be maintained at an adequate level to absorb all estimated incurred losses in the Groups credit portfolio at any given point in time.
Starting from 1 January 2018 the Group moved to the new provisioning methodology in line with IFRS 9 requirements.
The updated methodology makes it possible to assess loanloss provisions and allowances accurately with the incorporation of forwardlooking information.
Along with methodology development an IT tool for provisioning was implemented.
During 201617 significant work was performed to develop the impairment methodology and models per IFRS 9 requirements and set up the respective systems and processes.
The project was undertaken with the support of Deloitte.
Representatives of the Groups risk finance and IT departments were responsible for the methodology and IT tool implementation.
The new models are more complex and make it possible to incorporate expectations of macro developments based on 66 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 predefined scenarios.
Under the IFRS 9 methodology the Bank classifies its exposures in three stages Stage I  assets for which no significant increase of credit risk since initial recognition is identified Stage II  assets for which significant increase in credit risk since initial recognition is identified and Stage III  creditimpaired exposures.
The implementation of IFRS 9 has resulted in a onetime impact of GEL 64 million which will be passed directly to IFRS equity.
The impact did not affect the Banks profit and loss statement or capital adequacy.
Financial risk management Liquidity risk management Liquidity risk is the risk that the Group either may not have sufficient financial resources available to meet all its obligations and commitments as they fall due or may only be able to access those resources at a high cost.
Both funding and market liquidity risks can emerge from a number of factors that are beyond the Groups control.
Due to financial market instability factors such as a downgrade in credit ratings or other negative developments may affect the price or ability to access funding necessary to make payments in respect of the Groups future indebtedness.
Liquidity risk is managed by the financial risk management and treasury departments and monitored by the Management Boards Risk Committee or the Assets and Liabilities Management Committee ALCO within their predefined functions.
The principal objectives of the Groups Liquidity Risk Management Policy are to i ensure the availability of funds to meet claims arising from total liabilities and offbalance sheet commitments both actual and contingent at an economic price ii recognise any structural mismatch existing within the Groups statement of financial position and set monitoring ratios to manage funding in line with the Groups wellbalanced growth and iii monitor liquidity and funding on an ongoing basis to ensure that approved business targets are met without compromising the Groups risk profile.
The Management Board reviews the Liquidity Risk Management Policy which is then presented to the Board and the Supervisory Board for approval.
Liquidity risk is categorised into two risk types funding liquidity risk and market liquidity risk.
Funding liquidity risk is the risk that the Group will not be able to efficiently meet both expected and unexpected current and future cash flows without affecting either its daily operations or its financial condition under both normal conditions and during a crisis.
To manage funding liquidity risk the Group has an internally developed model using a liquidity coverage ratio LCR and a net stable funding ratio NSFR both under Basel III liquidity guidelines.
Additionally the Group applies stresstests and whatif scenario analyses and monitors the National Bank of Georgias minimum liquidity ratio.
In 2017 the National Bank of Georgia introduced its own LCR for liquidity risk management purposes.
In addition to the Basel III guidelines the ratio applies conservative approaches to the weighting of mandatory reserves and deposit withdrawal rates depending on the client groups concentration.
From September 2017 the Bank also monitors compliance with the National Bank of Georgias LCR limits.
In addition to the total LCR limit the National Bank of Georgia has also defined limits per currency for the GEL and foreign currencies.
The LCR is calculated by reference to the qualified liquid assets divided by 30day cash net outflows.
It is used to help manage shortterm liquidity risks.
The NSFR is calculated by dividing available stable funding by required stable funding.
It is used for longterm liquidity risk management to promote resilience over a longer time horizon by creating additional incentives for the bank to rely on more stable sources of funding on a continuing basis.
Market liquidity risk is the risk that the Group cannot easily offset or eliminate a position at the thencurrent market price because of inadequate market depth or market disruption.
To manage market liquidity risk the Group follows the Basel III guidelines on high quality liquidity asset eligibility to ensure that the Groups high quality liquid assets can be sold without causing a significant movement in price and with minimum loss of value.
In addition the Group has a liquidity contingency plan which forms part of the overall prudential liquidity policy.
The plan is designed to ensure that the Group can meet its funding and liquidity requirements and maintain its core business operations in deteriorating liquidity conditions that could arise outside the ordinary course of its business.
Funding and maturity analysis The Groups principal sources of liquidity include customer deposits and accounts borrowings from local and international banks and financial institutions subordinated loans from international financial institution investors local interbank shortduration term deposits and loans proceeds from sales of investment securities principal repayments on loans interest income and fee and commission income.
The Board believes that a strong and diversified funding structure is one of the Groups differentiators.
The Group relies on relatively stable deposits from Georgia as the main source of funding.
To maintain and further enhance its liability structure the Group sets targets for retail deposits in its strategy and sets loantodeposit ratio limits.
The Group also sets deposit concentration limits for large deposits and deposits of nonGeorgian residents in its deposit portfolio.
The
Board believes that the Group has sufficient liquidity to meet its current on and offbalancesheet obligations.
For further information on the management of liquidity risk please refer to Note 36 to the Audited Consolidated Financial Statements.
RISK MANAGEMENT CONTINUED 67 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Market risk The Group follows the Basel Committees definition of market risk as the risk of losses in on and offbalancesheet positions arising from movements in market prices.
These risks are principally a risks pertaining to interestrate related instruments and equities in the trading book financial instruments or commodities held for trading purposes and b foreign exchange risk and commodities risk throughout the Group.
The Groups strategy is not to be involved in trading financial instruments or investments in commodities.
Accordingly the Groups only exposure to market risk is foreign exchange risk in its structural book comprising its regular commercial banking activities which have no trading arbitrage or speculative intent.
Foreign exchange risk Due to the Georgian economys significant reliance on foreign currencies movements in foreign exchange rates can adversely affect the Groups financial position.
This risk stems from the open currency positions created due to mismatches in foreign currency assets and liabilities.
The National Bank of Georgia requires the Bank to monitor both balancesheet and total aggregate balance including offbalance sheet open currency positions and to maintain the latter within 20% of the Banks regulatory capital.
For the year ended 31 December 2017 the Bank maintained an aggregate balance open currency position of 1.5%.
In addition the Supervisory Board sets further limits on open currency positions.
The ALCO has set limits on the level of exposure by currency and for total aggregate position that are more conservative than those set by the National Bank of Georgia and the Supervisory Board.
The heads of the treasury and financial risk management departments separately monitor the Banks compliance with these limits daily.
Compliance with these limits is also reported daily to the Management Board and periodically to the Supervisory Board and its Risk Ethics and Compliance Committee.
On the Groupwide level foreignexchange risk is monitored and reported monthly.
A valueatrisk analysis following the Basel guidelines is used to assess the Banks minimum capital requirements under the Internal Capital Adequacy Assessment Process ICAAP framework monthly.
Interest rate risk management Interest rate risk arises from potential changes in market interest rates that can adversely affect the value of the Groups financial assets and liabilities.
This risk can arise from maturity mismatches of assets and liabilities as well as from the repricing characteristics of such assets and liabilities.
The deposits and most of the loans offered by the Group are at fixed interest rates while a portion of the Groups borrowing is based on a floating interest rate.
The Groups floating rate borrowings are to a certain extent hedged because the National Bank of Georgia pays a floating interest rate on the minimum reserves that TBC Bank holds with it.
Furthermore many of TBC Banks loans to and deposits from customers contain a clause allowing it to adjust the interest rate on the loandeposit in case of adverse interest rate movements thereby limiting exposure to interest rate risk.
The management also believes that TBC Banks interest rate margins provide a reasonable buffer to mitigate the effect of a possible adverse interest rate movement.
The Group employs an advanced framework for the management of interest rate risk by establishing appropriate limits monitoring compliance with them and preparing forecasts.
Interest rate risk is managed by the financial risk management department and is monitored by the ALCO which decides on actions that are necessary for effective interest rate risk management and follows up on their implementation.
The major aspects of interest rate risk management development and the respective reporting are periodically provided to the Management Board the Supervisory Board the Board and the Risk Ethics and Compliance Committees.
The Group measures four types of interestrate risk based on the source of the risk i repricing risk ii yield curve risk iii basis risk and iv optionality embedded option risk.
The Group considers numerous stress scenarios including different yield curve shifts and behavioural adjustments to cash flows such as deposit withdrawals or loan prepayments to calculate the impact on oneyear profitability and enterprise value.
Appropriate limits are set by the Supervisory Board and the Management Boards Risk Committee.
Under the ICAAP framework the Group reserves capital in the amount of the adverse effect of possible parallel yield curve shift scenarios on net interest income over a oneyear period for Basel II Pillar 2 capital calculation purposes.
In addition the Group has developed stresstests in accordance with Basel II requirements to ensure that the Bank can withstand severe but probable stress scenarios.
Counterparty risk Through performing banking services as lending in the interbank money market settling a transaction in the interbank foreign exchange market entering into interbank transactions related to trade finance or investing in securities TBC Bank is exposed to the risk of losses due to the failure of a counterparty bank to meet its obligations.
To manage counterparty risk the Bank defines limits on an individual basis for each counterparty and as well on a portfolio basis by limiting the expected loss from both treasury and trade finance exposures.
As of 31 December 2017 TBC Banks interbank exposure was concentrated with banks that external agencies such as Fitch Moodys and Standard and Poors have assigned high Agrade credit ratings.
Nonfinancial risk management Operational risk management One of the main risks that the Group faces is operational risk which is the risk of loss resulting from inadequate or failed processes and systems human error  fraud or external events.
It includes legal risk but excludes strategic and reputational risk.
However  reputational risk management is also given high importance and priority and is an integral part of the organisations overall risk culture.
The Group is exposed to many types of operational risk including fraudulent and other internal and external criminal activities breakdowns in processes controls or procedures and system failures or cyberattacks from an external party with an intention to make the Groups services or supporting infrastructure unavailable to its intended users which in turn may jeopardise sensitive information and financial transactions of the Group its clients counterparties or customers.
68 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Moreover  the Group is subject to the risks that cause disruption to systems performing critical functions or business disruption arising from events wholly or partially beyond its control for example natural disasters transport or utility failures etc which may result in losses or reductions in service to customers andor economic losses to the Group.
The operational risks discussed above are also applicable where the Group relies on outside suppliers of services.
Considering the fast changing environment and sophistication of both banking services and possible fraudsters the importance of constantly improving processes controls procedures and systems is heightened to ensure risk prevention and reduce the risk of loss to the Group.
To oversee and mitigate operational risk the Group has established an operational risk management framework an overarching document that outlines the general principles for effective operational risk management and defines the roles and responsibilities of various parties involved in the process.
Policies and procedures enabling effective management of operational risks are an integral part of the framework.
The Management Board ensures a strong internal control culture within the Group where control activities are an integral part of operations.
The Board sets the operational risk appetite and the Operational Risks Committee oversees compliance with the limits.
The
Operational Risks Committee discusses the Groups operational risk profile and risk minimisation recommendations on a regular basis.
The operational risk management department acts as second line of defence.
It is responsible for implementing the framework and appropriate policies and procedures to enable the Group to manage operational risks as well as monitoring operational risk events risk exposures against risk appetite and material control issues.
The department is also responsible for the daytoday management of operational risks using various techniques.
These include but are not limited to running risk and control selfassessments which are aimed at detecting possible gaps in operations and processes with the purpose of suggesting appropriate corrective actions forming an internal risk event database for further quantitative and qualitative analysis performing internal control to detect systematic errors in banking operations internal fraud events and monitoring key risk indicators conducting scenario and rootcause analyses providing business advisory services regarding nonstandard cases as well as assessments of new products and procedures monitoring IT incident occurrence and overseeing activities targeted at solving identified problems and obtaining insurance policies to transfer the risk of losses from operational risk events.
The operational risk management department has reinforced its internal control risk assessment teams and methodologies to further finetune the existing control environment.
The same applies to the set of actions directed to homogenise operational risk management processes throughout the Groups member companies.
The operational risk management department reports to the chief risk officer .
Various policies processes and procedures are in place to control and mitigate operational risks including enacting an outsourcing risk management policy which enables the Group to control outsourcing vendor risk arising from adverse events and risk concentrations due to failures in vendor selection insufficient controls and oversight over a vendor andor services provided by a vendor and other impacts to the vendor implementing procedures to analyse systemic flaws and take corrective measures to prevent the reoccurrence of significant losses involving the operational risk management department in the approval process for new products and services to minimise risks relating thereto and developing a special operational risk awareness programme for the Groups employees and providing regular training to further strengthen the Groups internal risk culture.
During 2017 particular attention was given to operational risk concerns arising from an incidence of identity fraud in the fourth quarter 2017.
Using an apostilled power of attorney which was ultimately confirmed as fraudulent by the account owner a third party was able to gain access to our clients bank account and withdraw approximately US 800000 in cash.
To prevent any reoccurrence of this type of fraud extra control measures were added to the Banks identity verification process and its corresponding policies.
Compliance
The compliance department is a key body executing the Banks compliance function has a formal status and is independent from operating structural units and business lines.
The compliance functions role is executed by a compliance officer who acts as a compliance adviser and coordinator addressing compliance issues in structural units or business lines.
The chief compliance officer reports quarterly to the Risk Ethics and Compliance Committee with a disciplinary reporting line to the CEO.
The department is responsible for the Groups compliance and reputational risk management.
It implements and monitors the fulfilment of requirements of the following policies the AntiMoney Laundering and CounterTerrorist Financing Policy the AntiBribery AntiCorruption and AntiFacilitation of Tax Evasion Policy the RelatedParty Transaction Policy the Share Dealing Policy and the Whistleblowing Policy.
The compliance department manages regulatory risk by conducting root cause analyses of customer complaints the operational risk event database internal audit findings and litigation cases.
Based on the outcomes of these analyses it then initiates changes to internal instructions or gives recommendations to the Banks structural units on relevant process amendments.
The compliance officer has the role of educator and adviser on compliance issues.
The compliance department delivers training courses via distance learning and faceto face sessions to existing staff members and newcomers and promotes a compliance culture within the Group.
RISK MANAGEMENT CONTINUED 69 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance As part of its ongoing operations in 2017 the National Bank of Georgia has conducted a thematic inspection of the Bank covering the past six years.
Over this period it has identified a certain number of transactions in connection with which the Bank was required to pay penalties in the aggregate amount of GEL 1.9 million.
The majority of these transactions were related to few companies which were considered not to be properly identified and the amount of a single penalty for most of these transactions did not exceed GEL 1000.
However the National Bank of Georgia noted the progress that the Bank has made to date as well as the planned actions going forward and assessed the level of antimoney laundering and counterterrorist financing controls as acceptable.
The Bank paid these penalties from the appropriate provisions that had been created for similar actions and operations in the previous years and accordingly there was no impact on the Banks profit and loss statement in the 2017 results.
The new EU General Data Protection Regulation GDPR will come into force on 25 May 2018 which will apply mainly to our holding company TBC Bank Group PLC.
Given the fact that the Groups operations are mainly in Georgia which is outside EU the impact of GDPR on the Group will be limited.
However the Group is in the process of assessing the scope given that the GDPR applies to entities outside the EU offering goods and services into the EU and developing respective actions.
Information Security Steering Committee An Information Security Steering Committee has been established and charged with continuously improving information security and business continuity management processes and minimising information security risks.
The committee has been formed to centralise the information security function including physical security HR security data security IT security and business continuity.
The Group invests in effective information security risk management incident management and awareness programmes which are enhanced with automated tools that ensure acceptable levels of information security risk within the organisation.
Whenever preventive controls are not applicable comprehensive business continuity and incident response plans ensure the Groups ability to operate on an ongoing basis and limit losses in the event of a severe business disruption.
Conduct risk Conduct risk is defined as the risk to the delivery of fair outcomes for customers and other stakeholders.
The Groups business holds a unique place of trust in the lives of more than 2.2 million customers throughout Georgia.
Therefore preserving market confidence through the protection of our customers interests is of utmost importance for the financial stability of the Group and the attainment of its strategic objectives.
The Groups employees undertake and perform their responsibilities with honesty and integrity.
They are critical to maintaining trust and confidence in its operations and upholding the important values of trust loyalty prudence and care.
Additionally the Groups management understands that it bears responsibility to a diversified group of domestic and international investors and needs to embrace the rules and mechanisms of protecting customers and maintaining the confidence of investors and financial markets.
The Groups directors strive to establish the tone from the top which sets out the messages describing and illustrating the core components of good conduct.
In managing conduct risk the Group entrusts different departments and divisions with carrying out the task of managing mitigating and eliminating the conduct risk across all the Groups operations with clients and other stakeholders.
The compliance and operational risk departments cooperate to create a unified conduct risk management framework and assist the business lines and departments in developing and maintaining policies and procedures to ensure that the respective departments and individual employees comply with the provisions set out by regulatory provisions best practice and the Groups internal handbook maintaining a liaison with the compliance department regarding the administration of policies and procedures and the investigation of complaints regarding the conduct of the department its manager andor its employees ensuring that product information provided to clients by the frontline employees is accurate and complete and is conveyed both in written and oral form in a simple and understandable way regardless of the level of sophistication of a given client maintaining records of client conversations and emails that contain sensitive and salesrelated information including information pertaining to the acquisition of new clients and making complex product offers to existing and prospective clients delivering timely onboarding training for new employees regarding proper conduct and ensuring that all employees stay up to date on evolving compliance standards within the Group through periodic training developing an open culture that encourages employees to speak up without fear of punishment.
Specifically this means setting up processes for the prevention and detection of conflicts of interest creating ethical incentives and bonus formulas and aligning incentives and disciplinary practices to the Groups risk appetite and employing qualified staff and sufficient human and technological resources to investigate analyse implement and monitor sales and aftersales activities.
The above approach ensures that the management of conduct risk is not limited to risk management units including the compliance department but is fully embraced by the frontline departments and that the proper conduct is fully integrated into required job skills.
Viability statement The assessment of principal risks underpins the Viability Statement in the Directors Report for 2017 see pages 111 to 112.
The assessment involved consideration of the Groups current financial position over three years of coverage ending 1 January 2021 which is relevant to the strategic considerations of the Group.
INFOCUS
YEARS OF
RESPONSIBILITY
PETRE OTSKHELI WINGED PAINTER  CORPORA TE RESPONSIBILITY AREAS OF FOCUS
CULTURE SPORTS PEOPLE INFOCUS YEARS OF OUR PEOPLE 74 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 OUR CUSTOMERS Retail customers We serve more than 2 million retail customers which is around 75% of the total adult population of Georgia.
We do our best to provide superior customer service through our wide distribution network with special focus on digital channels as more and more of our clients are shifting to online solutions.
Our
Our mobile banking application enjoys ratings of 4.9 stars in the Google Play store and 4.8 stars in the Apple App Store.
We continuously innovate to offer our customers new products tailored to their needs which are delivered with highquality service.
We actively listen to our customers and use their feedback to improve our offerings.
As a result we have the highest customer satisfaction scores in the Georgian banking industry and hold a leading position among other major retail companies.
We have introduced several innovative products to make our customers lives more comfortable including the first Georgianspeaking chatbot a mobile wallet a voice biometric recognition system in our call centre our Ertguli loyalty programme as well as student and school banking cards.
More information on our customer value proposition can be found in the retail banking section on pages 3033.
Business customers We believe that one of our main responsibilities is to help businesses grow and develop.
Increasing the number of successful businesses in our country makes it stronger increases its economic potential and fosters an attractive investment environment.
TBC Bank was a startup 25 years ago and we understand the importance of having a steady partner through different development stages.
Earlystage businesses need financial assistance as well but it is common for established banks to refrain from financing them because of the risks associated with startups.
In 2017 we launched our first project oriented at startups called Startuperi which aims to mentor startups on their strategy assist them to become thriving businesses and provide financing for further development.
The word startuperi in Georgian means startup nation reflecting our belief that our countrys prosperity is related to the number of flourishing businesses in Georgia.
The project has partnerships with several leading companies offering the participating startups tailored services for their needs.
This year we coorganised a special annual conference called Spotlight for the startups where the speakers were founders of successful firms sharing their stories of failures and successes.
The project has been a huge success since its launch.
Startups received individual consultations with leading professionals about topics such as marketing human resources management finance and taxes.
In total up to 13000 startups were involved and we disbursed 168 loans totalling GEL 21.0 million in financing for their businesses.
1 Based on surveys conducted by independent research companies IPM and ACT CORPORATE RESPONSIBILITY In the 25 years that have passed since TBC Bank s inception we have faithfully served our customers and businesses supporting the wider Georgian community creating a positive work environment for our colleagues and preserving the environment.
We are privileged to be the leading bank in Georgia but this carries the added responsibility of making a sustainable positive impact for all our stakeholders.
We are committed to having a collaborative approach with all our stakeholders and contributing to building a prosperous and independent country.
WE SERVE MORE THAN retail customers which is around 75% of the total adult population of Georgia 75 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance OUR PEOPLE Promoting equal opportunity We are an equalopportunity employer and do not discriminate based on race ethnicity religion gender age or disability.
We aim to create a corporate culture that welcomes and benefits from diversity.
We promote gender equality and support women in the workforce.
We are proud that women comprised 67% of our total workforce at the end of 2017.
To better support women employees we offer them six months of maternity leave at full pay and other childcare benefits.
Furthermore we have provided more than GEL 160.4 million for micro small and medium enterprises MSMEs in rural areas supporting agriculture manufacturing tourism and other economic activities in those regions.
We also continue to support MSMEs through our business support programme which we launched in 2013.
The programme offers free training courses individual consultations networking events conferences and masterclasses.
During the past year  around 4400 companies have attended the training courses and workshops and 116 MSMEs have received individual consultations.
Participation in the business support programme is free of charge.
Another remarkable idea put into action in 2017 was making basic information about various industries easily accessible for businesses.
We collaborated with Georgias Revenue Service to analyse available public data and create a business map that is accessible to any person free of charge allowing them to benchmark against actual average industry metrics like revenues costs number of employees and payroll.
This tool will enable companies to measure their place and performance against their competitors.
This year  we held our annual business awards ceremony for the second time.
After the successful ceremony last year  this year the number of participants increased up to 700.
The awards ceremony promotes entrepreneurship in Georgia and presents thriving business examples to a wider audience encouraging innovative businesses to set up.
The event was covered by traditional and social media channels reaching 5.3 million views.
For the 2017 business awards we introduced a new Business of the Year category.
To select a winner for the new category we paid special attention to a companys corporate responsibility strategy and assessed their activities along with other criteria.
Georgias mountainous regions are an area that is less developed but has high potential to grow economically and attract a significant number of tourists to the country due to their unique nature and beauty.
Georgian ski resorts are becoming increasingly popular but need support to transform them into highclass destinations with proper infrastructure thereby improving their reputations among tourists.
We have been supporting Georgian mountain resorts since 2016.
The primary focus of our partnership is developing infrastructure and innovative payment systems at Georgian mountain resorts which will improve their efficiency and facilitate increased demand for skiing treks positively reflecting on the Georgian economy and promoting local businesses.
Priorities for 2018 In 2018 we will carry on innovating and developing new offerings for our customers as well as continue focusing on increasing customer satisfaction levels.
We will also increase lending volumes in rural areas to encourage economic activities and help to lower the unemployment rate in those regions.
We firmly believe that each employee is part of our success and we are committed to attracting and retaining top talent by providing competitive remuneration and attractive benefits fostering fair honest and collaborative working relationships and supporting professional development.
As of the end of 2017 we employed more than 7000 people who all share the same values and are dedicated to achieving our vision of becoming the best digital financial services company in the region Years with TBC Bank 2017 01 years 29% 15 years 37% 510 years 22% 10 years 12% We give fair consideration to job applications from candidates who may have disabilities.
We also support and retain employees who become disabled during their employment at TBC Bank and aim to adjust our workplace in order to make it more comfortable for disabled people.
Board of directors Male 100% Female 0% Male 100% Female 0% 2017 2016 Top management Male 88% Male 88%
2017 2016 Middle management Male 66%
Male 65% 2017 2016 All employees
Female 67% Female 65%
Female Female 12% 35% 34% 33% 35% 12% 2017 2016 2 Region in this context comprises Armenia Azerbaijan and Georgia 76 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Performance assessment The Bank runs a transparent and fair assessment system to evaluate the performance and skills of all employees.
Actively engaging employees in their goal setting monitoring performance progress and providing constructive feedback are the key components of our performance assessment system.
We use the managementbyobjectives MBO system for most of our backoffice staff under which specific objectives aligned to the organisational goals are defined and agreed at the beginning of the assessment period.
After setting goals employees have a clear understanding of their roles responsibilities and contribution to the Groups overall strategy.
The process includes ongoing tracking and semiannual feedback on employee achievements.
The scoring system is the same for all employees within the MBO system and ensures fairness throughout the organisation.
For frontoffice staff we have a targetbased system developed by external consultants.
Under our targetbased system employee performance is linked to quantitative and qualitative KPIs that are closely aligned to the Groups strategic objectives.
Compared with the MBO system the targetbased systems progress is measured monthly quarterly or annually.
We also run a 360degree feedback system for our middle managers which allows them to receive a wellrounded and balanced view of their skills and behaviours assisting them to build on current strengths and develop new skills.
To further enhance our performanceassessment system for middle management in 2017 we introduced a new system that we developed together with Mercer a leading international HR consulting company.
The new system utilises a more standardised approach and helps to better align the managers tactical goals with the Groups overarching strategy and assists them in developing critical competencies.
Financial rewards and nonmonetary benefits To attract and retain the best talent we offer a competitive remuneration and marketleading benefits package.
Our employee remuneration package consists of monthly salaries and an attractive bonus scheme which vary by position and are linked to performance.
To promote a longerterm view and align middle managers interests with those of shareholders we offer a deferred share bonus scheme whereby 1520% of the annual bonus is paid in TBC PLC shares with a threeyear vesting period as follows 10% is awarded on the first anniversary of the award a further 10% on the second anniversary and the remaining 80% on the third anniversary.
The company awarded around 136000 shares as annual bonuses in 2018 based on 2017 performance.
The directors remuneration system is described in detail in the remuneration report on pages We provide our colleagues with attractive insurance and pension benefits six months of maternity and paternity leave at full pay and paid annual and sick leave.
We also offer corporate mobile numbers with free internal calls and special discounted fees for other calls.
In the case of both marriage and childbirth we provide our team members and their families with monetary awards as well as compensation in the case of serious illness or death.
We also support large families and provide a special onetime gift of GEL 10000 to all TBC Bank employees upon the birth of their fourth child or more.
Talent attraction and development As we believe that our people are one of our key competitive advantages we seek to recruit retain and develop highly qualified and engaged individuals.
We actively participate in numerous job fairs organised by top universities and leading HR consultancies to help us in selecting the best candidates with the highest growth potential.
Since 2012 we have run a special internship programme for college students in their third or fourth year of study.
We partner with top Georgian universities and give the best students an opportunity to become part of our team.
During our oneyear internship programme students can rotate through different departments of the bank.
After they complete their internships we offer permanent jobs to the most successful trainees.
We pride ourselves on being named the best supporter of education in 2017 by Free University of Tbilisi the leading university in Georgia.
Supporting the development of our people and helping them to realise their potential is one of our top priorities.
For this purpose we offer various inhouse training sessions and courses in addition to sponsoring various international certification programmes including CFA ACCA and FRM for all our employees.
We also provide financial support to our brightest people to pursue graduate education at leading universities worldwide.
In 2017 19 managers received TBC scholarships.
Since 2011 the Bank has run TBC Academy an inhouse educational centre available to all employees that offers numerous courses in banking and related fields.
The Banks top and middle management teach the courses.
For new employees we provide introductory training in order to share with them our corporate values and culture and to give them a brief overview of the Group.
In 2017 several new classes were added including regulations ethics and financial fraud management as well as soft skills like leadership and change management.
In addition we regularly organise various jobrelated training for our employees.
We also use a distance learning system for many training programmes allowing employees more flexibility in completing the courses.
Furthermore in May 2017 we started a session of masterclasses for personal development which were delivered by leading professionals who shared their knowledge and experience with our employees.
In total six masterclasses were held and more than 1800 employees attended.
CORPORATE RESPONSIBILITY CONTINUED 77 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Employee motivation and engagement We constantly work on improving our peoples motivation and engagement levels by exploring their interests and doing our best to surprise and celebrate with them.
To support internal communications we have established several clubs based on employee interests that unite photographers football lovers TBC talents and employees with other interests.
Clubs bring together employees from different departments and give them an opportunity to get to know each other share their ideas and views.
One such employee gathering is an internal championship of the intellectual game What Where When in which over 30 teams participated.
To promote a healthy work  life balance we organise weekend field trips teambuilding events and retreats for our employees as well as numerous internal championships including bowling football basketball and sand rugby.
We also participate in external running competitions and various sporting events.
As part of our efforts to promote a healthy lifestyle we offer our employees medical checkups and free consultations.
In 2017 nearly 2000 employees benefited from these benefits.
In addition our team members can receive special discounts and offers at various sport centres.
Most of our employees also donate up to 2% of their salary to the TBC Fund which supports our team members and their relatives with severe diseases and helps to finance their medical treatment costs.
TBC
Fund was established in 2009 and has since helped around 1000 people.
For middle management we organise annual overseas workshops.
As national rugby team supporters we try to combine these workshops with important rugby matches.
Last year we supported our national team in an autumn test match with Scotland.
In 2017 we took our middle managers to Wales to support the Georgian national rugby team in a challenging game versus Wales as part of Autumn Internationals 2017.
This type of event both creates strong team spirit and is in line with our strategy of becoming the ambassadors for rugby in Georgia.
As we care about our employees appearance and comfort this year we decided to upgrade our corporate apparel.
To take into consideration our employees ideas and wishes we conducted a survey that more than 2500 employees participated in.
Based on the survey results we created 10 different designs of scarves and ties in partnership with leading Georgian designers.
These accessories were distributed to frontoffice employees as gifts and are also available for sale at our corporate online brand shop.
Our brand shop is subsidised by TBC Bank and features other products as well including branded stationery clothing accessories and gift items.
We continuously add new collections to our brand shop that are designed exclusively for TBC Bank.
We offer our employees various promotions and discounts through our internal network including free tickets to exhibitions the cinema opera and ballet and rugby games.
We also host book fairs where our employees can buy books with special discounts.
In addition we provide backtoschool packages to the youngest members of our TBC family.
Regular communication with employees is an integral part of our corporate culture.
We strive to provide our employees with the latest information and developments about the Group.
Since 2012 we have conducted an annually employee satisfaction and engagement survey to get feedback from our staff and take actions accordingly.
These surveys are conducted in partnership with leading international universities and research firms.
Our most recent survey conducted in December 2017 generated an employee engagement index as high as 91% and employee net promoter score of 55.
1 91% of all employees feel involved and committed to TBC Bank 78 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ethics and conduct We aspire to conduct business in a way that promotes high ethical standards values and respects human rights and encourages our employees to act with integrity and responsibility towards each other and our customers partners and community.
For this purpose we have implemented a set of internal policies and procedures and closely monitor their execution Code of Ethics Code of Conduct AntiBribery AntiCorruption and Prevention of the Facilitation of Tax Evasion Policy which was approved in January 2018 to replace the former AntiBribery and AntiCorruption Policy Whistleblowing Policy These policies can be found on our IR website at www. bcbankgroup. com.
The Code of Ethics and Code of Conduct regulate employee rights and responsibilities and set appropriate relationship norms and principles.
TBC Banks employees are expected to act honestly and fairly at all times and to comply with both the spirit and intent of all laws.
All employees are responsible for ensuring that the working environment is free of any form of harassment discrimination including gender age physical disability or religious affiliations or inappropriate behaviour.
In dealing with customers the TBC Bank is dedicated to offering topquality products and services as well as to providing straightforward information.
In regard to suppliers the Group engages only in armlength transactions.
Compliance with the Groups Code of Ethics and Code of Conduct is closely monitored by the HR Department Compliance Department and Information Security Department on regular basis.
Periodic audits are also conducted by the Internal Audit Department in order to identify any breach or misconduct in relation to compliance with these policies.
No material breaches of the Groups Code of Ethics and Code of Conduct were identified during 2017.
Our AntiBribery AntiCorruption and Prevention of the Facilitation of Tax Evasion Policy complies with all relevant local and international laws and regulations and applies to all employees of the Group.
The policy provides comprehensive guidance on the types of behaviour that may give rise to violations of antibribery and anticorruption laws andor Criminal Finance Bill requirements and reinforces a culture of honesty and openness among employees.
To ensure employee protection and improve working conditions we have a whistleblowing policy in place that is available to all employees and aims to identify and respond to potential violations that may jeopardise employee work effectiveness.
The policy encourages all employees to report on any suspected violations in an open manner without fear of retaliation.
In addition TBC Bank provides channels for anonymous whistleblowing for anyone who believes that a violation of internal standards or legal requirements has taken place but is uncomfortable using the normal reporting lines.
Our guidelines seek to ensure that complaints are recorded and that employees are safe from any potential retaliation.
The Compliance Department regularly conducts employee training sessions in order to raise awareness and highlight the importance of anticorruption and antibribery issues.
Periodic audits are also conducted by the Internal Audit Department to identify any violations or inappropriate behaviour.
No such material instances were identified during 2017.
In terms of whistleblowing 45 whistleblowing reports were received according the Groups internal policy which were escalated and resolved as appropriate.
Priorities for 2018 To maintain and enhance our position as one of the most desired employers in the country we continuously work in partnership with the leading HR consulting companies to further improve our human resources systems and remain abreast of new market trends.
Our 2018 initiatives include introducing a job classification system which means assessing and grading head office staff positions.
The job classification system will make it easier to compare different positions throughout the Bank and will facilitate transparent and consistent people management and career development processes and implementing a selfservice platform through our internal network and mobile application which will allow each employee to control their jobrelated information such as updating personal information applying for annual leave or registering for health insurance.
Employee selfservice systems will help us to save time make processes easier and more efficient and give our employees more autonomy to manage their employment related issues.
CORPORATE RESPONSIBILITY CONTINUED 79 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance OUR COMMUNITY We take care of our community and support those areas that are pivotal for our country and its future the young generation sports and culture.
These are the directions that we believe require the most attention to develop and foster success.
Young generation As the leading Georgian bank we are convinced that it is our social responsibility to set examples and encourage the young generation to succeed.
In 2017 we continued to sponsor numerous campaigns encouraging young people to undertake challenging endeavours.
For the second year in a row we hosted the Da Vinci scientific festival which aims to popularise STEM fields among young people.
The winning team received a oneyear scholarship from TBC Status.
We also supported last years winners to participate in the Intel International Science and Engineering Fair.
Our talented participants took third place out of 800 teams.
Besides the local festival TBC Bank sponsored the participation of Georgian teams in the international scientific Olympiads such as First Global Intel International Science and Engineering Fair etc.
To encourage innovative business ideas and entrepreneurship TBC Banks Startuperi programme in partnership with Estonian firm Garage 48 organised a threeday training course for Georgian students in small towns.
Students received training from leading marketers software developers project managers and on the last day had to work on an idea and create a prototype of their product.
The winning teams participated in a hackathon organised in Tbilisi.
More than 100 people with a startup mindset took part in the hackathon creating business prototypes for gamification and entertainment.
After renovating Tbilisis renowned Mziuri Park and opening the nonprofit Mziuri Cafe last year we continued to support the cafe.
We also initiated Sunday meetings for primary schoolchildren where invited experts would discuss a variety of intriguing topics and develop childrens curiosity and fantasy.
Statusdonates.
In the beginning of 2017 TBC Banks private banking brand TBC Status launched statusdonates. specific projects.
Short movies are made on each story and uploaded to the platform where people can view and choose which project they want to support.
The platform is innovative since it mainly focuses on supporting success and it gives donors an opportunity to select a particular case that they want to support.
Different stories are submitted to appear on the platform but a specially designated committee reviews cases and selects the most appropriate ones.
Since its launch statusdonates. e has financed 13 projects.
Rugby
TBC Bank is a title sponsor of the Georgian Rugby Union and supports numerous tournaments throughout the year.
We have a longterm partnership with the Rugby Union and in addition to the sponsorship we use our social media channels to promote the sport of rugby and increase the number of national team fans.
Georgian rugby had a remarkable year in 2017 it is the first time that the country hosted the World Rugby Under20 Championship.
A total of 12 leading teams from all over the world visited Georgia in June to play in the Championship which is the second most important event in rugby following the Rugby World Cup.
Our partnership with Rugby Union entered a new phase in November when we branded the autumn international rugby testseries as the TBC Rugby Series attracting more fans to the matches.
This is another example of our successful cooperation with sports.
Culture
TBC Bank remains an avid supporter of Georgian culture including the visual arts literature and ballet.
During the past 25 years we have organised numerous exhibitions supported young artists and financed the restoration of artwork.
In 2017 we restored two masterpieces by prominent Georgian painter Niko Pirosmani Tamar King and Rustaveli providing an opportunity for Georgian society to view these unique paintings for the first time.
TBC Bank also organised special educational tours for schoolchildren to introduce them to Pirosmanis life and work.
Another significant exhibition during the year was presenting the works of Petre Otskheli one of the founders of Georgian modernism.
For the 110th anniversary of Otskhelis birth we financed the conservation and restoration of 30 paintings.
The exhibition drew special attention from a wider audience and received excellent reviews.
In 2003 TBC Bank established Saba the main literary award in
Since then it remains the countrys most prestigious annual cultural event.
Saba popularised not only known Georgian writers it also helped to uncover new talent and introduce them to a wider audience.
In 2017 Saba introduced a mobile audiobook application that provides free audiobooks to blind users.
80 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Another milestone project that began in 2016 is the translation platform supported by Microsoft GeoLab Leavingstone PH International and TBC Bank.
For the project more than 500 million Georgian sentences from the database of the Georgian ebook application Saba were analysed translated and contributed to the platform.
Translated sentences were loaded into Microsofts machinelearning platform.
As a result the Microsoft text API will support the Georgian language and will accurately translate Georgian sentences into English.
Microsoft has already started to integrate Georgian language translation capability into its products such as the Bing search engine Microsoft Office Skype etc.
This is an important advancement for the Georgian language in the information age.
Another initiative that we have curated since 2013 is Artarea the first online TV Channel dedicated to art and culture.
The channel offers its viewers various culturally themed lectures recommendations entertainment programmes and live concerts which are quite popular among all generations.
One of the most successful projects is Tbilisuri Ezo Tbilisian Yard which gathers an audience in a random yard of Old Tbilisi and organises a classical music concert by the National Symphony Orchestra.
Priorities for 2018 While TBC Bank continues growing and developing as a financial institution we reaffirm adherence to our chosen directions the young generation culture and sports.
We are convinced that these are the key areas where we can have a positive impact on the community and dedicate our efforts to building a prosperous country.
In 2018 we will increase the number of projects that we support in line with our strategy actively promote them and ensure that they remain transparent to allow more people to benefit from our endeavours.
As the number one bank in Georgia we will set a leading example and encourage other businesses to engage in corporate responsibility activities.
ENVIRONMENT
As the largest banking group in the country we fully understand the importance of doing business with minimal impact on the environment.
We are strongly committed to preserving the environment by operating our business in a sustainable and ethical manner and to take action to reduce our negative impact from both direct and indirect activities.
Lending responsibly We lend responsibly and do not finance projects that have an adverse environmental or social impact.
For this purpose the Bank has adopted an Environmental and Social Risk Management Policy to ensure compliance with local environmental legislation and applicable international guidelines.
It outlines our liabilities in terms of impact on both the environment and communities.
Compliance with the Banks Environmental and Social Risk Management Policy is closely monitored by the Social and Environmental Risk Manager .
In terms of lending activities credit officers undertake periodic monitoring visits to their clients to ensure that all environmental and social norms are adhered to.
Periodic audits are also conducted by Internal Audit Department in order to identify any breaches.
No such material breaches of the Banks Environmental and Social Risk Management Policy were identified during 2017.
We are also committed to promoting ecofriendly projects.
This year we attracted around US70 million in the form of debt finance from international financial institutions to foster investments in areas related to energy efficiency renewable energy and pollution reduction.
Waste management and energy conservation Since 2016 TBC Bank has implemented a waste management programme that has been approved by Georgias Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources Protection and has ensured that we closely monitor and effectively manage our nonhazardous and hazardous waste.
The nonhazardous waste mainly arises from printing paper  which we shred and exchange with a recycling company in return for books that we donate to orphanages vulnerable families and libraries in remote villages in Georgias mountainous regions.
This year we introduced several changes to reduce the usage of paper in line with the Banks Environmental and Social Risk Management Policy.
In June 2017 we transformed several client authorisation procedures paperless and saved around 1.7 million sheets of paper .
We also simplified our banking product agreements and reduced the number of pages per agreement.
Moreover  our customers can apply for and receive preapproved fast consumer loans via remote channels meaning that no additional paperwork is needed for disbursing a loan.
In 2017 we disbursed around 23000 such loans.
For hazardous office waste such as printer cartridges we collaborate with a company that specialises in supplying new cartridges and recycling used ones.
CORPORATE RESPONSIBILITY CONTINUED 81 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Since 2016 we have used only energyefficient LED lighting in our premises which has helped us to reduce the consumption of electricity by around 9% this year.
In addition we operate an energyefficient heating and cooling system in our offices.
Greenhouse gas emissions As one of the largest financial institutions in Georgia and a premiumlisted company trading on the LSE TBC Bank has a commitment to calculate and report upon its greenhouse gas GHG emissions from the usage of fuel and electricity for its direct operations.
To this end we commissioned the Energy Efficiency Centre Georgia EECG to prepare a report on GHG emissions from activities for which TBC Bank is responsible.
This report allowed us to obtain a more complete picture of our direct impact in 2017 and 2016 by calculating GHG emissions from TBC Banks business activities in tonnes of carbon dioxide CO equivalent based on the scopes set out in the GHG protocol Scopes 1 2 and 3.
Total CO e emissions data for the FY 2017 Total CO e emissions data for the FY 2016 Tonnes Tonnes Scope 1 2409 1804 Scope 2 1375 1147 Scope 3 366 268 Total emissions 4150 3219 Total emission per full time employee 0.60 0.52 Scope 1  1538 CO e emissions in tonnes from combustion of fuel NG from owned operation and facilities of TBC Bank in 2017 compared to 1209 CO in 2016 763 CO e emissions in tonnes from owned vehicles of TBC Bank in 2017 compared to 533 CO e in 2016 108 CO e emissions in tonnes from owned generators of TBC Bank in 2017 compared to 63 CO Whilst we remain committed to reducing our GHG emissions the increase in our CO emissions between 2016 and 2017 is in part attributable to TBC Banks increased scale of operations following the completion of TBC Banks acquisition of Bank Republic in 2017 and partially the result of a change in methodology which incorporated an assessment of 100% of TBC Banks operations in 2017.
Calculation methodology The EECG report considers all emission sources required under the Companies Act 2006 Strategic Report and Directors Reports Regulations 2013 Scope 1 and 2 and the emission sources under Scope 3 that are applicable to our business.
In preparing the emissions data the World Resources Institute WRI Greenhouse Gas Protocol A Corporate Accounting and Reporting Standard revised edition emissions factors from the UK governments Greenhouse Gas Conversion Factors for Company Reporting 2017 and national Provider Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change IPCC emission factors for electricity tCO MWhe were used.
The required data was collected and the report developed to address the scope of TBC Banks main banking activities which includes all offices andor retail branches where TBC Bank has operational control as follows Scope 1 combustion of fuel and operation of facilities includes emissions from combustion of natural gas diesel andor petrol in equipment at owned and controlled sites.
It also includes combustion of among others petrol diesel fuel and natural gas in owned transportation devices.
Scope 2 purchased electricity for own use i. owned and controlled sites.
To calculate the emissions the conversion factor for NonOECD Europe and Eurasia average conversion from the UK Governments Greenhouse Gas Conversion Factors for Company Reporting 2017 and national IPCC emission factors for electricity tCO MWhe have been used.
Scope 3 includes emissions from air business travels short haul medium haul long haul and international haul.
82 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017
FINANCIAL REVIEW
Overview
These financial results are presented for TBC Bank Group PLC TBC Bank or the Group which was incorporated on 26 February 2016 as the ultimate holding company for JSC TBC Bank.
TBC Bank became the parent company of JSC TBC Bank on 10 August 2016 following the Groups restructuring.
As this was a common ownership transaction the results have been presented as if the Group existed at the earliest comparative date as allowed under the International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS as adopted by the European
TBC Bank successfully listed on the London Stock Exchanges premium listing segment on 10 August 2016.
In Q4 2016 TBC Bank acquired Bank Republic BR which has been consolidated into the Groups results.
Results reported below prior to 30 September 2016 relate to the group previously headed by JSC TBC Bank.
TBC Bank Group PLC financial results are prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as endorsed by the European Union IFRS and are adjusted for certain oneoff items to enable better analysis of the Groups performance.
The reconciliation of the underlying profit and loss items with the reported profit and loss items and the underlying ratios are given under annex 1 section on pages 99100.
To further enhance the analysis the Group separately discloses BR effects in 2016 and 2017.
Detailed information is given in annex 2 section on pages 100103.
Tax strategy TBC Bank is committed to complying with all applicable tax laws in all jurisdictions where TBC Group operates including in the UK.
In particular we aim to pay the correct amount of tax within applicable time limits.
Our objectives are built around the following key principles transparency responsibility and effective interaction with tax authorities.
We ensure that the management of tax risk and proper governance around our tax operations is supported by appropriately trained personnel who have clear responsibilities to identify analyse assess and manage tax risks.
For more details please view our tax strategy on our website at site under about us section.
IFRS 9 implementation In January 2018 we have completed the IFRS 9 implementation which is expected to increase the provision level by GEL 64 million and our nonperforming loans coverage ratios with IFRS impact will stand at 104.7% or 209.4% including collateral.
As anticipated IFRS 9 will have no impact on our local regulatory capital requirements as established by NBG and profit and loss statement.
1 Excluding oneoff items.
Detailed information and effects are given in annex 1 on pages 99 to 100.
2 Market share figures are based on data from the National Bank of Georgia
NBG includes interbank loans for calculating market share in loans Financial highlights FY 2017 profit and loss highlights
YoY hence delivering an underlying ROE of 21.4% FY 2016 20.6% Reported net profit was up by 20.7% YoY to GEL 360 million delivering a reported ROE of 20.9% FY 2016 22.4%
ROA was 3.2% FY 2016 3.6% Reported ROA was 3.1% FY 2016 3.9% Total operating income for the period was up by 26.4% YoY to GEL 861 million
Reported cost to income stood at 41.7% FY 2016 45.8% Cost of risk stood at 1.2% FY 2016 1.0% Net interest margin NIM stood at 6.5% FY 2016 7.8% Risk adjusted NIM stood at 5.1% FY 2016 6.4% Balance sheet highlights as at 31 December 2017 Total assets amounted to GEL 12966 million as of 31 December 2017 up by 20.4% YoY Gross loans and advances to customers stood at GEL 8553 million as of 31 December 2017 up by 16.2% YoY Net loans to deposits  IFI funding stood at 92.5% and Net Stable Funding Ratio NSFR stood at 124.4% Non performing loans NPLs stood at 3.3% down by 0.2 pp YoY NPLs coverage ratios per IFRS 9 will be 104.7% and 209.4% with collateral NPL coverage ratios per IAS 39 stood at 81.8% or 186.5% with collateral on 31 December 2017 compared to 88.4% or 222.5% with collateral on 31 December 2016 Total customer deposits stood at GEL 7817 million as of 31 December 2017 up by 21.1% YoY As of 31 December 2017 the Banks Tier 1 and Total Capital Adequacy Ratios CAR per new NBG methodology stood at 13.4% and 17.5% respectively while minimum requirements amounted to 10.3% and 12.9% Market shares Market share in total assets stood at 36.4% up by 1.2 pp YoY Market share in total loans was 38.2% as of 31 December 2017 down by 0.6 pp YoY In terms of individual loans the Bank had a market share of 40.2% or 42% without Credo Bank effect which is a former microfinance organisation registered as a bank in Q1 2017 and is mainly focused on retail clients as of 31 December 2017 down by 4.0 pp YoY.
The market share for legal entity loans was 36.0% up by 2.5 pp YoY Market share of total deposits stood at 39.8% as of 31 December 2017 up by 2.0 pp YoY The Bank maintains its longstanding leadership in individual deposits with a market share of 41.3% up by 0.5 pp YoY.
In terms of legal entity deposits TBC Bank holds a market share of 37.9% up by 3.7 pp YoY.
83 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Consolidated financial results overview FY 2017 Income statement highlights In thousands of GEL 2017 2016 Change YoY Net Interest Income 604015 490453 23.2% Net Fee and Commission Income 125961 90268 39.5% Other Operating NonInterest Income 131009 100341 30.6% Provisioning Charges 106907 53395 100.2% Operating Income after Provisions for Impairment 754078 627667 20.1% Operating Expenses 359400 311988 15.2% Profit Before Tax 394678 315679 25.0% Income Tax Expense 34750 17421 99.5% Profit for the Year 359928 298258 20.7% Underlying profit for the Year 369214 273318 35.1% Balance sheet and capital highlights Dec17 Dec16 Change YoY In thousands GEL US GEL US % Total Assets 12965910 5001894 10769032 4068699 20.4% Gross Loans 8553217 3299598 7358725 2780234 16.2% Customer Deposits 7816817 3015515 6454949 2438775 21.1% Total Equity 1890454 729285 1582631 597941 19.5% Regulatory Tier I Capital Basel III 1437218 554440 NA NA NA Regulatory Total Capital Basel III 1885287 727292 NA NA NA Regulatory Tier I Capital Basel IIIII 1437218 554440 1041270 393407 38.0% Regulatory Total Capital Basel IIIII 1883835 726732 1422021 537260 32.5% Regulatory Risk Weighted Assets Basel III 10753189 4148287 NA NA NA Regulatory Risk Weighted Assets Basel IIIII 13908927 5365684 10021457 3786254 38.8% Per new NBG regulation which came into force in December 2017 Figures for December 2017 are based on internal estimates and are presented for comparison purposes Key ratios 2017 2016 Change YoY in pp Underlying ROE 21.4% 20.6% 0.8 Reported ROE 20.9% 22.4% 1.5 Underlying ROA 3.2% 3.6% 0.4 Reported ROA 3.1% 3.9% 0.8 Underlying Cost to Income 40.5% 42.9% 2.4 Reported Cost to Income 41.7% 45.8% 4.1 Cost of Risk 1.2% 1.0% 0.2 NPL to Gross Loans 3.3% 3.5% 0.2 Regulatory Tier 1 CAR Basel III 13.4% NA NA Regulatory Total CAR Basel III 17.5% NA NA Regulatory Tier 1 CAR Basel IIIII 10.3% 10.4% 0.1 Regulatory Total CAR Basel IIIII 13.5% 14.2% 0.7 Leverage Times 6.9x 6.8x 0.1x Per new NBG regulation which came into force in December 2017 Figures for December 2017 are based on internal estimates and are presented for comparison purpose 1 Please refer to page 98 for key ratio definitions 84 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Income statement discussion Net interest income In thousands of GEL 2017 2016 Change YoY Loans and Advances to Customers 919796 688724 33.6% Investment Securities Available for Sale 43735 25707 70.1% Due from Other Banks 14807 4550 NMF Bonds Carried at Amortised Cost 32328 30714 5.3% Investment in Leases 23273 16566 40.5% Other  165 100.0% Interest income 1033939 766426 34.9% Customer Accounts 233884 154840 51.0% Due to Credit Institutions 157122 85030 84.8% Subordinated Debt 36975 34325 7.7% Debt Securities in Issue 1943 1778 9.3% Interest expense 429924 275973 55.8% Net interest income 604015 490453 23.2% Net interest margin 6.5% 7.8% 1.3pp NMF  no meaningful figures In FY 2017 net interest income grew by 23.2% YoY to GEL 604.0 million GEL 493.3 million without the Bank Republic estimated contribution effect.
Without the Bank Republic estimated contribution effect the interest income increased by GEL 142.0 million or 19.5% YoY mainly driven by a higher interest income from loans to customers by GEL 114.3 million or 17.5%.
This is primarily related to the 26.2% gross loan portfolio increase.
A rise in interest income from investment securities comprising both investment securities available for sale and bonds carried at amortised cost of GEL 13.5 million or 25.1% also contributed to the overall increase in loan portfolio.
That in turn was driven by the significant rise in the respective portfolio.
In addition net interest income from due from other banks grew by GEL 7.7 million which was also determined by the large increase in respective portfolio.
In FY 2017 the Bank Republic effect mainly contributed GEL 152.0 million or 16.5% to the interest income from loans and advances to customers which totalled GEL 919.8 million and GEL 8.7 million or 11.5% to interest income from investment securities which amounted to GEL 76.1 million.
As a result the overall Bank Republic estimated contribution effect was GEL 163.3 million or 15.8% to the interest income.
Loan yields declined over the same period from 13.4% to 12.1%.
The drop was driven by a decrease in rates on foreign currencydenominated loans from 10.4% to 9.1% as well as by decline in GELdenominated loan rates from 19.0% to 16.9% broadly in line with the overall market trend.
The decline of yields on investment securities from 8.6% to 7.8% over the same period is related to a lower average refinance rate in the country in FY 2017 compared to FY 2016.
As a result the yields on average interest earning assets dropped from 12.2% in FY 2016 to 11.1% in FY 2017.
In the reporting period without the Bank Republic estimated contribution effect interest expense increased by GEL 115.3 million or 44.0% YoY.
The rise was mainly due to a higher interest expense on customer accounts of GEL 61.2 million or 41.6% and due to credit institutions of GEL 54.9 million or 69.8%.
The growth in interest expense on both customer accounts and on due to credit institutions was driven by the large increase in respective portfolios related to the overall business growth.
The Bank Republic estimated contribution effect added GEL 25.4 million or 10.9% to the interest expense on customer accounts which amounted to GEL 233.9 million in FY 2017 and GEL 23.5 million or 15.0% to interest expense due to credit institutions which amounted to GEL 157.1 million.
As a result the overall Bank Republic contribution effect was a GEL 52.5 million or 12.2% to the interest expense.
The cost of deposits increased slightly by 0.1pp to 3.4% in FY 2017 and in the same period the cost of borrowing dropped to 6.5% from 7.0% in FY 2016.
This was mainly due to the 1.2 pp decrease in rates on GELdenominated borrowings and the 0.2 pp decrease in rates on FC denominated borrowings.
As a result the cost of funding ratio remained flat at 4.5%.
Consequently NIM was 6.5% in FY 2017 compared to underlying NIM of 7.6% in FY 2016 or reported NIM of 7.8% FINANCIAL REVIEW CONTINUED 85 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Fee and commission income In thousands of GEL 2017 2016 Change YoY Card Operations 82525 61115 35.0% Settlement Transactions 59739 43434 37.5% Guarantees Issued 15121 11699 29.3% Letters of Credit 5735 6215 7.7% Cash Transactions 17424 13013 33.9% Foreign Exchange Operations 1339 1277 4.9% Other 12061 6047 99.5% Fee and commission income 193944 142800 35.8% Card Operations 46360 34906 32.8% Settlement Transactions 7421 5795 28.1% Guarantees Issued 1801 796 126.3% Letters of Credit 1072 1624 34.0% Cash Transactions 4393 2633 66.8% Foreign Exchange Operations 94 190 50.5% Other 6842 6588 3.9% Fee and commission expense 67983 52532 29.4% Card Operations 36165 26209 38.0% Settlement Transactions 52318 37639 39.0% Guarantees 13320 10903 22.2% Letters of Credit 4663 4591 1.6% Cash Transactions 13031 10380 25.5% Foreign Exchange Operations 1245 1087 14.5% Other 5219 541 NMF Net fee and commission income 125961 90268 39.5% NMF  no meaningful figures In FY 2017 net fee and commission income totalled GEL 126.0 million marking an increase of GEL 35.7 million or 39.5% compared to FY 2016.
The rise resulted mainly from a GEL 14.7 million or 39.0% gain in net fee and commission income from settlement transactions a GEL 10.0 million or 38.0% increase in net card operations a GEL 2.7 million or 25.5% rise in net cash transactions and a GEL 2.4 million or 22.2% increase in net guarantees.
The Bank Republic estimated contribution was GEL 6.9 million or 5.5% in the net fee and commission income.
Net fee and commission income from card operations expanded due to an increase in the number of active cards by 35.6% YoY as well as a rise in number of POS terminals by 12.1% YoY.
Net Fee and commission income from settlement transactions increased mainly due to increased commission income from money transfers by 40% and an increased volume of settlement transactions by 44% for one of the subsidiaries TBC Pay.
86 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Other operating noninterest income and gross insurance profit In thousands of GEL 2017 2016 Change YoY Gains less losses from trading in foreign currencies and foreign exchange translations 91473 67762 35.0% Share of profit of associates 909  NMF Gains less losseslosses less gains from derivative financial instruments 36 206 82.5% Gains less losses from disposal of investment securities available for sale 93 9293 99.0% Revenues from cashin terminal services 1093 1100 0.6% Revenues from operational leasing 6544 5772 13.4% Gain from sale of investment properties 4353 2623 66.0% Gain from sale of inventories of repossessed collateral 2383 2382 0.0% Administrative fee income from international financial institutions  644 100.0% Revenues from noncredit related fines 1408 658 114.0% Gain on disposal of premises and equipment 1017 208 NMF Other 14999 9849 52.30% Other operating income 31797 23236 36.8% Other operating noninterest income 124236 100085 24.1% Gross insurance profit 6773 256 NMF Other operating nonInterest income and gross insurance profit 131009 100341 30.6% NMF  no meaningful figures In FY 2017 total other operating noninterest income and gross insurance profit increased by GEL 30.7 million or by 30.6% YoY to GEL 131.0 million in FY 2017.
This increase was mainly driven by a GEL 23.7 million or 35.0% rise in net gains less losses from trading in foreign currencies and foreign exchange translations mainly driven by increased trade volume and Bank Republic contribution.
Another large contributor to the increase in other operating noninterest income and gross insurance profit is a GEL 6.5 million increase in gross insurance profit from our subsidiary  TBC Insurance which was acquired in October 2016.
As a result the Groups consolidated figures include contribution from TBC Insurance only in the 4Q 2016 while it has been consolidated on a full year basis in 2017.
During 2017 we have significantly increased the number of customers to around 277000 from only 3000 which in turn led to high increase in gross written premium which amounted to GEL12.2 million in 2017 on a standalone basis.
As a result market share increased to 13.3% from 3.5% establishing TBC Insurance as the thirdlargest player on market.
The growth is also due to a GEL 1.7 million increase in gain from the sale of investment properties as well as GEL 5.2 gain in the other subsection of other operating income.
The latter is mainly attributable to GEL 2.6 million reimbursed taxes a GEL 2.9 million related to fair value adjustment of previously acquired portfolio due to a better than expected performance and a GEL 2.1 million related to a expensesharing programme by our partner payment technology companies.
The rise across these items was largely offset by a GEL 8.8 million drop in net gains less losses from disposal of investment securities available for sale due to a oneoff gain from the sale of investment security in Q2 2016.
The Bank Republics estimated contribution in total other operating noninterest income was GEL 22.8 million or 17.4% out of which GEL 14.1 million was related to gains less losses from trading in foreign currencies and foreign exchange translations.
FINANCIAL REVIEW CONTINUED
1 Source insurance. ov.
Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Provision for impairment In thousands of GEL 2017 2016 Change YoY Provision for loan impairment 93823 49202 90.7% Provision for impairment of investments in finance lease 492 558 11.8% Provision for performance guarantees and credit related commitments 153 771 80.2% Provision for impairment of other financial assets 12439 2853 NMF Impairment of investment securities available for sale  11 100.0% Total provision charges for impairment 106907 53395 100.2% Operating income after provisions for impairment 754078 627667 20.1% Cost of risk 1.2% 1.0% 0.2pp NMF  no meaningful figures In 2017 total provision charges rose to GEL 106.9 million up by GEL 53.5 million compared to FY 2016 mainly driven by the increased charges on loans by GEL 44.6 million and a GEL 9.6 million rise in provision for impairment of other financial assets.
The cost of risk increased by 0.2pp to 1.2%.
Further details on asset quality are available under the Balance Sheet Discussion section.
88 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Operating expenses In thousands of GEL 2017 2016 Change YoY Staff costs 203100 172221 17.9% Provisions for liabilities and charges 2495 2210 NMF Depreciation and amortisation 37265 28082 32.7% Professional services 14332 29926 52.1% Advertising and marketing services 18430 13796 33.6% Rent 23132 18294 26.4% Utility services 6067 5108 18.8% Intangible asset enhancement 10304 7446 38.4% Taxes other than on income 5670 4699 20.7% Communications and supply 4063 4183 2.9% Stationery and other office expenses 4936 3448 43.2% Insurance 2461 2687 8.4% Security services 1965 1883 4.4% Premises and equipment maintenance 5413 3889 39.2% Business trip expenses 2021 1880 7.5% Transportation and vehicles maintenance 1637 1386 18.1% Charity 1045 884 18.2% Personnel training and recruitment 1444 1272 13.5% Writedown of current assets to fair value less costs to sell 538 4424 87.8% Loss on disposal of inventory 1239 1690 26.7% Loss on disposal of investment properties 442 61 NMF Loss on disposal of premises and equipment 492 423 16.3% Impairment of intangible assets 1916 2043 6.2% Acquisition costs 2447 207 NMF Other 12612 8694 45.1% Administrative and other operating expenses 121530 109475 11.0% Operating expenses 359400 311988 15.2% Profit before tax 394678 315679 25.0% Income tax expense 34750 17421 99.5% Profit for the year 359928 298258 20.7% Cost to income 41.7% 45.8% 4.1pp ROE 20.9% 22.4% 1.5pp ROA 3.1% 3.9% 0.8pp NMF  no meaningful figures Total operating expenses excluding oneoffs and the Bank Republic estimated contribution effect amounted to GEL 287.7 million up by GEL 17.5 million or 6.5% YoY.
The growth was mainly driven by a GEL 15.3 million increase in administrative expenses and a GEL 4.4 million rise in depreciation and amortisation.
In FY 2016 the oneoff costs related to the Premium Listing and the Bank Republic integration amounted to GEL 16.2 million and GEL 12.2 million respectively.
In FY 2017 oneoff costs were related to the Bank Republic integration and totalled GEL 10.9 million.
Out of the total operating expenses the Bank Republic estimated contribution amounted to GEL 60.8 million or 16.9% of which staff costs amounted to GEL 35.2 million and administrative and other operating expenses to GEL 20.9 million.
Total operating expenses including oneoffs and the Bank Republic estimated contribution effect amounted to GEL 359.4 million.
Annualised cost synergies are expected to be GEL 24 million.
In 2017 the estimated realised synergies were around GEL 20.5 million.
As a result the cost to income ratio stood at 41.7% 40.5% with oneoffs in FY 2017 compared to 45.8% 42.9% with oneoffs in FY 2016.
FINANCIAL REVIEW CONTINUED 89 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Balance sheet discussion In thousands of GEL Dec17 Dec16 Change Cash Due from Banks and Mandatory Cash Balances with NBG 2504938 1960547 27.8% Loans and Advances to Customers Net 8325353 7133702 16.7% Financial Securities 1107476 803659 38.0% Fixed and Intangible Assets and Investment Property 529637 470604 12.5% Other Assets 498506 400520 24.1% Total Assets 12965910 10769032 20.4% Due to Credit Institutions 2620714 2197577 19.3% Customer Accounts 7816817 6454949 21.1% Debt Securities in Issue 20695 23508 12.0% Subordinated Debt 426788 368381 15.9% Other Liabilities 190442 141986 34.1% Total Liabilities 11075456 9186401 20.6% Total Equity 1890454 1582631 19.5%
As of 31 December 2017 TBC Banks total assets amounted to GEL 12965.9 million up by GEL 2196.9 million or 20.4% YoY.
This was mainly due to the increase in gross loans to customers by GEL 1194.5 million or 16.2%.
In addition the YoY rise resulted from a GEL 303.8 million or 37.8% increase in financial securities a GEL 486.3 million or 51.5% increase in cash and cash equivalents a GEL 52.9 million or 16.8% increase in premises and equipment and a GEL 22.5 million or 37.0% increase in intangible assets largely attributable to the Bank Republic estimated contribution effect.
Asset quality PAR 30 by segments and currencies Dec17 Dec16 PAR 30 GEL FC Total GEL FC Total Corporate 0.0% 2.0% 1.5% 0.0% 1.4% 1.0% Retail 2.9% 2.0% 2.4% 2.5% 2.3% 2.4% MSME 1.5% 3.1% 2.5% 1.8% 3.5% 3.0% Total 2.1% 2.2% 2.2% 1.9% 2.3% 2.2% 1 loans overdue by more than 30 days to gross loans Par 30 for December 2016 is given per new segmentation
The total PAR 30 ratio remained stable YoY at 2.2%.
PAR 30 in local currency increased by 0.2pp to 2.1% while PAR 30 in foreign currency dropped by 0.1pp to 2.2%.
Retail
The retail segment PAR 30 amounted to 2.4% unchanged from December 2016.
The Retail PAR 30 in local currency increased by 0.4pp to 2.9% while PAR 30 in foreign currency declined by 0.3pp to 2.0%.
Corporate
The corporate segment PAR 30 amounted to 1.5% an increase of 0.5pp YoY.
The increase is driven by one large borrower falling in PAR 30 this exposure is guaranteed by the AAArated Export Development Agency according to international credit rating agencies.
The corporate PAR 30 in local currency remained stable at 0.0% while PAR 30 in foreign currency rose by 0.6pp to 2.0%.
MSME
The MSME segment PAR 30 amounted to 2.5% down by 0.5% YoY.
The decrease is driven by overall improved performance of the book.
The MSME PAR 30 in local currency decreased by 0.3pp to 1.5% while PAR 30 in foreign currency decreased by 0.4pp to 3.1%.
90 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Dec17 Dec16 NPLs GEL FC Total GEL FC Total Corporate 0.0% 4.2% 3.2% 0.7% 6.1% 4.8% Retail 2.6% 2.8% 2.7% 1.8% 3.0% 2.5% MSME 2.2% 6.0% 4.6% 1.8% 4.9% 4.0% Total 2.1% 4.1% 3.3% 1.6% 4.4% 3.5% NPL for December 2016 is given per new segmentation
Total NPLs stood at 3.3% down by 0.2 pp on YoY basis.
The NPLs in local currency increased by 0.5pp to 2.1% while NPLs in foreign currency decreased by 0.3pp to 4.1%.
Retail
Retail NPLs stood at 2.7% up by 0.2pp on YoY.
The Retail NPLs in local currency increased by 0.8pp to 2.6% while NPLs in foreign currency declined by 0.2pp to 2.8%.
Corporate
Corporate NPLs stood at 3.2% down by 1.6pp on a YoY basis.
The decline was driven by the writeoff of one large corporate borrower in Q1 2017 which was almost fully provisioned as well as by improved financial conditions of several other borrowers.
The corporate NPLs in local currency decreased by 0.7pp to 0.0% while NPLs in foreign currency dropped by 1.9pp to 4.2%.
MSME
MSME NPLs expanded by 0.6pp on a YoY basis to 4.6%.
The YoY increase is driven by worsened financial standing of a few borrowers.
The MSME NPLs in local currency increased by 0.4pp to 2.2% while NPLs in foreign currency increased by 1.1pp to 6.0%.
Dec17 including IFRS9 impact Dec16 NPLs coverage
Incl.
Excl. collateral
Corporate 86.6% 211.0% 91.8% 262.2% Retail 154.0% 237.3% 106.6% 205.6% MSME 54.6% 170.6% 57.7% 186.4% Total 104.7% 209.4% 88.4% 222.5% NPLs coverage for December 2016 is given per new segmentation
NPL coverage ratios per IAS 39 stood at 81.8% and 186.5% including collateral.
Retail
NPL coverage ratios per IAS 39 stood at 120.8% and 204.1% including collateral.
Corporate
NPL coverage ratios per IAS 39 stood at 63.2% and 187.7% including collateral.
MSME
NPL coverage ratios per IAS 39 stood at 46.1% and 162.2% including collateral FINANCIAL REVIEW CONTINUED 91 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance
As of 31 December 2017 TBC Banks total liabilities amounted to GEL 11075 million up by 20.6% YoY.
The YoY growth of GEL 1889.1 million was primarily due to a GEL 1361.9 million or 21.1% increase in customer deposits.
Total liabilities also grew following the increase in amounts due to credit institutions by GEL 423.1 million as well as a rise in subordinated debt by GEL 58.4 million.
Liquidity
The Banks liquidity ratio as defined by the NBG stood at 32.5% as of 31 December 2017 compared to 30.8% as of 31 December 2016.
The newly introduced shortterm liquidity ratio total LCR as defined by NBG stood at 112.7% above the 100.0% limit.
The LCR for GEL and FC stood at 95.6% and 122.9% respectively both higher than their respective limits of 75% and 100%.
Total equity As of 31 December 2017 TBCs total equity amounted to GEL 1890 million up from GEL 1583 million as of 31 December 2016.
The YoY change in equity was mainly due to the net profit contribution of GEL 359.9 million which was offset by a GEL 74.8 million dividend distribution gross of tax and consisting of GEL 66.7 million cashbased and GEL 8.1 million sharebased.
Regulatory capital In December 2017 the National Bank of Georgia introduced new capital adequacy requirements in order achieve better compliance with Basel III framework.
The regulatory Capital Adequacy Ratios CAR is already based on the new regulation.
As of 31 December 2017 the Banks Basel III Tier 1 and total CAR stood at 13.4% and 17.5% compared to the required levels of 10.3% and 12.9% respectively.
The Banks Basel III Tier 1 Capital amounted to GEL 1437 million and Banks Basel III Total Regulatory Capital amounted to GEL 1885 million.
Risk Weighted Assets amounted to GEL 10753 million as of 31 December 2017.
Results by segments and subsidiaries The segment definitions are Corporate  Legal Entities with an annual revenue of GEL 8.0 million or more or who have been granted a loan in an amount equivalent to US 1.5 million or more.
Some other business customers may also be assigned to this segment or transferred to the MSME segment on a discretionary basis.
MSME Micro Small and Medium Enterprises  all business customers who are not included in either Corporate and Retail segments or Legal Entities who have been granted a pawn shop loan Retail  all nonbusiness individual customers or individual business customers who have been granted a loan in an amount equivalent below US 8.0 thousand.
All individual customers are included in retail deposits and Corporate centre  comprises the Treasury other support and back office functions and nonbanking subsidiaries of the Group.
Businesses customers are all legal entities or individuals who have been granted a loan for business purposes.
92 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Income Statement by Segments 2017 Corporate Retail MSME Corp.
Centre Total Interest Income 203082 535851 184008 110998 1033939 Interest Expense 103707 118516 11661 196040 429924 Net Transfer Pricing 22489 73141 51488 102140 Net Interest Income 121864 344194 120859 17098 604015 Fee and Commission Income 30037 140582 20335 2990 193944 Fee and Commission Expense 6942 51199 8949 893 67983 Net fee and Commission Income 23095 89383 11386 2097 125961 Gross Insurance Profit    6773 6773 Gains Less Losses from Trading in Foreign Currencies 38885 22597 26885 1268 87099 Foreign Exchange Translation Gains Less Losses    4374 4374 Net Losses from Derivative Financial Instruments    36 36 Gains Less Losses from Disposal of Investment Securities Available for Sale    93 93 Other Operating Income 13465 12670 1726 3936 31797 Share of profit of associates    909 909 Other Operating NonInterest Income 52350 35267 28611 14781 131009 Provision Recovery of provision for Loan Impairment 27031 106579 14275  93823 ProvisionRecovery of Provision for Liabilities Charges and Credit Related Commitments 183 261 467 542 153 Provision for Impairment of Investments in Finance Lease    492 492 Provision for Impairment of other Financial Assets 7666 17 64 4692 12439 Operating income after provisions for impairment 216857 361987 146984 28250 754078 Staff Costs 25989 128331 31225 17555 203100 Depreciation and Amortisation 1438 29813 4972 1042 37265 Recovery of provision for Liabilities and Charges    2495 2495 Administrative and Other Operating Expenses 7457 81356 15118 17599 121530 Operating Expenses 34884 239500 51315 33701 359400 Profit before Tax 181973 122487 95669 5451 394678 Income Tax Expense 27738 15527 13820 22335 34750 Profit for the Year 154235 106960 81849 16884 359928 Portfolios by Segments In thousands of GEL Dec17 Dec16 Loans and advances to customers Consumer 2128658 1838895 Mortgage 2069728 1808434 Pawn 34767 33247 Retail 4233153 3680576 Corporate 2475392 2062229 MSME 1844672 1615920 Total loans and advances to customers Gross 8553217 7358725 Less Provision for Loan Impairment 227864 225023 Total loans and advances to customers Net 8325353 7133702 Customer accounts Retail 4378265 3747775 Corporate 2410862 1875576 MSME 1027690 831598 Total customer accounts 7816817 6454949 FINANCIAL REVIEW CONTINUED 93 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Retail banking As of 31 December 2017 retail loans stood at GEL 4233.2 million or GEL 3518.2 million without Bank Republic estimated contribution effect up by GEL 552.6 million or 15.0% YoY.
The main drivers were GEL 289.8 million or 15.8% increase in consumer loans and a GEL 261.3 million or 14.4% rise in mortgage loans.
As of 31 December 2017 TBC Banks retail loans accounted for 40.2% market share of total individual loans.
As of 31 December 2017 foreign currency loans represented 49.3% of the total retail loan portfolio.
In the reporting period retail deposits increased to GEL 4378.3 million or to GEL 4066.3 million without Bank Republic estimated contributed effect up by GEL 630.1 million or 16.8% YoY.
Retail deposits accounted for 41.3% market share of total individual deposits.
The increase in retail deposits was attributable to a GEL 355.2 million or 21.9% rise in current deposits and a GEL 274.9 million or 12.9% increase in term deposits
Term deposits accounted for 54.9% of the total retail deposit portfolio as of 31 December 2017 while foreign currency deposits represented 83.8% of the total retail deposit portfolio compared to 86.4% as of December 2016.
In FY 2017 retail loan yields and deposit rates stood at 14.0% and 3.1% respectively and the segments cost of risk on loans was 2.8%.
The retail segment contributed 29.7% or GEL 107.0 million to the TBCs total net income in the respective period.
Corporate banking As of 31 December 2017 corporate loans amounted to GEL 2475.4 million or GEL 2230.2 million excluding Bank Republic estimated effect up by GEL 413.2 million or 20.0% YoY.
Foreign currency loans accounted for 74.6% of the total corporate loan portfolio.
The market share for legal entities increased by 2.3% YoY to 36.0% mainly due to newly acquired blue chip customers.
As of the same date corporate deposits totalled GEL 2410.9 million or GEL 2297.5 million without the Bank Republic effect up by GEL 535.7 million or 28.6% YoY.
Foreign currency corporate deposits represented 49.8% of the total corporate deposit portfolio.
Market share stood at 37.9%.
In FY 2017 corporate loan yields and deposit rates stood at 9.5% and 5.2% respectively.
In the same period the cost of risk on loans was 1.3%.
Negative CoR in 2017 is driven by good performance of the book.
In terms of profitability the corporate segments net profit reached GEL 154.2 million or 42.9% of the Banks total net income.
MSME banking As of 31 December 2017 MSME loans amounted to GEL 1844.7 million GEL 1708.7 million excluding Bank Republic estimated loan portfolio up by GEL 228.8 million or 14.2% YoY.
Foreign currency loans accounted for 63.8% of the total MSME portfolio.
As of the same date MSME deposits stood at GEL 1027.7 million GEL 964.2 million excluding Bank Republic estimated deposit portfolio up by GEL 196.1 million or 23.6% YoY.
Foreign currency MSME deposits represented 53.7% of the total MSME deposit portfolio.
In FY 2017 MSME loan yields and deposit rates stood at 10.9% and 1.3% respectively while the cost of risk on loans was 0.8%.
In terms of profitability net profit for the MSME segment amounted to GEL 81.8 million or 22.7% of TBCs total net income.
Statements of TBC Bank Group PLC 94 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Consolidated Balance Sheet In thousands of GEL Dec17 Dec16 Cash and cash equivalents 1431477 945180 Due from other banks 39643 24725 Mandatory cash balances with the National Bank of Georgia 1033818 990642 Loans and advances to customers 8325353 7133702 Investment securities available for sale 657938 430703 Bonds carried at amortised cost 449538 372956 Investments in finance leases 143836 95031 Investment properties 79232 95615 Current income tax prepayment 19084 7430 Deferred income tax asset 2855 3511 Other financial assets 146144 94627 Other assets 156651 171263 Premises and equipment 366913 314032 Intangible assets 83492 60957 Goodwill 28658 28658 Investments in associates 1278 TOTAL ASSETS 12965910 10769032
Due to credit institutions 2620714 2197577 Customer accounts 7816817 6454949 Other financial liabilities 91753 50998 Current income tax liability 447 2577 Debt securities in issue 20695 23508 Deferred income tax liability 602 5646 Provisions for liabilities and charges 13200 16026 Other liabilities 84440 66739 Subordinated debt 426788 368381 TOTAL LIABILITIES 11075456 9186401
Share capital 1605 1581 Share premium 714651 677211 Retained earnings 1232865 955173 Group reorganisation reserve 162166 162166 Sharebased payment reserve 9828 23327 Revaluation reserve for premises 70045 70460 Revaluation reserve for availableforsale securities 1730 3681 Cumulative currency translation reserve 7359 7538 Net assets attributable to owners 1861199 1554367 Noncontrolling interest 29255 28264 TOTAL EQUITY 1890454 1582631 TOTAL LIABILITIES AND EQUITY 12965910 10769032 Consolidated Statement of Profit or Loss and Other Comprehensive Income In thousands of GEL 2017 2016 Interest income 1033939 766426 Interest expense 429924 275973 Net interest income 604015 490453 Fee and commission income 193944 142800 Fee and commission expense 67983 52532 FINANCIAL REVIEW CONTINUED 95 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Net fee and commission income 125961 90268 Net insurance premiums earned 12633 1222 Net insurance claims incurred 5860 966 Insurance profit 6773 256 Net gains from trading in foreign currencies 87099 70269 Net gains losses from foreign exchange translation 4374 2507 Net losses from derivative financial instruments 36 206 Net gains from disposal of investment securities available for sale 93 9293 Other operating income 31797 23236 Share of profit of associates 909 Other operating noninterest income 124236 100085 Provision for loan impairment 93823 49202 Provision for impairment of investments in finance lease 492 558 Provision for performance guarantees and creditrelated commitments 153 771 Provision for impairment of other financial assets 12439 2853 Impairment of investment securities available for sale  11 Operating income after provisions for impairment 754078 627667 Staff costs 203100 172221 Depreciation and amortisation 37265 28082 Recovery of provision provision for liabilities and charges 2495 2210 Administrative and other operating expenses 121530 109475 Operating expenses 359400 311988 Profit before tax 394678 315679 Income tax expense 34750 17421 Profit for the year 359928 298258 Other Comprehensive income Items that may be reclassified subsequently to profit or loss Revaluation of available for sale investments 5489 522 Gains less losses recycled to profit or loss upon disposal  11611 Exchange differences on translation to presentation currency 181 948 Income tax recorded directly in other comprehensive income  1649 Items that will not be reclassified to profit or loss Income tax recorded directly in other comprehensive income 422 10928 Other comprehensive income for the year 5248 540 Total comprehensive income for the year 365176 298798 Profit is attributable to Owners of the Bank 354410 299145 Noncontrolling interest 5518 887 Profit for the year 359928 298258 Total comprehensive income is attributable to Owners of the Bank 359585 299685 Noncontrolling interest 5591 887 Total comprehensive income for the year 365176 298798 96 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows In thousands of GEL 2017 2016 Cash flows from used in operating activities Interest received 1000571 735705 Interest paid 424105 273795 Fees and commissions received 195285 144247 Fees and commissions paid 68036 52154 Insurance premium received 23518 1591 Insurance claims paid 9127 703 Income received from trading in foreign currencies 87099 70411 Other operating income received 8992 8411 Staff costs paid 187520 148656 Administrative and other operating expenses paid 112270 104077 Income tax paid 53916 34279 Cash flows from operating activities before changes in operating assets and liabilities 460491 346701 Net change in operating assets Due from other banks and mandatory cash balances with the National Bank of Georgia 98586 448582 Loans and advances to customers 1330105 1219501 Investment in finance lease 49297 11687 Other financial assets 38064 22965 Other assets 73814 843 Net change in operating liabilities Due to other banks 228486 265679 Customer accounts 1329071 1150146 Other financial liabilities 18263 5724 Other liabilities and provision for liabilities and charges 3487 332 Net cash flows from operating activities 140588 65004 Cash flows used in from investing activities Acquisition of investment securities available for sale 560226 143980 Proceeds from disposal of investment securities available for sale  11868 Proceeds from redemption at maturity of investment securities available for sale 345748 166871 Acquisition of subsidiaries net of cash acquired 273 91404 Acquisition of bonds carried at amortised cost 307248 304109 Proceeds from redemption of bonds carried at amortised cost 242380 314231 Acquisition of premises equipment and intangible assets 114383 50689 Proceeds from disposal of premises equipment and intangible assets 1932 1273 Proceeds from disposal of investment property 19082 7822 Net cash flows used in investing activities 372988 88117 Cash flows from used in financing activities Proceeds from other borrowed funds 1461191 903502 Redemption of other borrowed funds 800333 666156 Proceeds from subordinated debt 119859 136817 Redemption of subordinated debt 59671 90416 Proceeds from debt securities in issue  4354 Redemption of debt securities in issue 2123 4636 Dividends paid 67927 54560 Acquisition of noncontrolling interest in subsidiary  3495 Issue of ordinary shares 29 Net cash from financing activities 651025 225410 Effect of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents 67672 22536 Net increase in cash and cash equivalents 486297 224833 Cash and cash equivalents at the beginning of the year 945180 720347 Cash and cash equivalents at the end of the year 1431477 945180 FINANCIAL REVIEW CONTINUED 97 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Key ratios Average balances Average balances included in this document are calculated as the average of the relevant monthly balances as of each monthend.
Balances have been extracted from TBCs consolidated management accounts prepared from TBCs accounting records which were used by Management for monitoring and control purposes.
Key ratios Ratios based on monthly averages where applicable 2017 2016 Underlying ROE 21.4% 20.6% Reported ROE 20.9% 22.4% Underlying ROA 3.2% 3.6% Reported ROA 3.1% 3.9% Underlying Cost to Income 40.5% 42.9% Reported Cost to Income 41.7% 45.8% Cost of Risk 1.2% 1.0%
6.5% 7.8% Risk Adjusted NIM 5.1% 6.4% Loan Yields 12.1% 13.4% Risk Adjusted Loan Yields 10.7% 12.1% Deposit rates 3.4% 3.3% Yields on interest Earning Assets 11.1% 12.2% Cost of Funding 4.5% 4.5%
6.6% 7.8% PAR 90 to Gross Loans 1.4% 1.3% NPLs to Gross Loans 3.3% 3.5% NPLs coverage per IAS 39 81.8% 88.4% NPLs coverage with collateral per IAS 39 186.5% 222.5% NPLs coverage per IFRS 9 104.7% NA NPLs coverage with collateral per IFRS 9 209.4% NA Provision Level to Gross Loans 2.7% 3.1% Related Party Loans to Gross Loans 0.1% 0.1% Top 10 Borrowers to Total Portfolio 8.2% 7.6% Top 20 Borrowers to Total Portfolio 12.4% 11.3% Net Loans to Deposits plus IFI Funding 92.5% 93.4% Net Stable Funding Ratio 124.4% 108.4% Liquidity Coverage Ratio 113% NA
Regulatory Tier 1 CAR Basel III 13.4% NA Regulatory Total CAR Basel III 17.5% NA Regulatory Tier 1 CAR Basel IIIII 10.3% 10.4% Regulatory Total CAR Basel IIIII 13.5% 14.2% Dividend Payout ratio 25.4% 25.2% Estimated Basel IIIII ratios as of 31 December 2017 98 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ratio definitions Underlying return on average total equity ROE equals underlying net income attributable to owners divided by monthly average of total shareholders equity attributable to the PLCs equity holders for the same period adjusted for the respective oneoff items Annualised where applicable.
Return on average total equity ROE equals net income attributable to owners divided by monthly average of total shareholders equity attributable to the PLCs equity holders for the same period Annualised where applicable.
Underlying return on average total assets ROA equals underlying net income of the period divided by monthly average total assets for the same period.
Annualised where applicable.
Return on average total assets ROA equals net income of the period divided by monthly average total assets for the same period.
Annualised where applicable.
Underlying cost to income ratio equals total underlying operating expenses for the period divided by the total underlying revenue for the same period.
Revenue represents the sum of net interest income net fee and commission income and other noninterest income.
Cost to income ratio equals total operating expenses for the period divided by the total revenue for the same period.
Revenue represents the sum of net interest income net fee and commission income and other noninterest income.
Cost of risk equals provision for loan impairment divided by monthly average gross loans and advances to customers.
Annualised where applicable.
Net interest margin NIM is net interest income divided by monthly average interestearning assets.
Annualised where applicable.
Interestearning assets include investment securities excluding corporate shares net investment in finance lease net loans amount due from credit institutions.
The latter excludes all items from cash and cash equivalents excludes EUR mandatory reserves with NBG which currently has negative interest and includes other earning items from due from banks.
Risk Adjusted Net interest margin is NIM minus cost of risk without oneoffs and currency effect.
Loan yields equal interest income on loans and advances to customers divided by monthly average gross loans and advances to customers.
Annualised where applicable.
Risk Adjusted Loan yield is loan yield minus cost of risk without oneoffs and currency effect.
Deposit rates equal interest expense on customer accounts divided by monthly average total customer deposits.
Annualised where applicable.
Yields on interest earning assets equal total interest income divided by monthly average interest earning assets.
Annualised where applicable.
Cost of funding equals total interest expense divided by monthly average interest bearing liabilities.
Annualised where applicable.
Spread equals difference between yields on interestearning assets including but not limited to yields on loans securities and due from banks and cost of funding including but not limited to cost of deposits cost on borrowings and due to banks.
PAR 90 to gross loans ratio equals loans for which principal or interest repayment is overdue for more than 90 days divided by the gross loan portfolio for the same period.
NPLs to gross loans equals loans with 90 days past due on principal or interest payments and loans with welldefined weakness regardless of the existence of any pastdue amount or of the number of days past due divided by the gross loan portfolio for the same period.
NPLs coverage ratio equals total loan loss provision calculated per IAS 39 divided by the NPL loans.
NPLs coverage with collateral ratio equals loan loss provision calculated per IAS 39 plus total collateral amount of NPL loans excluding thirdparty guarantees discounted at 3050% depending on segment type divided by the NPL loans.
NPLs coverage ratio equals total loan loss provision calculated per IFRS 9 divided by the NPL loans.
NPLs coverage with collateral ratio equals loan loss provision calculated per IFRS 9 plus total collateral amount of NPL loans excluding thirdparty guarantees discounted at 3050% depending on segment type divided by the NPL loans.
Provision level to gross loans equals loan loss provision divided by the gross loan portfolio for the same period.
Related party loans to total loans equals related party loans divided by the gross loan portfolio.
Top 10 borrowers to total portfolio equals total loan amount of top 10 borrowers divided by the gross loan portfolio.
Top 20 borrowers to total portfolio equals total loan amount of top 20 borrowers divided by the gross loan portfolio.
Net loans to deposits plus IFI funding ratio equals net loans divided by total deposits plus borrowings received from international financial institutions.
Net stable funding ratio equals available amount of stable funding divided by required amount of stable funding as defined in Basel III.
NSFR ratio for before Q2 2017 is calculated per updated internal methodology in line with Basel 2014 guidelines.
Liquidity coverage ratio equals highquality liquid assets divided by total net cash outflow amount as defined by NBG.
Leverage equals total assets to total equity.
Regulatory Tier 1 CAR equals tier I capital divided by total riskweighted assets both calculated in accordance with the Pillar 1 requirements of NBG Basel III standards.
The reporting started from the end of 2017.
Calculations are made for TBC Bank standalone based on local standards.
Regulatory Total CAR equals total capital divided by total riskweighted assets both calculated in accordance with the Pillar 1 requirements of NBG Basel III standards.
The reporting started from the end of 2017.
Calculations are made for TBC Bank standalone based on local standards.
Regulatory Tier 1 CAR equals Tier I Capital divided by total riskweighted assets both calculated in accordance with the NBG Basel IIIII requirements.
Regulatory Total CAR equals total capital divided by total riskweighted assets both calculated in accordance with the NBG Basel IIIII requirements Dividend payout ratio for 2017 is based on 2016 performance.
Dividend payout ratio for 2016 is based on 2015 performance.
Exchange rates To calculate the QoQ growth of Balance Sheet items without the currency exchange rate effect we used USDGEL exchange rate of 2.4767 as of 30 September 2017.
For calculations of the YoY growth without the currency exchange rate effect we used USDGEL exchange rate of 2.6468 as of 31 December 2016.
The USDGEL exchange rate as of 31 December 2017 equalled 2.5922.
For PandL items growth calculations without currency effect we used the average USDGEL exchange rate for the following periods Q4 2017 of 2.5933 Q3 2017 of 2.4207 Q4 2016 of 2.4958.
FINANCIAL REVIEW CONTINUED 99 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Annex 1 In thousands of GEL 2016 Reported net interest income 490453 Oneoff interest income related to large corporate borrowers 13814 Oneoff interest expense related to prepayment of subordinated loans 2457 Underlying net interest income 479096 Reported net fee and commission income 90268 Reported gross insurance profit 256 Reported other operating income 100085 Oneoff gain on sale of investment securities 8795 Underlying other operating income 91290 Reported operating income 681062 Underlying operating income 660910 Reported total provision expenses 53395 Oneoff recovery of previously writtenoff principal 26217 Oneoff currency effect on provisions 9595 Underlying total provision expenses 70017 Reported operating income after provisions 627667 Underlying operating income after provisions 590893 Reported operating expenses 311988 Oneoff costs related to premium listing 16227 Oneoff costs related to Bank Republic integration consulting costs 8000 Oneoff costs related to impairment of intangible assets of Bank Republic 2025 Oneoff costs related to staff redundancy provision related to Bank Republic acquisition 2210 Underlying operating expenses 283536 Reported profit before tax 315679 Underlying profit before tax 307367 Reported income tax 17421 Oneoff tax credit 17875 Effect on tax of oneoff items sum of oneoff items is multiplied by income tax rate 1247 Underlying income tax 34049 Reported net profit 298258 Underlying net profit 273318 Noncontrolling interest NCI 887 Reported net profit less NCI 299145 Underlying net profit less NCI 274205 100 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 In thousands of GEL 2017 Reported net interest income 604015 Reported net fee and commission income 125961 Reported gross insurance profit 6773 Reported other operating income 124236 Reported operating income 860985 Reported total provision expenses 106907 Reported operating income after provisions 754078 Reported operating expenses 359400 Oneoff costs related to Bank Republic integration consulting costs 10925 Underlying operating expenses 348475 Reported profit before tax 394678 Underlying profit before tax 405603 Reported income tax 34750 Effect on tax of oneoff items 1639 Underlying income tax 36389 Reported net profit 359928 Underlying net profit 369214 Reported noncontrolling interest NCI 5518 Underlying noncontrolling interest NCI 5638 Reported net profit less NCI 354410 Underlying net profit less NCI 363tel Underlying ROE 21.4% 20.6% Underlying ROA 3.2% 3.6% Underlying cost to income 40.5% 42.9% Underlying NIM 6.5% 7.6% Annex 2 Please note Bank Republic figures after the merger on 8 May 2017 are based on internal estimates as described below.
Bank Republic contribution assumptions To make the YoY analyses more comparable the Bank has segregated the Bank Republic contribution after the merger on 8 May 2017 which is based on direct income and cost attribution calculation and where not applicable based on established allocation rules appropriate management assumptions and estimates.
The management has estimated the Bank Republic contribution effect within the Groups financial results based on the following rationale Loan and deposit portfolio as well as the interest income and expense from these portfolios have been calculated for all Bank Republics existing clients with outstanding exposure for the reporting period as well as for all new clients attracted through the former branches of Bank Republic.
For the remaining items of BS and PandL where the direct attribution is not practical the management has used the allocation based on Bank Republic loan and deposit books contribution to each operating segment.
FINANCIAL REVIEW CONTINUED 101 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Reported figures for TBC and BR In thousands of GEL 2017 2016 Interest income TBC 870689 728663 Interest income BR 163250 37763 Interest income TBCBR 1033939 766426 Interest expense TBC 377404 262087 Interest expense BR 52520 13886 Interest expense TBCBR 429924 275973 Net interest income TBC 493285 466576 Net interest income BR 110730 23877 Net interest income TBCBR 604015 490453 Net fee and commission Income TBC 119050 88076 Net fee and commission Income BR 6911 2192 Net fee and commission income TBCBR 125961 90268 Other operating noninterest income TBC 108242 88358 Other operating noninterest income BR 22767 11983 Other operating noninterest income TBCBR 131009 100341 Operating income TBC 720577 643010 Operating income BR 140408 38052 Operating income TBCBR 860985 681062 Total provisions TBC NA 41597 Total provisions BR NA 11798 Total provisions TBCBR 106907 53395 Operating expenses TBC 298625 296686 Staff costs 167925 164604 Depreciation and amortisation 32563 28141 Provision for liabilities and charges 2495 2210 Administrative and other operating expenses 100632 101731 Operating expenses BR 60775 15302 Staff costs 35175 7617 Depreciation and amortisation 4702 59 Provision for liabilities and charges Administrative and other operating expenses 20898 7743 Operating Expenses TBCBR 359400 311988 Staff costs 203100 172221 Depreciation and amortisation 37265 28082 Provision for liabilities and charges 2495 2210 Administrative and other operating expenses 121530 109474 Income tax expense TBC NA 17146 Income tax expense BR NA 275 Income tax expense TBCBR 34750 17421 Net profit TBC NA 287581 Net profit BR NA 10677 Net profit TBCBR 359928 298258 102 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Underlying figures for TBC and BR In thousands of GEL 2017 2016 Interest income TBC 870689 714849 Interest income BR 163250 37763 Interest income TBCBR 1033939 752612 Interest expense TBC 377404 259630 Interest expense BR 52520 13886 Interest expense TBCBR 429924 273516 Net interest income TBC 493285 455219 Net interest income BR 110730 23877 Net interest income TBCBR 604015 479096 Net fee and commission income TBC 119050 88076 Net fee and commission income BR 6911 2192 Net fee and commission income TBCBR 125961 90268 Other operating noninterest income TBC 108242 79563 Other operating noninterest income BR 22767 11983 Other operating noninterest income TBCBR 131009 91546 Operating income TBC 720577 622858 Operating income BR 140408 38052 Operating income TBCBR 860985 660910 Total provisions TBC NA 58219 Total provisions BR NA 11798 Total provisions TBCBR 106907 70017 Operating expenses TBC 287701 270249 Staff costs 164852 164604 Depreciation and amortisation 32563 28141 Provision for liabilities and charges 2495 Administrative and other operating expenses 92781 77504 Operating expenses BR 60775 13277 Staff costs 35175 7617 Depreciation and amortisation 4702 58 Provision for liabilities and charges Administrative and other operating expenses 20897 5719 Operating expenses TBCBR 348475 283526 Staff costs 200027 172221 Depreciation and amortisation 37265 28082 Provision for liabilities and charges 2495 Administrative and other operating expenses 113678 83223 Income tax expense TBC NA 33470 Income tax expense BR NA 579 Income tax expense TBCBR 36389 34049 Net income TBC NA 260920 Net profit BR NA 12398 Net profit TBCBR 369214 273318 FINANCIAL REVIEW CONTINUED 103 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Governance Additional Information Financial Statements Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Loan and deposit portfolios reconciliation Loan portfolio In thousands of GEL 2017 2016 Total gross loans TBC 7457060 5911152 Retail 3518195 3240585 Corporate 2230158 1789309 MSME 1708707 881258 Total gross loans BR 1096157 1447573 Retail 714958 439991 Corporate 245234 272920 MSME 135965 734662 Total gross loans TBCBR 8553217 7358725 Retail 4233153 3680576 Corporate 2475392 2062229 MSME 1844672 1615920 Deposit portfolio In thousands of GEL 2017 2016 Total deposits TBC 7327962 5641123 Retail 4066282 3418681 Corporate 2297455 1468771 MSME 964225 753671 Total deposits BR 488855 813826 Retail 311983 329470 Corporate 113407 406429 MSME 63465 77927 Total deposits TBCBR 7816817 6454949 Retail 4378265 3747775 Corporate 2410862 1875576 MSME 1027690 831598 104 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017
DIRECTORS GOVERNANCE STATEMENT
Chairmans governance overview Dear shareholders I am pleased to present our corporate governance report for 2017.
My role as Chairman is to lead the Board and ensure that it works effectively in the pursuit of sustainable longterm shareholder value.
We believe that an effective governance structure and strong oversight of the Companys business by the Board is vital in providing necessary checks and balances thus supporting better decisionmaking and accountability in turn.
The effective delivery of longterm sustainable value for shareholders requires an effective Board.
We understand that the Board requires the right balance of skills countryspecific knowledge and diversity of experience and perspectives to achieve maximum effectiveness.
As Chairman I ensure that there is constructive debate in the boardroom in order to create and maintain an environment where the Board remains open to different viewpoints and ideas.
Our Board is comprised of nine members of which five namely Nikoloz Enukidze SID Stefano Marsaglia Nicholas Haag Eric Rajendra and Stephan Wilcke are considered independent nonexecutive Directors.
The Board views each of these nonexecutive Directors as being independent of management judgement and character and free from any business or other relationship that could materially interfere with their exercise of independent judgement.
In accordance with the UK Corporate Governance Code the Code all Directors are subject to annual reelection by shareholders at our Annual General Meeting.
As previously announced two nonexecutive Directors Stefano Marsaglia and Stephan Wilcke will be leaving TBC Bank and stepping down from the Board as and when suitable replacements are found during 2018.
I would like to extend the Boards thanks to both Stefano and Stephan for their important contributions to TBC Bank and wish them every success in the future.
Both nonexecutive Directors will remain in post pending the appointment of successors which may or may not have occurred by the time of the Annual General Meeting.
Stefano and Stephan will therefore only be reelected if they remain Directors at the opening of the Annual General Meeting.
The Board is responsible for promoting the highest standards of corporate governance within the Group and we are committed to further developing and strengthening our governance structure to achieve the highest level of effectiveness.
Mamuka Khazaradze
28 March 2018 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FRAMEWORK The Groups corporate governance framework provides shareholders with an explanation of how the Company has applied the main principles of the Code as relevant to the Company in 2017.
Compliance statement As a premiumlisted company on the LSE the Company complies with the Code.
At the date of this report the Company has applied the principles and complied with the provisions of the Code in full.
The Code and associated guidance is published by the Financial Reporting Council and is available at www. rc.
The Board The Board is collectively responsible for promoting the Groups longterm success and the delivery of sustainable value to shareholders by establishing and overseeing the strategic direction of the Company and its business.
The Board is led by the Chairman and provides challenge oversight and advice to ensure the Companys success.
The Board is the decisionmaking body in relation to all matters that are significant to the Group.
There is a formal schedule of matters reserved for the Boards approval in place to ensure that the Board retains control over key decisions.
The matters exclusively reserved for the Boards approval include among other things approval of the Groups strategy longterm objectives risk appetite the annual operating and capital expenditure budgets changes to the Groups capital share buybacks major acquisitions andor mergers annual reports and accounts.
The full document is available on our website at site Board Committees The Board places significant reliance on its committees the Committees and delegates a broad range of responsibilities to them while maintaining the effective links between Committees and the Board where required.
The Board has four Committees i the Audit Committee ii the Remuneration Committee iii the Corporate Governance and Nomination Committee and iv the Risks Ethics and Compliance Committee.
The chairs of each Committee report matters of significance to the Board after each meeting.
The detailed roles and responsibilities of each committee are set out in its terms of reference which can be found on the website at site 105 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Additional Information Financial Statements Governance Committee membership Audit Committee
Committee
Corporate
Governance and Nomination
Risks Ethics and Compliance
Badri Japaridze Eric J.
Rajendra
Nikoloz Enukidze Nicholas Dominic Haag Stefano Marsaglia Stephan Wilcke
Member
Division of responsibilities There is a clear division of responsibilities between the Chairman the Chief Executive Officer and the senior independent nonexecutive Director.
As Chairman Mamuka Khazaradze is responsible for leading the Board to ensure that the Board as a whole performs a full and constructive role in the development and determination of the Groups strategy and overall commercial objectives.
He also oversees the Boards decisionmaking processes.
The Chief Executive Officer Vakhtang Butskhrikidze is responsible for the Companys daytoday management and has the principal responsibility of running the Groups business.
He is responsible for proposing developing and implementing the Groups strategy and overall commercial objectives which is done in close consultation with the Chairman and the Board.
In addition the Board has appointed in line with the requirements of the Code Nikoloz Enukidze as the senior independent nonexecutive Director who provides a sounding board for the Chairman.
He serves as an intermediary for the other Directors where necessary and meets with investors to discuss the Groups corporate governance matters.
This separation of responsibilities between the Chairman the Chief Executive Officer and the senior independent nonexecutive Director ensures that no one individual has unfettered powers of decisionmaking.
The full document detailing the division of responsibilities between the Chairman the Chief Executive Officer and the senior independent nonexecutive Director is available on our website at site Board composition The Board currently comprises a Chairman five nonexecutive Directors and two executive Directors.
In accordance with the Code the majority of the Board are independent nonexecutive Directors.
Nonexecutive Directors constructively challenge and scrutinise the performance of management and help develop proposals on strategy.
The Board has considered the independence of the Companys nonexecutive Directors against the factors described in the Code and has determined as mentioned previously that all nonexecutive Directors are independent except for Mamuka Khazaradze and Badri Japaridze.
Provision A.3.1 requires that the Chairman on appointment should be independent.
Mamuka Khazaradze who is the Chairman is for the purposes of the Code not considered to have been independent on his appointment in 2016 as the Chairman due to his role as founder of the Group.
The
Board is unanimously of the opinion that Mr Khazaradze is an extremely valuable asset to the Company bringing a wealth of experience in Georgias banking sector  and that it is therefore in the Companys best interests that he should continue as the Chairman of the Company.
Each nonexecutive Director has an ongoing obligation to inform the Board of any circumstances that could impair his independence.
Details of the individual Directors and their biographies are set out on pages 114117.
Time commitment Each nonexecutive Director is required to devote such time as necessary for the effective discharge of their duties.
This includes attendance at the Board meetings and respective Committee meetings of which they are members as well as scheduled away days site visits conference calls and email communication.
Nonexecutive Directors consider all relevant materials prior to each meeting and commit additional time to the Company when it is undergoing a period of particularly increased activity.
106 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Board and Committee meeting attendance In 2017 the Company held three scheduled and eleven additional meetings.
In addition the Chairman and the Chief Executive Officer maintain frequent contact in person or otherwise with each other and the other Board members throughout the year outside of the formal meetings.
In addition the affairs of the Companys main subsidiary JSC TBC Bank the Bank are supervised by a supervisory board the Supervisory Board with the same composition as the Board and equivalent committees of the Supervisory Board.
There are therefore in practice two equivalent supervisory bodies within the Group represented by the Board and the Supervisory Board which are separate but interconnected with committees that have common membership.
However we carefully balance the work of the Board the Supervisory Board and their respective committees dividing functions according to whether they are supervising the topics that impact on the Company or solely the Bank.
Attendance of meetings of the Board and its Committees in 2017 are set out below Board Attendance Board meetings eligible to attend attended Audit Committee meetings eligible to attendattended
Committee meetings eligible to attendattended
Governance and
Committee meetings eligible to attendattended Risks Ethics and
Committee meetings eligible to attendattended Vakhtang Butskhrikidze Chief Executive Officer 1414 Giorgi Shagidze Chief Financial Officer Nonexecutive Directors Mamuka Khazaradze Chairman Badri Japaridze 1414 55 Eric J.
Rajendra 1414 88 44 55 44 Nikoloz Enukidze 1414 88 44 55 44 Nicholas Dominic Haag 1414 88 44 44 Stefano Marsaglia 1413 87 43 42 Stephan Wilcke 1414 88 55 44 Mr Shagidze was unable to join one Board meeting conference call held on 4 July 2017 due to delay of his business related flight however he had provided his opinion on the matters under consideration via email correspondence in advance of the meeting as soon as he became aware about the delay.
Mr Khazaradze was unable to attend one Board meeting held on 22 March 2017 due to a prior businessrelated travel commitment however he discussed all matters on the agenda with the senior independent nonexecutive Director and the CEO and provided feedback on materials as required in advance of the meetings.
Mr Marsaglia was unable to join one Board meeting and four committee meetings due to personal reasons.
Attendance of meetings of the Supervisory Board and its committees in 2017 are set out below Supervisory Board Attendance Supervisory Board meetings eligible to attendattended Audit Committee meetings eligible to attendattended
Committee meetings eligible to attendattended
Governance and
Committee meetings eligible to attendattended Risks Ethics and
Committee meetings eligible to attendattended Mamuka Khazaradze Chairman 5555 Vakhtang Butskhrikidze Chief Executive Officer 7575 Giorgi Shagidze Chief Financial Officer 7777 Badri Japaridze 5858 44 Eric J.
Rajendra 7777 88 77 44 3434 Nikoloz Enukidze 7777 88 77 44 3434 Nicholas Dominic Haag 7777 88 77 3434 Stefano Marsaglia 7775 87 76 3432 Stephan Wilcke 7777 88 44 3434 DIRECTORS GOVERNANCE STATEMENT CONTINUED 107 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Additional Information Financial Statements Governance Diversity policy We recognise the importance of ensuring diversity and see significant benefit to our business in having a Board and management team that is drawn from a diverse range of backgrounds.
This brings the required expertise cultural diversity and different perspectives to the Board discussions and helps to improve the quality of decisionmaking.
The Board is mindful that it does not currently include any female members and although the Board is satisfied with the current level of diversity relevant skills and expertise of its members it intends to ensure that the next appointments to the Board address this concern and complement the Boards diversity in terms of ethnicity cultures gender age levels relevant skills and work experience.
The Board notes the number of talented women in key positions reporting to the CEO and other management board members and going forward the Board intends to increase diversity by identifying qualified female candidates for appointment to the Board and senior management teams.
Induction and training A formal induction is arranged for newly appointed Directors based on the individuals need skills and experience.
Typically these included a series of meetings with the Chairman and other Directors and senior executives as well as local site visits to provide familiarity with the business.
During the year the Company did not have any new appointments to the Board or its Committees.
In addition the Chairman takes responsibility to ensure that the Board is updated in a timely manner about the Companys performance to enable it to make proper decisions.
The Chairman ensures that there are information exchanges between the Board the Committees and executives.
If there is a need for independent advice the Board can seek it directly at the Companys expense.
Members of the Board are required to complete a selfassessment process at the end of the year which is considered as part of the Boards annual effectiveness evaluation.
Annual Board effectiveness evaluation The Board and Committees continually strive to improve their effectiveness and recognise that their annual evaluation process is an important tool in reaching that goal.
Nonexecutive Directors individual performance evaluations were undertaken by the Chairman which involved a discussion about a Directors individual contribution the time commitment that is required to continue to deliver the role effectively and their training and development needs.
The Chairman has confirmed that all nonexecutive Directors continue to perform effectively contribute positively to the governance of the Group and are able to commit the time required for their role.
The Chairmans performance is evaluated by the independent nonexecutive Directors led by the senior independent Director.
Executive Directors individual performance evaluation is undertaken as part of the performance management process for all employees.
The results are considered by the Remuneration Committee when determining pay awards each year.
Having assessed the overall findings of the effectiveness review the Directors were satisfied that the Board collectively and its individual members operated effectively during 2017.
Following last years evaluation the Board discussed the previous suggestion to establish a strategy committee and unanimously decided that since all of the directors need to be engaged in setting the Groups strategy this topic should be a focus for the full Board.
Therefore instead of establishing a new committee the Board decided to add new meeting dates dedicated solely to the discussion of the Groups strategy.
Furthermore the Chairman defined several areas of focus to help maintain and improve its effectiveness in the following areas Continuing to focus the Boards attention on the Companys strategic planning by dedicating specific meeting days on this topic.
Further refining the quality of debate on strategic matters by increasing the length of meetings dedicated to this topic.
In addition as required by the Code the Company in 2018 and going forward once every three years will conduct an independent externally facilitated selfassessment of the effectiveness of the Board the Committees and individual Directors.
Directors commitments The Directors are required to disclose to the Board their external appointments or other significant commitments prior to their appointment.
Our nonexecutive Directors hold external directorships or other external positions but the Board believes they still have sufficient time to devote to their duties as a Director of the Company and believe that the other external directorshipspositions held provide the Directors with valuable expertise that enhances their ability to act as a nonexecutive Director of the Company.
No significant changes to the commitments of the Chairman or nonexecutive Directors were identified.
Reelection of Directors As mentioned above in accordance with the Code all Directors are subject to annual reelection by shareholders at our Annual General
Biographical details of the Directors are included on pages As already announced two nonexecutive Directors Stefano Marsaglia and Stephan Wilcke will be stepping down from the Board but remain in post pending the appointment of successors which may or may not have occurred by the time of the Annual General
Stefano and Stephan will therefore only be reelected if they remain Directors at the opening of the Annual General Meeting.
Remuneration Committee Information on the Remuneration Committee is included in the Directors Remuneration Report on pages 126 to 147.
Engagement with shareholders Effective communication with shareholders is one of the Boards highest priorities.
The Chief Executive Officer and the Chief Financial Officer together with the deputy Chairman andor the Chairman remain in regular contact with the Companys major shareholders.
They hold regular investor calls and also conduct facetoface meetings with investors visiting Georgia.
Moreover they participate in regular roadshows as well as various investor conferences across numerous geographic locations to promote awareness and understanding of the Groups business.
In addition they take an active part in government events abroad aimed at increasing investor confidence in the economic stability of the country and its 108 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 sustainable development.
The Banks senior executive team and Directors are also involved in hosting an annual Capital Markets Day in London.
Senior nonexecutive Director Nikoloz Enukidze together with the chairman of the Remuneration Committee met with large institutional shareholders to discuss remuneration matters in advance of the 2018 annual general meeting.
The Company has a dedicated investor relations website which contains information on all disclosures made to the market including results presentations and annual reports.
All announcements issued to the LSE are available on the Groups website at site The Group maintains a permanent representative in London who handles matters relating to investor relations and international media on behalf of the management team.
In addition the Chief Executive Officer Chief Financial Officer as well as Chairman deputy Chairman and senior independent Director are available to discuss the concerns of shareholders at any point during the year.
Annual General Meeting The last Annual General Meeting AGM of the Company was held on 5 June 2017 at the offices of Baker McKenzie 100 New Bridge Street London.
At the AGM 74.93% of total voting rights were exercised by shareholders.
All resolutions put to shareholders were passed with votes in favour ranging from 92% to 99% of the votes cast.
The 2018 AGM is scheduled for 21 May 2018 in London.
The Notice of AGM will be circulated to all the shareholders at least 21 working days before the AGM and it will also be made available on our IR website site The voting on the resolutions will be announced via the Regulatory News Service and made available on our website at site DIRECTORS GOVERNANCE STATEMENT CONTINUED 109 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Additional Information Financial Statements Governance DIRECTORS REPORT The Directors present their Annual Report together with the audited consolidated accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 which can be found on pages 157 to 254.
The Strategic Report on pages 2 to 103 was approved by the Board on 28 March 2018 and signed on its behalf by Vakhtang Butskhrikidze the Companys Chief Executive Officer.
The Management Report together with the Strategic Report on page 2 to 103 form the Management Report for the purposes of DTR 4.1.5.
R.
Other information that is relevant to the Directors Report and incorporated by reference into this report can be located as follows Contents Page Directors governance statement 104 Corporate Governance and Nomination Committee report 121 Risk Ethics and Compliance Committee report 123 Audit Committee report 148 Remuneration Committee report 126 Viability statement 111 Going concern statement 111 Greenhouse gas emissions 81 Risk management 60 Principal risks and uncertainties 56 Board of Directors 114 Employee matters 75 Environmental matters 80 Share capital 209 Disclosures required under Listing Rule 9.8.4 Details of longterm incentive schemes 140 Agreements with controlling shareholders 109 The remaining disclosures required by Listing Rule 9.8.4 are not applicable to the Group.
Information on the Groups financial risk management and its exposure to credit risk liquidity risk interest rate risk and foreign currency risk 223 Directors conflicts of interests The Company in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006 and the Companys articles of association the Articles of Association requires Directors to declare actual or potential conflicts of interest that could interfere with the interests of the Company.
The Directors are required prior to the Board meetings to declare any conflict of interest they may have in relation to the matters under consideration and if so abstain from voting and decisionmaking in relation to the matter in question.
Directors have a continuing duty to update any changes to these conflicts.
Directors indemnities and insurance The Group maintains directors and officers liability insurance which gives appropriate cover for legal action brought against its Directors and the company secretary.
The Company has also granted indemnities to each of its Directors to the extent permitted by law.
Neither the indemnity nor insurance cover provides cover in the event that a Director officer or company secretary is proved to have acted fraudulently or dishonestly.
The above referred liability insurance and indemnities were in force during the course of the financial year ended 31 December 2017 and remain in force as at the date of this report.
Political donations The Group did not make any political donations or incur any political expenditure during 2017.
Relationship agreement On 31 May 2016 the Company entered into a relationship agreement with Mamuka Khazaradze Badri Japaridze Vakhtang Butskhrikidze Temur Japaridze Bob Meijer and David Khazaradze together the Presumed Concerted Party Group the Relationship Agreement to regulate the degree of control that the members of the Presumed Concerted Party Group and their associates may exercise over the Groups management and business.
The principal purpose of the Relationship Agreement is to ensure that the Company and its subsidiaries are capable at all times of carrying on their business independently of members of the Presumed Concerted Party Group and their associates.
Under the Relationship Agreement for as long as it remains in force the members of the Presumed Concerted Party Group shall and have agreed that each of their associates shall when acting in a capacity which could include as a shareholder or director with any member of the Group amongst other things conduct all transactions and arrangements entered into between any member of the Group on the one hand and that member of the Presumed Concert Party Group andor his associates on the other on an arms length basis and on normal commercial terms and in accordance with the relatedparty transaction rules set out in the Listing Rules not take any action that would have the effect of preventing the Company from complying with its obligations under the Listing Rules andor not propose or procure the proposal of any resolution of the shareholders which is intended or appears to be intended to circumvent the proper application of the Listing Rules.
110 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Share capital As of 28 March 2018 the Companys issued ordinary share capital comprised 53550507 ordinary shares with a nominal amount of 0.01 each and carrying one vote per ordinary share at general meetings of the Company.
There were no shares held in treasury.
The Company has in issue one class of ordinary shares all of which are fully paid up and it does not have preference shares in issue.
The rights and obligations attaching to the Companys ordinary shares are set out in the Articles of Association.
There are no voting restrictions on the issued ordinary shares and each ordinary share carries one vote.
Details of the movements in share capital during the year are provided in Note 25 to the consolidated financial statements on page 209 of this Annual Report.
Profit and dividends The profit for the financial year ending 31 December 2017 attributable to the Companys shareholders after taxation amounts to GEL 354410352.
The Board intends to recommend GEL 1.64 per share which will represent about 25% of the net profit to be distributed to the Companys shareholders as dividend payable in British Pounds Sterling at an official exchange rate of the National Bank of Georgia for 24 May 2018 which is subject to shareholders approval at the 2018 AGM.
If approved the final dividend will be paid on 22 June 2018 to shareholders on the Register of Members at the close of business in the UK ie 6pm London time on 18 May 2018.
Shareholders may have their dividends reinvested in the Company by joining Companys scrip dividend programme approved at the 2017 Annual General Meeting.
The scrip dividend programme enables shareholders if they wish to receive new fullypaid ordinary shares in the Company instead of a cash dividend.
Powers of Directors The Directors may exercise all powers of the Company subject to applicable laws and regulations and the Articles of Association.
Special rights and transfer restrictions None of the ordinary shares in the capital of the Company carry special rights with regard to the control of the Company.
There are no specific restrictions on transfers of shares in the Company which is governed by its Articles of Association and prevailing legislation other than certain restrictions which may from time to time be imposed by laws or regulations such as those relating to insider dealing pursuant to the Groups Share Dealing Code whereby the Directors and designated employees require approval to deal in the Companys shares where a person with an interest in the Companys shares has been served with a disclosure notice and has failed to provide the Company with information concerning interests in those shares and pursuant to the Groups Senior Management Compensation System whereby Participants as defined therein may be granted restricted share awards which vest subject to continuous employment and malus and clawback provisions over three years from the award date.
All employees including Directors that are deemed by the Company to be insiders have complied with the Groups Share Dealing Code.
There are no restrictions on exercising voting rights save in situations where the Company is legally entitled to impose such a restriction for example under the Articles of Association where amounts remain unpaid in the shares after request or the holder is otherwise in default of an obligation to the Company.
The Company is not aware of any arrangements between shareholders that may result in restrictions on the transfer of securities or voting rights.
Major shareholders As at 31 December 2017 the Company had been notified under Rule 5 of the Disclosure Guidance and Transparency Rules of the Financial Conduct Authority the DTRs of the following interests in its total voting rights of 3% or more.
As of 31 December 2017
Mamuka Khazaradze 13.87% 7343936 Badri Japaridze 6.93% 3669878 Schroder Investment Management 9.53% 5045558 JPMorgan Asset Management 9.21% 4877138 European Bank for Reconstruction and Development 8.38% 4436406 Subsequent to year end Dunross and Co Holding Ltd notified the Company in accordance with DTR5 of an indirect holding of 2986157 ordinary shares representing 5.58% of the Companys issued share capital.
Any future regulatory filings by shareholders will be available on the Groups website at site and the LSE website at site Powers of Directors to issue andor buyback Company shares The Companies Act 2006 and the Articles of Association determine the powers of Directors in relation to share issues and buybacks of shares in the Company.
The Directors are authorised to issue and allot shares subject to approval at a general meeting of shareholders.
Such authorities were granted to the Directors by shareholders at the general meeting of the Company held on 5 June 2017 authorising the Directors to allot ordinary shares in the capital of the Company up to an aggregate nominal value of 163702.40.
The Company did not repurchase any of its ordinary shares during 2017.
This authority will apply until the conclusion of the 2018 AGM.
Shareholders will be requested to renew these authorities at the 2018 AGM.
DIRECTORS REPORT CONTINUED 111 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Additional Information Financial Statements Governance Appointmentreplacement of Directors and amendment of Articles of Association The appointment and retirement of Directors is governed by the Companys Articles of Association the UK Corporate Governance Code and the Companies Act 2016 and related legislation.
Shareholders are authorised to appointreplace the Directors and make amendments to the Articles of Association by resolution at a general meeting of the Company with the latter being required to be passed as a special resolution.
All of the Directors will stand for annual reelection at the Annual General Meeting.
As already mentioned two nonexecutive Directors Stefano Marsaglia and Stephan Wilcke will be stepping down from the Board but remain in post pending the appointment of successors which may or may not have occurred by the time of the Annual General Meeting.
Stefano and Stephan will therefore only be reelected if they remain Directors at the opening of the Annual General Meeting.
Vakhtang Butskhrikidze and Giorgi Shagidze have service contracts with the Company which came into effect on 10 August 2016 and will continue until terminated by either party to such contracts giving the other not less than seven months written notice.
They also have service contracts with the Bank which both came into effect on 1 July 2015 and will continue until 31 December 2018.
Further details on the Directors service contracts are available in the Remuneration Report on pages 146 to 147.
Biographical details and reasons for the reappointment for the Directors are given in the Notice of AGM.
Change of control There are no significant agreements to which the Company is a party of that take effect alter or terminate upon a change of control of the
In addition there are no agreements between the Company and its employees and the Directors that contain compensation clauses for loss of office or employment that occurs because of a takeover bid resulting in a case of change of control.
Employee disclosures The Companys disclosures relating to the employee engagement and policies as well as human rights are included in the Employee Matters section on pages 75 to 78 of this Annual Report.
Disclosure information to the auditor The Directors who held office at the date of approval of this Annual Report confirm that so far as they are aware there is no relevant audit information of which the Groups auditors are unaware and that each Director has taken all steps that heshe reasonably should have taken as a Director in order to make himherself aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that the Companys statutory auditors are aware of such information.
This confirmation is given and should be interpreted in accordance with the provisions of section 418 of the Companies Act 2006.
Going Concern statement The Board has fully reviewed the available information pertaining to the principal risks strategy financial health liquidity and solvency of the Group and determined that the Groups business remains a going concern.
The Directors have not identified any material uncertainties that could threaten the going concern assumption and have a reasonable expectation that the Company and the Group have adequate resources to remain operational and solvent for the foreseeable future which is for this purpose a period of 12 months from the date of approval of these financial statements.
Accordingly the Groups consolidated financial statements are prepared in line with the going concern basis of accounting.
Viability statement In compliance with the Code the Directors have assessed the viability of the Group over a threeyear period beginning on 1 January 2018.
The Directors have determined the threeyear period ending on 1 January 2021 to be appropriate as it is consistent with the Groups planning cycle covering financial forecasts and strategic considerations of the Group.
In considering the longer term viability of the Group and its operations the Directors have carried out a robust and thorough assessment of the Groups risk profile including all material existing and emerging risks that could cause the deviation of the groups financial condition operations and prospects from the expectations over the period of assessment.
In addition the Directors analysed the Groups ability to meet all regulatory requirements.
The Directors assessment considered All principal risks and uncertainties of the Group and effectiveness of current and proposed mitigating actions.
The key areas of focus were i foreign exchange rate risk which is significant due to the high dollarisation of the Groups portfolio ii the risk of economic and political instability and its impact on the Groups future performance iii the risk of economic and political instability and its impact on the Groups future performance iv the risk of not meeting minimum regulatory and liquidity requirements.
This particular topic was extensively analysed during the year due the recent regulatory changes introduced by the National Bank of Georgia.
Please refer to more details on page 125 and v interest rate risk in order to ensure that the Group will meet its profitability expectations.
A summary of all material risks the Group is exposed to and the mitigating actions taken by the Group are set out on pages 56 to 59.
112 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 DIRECTORS REPORT CONTINUED The Groups strategic plans While reviewing and analysing the Groups strategic plans the Directors assessed all potential risks related to the strategic plans the achievement of the Groups strategic objective and ensured that those risks were properly managed.
The key focus areas were i the current business position and future prospects of the Group ii capital funding and liquidity profile of the Group iii the use of stress tests to ensure that the Bank holds adequate economic capital to withstand the predefined stress scenarios.
The stress scenarios incorporate external and internal macroeconomic shocks specific idiosyncratic risks such as increased competition in the market and regulatory changes. technical resources.
Effectiveness of the Groups risk management framework practice and internal control mechanisms.
The Directors ensure that the Groups governance structure enables adequate oversight and accountability as well as a clear segregation of duties.
The involvement of all governance levels in risk management clear segregation of authorities and effective communications between different entities facilitates clarity regarding the Groups strategic and risk objectives adherence to the established risk appetite risk budget and sound risk management.
The centralised ERM function ensures effective development communication and implementation of risk strategy and risk appetite across the Group.
The Directors have determined that the Groups risk management framework is adequate for managing the principal risks and uncertainties set out in the Annual Report and reducing their likelihood and impact wherever possible.
The review and analysis of the information presented in this Annual Report has enabled the Directors to confirm that they have a reasonable expectation of the Groups viability over the next three years up to 1 January 2021 and that the Group will be able to continue its operations and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the threeyear period from 1 January 2018 to 1 January 2021.
Directors responsibilities The following statement which should be read together with the Auditors report set out on pages 157 to 254 is required by the Companies Act 2006 the Act.
The Directors are required to prepare the Companys and the Groups financial statements for each financial year.
Under the Act the Groups financial statements shall be prepared in accordance with the International Financial Reporting Standards the IFRS as adopted by the European Union and the Directors have elected to prepare the Companys financial statements on the same basis.
The group has in place an effective internal control system in order to ensure accurate and reliable financial reporting.
The group has a welldefined framework of accountability and delegation of authority as well as policies and procedures that include financial planning and reporting preparation of monthly management accounts project governance information security and review of the disclosures within the annual report and accounts from the respective leads to appropriately disclose all relevant developments within the group in the year and to meet the requirements of a true and fair presentation.
The financial statements are required by the Act and the IFRS to present fairly the financial position and performance of the Company and the Group for that period.
The Directors must not approve the financial statements unless they are satisfied that they give a true and fair view of the state of affairs and the profit or loss of the Company and the Group for that period.
The Directors consider that in preparing the financial statements they have used appropriate accounting policies supported by reasonable judgements and estimates and that all accounting standards which they consider to be applicable have been followed.
The Directors also believe that the financial statements have been prepared on the going concern basis.
Please see further the Going concern statement on page 111 of this Annual Report.
The Directors have a responsibility that the Company and the Group keep accounting records which disclose with reasonable accuracy the financial position of the Company and the Group and enable the Directors to ensure that the accounts comply with the Act.
The
Directors are also responsible for safeguarding the assets of the Company and the Group and for taking reasonable steps for the prevention and detection of fraud and other irregularities.
In addition the Directors are responsible for the maintenance and integrity of the Companys website.
Legislation in the UK governing the preparation and dissemination of financial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
113 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Additional Information Financial Statements Governance Directors responsibility statement Each of the Directors whose names and functions are listed on pages 114 to 117 of this Annual Report confirms that to the best of their knowledge the Groups financial statements which have been prepared in accordance with the IFRS standards give a true and fair view of the assets liabilities financial position and profit or loss of the Company and the undertakings included in the consolidation taken as a whole the Strategic Report and Directors Report contained in this Annual Report include a fair review of the development and performance of the business and the position of the Company and the Group together with a description of the principal risks and uncertainties that they face and the Annual Report and financial statements taken as a whole are fair balanced and understandable and provide the information necessary for the shareholders to assess the Companys performance business and strategy.
This responsibility statement was approved by the Board and is signed on its behalf by Mamuka Khazaradze
28 March 2018 114 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 BOARD BIOGRAPHIES Mamuka Khazaradze
Mamuka Khazaradze graduated from the Technical University of Georgia in 1988 and holds a diploma from Harvard Business School 19982000.
Between 1988 and 1989 he worked as an engineer at the ProjectingTechnological Scientific Research Institute in
In 1991 and 1992 respectively he founded and became the president of TBC Bank.
In 1995 he founded IDS Borjomi Georgia Borjomi Beverages Co.
N. where he held the position of president until 2004 and between 1999 and 2002 he acted as vice chairman of the supervisory board of Microfinance Bank of Georgia.
In 2004 Mr Khazaradze also founded the Georgian Reconstruction and Development Company of which he is still the president.
Between 1997 and 2007 he was also vice president of the Olympic Committee of Georgia.
Since 2010 he has served as the chairman of the Board of the American Academy in Tbilisi and the chairman of the supervisory board of Lisi Lake Development.
In 2014 Mr Khazaradze was recognised as Entrepreneur of the Year in Georgia by Ernst and Young the year this prestigious awards programme was launched in the country.
Mr Khazaradze has been the Chairman of TBC Banks Supervisory Board since its incorporation in 1992 and was appointed as a Chairman of the Board in May 2016.
Badri Japaridze Deputy Chairman Badri Japaridze graduated from the Faculty of Psychology at Tbilisi State University in 1982 and holds a postgraduate qualification from the Faculty of Psychology at Moscow State University.
In addition in 2001 he completed an executive course at the London School of Economics and Political Science.
Between 1990 and 1992 Mr Japaridze was a member of parliament in Georgia.
In 1992 he was appointed as head of the Foreign Relations department at TBC Bank and became the Banks vice president in 1993.
In 19962014 he was chairman of the Board at TBC TV.
Between 1995 and 2003 he served as a vice president at Georgian Glass and Mineral Water of which he was a cofounder.
The company was later renamed IDS Borjomi and he was a member of the Board between 2004 and 2010.
In 1995 Mr Japaridze was elected to TBC Banks Supervisory Board and has been deputy chairman of it since 1996.
In 2004 he was also elected as a member of the Board of Directors of the American Chamber of Commerce in Georgia and the Georgian Reconstruction and Development Company of which he is a cofounder.
In 2006 Mr Japaridze was elected to the supervisory board of the EU Georgian Business Council and simultaneously became the councils deputy chairman.
In 2008 he became a member of the Supervisory Board at Geoplant a position that he retains today.
Mr Japaridze is also chairman of the supervisory board at TBC Kredit and deputy chairman of the supervisory board at TBC Leasing.
Mr Japaridze was appointed as a deputy chairman of the Board at TBC Bank in May 2016.
Nikoloz Enukidze Senior independent nonexecutive Director Nikoloz Enukidze graduated from Tbilisi State University with a degree in physics in 1993 and obtained an MBA from the University of Maryland in 1996.
Mr Enukidze has served as managing director of corporate finance for Concorde Capital a leading Ukrainian investment banking firm assistant director at ABN AMRO Corporate Finance in London for four years senior manager of business development of Global One Communications LLC based in Reston Virginia and three years at ABN AMRO Corporate Finance in Moscow.
After years of experience in the financial services industry Mr Enukidze served as vice chairman of the supervisory board of Bank of Georgia and was one of the key people leading the bank to a successful IPO on the LSE the first ever IPO in London for a company from the Caucasus region.
In 2008 Mr Enukidze was appointed as chairman of the Bank of Georgia Board and he led the bank through the international and local financial crisis.
At present Mr Enukidze serves as executive chairman of JSC Caucasus Minerals a Georgian mineral resources exploration company.
He is also member of the board of Nikoil Bank in Azerbaijan.
Mr Enukidze was born and raised in Tbilisi and is a Georgian and British national.
Mr Enukidze was appointed to the Banks Supervisory Board as an independent member in 2013 and to the Board as a senior independent nonexecutive Director in May 2016.
115 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Additional Information Financial Statements Governance Stefano Marsaglia Nonexecutive Director As previously announced Stefano will be leaving TBC Bank and stepping down from the Board as and when suitable replacement is found during 2018.
Stefano will remain in post until his successor is appointed.
Stefano Marsaglia graduated from Turin University with a degree in economics and commerce in 1978.
Mr Marsaglia has 35 years of experience in the financial services industry with particular expertise in corporate and investment banking in Europe and Latin America.
In 1987 he was appointed deputy managing director and head of investment banking for Southern Europe at UBS and served as assistant director at Morgan Grenfell from 1983 to 1987.
Mr Marsaglia acted as managing director global head of financial institutions and cohead of investment banking for Europe at Rothschild between 1992 and 2010 and as the chairman of global financial institutions of the investment banking division at Barclays Bank London between 2010 and 2014.
Mr Marsaglia currently serves as executive chairman of corporate and investment banking at Mediobanca London.
In 2015 Mr Marsaglia was named Cavaliere del Lavoro by the President of the Italian Republic for his longstanding contribution to the financial services industry.
Mr Marsaglia was appointed to the Banks Supervisory Board in 2014 and to the Board as an independent nonexecutive Director in May 2016.
Nicholas Haag Nonexecutive Director Nicholas Haag earned an M. studies in geography in 1980.
Mr Haag has 32 years of experience working in the financial services industry with a significant emphasis on equity capital markets and technology.
His experience includes seven years at Barclays Bank between 1980 and 1987 in various capital markets and project finance roles including as the head of equity syndicate Barclays de Zoete Wedd BZW ten years at Banque Paribas Paribas Capital Markets between 1989 and 1999 initially as deputy head of global equity capital markets and later senior banker and head of European client coverage exFrance two years at ING Barings between 1999 and 2001 as managing director and global head of technology banking group six years at ABN AMRO between 2001 and 2007 based in London as the global head of technology banking member of Global TMT Management Committee senior managing director and member of the Senior Credit Committee four years with the Royal Bank of Scotland between 2008 and 2012 and RBS Hoare Govett as managing director head of London equity capital markets and member of the Global Equities Origination Management Committee.
Since 2012 he has served as a senior independent adviser to the chairman of the Management Board and from 2013 until November 2016 as a member of the supervisory board of Credit Bank of Moscow and a financial consultant specialising in capital raisings and stock exchange flotations.
He also serves as an independent nonexecutive director of Bayport Management Limited panAfrican and Latin American retail lender and since 2016 as a director of AS Citadele Banka in Riga.
Since 2012 he has acted as sole director of his own consulting company Nicdom Limited.
Mr Haag was appointed to the Banks Supervisory Board in 2013 and to the Board as an independent nonexecutive Director in May 2016.
Nicholas Haag has the recent and relevant financial experience required by the UK Corporate Governance Code to fulfil his responsibilities as a designated financial expert on the Audit Committee of TBC Bank Group PLC.
116 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Eric Rajendra Nonexecutive Director Eric Rajendra graduated from Brandeis University earned his M.
School in 1982 Tufts University in cooperation with Harvard University and conducted postgraduate research at INSEAD Business School in the areas of financial markets and institutions.
Mr Rajendra is also a graduate of the Australian Institute of Company Directors and was formerly an adjunct professor of strategy at INSEAD.
During
20052014 he held the position of senior adviser to the IFC and has served as a board director or consulting adviser on selected emerging markets financial institutions where the World Bank Group has an equity interest as well as leading strategic initiatives for the firm.
Prior to joining the IFC he was a vice president at Capgemini and a vice president at Electronic Data Systems in both institutions he was a key leader of the financial services practice.
From 2010 to 2012 he was a member of the Board of Directors at Orient Express Bank.
During 20062014 he was a member of the Board of Directors of LOCKOBank where he was also the chairman of the Audit and Risk Committee.
He started his career as a banker at JP Morgan Chase Bank in 1982 and later became a partner at McKinsey and Company.
Mr Rajendra was appointed to the Banks Supervisory Board in 2010 and to the Board as an independent nonexecutive Director in May 2016.
BOARD BIOGRAPHIES CONTINUED Stephan Wilcke Nonexecutive Director As previously announced Stephan will be leaving TBC Bank and stepping down from the Board as and when suitable replacement is found during 2018.
Stephan will remain in post until his successor is appointed.
Stephan Wilcke graduated from UWC Atlantic in 1990 and holds a Masters degree from Oxford University.
From 1993 to 2000 he worked at Oliver Wyman and Co. consultant becoming a partner in 1998.
From 2000 to 2007 he worked at Apax Partners as an investment professional becoming a partner in 2005.
From 2008 to 2009 he acted as adviser to the European Central Bank the Bundesbank and the Luxembourg Central Bank in connection with the collapse of Lehman Brothers and the subsequent failures of Landsbanki and Glitnir.
Thereafter he served as CEO of the UK Government Asset Protection Agency from 2009 to 2011.
In 2011 Mr Wilcke joined the board of OneSavings Bank as a nonexecutive director stepping up to become executive chairman in early 2012 and stepping back into a nonexecutive director role after taking the bank through its initial public offering in 2014.
He has been a commissioner of the Jersey Financial Services Commission since 2012 served as supervisory board vice chairman of the Nova Ljubljanska Banka from 2012 to 2013 and was a council member of the Hellenic Financial Stability Fund from 2013 to 2015.
Mr
Wilcke became chairman of the Audit and Risk Committee of BIMAMilvik S. nonexecutive chairman of Amigo Loans in 2015.
He has served as nonexecutive director and Investment Committee member of the investment firm EMF Capital Partners Ltd.
Rozes Invest Ltd.
Mr Wilcke was appointed to the Board as an independent non executive Director in May 2016 and as a member of the Supervisory Board in September 2016.
117 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Additional Information Financial Statements Governance Vakhtang Butskhrikidze
Chief Executive Officer
Vakhtang Butskhrikidze joined TBC Bank as a Senior Manager of the Credit Department in 1993 and was elected as Deputy Chairman of the Management Board in 1994.
He became Chairman of the Management Board in 1996.
Since 1998 he has held the position of CEO of TBC Bank and has headed a number of TBCs committees.
Mr
Butskhrikidze was appointed as Chief Executive Officer of the Company in May 2016 and as a member of the Supervisory Board in September 2016.
Mr Butskhrikidze is also a member of the supervisory boards of the Association of Banks of Georgia and is chairman of the financial committee of the Business Association of Georgia.
Since 2011 he has also held the position of member of the supervisory board of the Partnership Fund Georgia.
In 2016 Mr Butskhrikidze joined the Visa Central and Eastern Europe Middle East and Africa CEMEA Business Council.
In his earlier career Mr Butskhrikidze acted as junior specialist at the Institute of Economics Academy of Sciences of Georgia as well as an assistant to the Minister of Finance of Georgia between 1992 and 1993.
In 2001 Mr Butskhrikidze was honoured with the Best Businessman of the Year award by Georgian Times Magazine and in 2011 he was recognised as the Best Banker 2011 by GUAM  Organization for Democracy and Economic Development award.
Mr Butskhrikidze was also named as the CEO of the Year 2014 in Central and Eastern Europe and the CIS by EMEA Finance magazine.
Mr
Butskhrikidze obtained an MBA from the European School of Management in Tbilisi in 2001.
He graduated from Tbilisi State University in 1992 with a degree in Economics and holds postgraduate qualifications from the Institute of Economics Academy of Sciences of Georgia.
Giorgi Shagidze
Deputy CEO Chief Financial Officer
Giorgi Shagidze became deputy CEO and Chief Financial Officer of TBC Bank and was appointed to the Banks Management Board in 2010.
Mr Shagidze was appointed as a Chief Financial Officer of the Company in May 2016 and as a member of the Supervisory Board in September 2016.
He is a board member of Georgian Stock Exchange and also served as member of the supervisory board of Bank Constanta until its merger with TBC Bank in 2015.
Prior to joining TBC Bank Mr Shagidze acted as a global operations executive for Barclays Bank Plc between 2008 and 2010.
In his earlier career Mr Shagidze worked as director of the Distribution Channels Division at Bank of Georgia and deputy CEO of Peoples Bank of Georgia as well as occupied various senior positions at Tbiluniversalbank and Agro Industrial Bank of Georgia.
Mr Shagidze obtained an MBA from the University of Cambridge Judge Business School in 2008 and he graduated from Tbilisi State University in 1997 with a degree in economics.
He is also a CFA Charterholder and the member of the CFA Society in the UK.
118 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 George Tkhelidze Deputy CEO Corporate and Investment Banking George joined TBC Bank in 2014 as deputy CEO in charge of risk management.
After the creation of a corporate and investment banking CIB unit at the Bank in November 2016 George overtook the responsibility for the CIB.
George has more than 15 years of experience in financial services.
Prior to joining TBC George worked for Barclays Investment Bank where he held the position of vice president in the Financial Institutions Group FIG EMEA since June 2011.
From September 2009 he was an associate director in Barclays debt finance and restructuring teams.
During his career with Barclays in London George worked on and executed multiple MandA debt and capital markets transactions with European financial institutions.
In his earlier career in Georgia George held various managerial positions at ALDAGI insurance company during 20002007 where he also served as chief executive officer.
George graduated from the London Business School with an MBA degree .
He also holds Master of Laws degree LL.
Nottingham  and graduate diploma in Law from Tbilisi State University .
THE BANKS MANAGEMENT BOARD BIOGRAPHIES EXCEPT FOR CEOS AND CFOS BIOGRAPHIES WHICH ARE PRESENTED ON PAGE 117 Paata Gadzadze First Deputy CEO Paata joined TBC Bank in 1994 as deputy general director of TBC Bank and was appointed to the Management Board in 1996.
In 2005 he was appointed head of the credit department.
Paata has held the position of first deputy CEO since 1998.
Since
2014 he has held the position of the member of the supervisory board of TBC Leasing.
Since 2016 Paata has served as a lecturer at the Free University Georgia.
In 2017 he was appointed as CEO of TBC Insurance and continues to hold the position of First Deputy CEO at TBC Bank.
Between 2000 and 2004 he also served as CEO of Georgian Pension and Insurance Holding.
In his earlier career Paata was an assistant to the Minister of State Property Management between 1992 and 1994.
Paata also held the position of lecturer at the European School of Management in Tbilisi between 1994 and 2004.
Paata graduated from Tbilisi State University in 1992 with a degree in Economics and holds a postgraduate qualification from the Institute of Economics Academy of Sciences of Georgia.
119 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Additional Information Financial Statements Governance Vano Baliashvili
Deputy CEO Chief Operating Officer
Vano joined TBC Bank in 1999 as head of service internal audit and control.
He became finance division chief in 2000 and in 2002 he was appointed to the position of deputy CEO supervising finance and operations departments.
In 2010 he became chief operating officer.
Since 2008 Vano has held the position of chairman of the supervisory board of UFC and since 2016 he has been a member of the supervisory board of TBC
Vano also supervises activities of TBC Banks subsidiaries Banking System Service Company and Mali since 2009 and 2015 respectively.
Between 1993 and 1995 he held the positions of intern accountant and accountant at Commercial Bank Sandro and chief accountant at Commercial Bank Shalen.
Between 1995 and 1999 he held the positions of economist of foreign exchange division head of the foreign exchange department and head of the internal audit department at JSC TbilCredit Bank.
Vano graduated from Tbilisi State University in 1992 with a degree in Economics and obtained an MBA from the European School of Management in Tbilisi.
In 2011 he obtained a Masters Certificate in Project Management from George Washington University School of Business.
David Chkonia
Deputy CEO Chief Risk Officer
David joined TBC Bank in 2017 as Chief Risk Officer and deputy CEO following 15 years of international banking and risk management experience.
Prior to joining TBC David was a director at BlackRock in the BlackRock Solutions group advising financial institutions and regulators on topics related to risk management balance sheet strategy and regulation.
Prior to that he served as senior vice president at PIMCO responsible for the risk advisory practice.
In 20092011 David worked at European Resolution Capital helping Western European banks with NPL management and recovery strategies in CEE subsidiaries.
In 2006 David joined Goldman Sachs in the EMEA Structured and Principal Finance team where he completed a number of innovative financing transactions in the infrastructure and real estate sectors as well as focusing on restructuring assignments.
David started his career at the EBRD executing debt and equity investment transactions in CEE as well as has worked in the banks credit department.
David holds a BSc from San Jose State University and an MBA from the Wharton School at the University of Pennsylvania.
120 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Nino Masurashvili Deputy CEO Retail Banking Nino joined TBC Bank in 2000 as a manager in the planning and control department and became head of that department in 2002.
Between 2004 and 2005 she acted as head of the sales department and retail bank coordinator.
Nino was appointed as deputy CEO retail and SME banking in 2006.
Between 2006 and 2008 Nino was the chairman of the supervisory board of UFC.
During 20112015 she also held a position of a member of the supervisory board of Bank Constanta until its full merger with TBC Bank.
During
20112016 Nino has been a member of the supervisory board of TBC Kredit.
In her earlier career she held the positions of credit account manager credit officer financial analyst financial department and head of the financial analysis and forecasting department at JSC TbilCom Bank between 1995 and 2000.
Between 1998 and 2000 she also held the position of accountant at the Barents Group.
Nino graduated from Tbilisi State University in 1996 with a degree in Economics and obtained an MBA degree from the European School of Management in Tbilisi.
Nikoloz Kurdiani Deputy CEO SME and Micro Banking Nika has more than fifteen years of experience in the banking industry which includes five years at UniCredit Group in Austria Turkey and Kazakhstan.
Immediately before joining TBC Bank in 2014 Nika was managing director at Kaspi Bank a leading retail bank in Kazakhstan.
Prior to obtaining his MBA degree in 2007 he served as head of the retail banking division of Bank Republic Georgia Socit Gnrale Group and also held several positions at Bank of Georgia between 2003 and 2006.
He has expertise in postacquisition integration and restructuring as well as retail and SME banking.
Between 2008 and 2010 Nika held the position of senior sales support expert at the CEE retail division of Bank Austria UniCredit Group responsible for Turkey Kazakhstan Ukraine and Serbia.
Between 2010 and 2013 he was head of the retail division of ATF Bank UniCredit Group in Kazakhstan.
Nika obtained his MBA degree from IE Business School in 2007.
He also holds an MSc degree in International Economics from the Georgian Technical University and completed BBA studies at Ruhr University Bochum in Germany and the Caucasus School of Business.
THE BANKS MANAGEMENT BOARD BIOGRAPHIES CONTINUED EXCEPT FOR CEOS AND CFOS BIOGRAPHIES WHICH ARE PRESENTED ON PAGE 117 121 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Additional Information Financial Statements Governance CORPORATE GOVERNANCE AND NOMINATION COMMITTEE REPORT Chairmans Letter Dear shareholders The Corporate Governance and Nomination Committee the Committee is responsible for developing corporate governance principles and guidelines applicable to the Group and assessing the Groups governance practice in light of international standards of best practice.
The Committee continually seeks to ensure that the Boards composition is aligned to the Groups strategic objectives and recognises the importance of building upon Board diversity whilst maintaining the meritocratic approach to Board appointments that has served the Group well during recent years.
In addition the Committees role extends to recommendations of appointments to the Management Board of its main subsidiary JSC TBC Bank the
During 2017 succession planning and the composition of the Board and its Committees remained the key focuses of the Committee.
The
Committee regularly considered the balance of skills experience and diversity needed on the Board to ensure that the Group has the best calibre of individuals and a clear plan for both executive and nonexecutive succession.
As at the date of this Report the Committee is engaged in selecting an external search firm to identify suitable candidates to join the Board as additional Independent nonexecutive Directors.
Eric J.
Rajendra
Chairman of the Corporate Governance and Nomination Committee 28 March 2018 Members of the Committee There have been no changes in the composition of the Committee and as at 28 March 2018 the Committee is composed of three independent nonexecutive Directors namely Eric Rajendra Chairman Nikoloz Enukidze and Stephan Wilcke and Badri Japaridze who is not considered to be independent for the purposes of the UK Corporate Governance Code.
As such the Board believes that the composition of the Committee complies with the UK Corporate Governance Code and that the majority of the Committee members are free from any relationship or circumstances which may could would be likely to or appear to affect their judgement.
Attendance at Committee Meetings Only members of the Committee have the right to attend its meetings but the Committee may invite others including the Chief Executive Officer the head of human resources and external advisors to attend all or part of any meeting if it thinks it is appropriate or necessary.
The Committee members meet on a quarterly basis and schedule additional meetings when appropriate.
The attendance of members at the Committee meetings during the year is set out on page 106.
Committee role and responsibilities The Committees role and responsibilities are set out in its terms of reference available on the Groups website site The Committee is responsible for the establishment and oversight of the Groups compliance with the corporate governance guidelines and for making recommendations to the Board in respect of changes or additional actions as the Committee deems necessary.
The
Committee is responsible for leading the process for appointments to the Board and the Banks Management Board.
The Committee is also responsible for identifying and nominating candidates with the appropriate skills and experience for approval by the Board.
The main responsibilities of the Committee in relation to the development and functioning of corporate governance within the Group are advising the Board periodically with respect to significant developments in the law and practice of corporate governance reviewing the independence standards for Board members monitoring and evaluating the process for assessing the performance and effectiveness of the Board and its committees including a selfassessment of this Committee and reviewing the structures and procedures of the Board and its relationship with management to ensure that it can function independently.
The main responsibilities of the Committee in relation to nomination are evaluating the current balance of skills experience independence and knowledge of the Board and within the senior management team and in light of this evaluation preparing a description of the role and capabilities required for particular appointments ensuring that nonexecutive Directors are appointed for specified terms subject to reelection and to statutory provisions relating to the removal of a Director considering and making recommendations to the Board on the composition of the senior management team 122 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 overseeing the orientation programme for new members of the Board with respect to their Board responsibilities and roles as well as the contribution that individual members are expected to make and making recommendations to the Board on succession planning for the Board and the senior management team over the longer term in order to maintain an appropriate and diverse balance of skills and experience and to ensure progressive refreshing.
Appointment and reelection of Directors The Committee considers a skills matrix for the Board and the Boards committees and identifies the skills core competencies diversity and experience that the Group needs in order to be able to deliver its strategic aims to govern the Group appropriately and align with the Groups corporate culture and values.
In order to assess the overall effectiveness of the Committee in accordance with the requirements of the UK Corporate Governance Code the Chairman of the Committee carried out an internal evaluation and Committee is of the view that each Director demonstrated the level of commitment required in connection with their role on the Committee.
In accordance with the UK Corporate Governance Code all the Directors will stand for reelection at the Companys Annual General
As already announced two nonexecutive Directors Stefano Marsaglia and Stephan Wilcke will be stepping down from the Board but remain in post pending the appointment of successors which may or may not have occurred by the time of the Annual General Meeting.
Stefano and Stephan will therefore only be reelected if they remain Directors at the opening of the Annual General Meeting.
In addition as required by the UK Corporate Governance Code in 2018 and going forward once every three years the Board and its Committees will conduct an independent externally facilitated self assessment.
Diversity
The Committee recognises the importance of ensuring that there is diversity on the Board while continuing to recommend all appointments based on merit in the context of the skills and experience required.
The
Committee is very mindful that the Board does not currently include any female members and has resolved to ensure that the next appointments to the Board address this concern and complement the Boards diversity in terms of ethnicity  cultures gender  age levels relevant skills and work experience.
The Committee notes the number of talented women in key positions reporting to the CEO and other Management Board members and going forward the Committee intends to increase diversity by identifying qualified female candidates for appointment to the Board and senior management teams.
Board Recruitment and Appointment Process The Board has formal thorough and transparent procedures in place for Board recruitment and appointment.
In identifying suitable candidates the Committee typically seeks recommendations from trusted advisers but may also use external search consultancies to facilitate the recruitment.
As at the date of this Report the Committee is engaged in the selection of an external search firm to assist in the requirement of additional nonexecutive Directors to the Board.
The Committee carefully assesses each candidate for membership of the Board against our criteria for Board appointments and ensures that appointees have enough time available to devote to the position.
The Committee then decides whether to recommend an appointment to the Board and the Board decides whether to make the appointment.
The Committees work In 2017 the Committee remained focused on succession planning diversity matters assessment of effectiveness of the Board and its committees.
Succession
The Committee recognises that good succession planning contributes to the delivery of the Groups strategy by ensuring there is the desired mix of skills and experience in current and future Board members.
During the course of 2017 the Committee chairman personally met with key members of the Management Board and middle management to ensure that the Group creates opportunities for current and future leaders.
The Committee has identified strong and weak areas for each candidate and developed a plan for further professional development.
The recommended succession planning framework ensures that the Company builds an appropriate internal leadership pipeline and includes initiatives that cover additional qualification courses training opportunities and recommendations on developing relevant skills as needed.
Corporate governance independence and diversity The Committee oversaw the continued developments of the Groups corporate governance framework and reviews of its compliance with the Code requirements the independence of nonexecutive Directors together with nonexecutive Directors reelection and suitability to continue in office.
The review of Directors independence was also satisfactory as throughout 2017 all independent nonexecutive Directors remained independent as to both character and judgement.
Although Board appointment recommendations are always based on merit the Committee and the Board recognise the importance of diversity and are committed to increasing the diversity of the Board including by adding one or more female members to the Board.
Assessment of effectiveness The Committee effectiveness review is conducted every year in order to assess the Committees performance.
This assessment is carried out by the Committee as part of the annual evaluation process.
The
2017 Corporate Governance and Nomination Committee evaluation has found that the Committee effectively fulfilled all of its responsibilities and obligations.
Looking forward to 2018 In the coming year the Committee will continue its focus on increasing gender diversity by seeking to identify talented female candidates for appointment to the Board and to the Groups senior management team.
In addition the Committee will further elevate the performance standards expected of each member of the Board and oversee an external evaluation of the Boards performance.
Lastly the Committee will continue its effort to strengthen the development of the skillset of the Groups senior management team via specialised local and international training programmes.
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE AND NOMINATION COMMITTEE REPORT CONTINUED 123 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Additional Information Financial Statements Governance Chairmans Letter Dear shareholders I am pleased to present Risks Ethics and Compliance Committee the RECC report for the Group.
Throughout 2017 the RECC continued to take a proactive approach to risk management by closely monitoring and discussing the internal and external challenges facing the Group.
Along with regular updates regarding the macroeconomic environment the Groups risk profile risk management practices and results the committee focused on several other issues namely the recent regulatory changes concerning the new liquidity coverage ratio risk weighting rules and capital management framework the details of which are given below under Regulatory updates the successful project to implement IFRS 9 including updating the Groups provisioning methodology and the postmerger integration of Bank Republic into the Group which was successfully finalised in May 2017.
In January 2017 TBC Bank appointed a new CRO David Chkonia to further strengthen the risk function.
He has 15 years of experience in risk management.
In previous positions held before joining the Group Mr Chkonia consulted companies regarding risks especially those associated with credit and capital market transactions.
The
RECC worked closely with the new CRO and oversaw the transition process to ensure that he was equipped with all the necessary information to perform his duties effectively.
The report below summarises the RECCs activities for the year.
Nikoloz Enukidze Chairman of the Risk Ethics and Compliance Committee 28 March 2018 RISK ETHICS AND COMPLIANCE COMMITTEE REPORT Committee responsibilities The RECCs primary function is to assist the Board in its oversight of all matters related to the risk management and compliance of the Company and the Group as a whole.
The RECC is responsible for recommending the Groups risk appetite limits to the Board and monitoring the risk profile to make sure that it complies with the established limits.
It is also responsible for reviewing assessing and recommending any actions for the Board to take regarding the Groups overall risk management strategy as well as the risk management system and associated policies.
In addition the committee reviews and approves credit facilities to large borrowers if the borrower represents one of the top 20 groups of borrowers of the Bank or exceeds 5% of the Banks supervisory capital.
The RECC is also responsible for overseeing the Groups compliance activities to ensure that it complies with all applicable laws and regulations and maintains the highest standards of ethical behaviour.
The committee supports fostering an ethical culture within the Group based on the principles of honesty integrity fairness and transparency.
The RECCs terms of reference are available on the Groups website site Committee members and meetings The RECC consists of five independent nonexecutive Directors Nikoloz Enukidze Chairman Stefano Marsaglia Nicholas Haag Eric Rajendra and Stephan Wilcke.
Their biographies can be found on pages 114 to 117.
The committee meets in person on a quarterly basis.
At each meeting its members review a thorough report on risk management results for the quarter as well as updates on compliance and other areas within its remit.
The Chief Executive Officer CRO head of compliance and key members of the Groups risk and compliance teams normally attend the meetings.
Additional meetings as needed are held electronically.
The attendance of members at the RECCs meetings during the year at the Company and the Bank levels are set out in the Directors Governance statement on page 106.
RECC activities during 2017 In 2017 one of the Groups primary focus areas was to ensure a smooth postmerger integration with Bank Republic.
The RECC played an important role in monitoring the project of aligning all processes which was successfully completed in the first half of the year.
Additionally the NBG introduced various regulatory changes during the reporting period.
The committee closely monitored these changes including through reviews of periodical regulatory updates and frequent discussions regarding these changes assessing potential implications for the Groups capital and liquidity management processes and outlining ways to manage these processes more effectively.
124 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 The RECC was actively involved in the IFRS 9 implementation project by amongst other things systematically reviewing its progress and the key changes in the provisioning methodology as well as analysing the expected impact on the Groups level of allowances.
Apart from the above activities the committee maintained its focus on its key responsibilities of monitoring the Groups risk management processes promoting progress in risk management tools and techniques and implementing mitigation actions against prevailing risks.
Risk appetite The RECC received and reviewed the risk appetite compliance reports at each of its quarterly meetings during which the committee members discussed the Groups risk profile and respective outlook with the management.
In the beginning of 2017 the RECC discussed updates in risk appetite limits that the CRO proposed as well as assumptions and drivers for change.
The committee suggested certain revisions to the currently proposed limits which they subsequently considered and approved.
Macroeconomic environment in Georgia The RECC received a comprehensive report on Georgias macroeconomic environment and discussed the mediumterm economic outlook.
Considering that a significant part of the Groups loan book is denominated in foreign currency the GEL s volatility remained a key focus for discussions throughout the year.
The committee discussed potential implications of GEL depreciation on the Groups performance and respective actions that it undertakes to mitigate these risks.
The RECC continued to closely monitor how government initiatives launched in the beginning of 2017 which are aimed at reducing the economys dependence on currencies other than GEL affected the Groups portfolio composition and discussed expectations going forward.
Credit risk The RECC reviewed the performance of the Groups loan book at each meeting during 2017.
The reports covered the structure of the Groups portfolio including segmentation by currency business segments and economic sectors.
The committee received a detailed update regarding the Groups largest exposures during the meetings from the CRO and corporate business director.
They presented the strategy for growing the corporate loan book to ensure that it is balanced with proper risk assessment processes.
The RECC encouraged the CRO to maintain a balanced growth approach.
Operational risk Throughout the year the RECC focused on reviewing the results of internal loss data collection and fraud risk management.
The committee discussed establishing and segregating duties among the lines of defence of the Groups internal control system with the aim of further finetuning the operational risk management framework.
Following a recent incident of identity fraud a summary of which is set out on page 68 the RECC conducted a further review of TBC Banks internal control system and recommended the following actions to the Board the enhancement of authorisation processes related to execution of large cash transactions including those authorised under powers of attorney and the assessment of risks and controls involved with the Banks operating procedures with a focus on branch operations.
Financial risks The RECC closely reviewed the Groups financial risk positions and produced a report that included an assessment of TBC Banks risks associated with liquidity foreign exchange banking book interest rates and counterparties.
As part of assessing compliance with the approved risk appetite limits the committee monitored TBC Banks readiness to meet the NBGs new regulatory ratio the liquidity coverage ratio which came into force in September 2017.
In addition the RECC received comprehensive updates on optimising the liquidity coverage ratio and reviewed a thorough report on the interbank portfolios performance within the counterparty risk management framework.
The committee focused on developing a deep understanding of the interbank limits approval process.
At the yearend the Supervisory Board approved the Banks counterparty risk management policy in light of the RECCs positive recommendation.
The RECC paid special attention to the reduction in margins reviewing the interest rate risk positioning of the Banks net interest income and reports analysing the economic value sensitivities for different interest rate scenarios.
Capital management The RECC continued to review the internal capital adequacy process and closely monitored compliance with regulatory ratios under different macroeconomic scenarios.
During the committees meetings it also examined the changes and impacts associated with various capital framework initiatives that the NBG introduced during the reporting period.
In addition to the updated framework discussed below under the new capital regulations the NBG initiated a stresstesting exercise.
During the RECCs meetings it reviewed comprehensive presentations covering the methodology of the stresstesting and discussed the results extensively.
The main purpose of the stress testing framework is to use it in the future to define Pillar II buffers.
Compliance
Throughout 2017 the RECC reviewed the Groups compliance programmes on a quarterly basis.
The topics of discussion included the following the status of the compliance and antimoney laundering programmes implementation information on the supervision of subsidiaries identified weaknesses and compliance failures as well as followup corrective measures a summary of regulatory changes and a report on whistleblowing cases.
In addition the committee closely scrutinised the Groups related party list and transaction tracker for the purposes of the UK Listing Rules during 2017.
RISK ETHICS AND COMPLIANCE COMMITTEE REPORT CONTINUED 125 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Additional Information Financial Statements Governance As part of the NBGs ongoing operations it conducted a thematic inspection of the Bank covering the last six years a summary of which is set out on page 69.
The RECC followed up on agreed actions in response to the recommendations that the NBG provided after its inspection.
Regulatory updates The NBG introduced numerous initiatives during the reporting period.
The RECC examined all key initiatives that were relevant for risk management by analysing their impact on the Groups performance.
The NBG introduced capital buffers compliant with the Basel III regulatory framework which are based on the updated capital requirements that will be divided across Pillar I and II buffers.
These initiatives include the capital conservation buffer which is currently incorporated in minimum capital requirements which has been separated over a fouryear period a systemic risk buffer which will be introduced for systemically important banks a countercyclical capital buffer which has been introduced and initially set to 0% a currencyinduced credit risk CICR buffer which has replaced the current conservative weighting for unhedged loans denominated in foreign currencies concertation buffer which will be introduced for sectoral and single borrower exposures a net stress buffer which will be introduced based on the stresstesting results that the Group provided and a General RiskAssessment Programme GRAPE buffer which is defined by the regulator and will be applied based on the Banks specific risks.
In addition based on the updated methodology the NBG has introduced specific paymenttoincome PTI and loantovalue LTV thresholds applying higher risk weights to exposures that do not fall into the predefined limits for the PTI and LTV ratios.
Apart from the capital changes the NBG has introduced a liquidity coverage ratio which is used to manage liquidity risk.
This is in addition to the Basel III guidelines under which a conservative approach was applied to the weighting of mandatory reserves and to the deposit withdrawal rates depending on the concentration of client groups.
IFRS 9 implementation The implementation of IFRS 9 began in 2016 and was one of the most significant projects in 2017.
The Group developed an enhanced provisioning methodology in line with the IFRS 9 requirements.
With the updated methodology the Group can assess loan loss provisions and allowances accurately with the incorporation of forwardlooking information.
In addition to developing the methodology the Group also implemented an accompanying IT tool.
The impact of IFRS 9 on the equity as of the transition moment amounts to GEL 64 million.
Major impacts were observed in the retail segment.
Committee effectiveness review The Board and RECC members conduct a review of the committees effectiveness every year.
The main role of the review is to assess the RECCs performance as per international standards of best practice in corporate governance.
During 2017 the RECC was found to be effective in overseeing the Groups risk management compliance activities and ethical standards.
Looking ahead to 2018 Going forward the RECC will continue to focus on its key responsibilities of assessment of quarterly risk results and compliance with the Banks risk appetite providing signoff on transactions with the largest exposures and facilitate progress in risk management tools and techniques.
The RECC will continue the close monitoring of the impact that recent and upcoming regulatory changes may have on the Banks financial standing and respective implications for risk management processes.
In addition key attention will be paid to proper management of risks that may arise from further digitalisation of TBC Banks services.
Moreover review and monitoring of results produced from newly introduced IFRS 9 models will stay as one of the key focus areas of the RECC to ensure that respective results adequately capture TBC Banks expected losses.
126 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017
REMUNERATION REPORT
Dear shareholders As Chairman of the Board Remuneration Committee the Committee I am pleased to present the Directors Remuneration Report for 2017 which describes the Remuneration Policy the Policy for our executive and nonexecutive directors.
The Committee continues to ensure that directors remuneration is aligned with their performance and creates strong motivation to achieve the Groups strategy meets appropriate regulatory and best practice requirements and takes into the account the views of shareholders as well as other stakeholders.
The executive members remuneration is comprised of Fixed compensation consisting of both cashbased and sharebased payments Annual bonus based on the level of achievement of shortterm key performance indicators KPIs and consisting of sharebased payments only The nonexecutive members remuneration is in the form of monthly fixed cash payments and is based on best practice and specifically FTSE 250 financial companies board membership payments as well as reflecting the unique individual roles the chairman and deputy chairman play within the Group.
2017 Performance 2017 year was another successful year as the Group recorded high underlying net profit of GEL 369.2 million 35.1% up compared to the last year.
High profits were supported by strong NIM growth in noninterest income operating efficiency and strong asset quality.
As a result all corporate financial KPIs were met in full.
In addition the executives achieved a number of corporate nonfinancial and personal KPIs as explained below.
Hence executive directors received cash salary equal to the amounts received in 2016 as well as a number of deferred shares under the deferred share salary equal to the number of shares received in 2016 under this component.
In terms of deferred share bonus payouts amounted to 88% and 84% of the maximum opportunity in 2017 for CEO and CFO respectively.
New remuneration policy for 2019 Taking into consideration that our existing executive remuneration policy is expiring at the end of 2018 we have engaged with shareholders and external independent consultants to enhance our remuneration structure in order to ensure that it is more closely aligned with all stakeholders expectations and at the same time allows us to attract and retain the best talent.
The new strategy subject to shareholder approval at the 2018 AGM will come into force from 1 January 2019.
The total expected compensation will not exceed 2017 levels.
However there will be improvements in the structure of the compensation to strengthen the alignment of pay with longterm performance and ensure that it better conforms with market practice.
The key changes are Rebalancing the variable remuneration component and moving certain part of the annual bonus to a longterm incentive plan
As a result the maximum opportunity under the new policy will not exceed 2017 levels Introducing an LTIP in the form of a performance share plan with a 3 year vesting period subject to meeting performance conditions over this period plus setting a two year post performance holding and continued employment requirement The amount of deferred shares under the base salary and the annual bonus will be calculated by reference to a cash amount rather than a fixed number of shares and The maximum amount of salary and annual bonus will be also fixed by reference to a cash amount rather than number of shares.
We believe the new policy meets the best and regional practices is competitive and aligns executives longterm interests with those of the Group and its shareholders.
The full details are outlined in section 10.
Looking ahead The Remuneration Committee will continue to review the Policy on a regular basis to ensure that it is in compliance with all regulatory changes that might arise is in line with evolving market practises and continues to promote the longterm success of the Group.
Stefano Marsaglia Chairman of the Remuneration Committee 28 March 2018 CHAIRMANS STATEMENT 127 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Additional Information Financial Statements Governance Remuneration Committee The Companys Remuneration Committee is responsible for establishing and overseeing the Groups remuneration policy principles considering and approving remuneration arrangements of the executives and exercising oversight for remuneration.
Full details of the Committees responsibilities are set out in the Committee terms of reference which are available on our website at site The Remuneration Committee membership is comprised of solely independent nonexecutive directors from a wide variety of skills and backgrounds to provide the best input.
The members are Stefano Marsaglia chairman Nikoloz Enukidze Eric Rajendra and Nicholas Haag.
The attendance of members at the Committee meetings during the year at the Company and the Bank levels are set out in the Directors Governance Statement on page 106.
1.1 Advisers to the Remuneration Committee Members of the Remuneration Committee provide valuable input in updating the Remuneration Committee on the recent developments in the area of remuneration.
However when there is a need the Remuneration Committee receives external advisory services.
In 2017 KPMG was selected by the Remuneration Committee to provide advice to the Remuneration Committee on the remuneration policy for the executive members of the board.
The new Remuneration policy that is described in section 10 of the report is based on recommendations provided by KPMG and will be presented for the shareholders approval at the 2018 AGM.
KPMG was selected as a result of a tender among the potential candidates.
The amount of fees for the advice provided to the Remuneration Committee for the year 2017 by KPMG was US 29500 net of taxes.
The Fees were charged on a time and materials basis which was capped at the amount mentioned above.
The Remuneration Committee is satisfied that KPMGs advice was objective and independent and that KPMG team which provides the Remuneration Committee with advice does not have any connections with the Group that may impair its independence.
The Remuneration Committee reviewed the potential for conflicts of interest and decided that KPMG had appropriate safeguards in place.
1.2 Statement of voting at Annual General Meeting Last year remuneration policy was presented to the AGM.
The results were as follows No Resolution Votes For % of votes cast Votes Against % of votes cast Total votes % of issued share capital voted
Withheld
1 To approve the directors remuneration report.
37705979 99.39% 232087 0.61% 37938066 72.01% 1541174 2 To approve the directors remuneration policy.
31505105 99.72% 87954 0.28% 31593059 59.97% 7886181 Single total figure of remuneration The tables below summarize the total remuneration earned by each director of the TBC Bank Group PLC hereinafter referred as the Company or TBCG PLC in respect of their employment with the Companys Group defined as TBC Bank Group PLC and JSC TBC Bank TBCG for the financial years ended 31 December 2017 and 31 December 2016.
2.1 Single total figure for executive directors audited Vakhtang Butskhrikidze Giorgi Shagidze
US000
US000
US000
Salary including 102telCash salary tel226 Deferred share salary 2 tel209 Taxable benefits
Deferred share bonus award 3038 2128 1441 1078 Total remuneration 4084 3017 1954 1514 128 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017
REMUNERATION REPORT CONTINUED
Single total figure of remuneration continued Notes to table Base salary paid in year to executive directors.
No additional fees were paid to executive directors Deferred share salary comprises of TBCG shares granted in respect of service in the relevant year.
The number of shares awarded as deferred share salary is linked to the base salary and its current level is fixed at an annual grant of 17622 TBCG shares for Mr.
Vakhtang Butskhrikidze and 8811 TBCG shares for Mr.
Giorgi Shagidze.
Deferred shares in relation to 2016 were awarded on 28 March 2017 and deferred shares in relation to 2017 were awarded on 9 March 2018.
Deferred share salaries are subject to a condition of continuous employment and malus and clawback provisions.
Subject to these conditions 10% of the award vests on the first anniversary from the award date a further 10% vests on the second anniversary from award date and the final 80% of the award vests on the third anniversary from the award date.
For the purposes of this table the 2016 award has been valued using the closing market value of the shares on 28 March 2017 GBP15 converted into US using the cross rate of the official exchange rates published by the NBG of 2.4455 for GELUS and 3.0794 for GELGBP on the same date and grossed up for directors income tax on share awards paid by the Company.
The
2017 award has been valued using the closing market value of the shares on 9 March 2018 GBP18.4 converted into US using the cross rate of the official exchange rates published by the NBG of 2.4462 for GELUS and 3.397 for GELGBP on the same date and grossed up for directors income tax on share awards paid by the Company Taxable benefits comprise medical insurance company car allowances and in the case of our CEO security allowances The Group does not pay pension contributions to the executive directors.
None of the executive directors has a prospective entitlement to a defined benefit pension A deferred share bonus award is granted as a result of the achievement of performance measures for the relevant financial year.
The award is 100% deferred and is subject to continuous employment and malus and clawback provisions.
Subject to these conditions 10% of the award vests on the first anniversary from the award date a further 10% vests on the second anniversary from the award date and the final 80% of the award vests on the third anniversary from the award date.
Deferred shares in relation to 2016 were awarded on 28 March 2017 and deferred shares in relation to 2017 were awarded on 9 March 2018.
For the purposes of this table the 2016 award has been valued using the closing market value of the shares on 28 March 2017 GBP15 converted into US using the cross rate of the official exchange rates published by the NBG of 2.4455 for GEL US and 3.0794 for GELGBP on the same date and grossed up for directors income tax on share awards paid by the Company.
The 2017 award has been valued using the closing market value of the shares on 9 March 2018 GBP18.4 converted into US using the cross rate of the official exchange rates published by the NBG of 2.4462 for GEL US and 3.397 for GELGBP on the same date and grossed up for directors income tax on share awards paid by the Company.
The value of the award is determined in line with the achievement of performance measures as explained in detail in section 2.2 below
Butskhrikidze and Mr.
Shagidze were reimbursed for reasonable business expenses in accordance with the internal policy in force at the time.
Such reimbursements have not been included in the single figure table No money or other assets are received or receivable by the executive directors in respect of a period of more than one financial year where final vesting is determined by reference to the achievement of the performance measures or targets relating to a period ending in 2016 or 2017 as applicable The increase of deferred share salary and deferred share bonus in 2017 as compared to 2016 is largely due to the increase in share price.
The number of shares awarded to executive directors in the same period in aggregate increased by 2%.
A full explanation of the basis of the 2017 deferred share bonus awards is given at section 2.2 which highlights the link between strong company and executive performance for 2017 The Company was incorporated under the Companies Act 2006 in February 2016 and was listed on the London Stock Exchange in August 2016.
To provide a comparison for investors the figures included in this table include remuneration received or receivable from both TBC PLC and TBC JSC for the whole of 2017 and the whole of 2016.
2.2 Basis for determining executive directors deferred share bonus awards audited The 2017 deferred share bonus awards made to executive directors reflect the Remuneration Committees assessment of the extent to which corporate financial and nonfinancial and personal KPIs were achieved.
Such objectives were agreed by the Board at the beginning of the year.
The below table illustrates the performance measures set for Mr.
Butskhrikidze in respect of 2017 as well as his performance against them Performance Measure
Minimum
60%
100%
140% Performance
Evaluation
Financial measures 60% Underling ROE 15% 18.2  20.2% 20.2  21.1%  21.1% 21.4% 140% Underlying Cost to income ratio 15% 43.7  42.4% 42.4 41.1%  41.1% 40.5% 140% Noninterest income annual growth 15% 20.3  24.8% 24.8  27.3%  27.3% 24.8% 100% Cost of Risk 15% 1.8  1.5% 1.5  1.4%  1.4% 1.2% 140% Nonfinancial measures 30%
8% 120% Employee Engagement Index 4% 7079% 8089% 89% 91% 140% Employee Net Promoters Score 4% 4449 5055 55 55 100% Customer Experience 8% 100% NPS in Mass Retail gap with peer bank 3% 711% 1117% 17% 16.7% 100% CSAT in Mass Retail gap with peer Bank 5% 912% 1217% 17% 16.6% 100% TBCG PLC share price performance against peer bank 14% 30% 15% 15% 5% 5% 4.1% 100% Personal KPIs 10%
10% A A A A 140% Total 100% 124% Notes to table Each KPI is evaluated at 60% where achievement falls into the minimum range 100% where achievement falls into the target range and 140% where achievement falls into the maximum range.
Underlying ROE excludes oneoff costs related to Bank Republic acquisition and integration.
129 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Additional Information Financial Statements Governance Underlying cost to income ratio excludes oneoff costs related to the Bank Republic acquisition and integration.
For the purpose of this KPI noninterest income annual growth is calculated as follows 2016 figure is the sum of TBC Banks consolidated noninterest income without Bank Republic effect and Bank Republics noninterest income for the full year while 2017 figures is TBC Banks consolidated noninterest income.
Employee Engagement Index and Employee Net Promoters Score were measured by an independent consultant.
Two indexes were evaluated the index of CSAT in Mass Retail is based on surveys conducted by independent research companies ACT and IPM and the index NPS in Mass Retail is based on survey conducted by independent research companies ACT.
2017 average share price multiple of TBCG PLC compared with that of the peer bank in case of similar KPIs under the new policy described in section 10 the Group will not use targets which are discounted compared to the peer group.
Leadership skills are assessed by remuneration committee and were regarded as excellent.
The below table illustrates the performance measures set for Mr.
Shagidze in respect of 2017 as well as his performance against them Performance Measure
Minimum
60%
100%
140% Performance KPI Evaluation Financial measures 36% Underling ROE 10% 18.2  20.2% 20.2  21.1%  21.1% 21.4% 140% Underlying Cost to income ratio 10% 43.7  42.4% 42.4 41.1%  41.1% 40.5% 140% Noninterest income annual growth 8% 20.3  24.8% 24.8  27.3%  27.3% 24.8% 100% Cost of Risk 8% 1.8  1.5% 1.5  1.4%  1.4% 1.2% 140% Nonfinancial measures 26%
8% 120% Employee Engagement Index 4% 7079% 8089% 89% 91% 140% Employee Net Promoters Score 4% 4449 5055 55 55 100% Customer Experience 8% 100% NPS in Mass Retail gap with peer bank 3% 711% 1117% 17% 16.7% 100% CSAT in Mass Retail gap with peer Bank 5% 912% 1217% 17% 16.6% 100% TBCG PLC share price performance against peer bank 10% 30% 15% 15% 5% 5% 4.1% 100% Personal KPIs 38%
8% A A A A 140%
10% 9098% of the budget 98103% of the budget 103% of the budget 109.7% 140%
10% 80% Improving analytical tools and capabilities 10% A A A A 100% Total 100% 118% Notes to table Each KPI is evaluated at 60% where achievement falls into the minimum range 100% where achievement falls into the target range and 140% where achievement falls into the maximum range Underlying ROE excludes oneoff costs related to Bank Republic acquisition and integration Underlying cost to income ratio excludes oneoff costs related to the Bank Republic acquisition and integration For the purpose of this KPI noninterest income annual growth is calculated as follows 2016 figure is the sum of TBC Banks consolidated noninterest income without Bank Republic effect and Bank Republics noninterest income for the full year while 2017 figures is TBC Banks consolidated noninterest income.
Employee Engagement Index and Employee Net Promoters Score were measured by an independent consultant.
Two indexes were evaluated the index of CSAT in Mass Retail is based on surveys conducted by independent research companies ACT and IPM and the index NPS in Mass Retail is based on survey conducted by independent research companies ACT 2017 average share price multiple of TBCG PLC compared with that of the peer bank in case of similar KPIs under the new policy described in section 10 the Group will not use targets which are discounted compared to the peer group.
Leadership skills are assessed by remuneration committee and were regarded as excellent.
The figures are based on the banks IFRS standalone numbers and envisages meeting certain level of income from foreign exchange operations and liquidly management IR KPI was divided into two parts the first was to increase the number of analyst reports based on the following evaluation criteria 1 below target 2 on target and 3 above target and the second was TBC PLC share price performance as described in nonfinancial KPIs see note 7 above.
During 2017 one new analyst initiated the coverage.
The report for the second analyst was released in January 2018.
As a result the overall IR KPI was assessed at 80%.
Launching the advanced profitability and budgeting system.
The system was launched in 2017 and Management board assessed the KPI at 100%.
As a result during 2017 the Remuneration Committee therefore considered Mr Butskhrikidzes performance as excellent and determined the overall value of the deferred share bonus award of US 3037701 being the net value awarded of US 2385209 grossed up for directors income tax on deferred bonus share awards.
130 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017
REMUNERATION REPORT CONTINUED
Single total figure of remuneration continued The Remuneration Committee also considered Mr Shagidzes performance as excellent and determined the overall value of the deferred share bonus award of US 1441412 being the net value awarded of US 1138562 grossed up for directors income tax on deferred bonus share awards.
According to Georgian tax code a company is responsible for paying income tax for its employees.
As about 95% of the remuneration of CEO and CFO is subject to Georgian tax regulations the Group pays income taxes for the CEO and CFO total remuneration.
2.3 Further details of fixed and discretionary deferred share compensation granted during 2017 audited The following table sets out further details of the share awards granted to Mr Butskhrikidze and Mr.
Shagidze in 2017 in respect of the year ended 31 December 2016.
Deferred share salary Deferred share bonus Type of interest Direct share award subject to restrictions.
Direct share award subject to restrictions.
Basis on which award was made As described in note 2 to the table at 2.1 above.
As described in the table and notes at section 2.2 above.
Face value of awards made to Mr.
Butskhrikidze
US 419635 US 2127955 Face value of awards made to Mr.
Shagidze US 208958 US 1077532 Percentage of award receivable if minimum performance achieved Legal title to 100% of the shares are registered in the name of participant on the date the award is made.
The participant has the right to receive dividends and to vote.
The deferred shares however are subject to restrictions until they vest.
Deferred shares will vest 10%10%80% over the period of three years respectively.
The award is part of the executives salary set out in his service contract and is not subject to performance measures or conditions.
Legal title to 100% of the shares are registered in the name of participant on the date the award is made.
The participant has the right to receive dividends and to vote.
The bonus shares however are subject to restrictions until they vest.
Deferred shares will vest 10%10%80% over the period of three years respectively.
The performance period is one calendar year.
Vesting period Three years with full vesting on 28 March 2020 subject to continuous employment and malus and clawback requirement.
Three years with full vesting on 28 March 2020 subject to continuous employment and malus and clawback requirement.
Performance measures None See section 2.2 above Figures calculated as described in Notes 2 and 5 to the single total figure table at 2.1 above.
2.4 Change in remuneration of the CEO compared with the wider employee population The table below sets out the increase in salary benefits and bonus of the CEO compared with that of the wider employee population between 2016 and 2017
Executive All employees
17.8% 11.2% Cash bonus 0% 24.4% Taxable benefits 8.2% 30.2% Pensionrelated benefits 0% 26.1% Deferred share bonus award 42.8% 70.3% Total remuneration 35.4% 27.7% Notes to table This includes cash and deferred share salary.
The CEOs cash salary increase is calculated in US dollars the currency which is fixed for his cash salary The increase in deferred share salary reflects the increase in the share price.
The number of deferred shares awarded as salary has not changed between 2016 and 2017 For all employees cash salary and cash bonus calculations the actual increase of the salaries and bonuses of the employees employed at the end of 2017 who were also employed at the end of 2016 was used.
The total IFRS consolidated staff cost has increased by 17.9% in 2017 YoY.
However this does reflect the fact that the Bank Republic was only included for 2 months in the PandL statement in 2016 and in 2017 the bank was successful in extracting synergies from the acquisition.
The actual number of shares awarded to CEO as part of deferred shares bonus was increased from 89361 shares in 2016 to 93348 shares in 2017.
The increase shown in the table reflects the increase in the share price.
131 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Additional Information Financial Statements Governance 2.5 Single total figure for nonexecutive directors audited The table below sets out the remuneration received by each nonexecutive director for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 31 December 2017.
The independent nonexecutive Directors are remunerated based on the number of committees they serve on and chair.
Differences in fees paid to independent nonexecutive Directors also reflect any differences in tax treatment between jurisdictions as TBC Bank wishes non executive Directors to receive similar net pay regardless of the tax system applicable to them.
Director Year Fees US000
US000
Total remuneration
Mamuka Khazaradze 2017 1187 29 1216 2016 1152 34 1186 Badri Japaridze 2017 1149 23 1172 2016 1119 15 1134 Nikoloz Enukidze 2017tel 140  140 Nicholas Haag 2017tel 125  125 Eric Rajendra 2017tel 133  133 Stefano Marsaglia 2017tel 109  109 Stephan Wilcke 2017tel 62  62 Irina Schmidt 2016 82  82 Notes to table Taxable benefits comprise medical insurance car and security allowance Irina Schmidt resigned from the Board in June 2016 after the expiration of her appointment and was replaced by Stephan Wilcke The Company was incorporated under the Companies Act 2006 in February 2016 and was listed on the London Stock Exchange in August 2016.
To provide a comparison for investors the figures included in this table include remuneration received or receivable from both TBC PLC and TBC JSC for the whole of 2016 and 2017.
The table below shows the detailed breakdown of annual fees paid to nonexecutive director in 2017 and 2016 in relation to different roles Fees paid in 2017
2016 annualised fees established since premium listing US000 Nonexecutive director other than Chairman and Deputy Chairman 84 84 Senior Independent Director 14 14 Committee chairmanship 28 28 Committee membership 11 11 1 All board members receive the same remuneration for the roles listed above except for Eric Rajendra who receives the following fees board membership USD 94533 committee chairmanshipUS 27206 committee membershipUS 10882.
This is caused by differences in tax treatment between jurisdictions as TBC Bank wishes nonexecutive Directors to receive similar net pay regardless of the tax system applicable to them as mentioned above.
132 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017
REMUNERATION REPORT CONTINUED
Remuneration of the top management of JSC TBC Bank The table below summarizes the total remuneration earned by the top managers of the JSC TBC Bank for the financial years ended 31 December 2017 and 31 December 2016 except for the CEO and CFO as their remuneration information is disclosed in section 2 of this report.
Director Year Base salary
Deferred share salary
Taxable benefits
Deferred share bonus award
Total remuneration
Total for the top managers excluding CEO and CFO 2017 1377 2004 5 8147 11533 2016 1385 1278 7 4523 7193 Per Top manager excluding CEO and CFO average per 6 members tel1 1358 1922 tel1 754 1199 Notes to table Base salary paid in year for executive directors.
No fees were paid to executive directors Deferred share salary comprises of TBCG shares granted in respect of service in the relevant year .
The number of shares awarded as deferred share salary is linked to the Base salary.
Deferred shares in relation to 2016 were awarded on 28 March 2017 and deferred shares in relation to 2017 were awarded on 9 March 2018.
Deferred share salaries are subject to a condition of continuous employment and malus and clawback provisions.
Subject to these conditions 10% of the award vests on the first anniversary from the award date a further 10% vests on the second anniversary from award date and the final 80% of the award vests on the third anniversary from the award date.
For the purposes of this table the 2016 award has been valued using the closing market value of the shares on 28 March 2017 GBP15 converted into US using the cross rate of the official exchange rates published by the NBG of 2.4455 for GELUS and 3.0794 for GELGBP on the same date and grossed up for directors income tax on share awards paid by the Company.
The 2017 award has been valued using the closing market value of the shares on 9 March 2018 GBP18.4 converted into US using the cross rate of the official exchange rates published by the NBG of 2.4462 for GELUS and 3.397 for GELGBP on the same date and grossed up for directors income tax on share awards paid by the Company Taxable benefits comprise medical insurance and company car allowances A deferred share bonus award is granted as a result of the achievement of performance measures for the relevant financial year.
The award is 100% deferred and is subject to continuous employment and malus and clawback provisions.
Subject to these conditions 10% of the award vests on the first anniversary from the award date a further 10% vests on the second anniversary from the award date and the final 80% of the award vests on the third anniversary from the award date.
Deferred shares in relation to 2016 were awarded on 28 March 2017 and deferred shares in relation to 2017 were awarded on 9 March 2018.
For the purposes of this table the 2016 award has been valued using the market value of the shares on 28 March 2017 GBP 15 converted into USD using the cross rate of the official exchange rates published by the NBG of 2.4455 for GELUSD and 3.0794 for GELGBP on the same date and grossed up for directors income tax on share awards paid by the Company.
The 2017 award has been valued using the market value of the shares on 9 March 2018 GBP18.4 converted into US using the cross rate of the official exchange rates published by the NBG of 2.4462 for GELUS and 3.397 for GELGBP on the same date and grossed up for directors income tax on share awards paid by the Company The Company was incorporated under the Companies Act 2006 in February 2016 and was listed on the London Stock Exchange in August 2016.
To provide a comparison for investors the figures included in this table include remuneration received or receivable from both TBC PLC and TBC JSC for the whole of 2016 and 2017.
Payments to past directors audited There were no payments made to past directors relating to 2017.
Payments for loss of office audited There were no payments made in relation to loss of office in 2017.
Statement of directors shareholdings and share interests audited While directors are not required to hold a minimum number of shares the Policy naturally results in our executive directors holding a significant number of unvested shares and achieves a delay between performance and vesting which we believe is consistent with the principles of the Corporate Governance Code.
Unvested shares are subject to continuous employment and malus and clawback requirements but are not subject to specific performance conditions.
133 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Additional Information Financial Statements Governance The following table sets out a summary of each directors shareholdings and share interests in the Company.
Although not a Company requirement some nonexecutive directors have chosen to become shareholders.
Entity
Number of Vested Shares held Number of unvested shares held Total interests in shares Mamuka Khazaradze TBC Bank Group PLC 7343936  7343936 JSC TBC Bank Total 7343936  7343936 Badri Japaridze TBC Bank Group PLC 3669878  3669878 JSC TBC Bank Total 3669878  3669878 Vakhtang Butskhrikidze TBC Bank Group PLC 586016 106983 692999 JSC TBC Bank 26441 160416 186857 Total 612457 267399 879856 Giorgi Shagidze TBC Bank Group PLC 27540 54247 81787 JSC TBC Bank 11792 74639 86431 Total 39332 128886 168218 Nikoloz Enukidze TBC Bank Group PLC 10000  10000 JSC TBC Bank Total 10000  10000 Stephan Wilcke TBC Bank Group PLC 51075  51075 JSC TBC Bank Total 51075  51075 This figure includes all shares held which are no longer subject to any vesting conditions or transfer restrictions The figure excludes the shares that are registered in the name of the director but are still subject to vesting conditions in accordance with the deferred share compensation scheme This figure includes shares that are still subject to conditions including transfer restrictions a continuous employment condition and malus and clawback provisions.
The figure includes shares granted as deferred share compensation each year as a result of the achievement of performance measures for the relevant financial year and deferred share salary.
Details of these interests are described at sections 2.1 and 2.2 Total interests in shares includes vested and unvested interests held directly and indirectly The shares held in the JSC TBC Bank were awarded to each of executive directors before the premium listing under the applicable compensation policy.
Those shares were not exchanged for TBC Bank Group PLC shares due to temporary Georgian tax obligations.
Executives intend to exchange those shares for Company shares following the expiration of associated tax obligations On 9 March 2018 the Company has granted share awards to Mr Butskhrikidze and Mr.
Shagidze under the share based payment scheme in respect of the year ended 31 December 2017.
Mr Butskhrikidze has been granted 110970 shares and Mr.
Shagidze has been granted 53370 shares.
These shares have a three year vesting period with full vesting on 9 March 2021 subject to continuous employment and malus and clawback requirement.
These have not been included in the above table.
All figures in the table reflect the position as at 31 December 2017.
As at 28 March 2018 Mr Butskhrikidze held 294702 unvested shares and Mr.
Shagidze held 146145 unvested shares.
134 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017
REMUNERATION REPORT CONTINUED
Performance total shareholder return The following graph compares the total shareholder return TSR of the Company for the period from the date when shares were listed on the premium segment of the London Stock Exchange 10 August 2016 to 31 December 2017 with the performance of the FTSE AllShare Index and FTSE 250 Index over the same time period.
These market indexes were selected because they are most comparable to the Company in terms of listing and relevant governance and transparency standards.
Further the Company is included in the FTSE AllShare Index and FTSE 250 Index.
TBCG
FTSE 250 FTSE AllShare 10 Aug 16 10 Sep16 10 Oct16 10 Nov 16 10 Dec16 10 Jan 17 10 Feb17 10 Mar 17 10 Apr17 10 May 17 10 Jun 17 10 Jul 17 10 Sep17 10 Oct17 10 Nov 17 29 Dec17 Set out below is a table that contains details of Company CEO Vakhtang Butskhrikidzes remuneration for each financial year in the relevant period Financial year Single total figure of remuneration
Deferred share bonus as a percentage of maximum opportunity % 2017 4084 88% 2016 3017 85% 2015 1809 87% Notes to table Total remuneration includes base salary deferred share salary deferred share bonus award and taxable benefits as described in the single total figure table and notes at section 2.1 above.
For further details of the deferred share bonus please refer to section 2.2 above.
135 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Additional Information Financial Statements Governance Relative importance of spend on pay The following table illustrates the difference in spend on pay for all employees of the Group and the difference in dividends paid to the shareholders between 2017 and 2016.
Dividends paid to shareholders for the year ended 31 December 2016 increased by 26% as compared to 2015.
Year ended 31 December Year ended 31 December % change Total spend on pay US000 80861 72768 11% Dividends paid to shareholders US000 31110 24659 26%
Total spend on pay includes total staff costs and is converted into US using average USGEL exchange rate for 2017 and 2016 respectively Dividend paid to shareholders are gross amounts converted into US using official exchange rate prevailing at the date of payment of the dividends GEL 2.4047 and GEL 2.2126 for 2017 and 2016 respectively.
The Company was incorporated under the Companies Act 2006 in February 2016 and was listed on the London Stock Exchange in August 2016.
To provide a comparison for investors the figures included in this table include remuneration received or receivable from both TBC PLC and TBC JSC for the whole of 2016 and 2017.
Policy Implementation in 2018 Remuneration policy for executive directors The existing remuneration scheme for the executive directors was developed with the support of external consultants and was implemented on 17 June 2015 covering the period of 2015 until the end of 2018.
The Group worked with EY to review the existing remuneration policy for executive directors.
The existing remuneration policy will expire at the end of 2018.
The Group has developed a new remuneration policy which is presented in this document and if approved by shareholders on 2018 AGM will become applicable starting from 1 January 2019.
Nonexecutive director compensation As advised by the external consultants and approved by the shareholders on 2017 AGM the compensation of the Chairman and Deputy Chairman will be decreased by about 20% and 30% respectively starting from 1 January 2018.
Their new fees reflect the complexity of tasks and high intensity of the work carried out by the Chairman and Deputy Chairman to support the growth of the business taking into account their deep understanding of the market and their roles as the founders of the bank.
The Chairmans and deputy Chairmans input add significant value and are key and instrumental for the other members of the Board of Directors and for the Executive Committee members especially on all strategic matters and relationship with large corporate or individual customers as well as with policy makers.
The Remuneration Committee will continue to seek out shareholder feedback and undertake a benchmarking review of compensation practices when the current policy expires.
Introduction of the Policy for Companies Act 2006 purposes Due to requirements associated with the Groups premium listing and to comply with Companies Act 2006 requirements shareholders will be asked to specifically approve the Policy at the upcoming 2018 Annual General Meeting with the new Policy coming into effect for Companies Act 2006 purposes from 1 January 2019.
Statement of implementation In 2018 the Remuneration Committee intends to continue to provide remuneration in accordance with the policy tables set forth below as approved by shareholders at the 2017 AGM.
Fees and salaries may be adjusted but in all cases will not exceed the maximums stated in the appropriate policy table as approved by shareholders at the 2017 AGM.
New targets will be set for the deferred share bonuses.
The appropriate level of awards to be granted in 2018 is assessed by the Remuneration Committee but in all cases will remain within the maximums stated in the appropriate policy table as approved by shareholders at the 2017 AGM.
136 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017
REMUNERATION REPORT CONTINUED
From January 2018 the following will apply Executive directors Base salary cash and deferred shares The cash and deferred share salaries are set out in the executive directors service contracts.
The
Remuneration Committee reserves the right to agree changes to the base salary with the executive directors but no change will exceed the maximum stated in the policy approved by shareholders at the 2017 AGM.
The Remuneration Committees discretion will be exercised fairly and reasonably and with regard to appropriate comparable market practice and business strategy.
Deferred share bonus Performance measures and weightings Performance measures for 2018 are summarized below Corporate financial KPIs that are comprised of return on equity cost to income cost of risk and net interest margin Corporate nonfinancial KPIs that are comprised of employee satisfaction and engagement measures customer satisfaction measures and TBC PLCs share price performance against peer bank Personal KPIs that include leadership skills in the case of the CEO and in the case of the CFO include leadership skills IR function specific KPIs treasury operations targets and cost of funding targets.
The corresponding weightings for 2018 are set as follows CEO CFO Financial measures 56% 36% Nonfinancial measures 34% 26% Personal KPIs 10% 38% Total 100% 100% Performance targets Specific performance targets are considered commercially sensitive as they will give our competitors information about our budget and strategy.
The targets will be disclosed in the Groups 2018 annual report.
NonExecutive Directors Fees The fees paid to the nonexecutive directors will be within the policy approved by shareholders at the 2017 AGM.
The Remuneration Committee reserves the right to agree changes to fees with the non executive directors but no change will exceed the maximum stated in the policy table below.
The
Remuneration Committees discretion will be exercised fairly and reasonably and with regard to appropriate comparable market practice and business strategy.
137 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Additional Information Financial Statements Governance Directors Remuneration Policy This section describes the proposed new remuneration policy for executive directors which is expected to come into force starting from 1 January 2019 and is intended apply for 3 years until the end of 2021 subject to shareholders approval at the AGM meeting to be held on 21st May 2018.
The new policy aims to enhance our existing remuneration structure and ensure that it is more closely aligned with all stakeholders expectations as well as to offer competitive compensation to the executive directors.
Total expected compensation will not exceed 2017 levels.
The following table compares the executives maximum and actual compensation paid in 2017 to their maximum and expected compensation under the new remuneration policy in 2019 respectively.
Director Year Base salary
Deferred share salary
Annual bonus US000 LTIP US000
US000
CEO
2017 Paid 454 573 3038  4065 2019 excepted at target performance 454 510 965 1141 3071 2017 maximum opportunity 454 573 3441  4468 2019 maximum opportunity 454 510 1302 1554 3820
2017 Paid 227 285 1441  1953 2019 excepted at target performance 22tel1525 2017 maximum opportunity 227 285 1710  2222 2019 maximum opportunity 22tel1910
As described in section 2.1 The 2017 maximum opportunity has been valued using the closing market value of the shares on 9 March 2018 GBP18.4 converted into US using the cross rate of the official exchange rates published by the NBG of 2.4462 for GELUS and 3.397 for GELGBP on the same date and grossed up for directors income tax on share awards paid by the
The key changes are Introducing a longterm incentive plan LTIP in the form of a performance share plan with a 3 year vesting period subject to meeting performance conditions over this period.
Awards are initially intended to be in the form of conditional share awards which are conditional rights to receive shares in the Company but the plan also permits the grant of options and restricted share awards.
The performance will be measured over three years and shares will be delivered during the first quarter of the fourth year from the start of the performance period subject to the achievement of appropriate performance measures.
However after delivery the shares will be subject to an additional two year holding period during which time they will be subject to continued employment.
The maximum amounts of the LTIP are as follows CEOUS 1554240 CFO US 777120 The amount of deferred shares under the base salary and the annual bonus will be calculated by reference to a cash amount rather than a fixed number of shares.
The shares granted will be subject to continued employment for a 2 year period as follows 50% of the award for 1 year from the award date and the other 50% for 2 years from the award date.
The maximum amount of deferred share salary and the annual bonus will be also fixed by reference to a cash amount rather than number of shares.
The maximum amounts of the deferred share salary are as follows CEO US 510000 CFO US 255000.
The maximum amount of annual bonuses are determined as follows CEO US 1301760 CFO US 650880.
The shares granted will be subject to continued employment for a 2 year period as follows 50% of the award for 1 year from the award date and the other 50% for 2 years from the award date.
The maximum amounts of annual cash salaries to be paid to CEO and CFO are determined to be US 453994 and US 227004 respectively.
It is the Remuneration Committees intention that the Policy remains unchanged for three years until the end of 2021.
For the avoidance of doubt it is intended that the new remuneration scheme to be approved at the 2018 AGM allows the existing remuneration scheme for the executive directors to continue until 1 January 2019 with the new remuneration scheme to take effect from 1 January 2019.
138 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017
REMUNERATION REPORT CONTINUED
Preexisting obligations It is a provision of this Policy that the Group will uphold all preexisting obligations and commitments that were agreed prior to this Policy taking effect.
The terms of those preexisting obligations and commitments may differ from the terms of the Policy and may include without limitation obligations and commitments under service contracts deferred share compensation schemes and pension and benefit plans.
We believe the new policy meets the best and regional practices is competitive and aligns executives longterm interests with those of the Group and its shareholders.
The full details are outlined below.
10.1 Remuneration policy for Chief Executive Director and Chief Financial Director Component Purpose and Link to Strategy of the Group Operation Maximum Opportunity Performance Measures Fixed Pay Base Salary in the form of cash and deferred shares Salaries are determined based on market practice and provide each executive director with a competitive fixed income to efficiently retain and reward the director  based upon each directors roles and responsibilities within the Group and relative skills and experience.
Cash salary The cash part of the salary is aimed to provide fixed cash remuneration to reflect the complexity of the Group.
Deferred share salary Part of the salary is given in the form of shares and despite being salary is still intended to promote the longterm success of the Group by closely aligning executive directors and shareholders interests.
Shares are usually delivered during the first quarter of the second year i. remuneration committee.
Once shares are delivered they remain subject to continued employment 50% of the shares for 1 year and the other 50% for 2 years from the delivery date.
Upon the delivery whilst the shares remain subject to the continued employment condition the shares are registered in the trustees name as nominee for the participants and the participants are entitled to receive dividends.
Both the cash and deferred share salaries are paid in part under the executive directors service contract with TBC JSC and in part under his service contract with TBC PLC to reflect the executive directors duties to each.
Initial salaries are set by the Remuneration Committee based on responsibilities and market data and are set out in an executive directors service contract with the Group.
An executive director may be paid separate salaries for roles and responsibilities at different entities within the TBC Group as set out in a separate service contract with any relevant entity.
Deferred compensation is subject to the Groups malus and clawback policies until the shares are vested and during the holding period.
If at any time after making the deferred compensation there is a material misstatement in the financial results for the year in respect of which the compensation was formally granted the Remuneration Committee has the right to cause some or all of the deferred compensation for that year or any subsequent financial year that is unvested or unpaid to lapse or not be paid.
Cash salary The maximum annual cash salary for Chief Executive Director is
453994.
The maximum annual cash salary for Chief Financial Director is
227004.
Deferred Share Salary The maximum annual value for the deferred share salary for the Chief Executive Director is US 510000.
The number of shares is calculated based on the average share price of the last 10 days preceding the committee decision date.
However the maximum is fixed by reference to a cash amount.
The maximum annual value for the deferred share salary for the Chief Financial Director is US 255000.
The number of shares is calculated based on the average share price of the last 10 days preceding the committee decision date  However the maximum is fixed by reference to a cash amount.
The bank pays income tax and other employeerelated taxes related to base salary however taxes are included in the maximum amounts.
These numbers include the salaries received from both JSC TBC Bank and TBC Bank Group PLC.
The executives do not receive any additional salary from other Group entities.
Not performance based.
1 The proposed structure of paying income tax for the executives is due to the Georgian tax code which requires a company to pay income tax on any benefit paid to the executives  and does not allow for alternative arrangements.
However the numbers disclosed include such income tax estimates.
Directors Remuneration Policy continued 139 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Additional Information Financial Statements Governance Component Purpose and Link to Strategy of the Group Operation Maximum Opportunity Performance Measures Salaries are reviewed and may be adjusted annually by the Remuneration Committee based on the available market data on compensation among a peer group sample selected by the Remuneration Committee.
The
Remuneration Committee must ensure that the total reward potentially available is not excessive from the standpoint of relevant employment data.
Any changes to salaries must be recommended by the Remuneration Committee and approved by the Board.
Variable pay Annual bonus in the form of deferred shares To provide a strong motivational tool to achieve the annual KPIs and to provide rewards to the extent those KPIs are achieved.
The annual KPIs are chosen to align our executive directors interests with the short terms strategic objectives of the
The annual bonus is determined as to the extent that the annual KPIs have been met.
Shares are usually delivered during the first quarter of the second year i. remuneration committee.
Once shares are delivered they remain subject to continued employment 50% of the shares for 1 year and the other 50% for 2 years from the delivery date.
Upon the delivery whilst the shares remain subject to the continued employment condition the shares are registered in the trustees name as the nominee for the participants and the participants are entitled to receive dividends.
KPIs are set by the Remuneration Committee at the beginning of each year in relation to that year see more detail below at 10.3b.
To the extent that the KPIs are achieved the Remuneration Committee may decide whether an award may be made and the amount of such award.
The Group does not pay guaranteed bonuses to executive directors.
The nature of the KPIs but not necessarily their specific weightings will be disclosed in the annual report published in the performance year .
However  the precise targets are commercially sensitive and will be disclosed retrospectively.
The Remuneration Committee may also adjust KPIs during the year to take account of material events such as without limitation material corporate events changes in responsibilities of an individual andor currency exchange rates.
Awards are subject to the Groups malus and clawback policies until the shares are vested and during the holding period.
If at any time after making the award there is a material misstatement in the financial results for the year in respect of which the award was formally granted the Remuneration Committee has the right to cause some or all of the award for that year or any subsequent financial year that is unvested or unpaid to lapse or not be paid.
The maximum value of the annual bonus for the Chief Executive Director  under the annual shortterm incentive arrangements is US 1301760 135% of fixed salary.
The number of shares is calculated based on the average share price of the last 10 days preceding the committee decision date.
However  the maximum is fixed by reference to a cash amount.
The maximum value of the annual bonus for the Chief Financial Officer  under the annual short term incentive arrangements is US 650880 135% of fixed salary.
The number of shares is calculated based on the average share price of the last 10 days preceding the committee decision date.
However the maximum is fixed by reference to a cash amount.
The bank pays income tax and other employeerelated taxes related to the award however  taxes are included in the maximum amounts.
The KPIs consist of corporate and individual performance measures.
Corporate KPIs include financial measures and nonfinancial measures with long term focus.
Individual
The performance period is one year .
The
Remuneration
Committee may decide to make no awards where KPIs have not been met.
Directors Remuneration Policy continued 140 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017
REMUNERATION REPORT CONTINUED
Component Purpose and Link to Strategy of the Group Operation Maximum Opportunity Performance Measures Long Term
Plan LTIP To provide a strong motivational tool to achieve longterm performance conditions and to provide rewards to the extent those performance conditions are achieved Performance conditions are chosen to align our executive directors interests with strategic objectives of the Group over multiyear periods and encourage a longterm view.
In order for the shares to be delivered the executive directors need to meet performance conditions over the 3 year performance period.
Share are usually delivered during the first quarter of the fourth year i. remuneration committee.
Once shares are delivered they remain subject to 2 year holding period and continued employment requirements.
Awards may benefit from dividend equivalents.
No dividend equivalents will be paid on any awards or part thereof that lapse on or before vesting.
The awards may be granted in the form of conditional share awards options or restricted share awards.
Performance Conditions are set by the Remuneration Committee for a period of 3 years.
The Remuneration Committee determines the level of award at the end of the performance period based on the extent to which the performance conditions have been met.
The performance conditions and respective targets will be disclosed in the annual report published in the year of the award.
The Remuneration Committee may also adjust performance conditions during the performance period to take account of material events such as without limitation material corporate events changes in responsibilities of an individual andor currency exchange rates.
Awards are subject to the Groups malus and clawback policies until three years after the shares are delivered.
If at any time after making the award the award holder deliberately mislead the Company or the Bank in relation to the financial performance there is a material misstatement or material error in the financial statements of the Company or the Bank the award holders unit has suffered a material downturn in its financial performance caused by the award holder  there is misconduct on the part of the award holder that caused material harm to the Companys or the Banks reputation or there is misconduct on the part of the award holder that caused failure of the risk management resulting in a material loss to the Company or the Bank the Remuneration Committee has the right to cause some or all of the award for that year or any subsequent financial year that is unvested or unpaid to lapse or not be paid and to clawback any amount that has already been paid.
The maximum value of the award for the Chief Executive Director in any given year  under the long term incentive arrangements to be awarded is US 1554240 161% of fixed salary.
The number of shares is calculated based on the average share price during the 10 days after the preliminary annual results of the year preceding the year of each grant is announced.
The maximum value of the award for the Chief Financial Officer in any given year  under the long term incentive arrangements to be awarded is US 777120 161% of fixed salary.
The number of shares is calculated based on the average share price during the 10 days after the preliminary annual results of the year preceding the year of each grant is announced.
The bank pays income tax and other employeerelated taxes related to the award however taxes are included in the maximum amounts.
The performance conditions for the award are set by the Committee each year .
The
Remuneration
Committees current view is that performance conditions will include a measure of efficiency e.
ROE a measure of share price performance e.
EPSTSR a measure of customer experience Weightings of these measures may vary yearonyear .
The performance period is three year .
Directors Remuneration Policy continued 141 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Additional Information Financial Statements Governance Component Purpose and Link to Strategy of the Group Operation Maximum Opportunity Performance Measures For newly issued and treasury shares the LTIP is limited to using 10% in 10 years for employee plans and 5% in 10 years for discretionary plans.
These limits will exclude shares under awards that have been renounced forfeited released lapsed or cancelled or awards that were granted prior to the Companys IPO or awards that the Remuneration Committee decide will be satisfied by existing shares.
The plan will be administered by the Remuneration Committee.
Pension To assist our employees in providing for their retirement and to maintain a market competitive benefits package to attract and retain executive directors.
The Group may introduce a defined contribution pension scheme taking into account any pension reform or practice in
The operation of the pension would be considered by the Remuneration Committee fairly and reasonably and with regard to best market practice.
If introduced there will be no provision for the clawback or withholding of pension payments.
The maximum employer contribution will not exceed 3% of annual salary.
Not performance based.
Benefits Benefits are in line with Georgian market practice and are designed to be sufficient to attract and retain high calibre talent.
Benefits available to executive directors consist of insurance such as medical life and disability insurance physical examinations tax gross ups directors and officers liability insurance a car service personal security arrangements and assistance with filling out tax returns where required.
Executive directors are reimbursed for reasonable business expenses incurred in the course of carrying out duties under their service contracts on provision of valid receipts.
A tax equalisation payment may be paid to an executive director if any part of his remuneration becomes subject to double taxation.
The policy is framed by the nature of the benefits that the Remuneration Committee is willing to provide to executive directors.
The maximum amount payable depends on the cost of providing such benefits to an employee in the location at which the executive director is based.
Shareholders should note that the cost of providing comparable benefits in different jurisdictions may vary widely.
Disclosure of amounts paid will be provided in the implementation report and will be explained where the cost of benefits is significant.
Not performance based.
1 This element has been added to the remuneration policy to extend the long term outlook of the policy beyond but in addition to the annual bonus plan 2 The proposed structure of paying income tax for the executives is due to the Georgian tax code which requires a company to pay income tax on any benefit paid to the executives  and does not allow for alternative arrangements.
However the numbers disclosed include such income tax estimates.
3 According to Georgian tax code the company is responsible for paying income tax for the participants.
As about 95% of the remuneration of CEO and CFO is subject to Georgian tax regulations the Company pays respective taxes on the relevant portion.
Directors Remuneration Policy continued 142 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017
REMUNERATION REPORT CONTINUED
10.2 Individual arrangements There are no individual arrangements other than those disclosed in this report.
10.3 Performance measures and targets a Salary  deferred shares Paying part of the executive directors salary in shares is an important element of remuneration as it helps to align each individuals efforts with the Groups performance.
As the executive directors shareholding will increase each year we believe this is an effective tool to incentivise executive directors to think about longterm performance.
There are no performance measures or conditions associated with salary  the salary is fixed at the outset in the executive directors service contracts.
The Policy naturally results in our executive Directors holding a significant number of unvested shares and achieves a delay between performance and vesting which we believe is consistent with the principles of the Corporate Governance Code.
Unvested shares are subject to continuous employment and malus and clawback requirements but are not subject to specific performance conditions.
Annual deferred share bonuses are awarded to reward past performance over the year.
At the end of the performance year the shares will be delivered to the extent that annual KPIs have been met as determined by the Remuneration Committee.
Once shares are delivered the shares will be subject to a 2 year post performance vesting period with 50% vesting each year subject to continued employment.
The Remuneration Committees goal for each KPI is to establish a level of performance that is not certain to be attained so that achieving or exceeding the targets requires diligent efforts by our executive directors.
Remuneration committee intention is to retain the current KPIs for the Annual Share Bonus which consist of corporate financial such as ROE cost to income ratio CoR and nonfinancial KPIs share price performance employments and customer satisfaction levels and individual KPIs such as leadership andor performance of specific function and which reflect the executive directors required contribution to the Groups overall key strategic and financial objectives for that financial year.
However given the fact that the first year under assessment for the Annual Share Bonus is 2019 the respective KPIs will be set at the start of the each performance period 2019 2020 and 2021.
The nature but not necessarily the weightings of the KPIs will be disclosed in the annual report published in the performance year.
However specific targets for each KPI will be disclosed only retrospectively given the sensitivity of the measure to the Groups business.
Each KPI will have a threshold target and maximum level and conditions to meet these levels.
Targets for each corporate KPI will be determined by the Remuneration Committee and will be approved by the Board.
Individual KPIs will be approved by the Remuneration Committee based on the recommendations of the CEO.
The Awards will be granted subject to performance conditions over a 3 year period.
After three years the shares will be delivered to the extent the performance conditions have been met as determined by the Remuneration Committee.
Once shares are delivered the shares will be subject to a 2 year post performance holding period subject to continued employment.
This approach will be used for 3 years starting from 2019.
Thus 20192021 performance will be measured in 2022 20202022 performance will be measured in 2023 and 20212023 performance will be measured in 2024.
Given the fact that the first performance period under the LTIP will start only in 2019 the exact performance conditions will be defined closer to this date.
The Remuneration Committees goal for each performance condition is to establish a level of performance that is not certain to be attained so that achieving or exceeding the targets requires diligent efforts by our executive directors.
Remuneration Committees current view is that performance condition will include a measure of efficiency e.
ROE a measure of share price performance e. measure of long term differentiator such as customer experience.
However in the case of relative KPIs the Remuneration Committee retains the right to apply downward adjustment considering factors such as absolute share priceTSR in determining the final payouts.
Any measure selected will be closely aligned with the group strategy.
The performance conditions for each three year performance period will be set at the start of the each performance period 2019 2020 and 2021.
The performance conditions and respective targets will be disclosed in the annual report published in the year of the award.
The Remuneration Committee has discretion to amend the agreed performance conditions in exceptional circumstances if in the opinion of the Remuneration Committee the original performance conditions are no longer appropriate.
Directors Remuneration Policy continued 143 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Additional Information Financial Statements Governance Each performance condition will have a threshold target and maximum level and conditions to meet these levels.
Targets for each corporate performance condition are determined by the Remuneration Committee and are approved by the Board.
Executive directors should naturally build up a significant holding of shares in the Company.
In order to encourage this and set a standard position the Company is introducing a minimum shareholding requirement of 200% base salary.
There is no set time during which this requirement must be met but until it is met executive directors are expected to hold shares net of tax acquired under this policy.
Shares counted for this purpose include deferred shares paid in relation to salary and annual bonus and any vested awards from the LTIP.
Unvested awards from the LTIP will not be counted.
Consideration of shareholder views The current policy takes into account shareholder feedback regarding the remuneration of the Board.
Shareholder input has been key to designing the remuneration policy as described above.
We have established a practice to meet with the shareholders on this matter and request their feedback which will continue in the future.
The Remuneration Committee remains mindful of shareholder views when evaluating and setting ongoing remuneration strategy.
Remuneration throughout the Group Remuneration of other top management members of JSC TBC Bank is similar to that of the executive members of the Company.
Other senior and middle management across the Group as well as some other key employees receive their entire salary in cash and are also eligible to cash and share bonus compensation.
All other employees within the Group receive cash salaries and may be eligible to receive cash bonuses.
Executive director and employee pay is studied and determined through the use of appropriate market data usually with input from a compensation consultant.
All employees receive a competitive benefit package in line with Georgian market practice and are entitled to participate in the pension scheme on a voluntary basis.
Policy table nonexecutive directors In the same way as the executives the nonexecutive directors receive their compensation both from the Company and the main subsidiary JSC TBC Bank proportionate to the time spent working on the respective entitys Boards and committees.
Starting from 1 January 2018 until the end of 2021 the compensation for the nonexecutive directors is as follows 144 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017
REMUNERATION REPORT CONTINUED
Component Purpose and Link to Strategy Operation Maximum Opportunity Fees To provide appropriate compensation for a non executive director of the Group sufficient to attract retain and motivate high calibre individuals with the relevant skills knowledge and experience to further the Groups strategy.
In addition for the chairman and deputy chairman the Groups remuneration policy reflects the importance and unique role each of them has within the Group.
The Group pays fees to nonexecutive directors.
The fees are determined by the Remuneration Committee and the current level of fees include the following The annual fees for the chairman are US950000 The annual fees for the deputy chairman are
The annual fees for acting as a nonexecutive director other than for chairman and deputy chairman range between US84375  US94553 The annual fees for acting as Senior Independent Director in addition to the fees received for acting as a nonexecutive director are US20000 The annual fees for relevant committee memberships range between US10882  US11250 The annual fees for committee chairman positions range between US27206  US28125 The ranges depend on tax residency status where the Company aims to ensure that the net compensation per each of the items above paid to the nonexecutive directors are the same.
The Remuneration Committee reserves the right to structure the nonexecutive directors fees differently in its absolute discretion.
The Remuneration Committees discretion will be exercised fairly and reasonably and with regard to appropriate comparable market practice and business strategy.
Fees are generally paid monthly in cash.
However the Remuneration Committee reserves the right to pay the fees on a different basis.
Fees are periodically reviewed and adjusted by the Remuneration Committee having regard to external comparators such as the Groups peer group the chair or committee roles and responsibilities and other market factors.
The maximum annual fees that may be paid to the chairman and deputy chairman are US950000 and US800000 respectively.
The maximum annual fee paid to the Senior Independent Director is
The maximum annual fee paid for acting as a nonexecutive director other than for chairman deputy chairman and Senior Independent Director is US165000.
Expenses To compensate nonexecutive directors for expenses incurred in connection with the performance of their nonexecutive director duties and to ensure the Group has the appropriate nonexecutive director input as and when required.
The Group may reimburse nonexecutive directors for their expenses incurred in connection with the performance of their duties including attending Board and committee meetings such as for example travel accommodation other subsistence expenses and personal security arrangements Boardcommittee dinners and functions Board training sessions directors and officers liability insurance advice in respect of professional duties and corporate hospitality events or the Group may pay such expenses directly.
For the Chairman and Deputy Chairman JSC TBC Bank provides insurance company car service and a security service for the Chairman only which is a legacy arrangement and widely establish practice in Georgian market.
The policy is framed by the nature of the expenses that the Remuneration Committee is willing to provide to nonexecutive directors.
The maximum amount payable depends on the cost of providing such expenses in the location at which the nonexecutive director is based.
Shareholders should note that the cost of providing comparable expenses in different jurisdictions may vary widely.
Policy table nonexecutive directors 145 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Additional Information Financial Statements Governance 13.1 Nonexecutive directors Since nonexecutive directors are not employees they do not receive compensation or benefits reserved only for employees such as company paidsubsidised insurance or paid holiday.
The nonexecutive directors are not eligible for performancebased share awards.
They do not currently receive pension or other equivalent benefits except for the chairman and deputy chairman who are compensated for and provided with car service expenses.
Awards with performance conditions are not part of the nonexecutive remuneration package as we do not wish the nonexecutive directors to be driven by shortterm Group performance so as to maintain their independence as advisors to the Group.
The nonexecutive directors are entitled to broad indemnification by the Group pursuant to a deed of indemnity entered into with each director and are covered by the Groups Directors and Officers Liability Insurance Policy.
Illustration of application of the Remuneration Policy The following graphs illustrate the levels of remuneration that each executive director could earn in 2019 under the new Policy.
Cash Salary Deferred Shares Salary Deferred Shares Bonus
Below award threshold
Target award
Below award threshold
Target award
47% 20% 15% 12% 53% 23% 2227899 963994 3819994 3070502 Chief Executive Ofcer Chief Financial Ofcer 1107633 482004 1910004 1524720 17% 13% 37% 31% 41% 34% 31% 26% 47% 20% 15% 12% 53% 23% 17% 13% 37% 31% 41% 34% 31% 26%
Directors compensation consists of cash salary deferred share salary annual bonus and LTIP.
Cash salary and deferred share salary are the same in each performance scenario.
No pension contributions have been included in the performance scenarios as we assume no pension contributions will be paid.
The below bonus threshold chart reflects a scenario where KPI achievement falls below 60% and so no bonuses would be awarded.
If KPIs are fulfilled at minimum on target or maximum ranges the evaluation and subsequent bonus award will be 60% 100% and 135137% respectively.
Recruitment policy The Remuneration Committee intends that the components of remuneration set out in the above policy tables and the approach to those components as set out in the policy tables will subject to the remainder of this recruitment policy be equally applicable to the annual package provided to new recruits i. employee benefits for nonexecutive directors fees and relevant expenses.
For an internal appointment of an executive or nonexecutive director  any pay element awarded in respect of the prior role may either continue on its original terms or be adjusted to reflect the new appointment as appropriate.
In the year of promotion for an internal appointment additional awards prorated for the time served in the new role may be made to the individual within the maximums set out in the policy tables above.
Where necessary the Remuneration Committee can make a recruitmentrelated award to an external candidate.
However  the Group will not pay more than the Remuneration Committee considers necessary and will endeavour to deliver any such awards in line with the existing Group policies.
The Remuneration Committee has a preference not to provide a buy out arrangement andor to establish additional or particular arrangements specifically to facilitate the recruitment of the individual.
However where an individual would be forfeiting remuneration or employment terms in order to join the Group the Remuneration Committee may award appropriate compensation.
The Remuneration Committee would require reasonable evidence of the nature and value of any forfeited arrangements and would to the extent practicable ensure any compensation was of comparable commercial value and capped as appropriate taking into account the terms of the previous arrangement being forfeited for example the form and structure of award timeframe performance criteria and likelihood of vesting.
Where appropriate the Remuneration Committee would have a preference for buyouts to be delivered in the form of shares in the Company.
All such awards will be appropriately discounted to 146 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017
REMUNERATION REPORT CONTINUED
Committee overpay.
The Remuneration Committee will also consider the application of performance conditions andor clawback provisions as appropriate.
Details of any recruitmentrelated awards will be appropriately disclosed and any arrangements would be made within the context of minimising the cost to the Group.
In any case total value of a recruitment and buy out award should not exceed 100% of the salary including cash and share salary paid for the comparable executive position the year immediately preceding to the recruitment.
The Group may make a contribution towards legal fees in connection with agreeing employment terms.
The Group may also agree to pay certain expenses and taxes should an executive director be asked to relocate to a different country such that the executive director pays no more than would have been required in the home location.
Policy on payments for loss of office The following paragraphs describe the Groups general policy on payments for loss of office.
Section 16.2 sets out the policy for payments on termination of Mr Butskhrikidzes and Mr Shagidzes service contracts.
Any compensation payable in the event that the employment of an executive director is terminated will be determined in accordance with the terms of any service contract between the Group and the executive as well as the relevant rules governing outstanding deferred share awards bonus shares awards under the LTIP and this Policy.
Please see section 16.2 further for a summary of the treatment of such awards where an executive directors is a good or bad leaver.
The Remuneration Committee will take all relevant factors into account when considering whether the director is a good leaver as set out in their service contract or other applicable plan document.
The Remuneration Committee will exercise its absolute discretion to determine whether such terms should be included in any new service contract.
In addition to any payment referred to above the Remuneration Committee reserves discretion as it considers appropriate to continue benefits beyond the date of termination pay for relocation to previous location where applicable make payments in lieu of notice accelerate the vesting of equity awards make a severance payment andor pay for out placement services andor legal fees.
Generally the Group would require a noncompete and confidentiality agreement from the departing executive director to protect the interests of the Group.
16.1 Notice periods Notice periods are set out in the executive directors service contracts.
Generally speaking either party may terminate the service contract by giving the other party not more than one year and not less than seven months notice and the Group will reserve the right to terminate without notice in certain circumstances.
Notice periods will be reviewed by the Board and the Remuneration Committee when contracts are due for renewal with consideration given to business continuity and potential candidates in the market amongst other factors.
16.2 Service contracts The service contracts of executive directors may contain tailored terms which allow for termination payments to be paid if the executive directors employment is terminated under certain circumstances such as following a corporate change a change in control involuntary termination termination without cause for good leaver reasons including death or disability each as defined in the applicable executive directors service contract.
Details of such terms contained in the current executive directors service contracts are described below a Service contracts of the Groups current executive directors Service contracts with TBC PLC On 12 May 2016 TBC PLC entered into a service agreement with Vakhtang Butskhrikidze.
The service agreement can be terminated by either party giving to the other party not less than seven months written notice.
In addition TBC PLC may terminate the service agreement without notice or pay in lieu of notice for cause as defined in the service contract.
The service contract contains noncompete and confidentiality provisions and is governed by English law.
On 12 May 2016 TBC PLC entered into a service agreement with Giorgi Shagidze.
TBC PLC will also reimburse the CFO for all reasonable business expenses properly incurred and paid by him.
The service agreement can be terminated by either party giving to the other party not less than seven months written notice.
In addition TBC PLC may terminate the service agreement without notice or pay in lieu of notice for cause.
The service agreement contains non compete and confidentiality provisions and is governed by English law.
Service contracts with TBC JSC Vakhtang Butskhrikidze and Giorgi Shagidze also serve as CEO and deputy CEO CFO of TBC JSC respectively.
Although it is not strictly required under UK law we have described the service contracts that the Groups executive directors have with TBC JSC below for completeness.
In 1995 TBC JSC entered into a service agreement with Vakhtang
The current service agreement provides for Mr Butskhrikidze to act as CEO of TBC JSC.
The service agreement contains noncompete and confidentiality provisions and is governed by Georgian law.
In 2010 TBC JSC entered into a service agreement with Giorgi
The current service agreement provides for Mr .
Shagidze to act as deputy CEO CFO of TBC JSC.
The service agreement contains noncompete and confidentiality provisions and is governed by Georgian law.
In September 2016 Vakhtang Butskhrikidze and Giorgi Shagidze were appointed to the Supervisory Board of TBC JSC.
The service contracts are kept at TBC Bank head office a the following address 7 Marjanishvili street Tbilisi 0102 Georgia 147 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Additional Information Financial Statements Governance Vesting and lapse of awards The following table sets out the details of the shareholdings for the chief executive director and chief financial director of the Group.
Holder
Number of Shares Held
Vested
TBC Bank Group PLC JSC TBC
Total
Vakhtang
Butskhrikidze 692999 186857 879856 267399 612457 Giorgi Shagidze 81787 86431 168218 128886 39332 The shares held in JSC TBC Bank were awarded to each executive director before the premium listing under the applicable compensation policy.
Those shares were not exchanged for Company shares due to temporary Georgian tax obligations.
The executive directors intend to exchange those shares with Company shares following the expiration of the tax obligations.
If an executive director ceases to be employed by any Group company at hisher sole decision before the service contract expires or if the executive director leaves for a bad leaver reason the executive director must return all bonus shares awarded for which the continuous employment condition has not been met or as directed by the Company andor any nil cost options awarded will lapse and any unvested awards under the LTIP will lapse.
Depending on the circumstances the Remuneration Committee may at its sole discretion and with regard to any recommendation made by the CEO of the Company as applicable allow the executive director to partially or fully retain such bonus shares andor LTIP awards.
If the executive director is determined by the Remuneration Committee to be a good leaver the executive director is entitled to receive an award of deferred salary and deferred bonus shares pro rated for both time and performance during the performance year.
All outstanding awards of deferred salary and deferred bonus will continue to vest on their initial terms.
Subject to the achievement of the relevant performance criteria a portion of any outstanding awards under the LTIP may vest subject to a reduction pro rata to reflect shortened period of employment between grant and the end of the holding period.
In general the original performance period will continue to apply.
However where in the opinion of the remuneration committee early vesting is appropriate or where it is otherwise necessary awards will vest by reference to performance criteria achieved over the period of employment.
If during the three years after the dismissal of the executive director as a good leaver it is established that the executive director was a bad leaver the provisions applicable to bad leavers will apply.
Each nonexecutive director is required to submit himself or herself for annual reelection at the Annual General Meeting.
The letters of appointment with the Group for each nonexecutive director are effective from 2016.
The letters of appointment provide for a one month notice period although the Group may terminate the appointment with immediate effect without notice or pay in lieu of notice if the nonexecutive director has committed any serious breach or nonobservance of his or her obligations to the Group is guilty of fraud or dishonesty brings the Group or himherself into disrepute or is disqualified as acting as a nonexecutive director among other circumstances.
Upon termination the only remuneration a nonexecutive director is entitled to is accrued fees as at the date of termination together with reimbursement of properly incurred expenses incurred prior to the termination date.
Legacy arrangements The Remuneration Committee reserves the right to make any remuneration payments and payments for loss of office notwithstanding that they are not in line with the Policy set out above where the terms of that payment were agreed before the Policy came into effect including without limitation pursuant to awards granted before the Policy came into effect or before the individual became a director of the Group provided the payment was not in consideration for the individual becoming a director.
In addition the policy tables shall not have the effect of limiting any payment to a new recruit made under the recruitment policy set out in section 15 above.
Consideration of employment conditions within the Group In accordance with prevailing commercial practice the Remuneration Committee evaluates the compensation and conditions of employees of the Group in determining the Policy with respect to executive directors.
The Remuneration Committee may engage external advisors to assist in analysing remuneration in the
Each year the Remuneration Committee approves the overall percentage pay out for compensation and material changes to employee benefit plans.
Consistent with practice in the industry in which the Group operates it is not the Groups policy to consult with staff on the pay of its directors.
Minor changes The Remuneration Committee may make without the need for shareholder approval minor amendments to the Policy for regulatory exchange control tax or administrative purposes or to take account of changes in legislation.
1 The executive directors service contracts and nonexecutive directors letters of appointment are also available for inspection at TBC PLCs registered office.
148 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 AUDIT COMMITTEE REPORT Chairmans Letter Dear shareholders I am pleased to present the Audit Committee report for the Group.
I invite you to read the results of these and other main activities of the Audit Committee in the report below.
Nicholas Dominic Haag Chairman of the Audit Committee 28 March 2018 Committee Structure and Role Since the Companys incorporation in 2016 there have been two separate but interconnected audit committees in the Group for each of the Company and the Bank which have common membership and perform a joint function within the Group.
In practice we consider both audit committees as complementary and somewhat fungible with both of them being focused on optimising governance of the Group as a whole especially because the Bank represents 98% of the Groups total assets.
Nevertheless we continue to ensure that particular resolutions are passed by the appropriate audit committee with as little duplication as possible while making sure that there is seamless cooperation between the two committees to avoid any gaps in overall scrutiny.
For the purpose of this report we refer to the two committees collectively as the Audit Committee.
The Audit Committees primary responsibilities include overseeing the Groups financial reporting process supervising the process of appointment of external auditors reviewing the implementation of the Groups accounting and reporting policies and practices ensuring the integrity accuracy and full disclosure of the Groups financial condition including the Groups taxes and assisting in the assessment of the going concern status of the Group.
The Audit Committee is also responsible for reviewing relevant content of the Groups annual reports and interim statements and supervising the Banks systems of internal control in relation to financial reporting and certain operational risks including internal investigations into control weaknesses.
Moreover the Audit Committee evaluates the managements competence in all the above areas and ensures that they take necessary corrective actions in a timely manner to address any vulnerabilities.
In relation to the risk assessment function the Group has a separate Boardlevel committee responsible for risk ethics and compliance the RECC which is chaired by Nikoloz Enukidze who is also a member of the Audit Committee.
Nicholas Haag the Chairman of the Audit Committee is in turn a member of the RECC.
Please see pages 60 to 69 for a description of the Groups risk management framework and pages 123 to 125 for the RECCs report.
Whilst there are synergies between the work of the Audit Committee and the RECC and they share many of the same complex issues of judgement and policy we continue to believe that there is a clear benefit in preserving a separate independent Audit Committee as well as a strong RECC.
We recognise that there is in any case no clear dividing line between financial risk and other risks but we acknowledge that the Audit Committee is more attuned to risks in financial reporting whereas the RECC is responsible for monitoring ongoing credit and other market risks.
In addition to close cooperation with the RECC several of the Audit Committees members including the Chairman also sit on the Remuneration Committee which allows the Audit Committee to track remuneration policies and ensure that there are no incentives which could weaken controls or introduce Management bias in connection with loan provisioning and valuations.
The Audit Committee has adequate administrative resources from the Groups and Board Secretariat and receives sufficient and timely materials from the Management both proactively and when we make additional information requests.
The lines of communication with the Management are open with constructive candid and continual dialogue taking place throughout the year.
Committee Composition Expertise and Independence At the end of 2017 the audit committee of the Company comprised five nonexecutive Directors Nicholas Haag Chairman Eric J.
Rajendra Stephan Wilcke Nikoloz Enukidze and Stefano Marsaglia.
All members of the audit committee of the Company have been deemed as independent under the Code which is applicable to companies listed on the premium segment of the LSE.
We believe that the audit committee of the Company and all of its members continue to exercise fully independent judgement in all matters related to their functions.
In addition members of the audit committee continue to satisfy the director independence criteria as defined by the Georgian Law of Banks.
Committee Meetings In 2017 the attendance level of members at meetings of the audit committee of the Company was 98%.
The majority of meetings took place in London and were attended by members either physically in person or via teleconference.
In case of the latter relevant attendees participated from locations within the UK.
The attendance of members at the Audit Committee meetings during the year 2017 are set out in the Directors Governance statement on page 106.
The meetings of the Banks audit committee took place in both the UK and Georgia with the majority of meetings taking place in 149 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Additional Information Financial Statements Governance
The reason for this is that the Audit Committee is keen to maintain a high degree of interaction with a range of local staff employed by the Bank in operational financial and control roles.
This allows us to gather deeper insights into the Banks processes culture and morale of staff who have functions related to our audit work.
This type of review cannot be so easily performed in the UK due to logistical reasons and the extra expense of having to bring a large number of the Banks employees to London on a regular basis.
Attendance of meetings of the Banks Audit Committee in 2017 is set out in the Directors Governance statement on page 106.
All current members of the Audit Committeesee biographies on pages 114 to 117 of the Annual Report are financially literate and possess a detailed understanding of the financial services sector with backgrounds primarily in the banking industry in both the EU and emerging markets as well as consultancy risk management and IT.
Most have served on or chaired other banks audit and risk committees which provides them with the necessary expertise to guide and challenge the Board the Management and external auditors.
The Audit Committee therefore has sufficient recent and relevant expertise in particular of the financial services industry to operate effectively and it calls upon other expert internal and external resources as and when required.
Moreover the Chairman of the Audit Committee has the recent and relevant financial experience required by the Code to fulfil his responsibilities as a designated financial expert on the Audit Committee.
Although one member of the Audit Committee has a substantially fulltime executive role on the management board of another nonconflicting bank and all other members spend much of their time on various supervisorytype boards the Board believes that members of the Audit Committee have sufficient time to devote to their responsibilities towards the Group.
Appropriate training is available to members of the Audit Committee and has recently included professional updates by external specialists on new accounting regulations which are currently being implemented and relevant developments in corporate governance and best practice which training was attended by most members of the Audit Committee.
We continue to review in collaboration with the Corporate Governance and Nominations Committee suitable mediumterm succession plans for the Audit Committee similar to the same process for all other committees of the Board.
Our priority would be to select future members of the Audit Committee with a background in the audit industry or one with a relevant specialist background and knowledge such as in cybersecurity.
The Committee is also acutely aware of the highest standards expected of disclosure recordkeeping and controls associated with the Companys listing on the premium segment of the LSE.
We will continue to work to ensure these standards are fully met and maintained.
Over the course of 2017 there were 8 formal meetings of the audit committee of the Company and the same number for the Banks audit committee all of which were minuted.
In addition there were regular interim meetings via teleconference facilities where members discussed a narrower agenda mostly around planned releases of financial data.
Members are also in regular email correspondence with each other on various matters relating to the Audit Committees work.
During each formal meeting the Audit Committee met in executive session without Management present.
In addition we typically also met with at least one member of the Management Board of the Bank responsible for a particular divisional line of business to seek feedback on issues that may have been highlighted in Internal Audit reports.
This allows us to impress upon senior members of the Management the importance of minimising deficiencies and remedying any that do occur.
We also typically met with other senior members of the Management notably the CEO CFO COO CIO and
The Head of Internal Audit was present throughout every meeting.
We have adopted a policy of inviting PwC to attend the entirety of our Audit Committee meetings except for meetings that address topics sensitive to PwC such as auditor appointments and fees because we felt that this would assist with their understanding of the Company and the Group.
This also allowed us to benefit from PwCs wideranging expertise.
The audit committee of the Company met twice in or around each quarter of 2017 broadly in synch with the Banks quarterly financial reporting cycle.
At least one such quarterly meeting coincided with the timing of our Board meetings and the Audit Committee was scheduled a day in advance of these meetings to ensure that we could formally present our summary findings to the Board.
The
Audit Committee used such reports for highlighting the scope for process improvement and inviting responses from the CEO or his senior team which led to followup actions that were formally minuted by the Board.
The number of meetings of the audit committee of the Company doubled from that held in 2016 which reflects additional supervisory responsibilities arising from the Companys listing on the premium segment of the LSE its status as a Public Interest Entity under the Statutory Audit Directive 200643EC of the European Parliament and of the Council and its commitment to enhanced supervision.
The
Company became a Public Interest Entity for the first time in 2017.
In 2017 there were no significant or enduring points of difference of opinion between the Audit Committee and PwC or between the Audit Committee and the Board or Management.
Audit Committee Effectiveness The Terms of Reference for the audit committee of the Company were approved by the Board on May 2016.
The document is available on TBCs website at site The audit committee Policy of the Bank was revised and approved in March 2017 and approved by the Supervisory Board of the Bank in the same month.
In March 2018 the Audit Committee conducted an annual Effectiveness SelfReview using an extensive and customised questionnaire.
In addition the whole Board included in its wider SelfAssessment certain questions relating to the efficacy of the Audit Committee amongst other committees of the Board.
Both the Audit Committee and the Board concluded that the former is constituted properly operates effectively and carries out all its responsibilities as laid out in its Terms of Reference and Policy.
Integrity of Financial Statements We have reviewed with input from the External Auditor and inhouse Finance Risk and Internal Audit teams all data and narrative comment and concluded that the Annual Report and full year financial statements give a complete true fair balanced and 150 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 AUDIT COMMITTEE REPORT CONTINUED understandable view of the Groups financial position and are consistent with the Committees understanding of the facts and provide the information necessary for the Companys shareholders and other stakeholders to assess the financial condition of the Group.
The Committee is conscious that the Group consists of the Company which is listed on the premium segment of the LSE  and the Bank which is the largest financial services company in the Georgian market and it has legal and social responsibilities to the Companys shareholders and other stakeholders of the Group.
Our business is overwhelmingly tied to the performance of the Georgian economy.
In
2017 Georgia delivered a strong real GDP growth of 5.0% an improvement on 2.8% growth in 2016.
The Georgian government and third party forecasts for 2018 suggest growth of a similar magnitude may be achievable.
At the timing of writing the macroeconomic outlook for Georgia looks more positive than it has been for several years with significant improvements in foreign trade and tourism as well as development of important and often multinational infrastructure projects which indicate the potential for Georgia to become more of an international hub economy.
Nevertheless there is always a risk of a sudden downturn due to a changing local regional or global environment and the Committee like the RECC tracks closely on a weekly basis relevant economic data for warning signs.
We are equally vigilant in seeking any evidence of complacency which might lead to a risk of deterioration in internal standards.
The
Audit Committee will seek to ensure that any unexpected deterioration in the Georgian economy will trigger extra vigilance on our part in relation to financial controls and reporting risk since any challenging economic context potentially raises both credit and operational risks within the Bank.
The recent adoption of IFRS9 in our view further supports the early revelation of any such potential deterioration in loan quality and it is being swiftly reflected in our models with any necessary extra provisioning accounted for accordingly.
The Group has always operated a conservative provisioning policy but the Audit Committee welcomes the extra discipline imposed by IFRS9 and the additional disclosures to the Groups stakeholders.
The Audit Committee remains as focused as ever on ensuring the integrity of our financial releases and internal records.
The Audit Committee prevets all audited and auditorreviewed financial releases as well as all other financial releases before making recommendations to the Board to approve these.
The Audit Committee holds formal discussions with the Management in particular the CFO and his finance team about each of these releases typically with a multistage drafting review and approval process.
We are also in regular communication with the External Auditor via both teleconference facilities and correspondence before approving any releases.
We have extended the remit of Internal Audit which now undertakes its own assessment of financial and regulatory reporting to give the Audit Committee further assurance on the integrity of our reported numbers and above all the governance process involved in assembling and releasing our financial statements in the public domain.
We also monitor the financial data published on the TBC Banks website to ensure its accuracy.
External Audit Team and Planning The Audit Committee makes recommendations on the appointment or potentially removal and compensation of external auditors and seek to maximise the value of the external audit relationship.
We assess and approve audit scope and frequency make recommendations to auditors on areas for particular focus and receive and review key external audit reports.
The audit committee of the Company held multiple audit planning meetings with PwC in 2017 commencing this process in the middle of the year.
The Audit Committee had the opportunity without involvement of the Management to highlight areas it wished the External Auditor to focus on flagging relevant concerns and trends and discussing the appropriate audit response.
The Audit Committee has a policy of regular quarterly face to face discussions with PwC as part of our formal meeting agendas proactively and mutually addressing any material audit or control issues.
In addition the Chairman and often other members of the Audit Committee had a similar number of more informal i. spectrum.
This provided both parties with the opportunity for open dialogue.
Given the holding company structure of the Group both the London and Tbilisi practices of PwC are fully involved in the audit process for the Group.
PwC Georgia and PwC in Azerbaijan which audits our small Azeri subsidiary are both part of PwCs Central and Eastern Europe network firm.
In the opinion of the Audit Committee this double coverage works well and provides some extra reassurance to us in terms of scrutiny of the Groups financial and risk management processes.
We also enjoy ready access to our audit engagement partner Jeremy Foster for the entire Group who is aware of his overall responsibility and ultimate signoff duties and the cooperation and communication between the two audit practices is well coordinated with a common audit methodology.
The London audit team coordinates the entire audit for the Group and the balance of PwCs audit responsibilities is shifting somewhat from Tbilisi to London.
We expect this trend to continue going forward.
The Chairman and majority of the Audit Committees members are based in the UK and enjoy ready access to the audit team there.
In our view Jeremy Foster has exhibited not only strong technical skills but also a good understanding of the Groups business the country and sector.
He has also exhibited suitably robust challenge and professional scepticism in relation to the audit.
The Audit Committee has shared its views on audit and partner quality with PwCs own independent senior partner who collects client feedback and seeks to maximise standards of service by PwC.
In 2017 we welcomed Agnieszka Accordi as the new PwC audit partner for the Banks audit.
We are satisfied with the smooth transition from the previous longstanding PwC audit partner for the Bank and she has made a strong handson start to understanding the Banks business and audit issues and is also a subjectexpert in areas of importance to us in particular IFRS9.
Agnieszka is based in Warsaw but similar to Jeremy Foster has already travelled to Georgia on a number of occasions.
151 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Additional Information Financial Statements Governance Areas of Focus for External Audit and Audit Committee The audit coverage and the judgements about underlying audit materiality have been explained to us satisfactorily.
We agreed with PwC an overall consolidated audit materiality sum of GEL19.7m for the Group compared to GEL15.8m in 2016.
The increase is related to the further expansion in the Groups size and profitability.
We continue to believe that pretax profitability of 5% is a suitable and meaningful materiality basis for the Company especially given the relatively stable performance of the Groups profitability metric over the years.
In accordance with our normal practice we have assessed the reasonableness and appropriateness of all critical accounting estimates and judgements in applying accounting policies.
In the frequent planning meetings held between the Audit Committee and PwC there were a number of areas of focus identified.
The key accounting judgements and significant estimates were identified and have been addressed with appropriate resources including the necessary involvement of specialists in these areas.
In particular we agreed with PwC that the two most significant auditrelated risks were the Managements ability to override controls and the provisions for impairment of loans and guarantees.
We also agreed with PwC an additional elevated risk in relation to the disclosure of the potential impact of IFRS9 given the complexity of determining such estimates and the requirement to guide the market as soon as valid estimates became available.
Other risks in terms of areas of judgement that we asked PwC to focus on included accruals for litigation and claims collateral values supporting the Groups loan book net realisable value of repossessed collateral fair value of securities and derivatives share based payments and impairment of goodwill.
Provisions and impairments In terms of loan provisions we have worked with PwC in verifying the current provisioning methodology used by the Bank challenging these assumptions and examining individual mostly corporate loan exposures on the nonperforming and watch list.
We have confirmed the completeness of this watch list which we note tends to be stable in composition without frequent additions that would indicate a deteriorating book or poor capture of problem loans.
We have also sought to use our judgement to backtest the reliability of the Banks previous impairment assumptions which we have found to be reasonably conservative compared to observed reality partly because the Georgian economic climate has proven to be more resilient than the Banks earlier assumptions.
We note that in 2017 we made significant recoveries from corporate loans that we had provisioned or written off.
The Audit Committee benefiting from work streams led by the RECC continues to monitor on a regular basis individuallyassessed loans on the Banks watch list but also collectivelyassessed loans that are less than 90 days past due and not yet classified as impaired to calibrate any deterioration of credit quality that may feed through into impairments.
Given the continued challenging macro economic situation in Azerbaijan the Audit Committee has paid close attention to the portfolio quality of TBC Kredit our Azeri subsidiary.
We note that there has been some stabilisation in the quality of this portfolio since 2016.
Clearly one of the biggest factors impacting and also reflecting the Georgian economy is the stability of the local Lari currency.
The Lari has been prone to periods of volatility particularly in early and late 2017 which was to some extent affected by the seasonality of FX inflow and outflow among other things related to the tourism industry and energy imports.
The exchange rate appears to have now stabilised and the Lari is currently trading at a higher level against the US than at the start of 2017 partly reflecting the apparent weak dollar policy of the US government.
Given the still highly dollarised nature of the Georgian economy and the Banks loan book we invited PwC to scrutinise the Managements judgements as to the continuing creditworthiness of those of the Groups clients including both retail and corporate without matching dollar sources of income.
In reviewing provisioning levels the Audit Committee has sought and received detailed data on such currency mismatches and the RECC has performed a deepdive into this risk issue.
We note that in previous periods of national currency volatility our assumptions regarding the impact of this on the quality of the loan book have proven reassuringly cautious on a backtested basis and the periods of Lari weakness over 2017 were in our view not sustained enough per se to be reflected in changes to the quality of our portfolio.
In addition we note that the welcome larisation policy of the Georgian government has and will continue to diminish the credit and financial reporting risk.
Implementation of IFRS9 Whilst the new standard was not formally adopted until 1 January 2018 IFRS9 was clearly an audit priority for the Audit Committee in 2017.
As noted above this was almost by definition an area of elevated risk in the audit since the implications for the Group are significant in the same way as for most European banks with necessary anticipatory disclosure about the likely transitional impact and the inherent risk of misstatement.
In 2017 the Audit Committee together with the RECC oversaw the Groups preparations for the implementation of IFRS9 which has been a complex project launched by the Group in the middle of 2016.
Both the Audit Committee and the RECC at regular intervals invited the CFO CRO and the internal dedicated Credit Risk and Finance team to provide them with updates and supporting materials.
The Group worked with Deloitte our project consultant and product vendor  throughout the year and the main inputs and outputs were shared with PwC.
We obtained confirmation that PwC employing their accounting modelling and IT specialists have adequately identified the key sources of complexity judgement and uncertainty in the Groups estimates of expected credit losses under IFRS9.
They have undertaken substantive testing of key model methodologies for completeness availability and accuracy of the data flows and for key judgements and assumptions as well as the governance and internal controls involved.
We note however that there is limited historical loss data in the Georgian market.
The Bank has undertaken parallel runs i.
IFRS9 vs IAS39.
We have also maintained a close dialogue on the subject with the NBG.
We anticipate that the Banks provisioning policies described above will enhance the Banks already robust approach to financial reporting on credit risk.
There has been a lot written about the potential impact of IFRS9 being likely to result in higher provisioning and profit and 152 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 loss volatility particularly amongst smaller banks.
However  the Bank has a record of steady growth in earnings and we anticipate that the impact on our results may be somewhat less material.
We recognise that the impact of IFRS9 will take time to calibrate across all across financial institutions and that there will be an element of informed guesswork as it has been widely described in financial reporting until the new standard is definitively established.
Readiness for other accounting standards The Audit Committee has also looked at other accounting standards recently adopted or in the pipeline most notably IFRS15 which has applied since January 2018 on revenue recognition and IFRS16 which is expected to come into force from January 2019 on leases.
IFRS 15 potentially changes the profile of revenue and in some cases cost recognition.
However we anticipate no material impact because most of the Groups revenue will be outside the scope of the new standard as the proportion of contractually uncertain revenue streams is small and equally the cost differential is also small and this is reflected in the impact disclosure in our published 2017 financial statements.
IFRS 16 sets out the principles for the recognition measurement presentation and disclosure of leases which will become effective starting from January 2019.
It will change the reporting standard of leasing transactions for the lessees.
Given the low volume of transactions where the Group is the lessee we do not anticipate any material impact on the financial statements of the Group.
Under IFRS 16 the lessor accounting remains largely unchanged from IAS 17 and hence the change will have no impact on transactions where the Group is a lessor .
Managements ability to override controls In terms of the significant risk of Managements overriding of controls we note that this is a priority risk factor on all audit engagements especially in a banking context because the Management is responsible for the design and operation of systems to prevent and detect fraud and thus it is in a unique position to manipulate accounting records.
In response to this risk PwC conducted review of organisationwide governance systems and overall control environment.
We asked Internal Audit to pay special attention to the bedding down of controls in relation to the Groups acquisition of Bank Republic.
The operational merger was completed in May 2017 and this has several implications for audit in terms of process flow and the integration of differing bank systems.
We invited PwC to analyse the integration and alignment of policies and procedures.
The Audit Committee was satisfied that this integration has been essentially completed.
Deferred tax Another particular focus area of the Audit Committee has been the derecognition of deferred tax balances under changes in Georgian tax regulation.
In May 2016 the government enacted changes to incentivise the reinvestment of corporate profits.
The new code impacts the recognition and measurement principles of the Groups income tax and also affects the Groups deferred income tax assets liabilities.
Whist this law will not come into effect for the banking sector until January 2019 it has a more immediate impact on deferred tax calculations.
In 2016 the Group had a oneoff income charge of GEL 17.9m related to this change and in 2017 the change decreased the effective tax rate from a potential 12% to 9% through reducing deferred tax liabilities relating to the period from 1 January 2019.
However the potentially taxfree reinvestment of future profits will have a positive effect on lowering the Groups future effective tax rate by several percentage points further starting from 2019.
Reporting on the alternate performance measures The Audit Committee is conscious of the recommendations of European authorities and the UKs Financial Reporting Council the FRC in connection with improving the reporting of alternate performance measures APMs.
We carefully track what APMs the Group uses in its financial reporting.
The Group discloses a limited number of APMs such as adjusted cost to income ratio various return metrics and adjustments for the Bank Republic acquisition.
We consider that most of these for example the return metrics pre as well as postprovision are in common usage and meaningful additions to our reporting designed to clarify rather than obfuscate our financial position and do not detract in any way from our core IFRS numbers.
Some of them such as for Bank Republic are inherently timelimited in terms of usage.
Revised segment accounting methodology One other area that the Audit Committee intends to focus on in 2018 and has already discussed with the CFO is the revised segment accounting methodology that the Group is changing from 1 January 2018 because this has implications around divisional profitability and strategy as well as touching on remuneration incentives.
External Audit Quality Tender Assessment and
The Audit Committee is responsible for the assessment of the performance objectivity and independence of the External Auditor and the delivery of a good quality audit.
Each year the Audit Committee is required to consider the reappointment of the auditors the suitability of the lead engagement partner as well as the wider audit team and the remuneration and terms of engagement for the chosen auditor.
PwC have undertaken a comprehensive assessment of their independence in accordance with the requirements of standards and relevant legislation.
PwC has been the Groups External Auditor since 2008.
2017 marks the 10th year in which PwC has audited the Group.
Consequently the Audit Committee had extensive discussions in 2016 and 2017 regarding the merits of conducting an external audit tender under the UK implementation of the EU Audit Regulations for Public Interest Entities the EU Regulations.
Given the Groups recent incorporation of the Company and its listing on the premium segment of the LSE the audit rotation rules permitted the 10year audit clock for the mandatory tendering of the Group audit to be reset to start in 2016 obviating any requirement for a mandatory audit tender in the foreseeable future.
However  taking into account the existence of the Bank prior to the incorporation of the Company and the duration of our relationship with PwC the Audit Committee evaluated with input from the CFO whether there would be a case nonetheless to initiate an audit tender .
The Audit Committee concluded that it would be distracting to change auditor shortly after the Companys listing on the premium segment of the LSE and given other important work streams for the Groups finance team such as the adoption of IFRS9.
Accordingly the Company has complied with the requirements of The Statutory Audit Services for Large Companies Market Investigation Mandatory Use of Competitive Tender Processes and Audit Committee Responsibilities Order 2014 which relates to the frequency of external auditor tenders for the financial year under review.
AUDIT COMMITTEE REPORT CONTINUED 153 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Additional Information Financial Statements Governance We are also mindful that the availability of leading audit suppliers in the Georgian market is somewhat limited and further restricted by potential conflicts in respect of the provision of such services to other large Georgian banks which makes a change of auditor more difficult but not impossible.
In addition we have taken into account the extra safeguards of a relatively recently appointed lead engagement partner since 2016 ie Jeremy Foster the shift of the centre of gravity for the audit to London from its historical base in Tbilisi and a new engagement partner for the Banks audit ie Agnieszka Accordi appointed in 2017.
Consequently last year we resolved to defer any decision whether to hold an audit tender and we expect that subject to the finalisation of suitable contract terms and the Board approval PwC will remain the Groups External Auditor for 2018.
There is clearly an interesting ongoing global debate about the socalled audit gap which is the occasional difference between expectations of users and auditors as to the responsibilities of the latter and the nature of the audit engagement.
Leaving this aside the Audit Committee has concluded that PwC have delivered a high quality audit.
In 2017 PwC made reliable and effective judgements at all stages identified and focused on areas of greatest risk and convincingly articulated their testing strategy.
We welcomed the candour of the audit partners for both the Company and the Bank and the clarity of their observations in private and informal sessions.
As noted above we are confident in the technical and personal qualities displayed by Jeremy Foster and Agnieszka Accordi and that they have deployed sufficient PwC human and automated i. both London and Tbilisi.
We also note PwCs proven continuing ability to meet our tight reporting deadlines in the context of a larger Group the Companys listing on the premium segment of the LSE and our acquiring the status of a FTSE 250 company.
Feedback from our CFO and finance team has been positive expressing the view to the Audit Committee that PwC have demonstrated a good understanding of the Groups business and the current economic environment in Georgia and have provided useful insight into corporate governance and good advice on the enhancement of disclosures in this Report.
Equally PwC have shared with us supportive insights into the Management as part of their audit findings.
In the meantime both the Audit Committee and the Management consciously cultivate relationships with other prominent audit firms and some of their individual partners in London and Tbilisi and use the allocation of nonaudit services as an opportunity to engage with and to try out different firms and to familiarise some of them with the Company and our business.
Audit quality will always be paramount in our selection of auditor.
External Audit Quality Validation As noted in last years Report FRC undertook a routine formal Audit Quality Review AQR of PwCs audit of the Bank for the year ending December 2015.
It is reassuring to us that the AQR confirmed that the audit was properly compliant and was awarded one of the FRCs highest compliance categories.
The AQR did not highlight any significant areas for improvement and nothing that brought into question the reappointment of PwC.
Over the course of 2017 we have tracked progress in the minor follow up recommendations noted by the FRC in their AQR and implemented with PwC small changes in audit procedure for example acceleration of communication with this Committee.
External Audit Independence and Provision of NonAudit Services The Audit Committee is rigorous in ensuring that all nonaudit assignments to our External Auditor do not jeopardise the latters proper independence of judgement.
We will typically use our External Auditor only where such nonaudit services are required by legislation to be undertaken by the incumbent auditor or where the service is a byproduct of the audit process.
The Groups policy as to the provision of nonaudit services was updated in 2016 and is regularly reviewed to ensure that it continues to be appropriate.
Essentially all such engagements without exception or derogation are first recommended by the CFO and must be approved in advance by the Audit Committee.
We will then use our External Auditor for nonaudit services only where there is either a clear synergy with their audit role or where they offer superior competence or materially better commercial terms.
No nonaudit services were provided by PwC that are or will be prohibited in the foreseeable future by the UKs implementation of relevant EU Regulations.
We have a system in place for precisely tracking procurement and tendering for all nonaudit fees irrespective of their size and scope.
PwC provide the financial audit both for the Company and the Bank.
In
2017 fees to PwC for total contracted auditrelated work totalled US877000 net of taxes of which the fees attributed to the Groups financial audit was US645000 with threequarters for the Companys audit and a quarter for the Banks audit.
The balance of PwCs fees related to additional financial reviews for both entities audit of other subsidiaries and other miscellaneous auditrelated work such as provision of comfort on financial covenants.
We also used PwC for tax audit work in our Azeri subsidiary after a full tender process.
Only 2% of the Groups total spend with PwC in 2017 related to nonaudit work.
In addition only 3% of the Groups total nonaudit services spend was awarded to PwC compared to 70% in 2016 which was then due to the exceptional work related to the Companys listing on the premium segment of the LSE and a number of acquisition related transactions.
The rest of the total nonaudit services spend was shared between three other large firms.
As stated above we work with other firms not only to preserve auditor independence but also to build relations and user experience that will be useful when the Group decides to tender its audit contract in due course.
In terms of nonaudit related services the biggest consulting spend of 2017 US180000 related to designing a methodology around IFSR9 with Deloitte being chosen following a tender of 5 firms and an open tender for fair valuation services was awarded to KPMG.
In summary total spend with the socalled Big Four firms on contracts in 2017 amounted to c.
US1.2M.
Nearly threequarters of this was for auditrelated work all of which went to PwC.
As regards the nonaudit consulting spend only US20000 of approximately US300000 was awarded to PwC excluding c.
US8000 paid for tax audit in our Azeri subsidiary which was in respect of providing consulting services for implementing accounting rules in our leasing subsidiary with PwC winning on price and relevant experience.
The Audit Committee will remain mindful of the relatively new EU Regulations on capping the quantum of nonaudit fees that can be billed in any one year to an external auditor 70% of the average audit fees billed in the last three consecutive years.
We do not believe that the Company will have cause to breach these rules even in the event that PwC remains our External Auditor after 2018.
154 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 We note that there is a commercial banking relationship between PwC Georgia and the Bank but this is not material in size and it is conducted in the ordinary course of business and predates the appointment of PwC as the Groups auditors.
PwC have confirmed in writing their independence and that no prohibited nonaudit services were provided.
There were no independence issues raised by the FRC when they completed their AQR on the Companys audit in 2016.
We remain satisfied taking account also of the views of Internal Audit and the Management that PwC have a robust process for maintaining independence and monitoring such compliance in accordance with the FRCs 2017 Ethical Standards.
In our view PwC continue to offer an independent professional and costeffective service that is capable of detecting any audit irregularities.
Any potential threats to auditor objectivity overfamiliarity self review etc. safeguards.
In particular  we are convinced that the objectivity of the lead audit engagement partner and audit staff is not impaired.
We reached this decision on the basis of PwCs openness to challenge our perception of their proper independence from the Management and absence of any material prior year financial restatements.
Internal Audit The Audit Committee has continued its regular dialogue with Internal Audit during 2017.
The Audit Committee relies heavily on Internal Audit to provide an objective and professionally sceptical view of how the Bank is handling a number of key financial and non financial reporting and recordkeeping tasks.
Whilst primary responsibility to manage risk always resides with the Management Internal Audits role acting in its capacity as the third line of defence is to identify potential problems and recommend ways of improving risk management and internal control.
The Audit Committee meets regularly with the Head of Internal Audit i.
Chief Audit Executive CAE with no members of the Management present during such meetings.
The CAE always attends the entirety of our Audit Committee meetings.
As Chairman of the Audit Committee Nicholas Haag is in at least monthly and often weekly contact with the CAE who functionally reports unambiguously to him.
Internal Audits Charter has been reviewed and approved in March 2017.
The Audit Committee routinely reviews Internal Audits remit and annual and rolling 3year plans on which it provides feedback and authorises any changes to their scope.
We provide targets for and formal assessment of Internal Audit and ensure that it is effective suitably embedded in the organisation and used and respected by the Management.
The CAE routinely attends monthly Management Board meetings as an observer makes a formal quarterly submission to the Audit Committee and delivers a formal status report on its work at every Board meeting as well as providing an annual summary Internal Audit report which presents an overall assessment of the effectiveness of the governance risk and control framework within the Group and an analysis of themes and trends emerging from its work.
The Audit Committee solely determines Internal Audits budget and compensation including variable bonus payments to the CAE and her staff.
The Audit Committee is also responsible for supervising the annual personal performance assessment of the CAE drawing on input from peers direct reports and senior members of the Management including the CEO and the CFO.
We are satisfied that Internal Audit has sufficient human and financial resources to perform its role and the Audit Committee has where necessary requested additional funds for them to purchase the training and tools necessary to function effectively.
The Audit Committee requires all Internal Audit executives to attend training and to take relevant international Certified Internal Auditor exams.
Recently the senior team of Internal Audit attended training in London at the Chartered Institute of Internal Auditors.
In February 2018 the Committee conducted an assessment of the Internal Audit function and concluded that the department is suitably structured and proactively meets its assurance objectives.
The quality of the Internal Audit function continues to improve.
Our
Chartered Institute of Internal Auditors in its September 2017 guidance on effective internal audit in the financial services sector and we expect to be 100% compliant by the end of 2018.
We had planned to conduct an External Quality Assessment EQA of Internal Audit in 2017 but decided to delay this until 2018 in order to allow time for the merger of Bank Republic to be completed and integrated into the Groups business and to ensure that a valid assessment of the combined departments could then be meaningfully undertaken.
The merger of the two Internal Audit units has now been completed satisfactorily and the deputy head of internal audit at Bank Republic has joined the Bank as deputy CAE.
We therefore intend to conduct an EQA of Internal Audit during the course of 2018.
We believe that Internal Audit has not only established its independence from the Management but feels properly empowered and motivated to perform its functions and carry out its duties.
Internal Audits value is recognised by the Management who have proactively requested with sign off from the Audit Committee their involvement in various projects and investigations.
At the behest of the Audit Committee we are in the process of establishing a new Bankwide rating system for Internal Audits audits whereby we will finetune the scoring methodology that the latter uses to evaluate the quantumseverity of sampled anomalies found in branches and service centres in respect of various transactional and lending processes.
We will then establish new thresholds to rank each of the Banks units into categories ranging from good to unsatisfactory.
The intention is to establish clearer and fairer benchmarks for acceptable levels of identified and often very minor deficiencies.
Internal Audit are also working with the Operational Audit department to establish a criticalitybased hierarchy of processes which will again determine the scoring outcome for different units within the Bank.
There will be zero tolerance for any unmitigated critical process failures.
In addition to its regular workload there were a number of oneoff projects commissioned by the Audit Committee from Internal Audit in 2017.
For example we asked Internal Audit to revalidate processes around capturing and disclosing related party lending within the Group.
In 2018 the Audit Committee has requested Internal Audit to confirm the adherence of the Bank to its approved risk tolerances.
We have also asked Internal Audit to work jointly with the Risk department to create a more comprehensive Bank wide register of risks to ensure we have sufficiently captured and recorded all types risks to which the Bank is exposed.
In addition AUDIT COMMITTEE REPORT CONTINUED 155 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Additional Information Financial Statements Governance we have asked Internal Audit in 2018 to undertake a cultural audit of the Bank.
As nonexecutive directors of a company it is often hard to understand the prevailing culture at lower levels of an organisation yet this often determines the opportunity incentives and pressures for staff which may lead them to commit dishonest acts or to bypass critical procedures and even to rationalise this behaviour.
Therefore the Audit Committee considers that such a cultural audit is essential to monitoring behavioural risks presented by the Banks most valuable asset its human capital and confirming that employees live the ethical values espoused by the Company and the wider Group.
The Audit Committee has increasingly organised Internal Audits plan to be riskweighted i.
Management wish it to undertake special investigations arising from situations where the Bank may have heightened vulnerability or has been the victim of fraud.
While we are still some way from automated internal auditing Internal Audit has invested in specialist software which will enable it to speed up some of its more routine tasks allowing it to concentrate on its most addedvalue functions.
Internal Audit must always try to stay ahead of business developments in the same way as all other assurance functions and it must use the power of data to deliver intelligent audit.
Control Environment A sound system of internal control contributes to safeguarding the best interests of all stakeholders and the Groups assets and liabilities.
The Management is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal controls over the capturing processing and reporting of financial information but the Audit Committee has responsibility for ensuring the effectiveness of these controls and for confirming that they are sufficiently robust to cope with changing economic conditions and continued strong growth in the Bank with approximately 7 million branch transactions executed in 2017.
We evaluate the Managements identification of fraud risk and implementation of antifraud measures and supervise investigation of any alleged or suspected frauds brought to our attention.
We seek to establish the right tone at the top and to assess whether the Group is a high integrity organisation from top to bottom.
The Audit Committee regularly reviews progress in this vital discipline and alerts the CEO CFO divisional heads and if necessary the entire Board where it occasionally sees intractable problems and insufficient commitment to continuous process improvement.
The Audit Committee was pleased to note that in 2017 there was a further improvement in the rate and speed of remediation of identified Internal Audit deficiencies especially in the Groups Retail segment.
In accordance with our mandate we have reviewed the robustness of the Banks controls working with our External Auditors our Operational Risk department and Internal Audit.
In the opinion of the Audit Committee there is a proper system and allocation of responsibilities for daytoday monitoring of financial controls within the Group and there have been no significant failings or weaknesses during 2017.
We have also considered the risk of Management override of controls and discussed with PwC their assessment of this mandatory significant audit risk.
We ensure that the remuneration of senior and middle members of the Management is calibrated to ensure that they are not incentivised to take unhealthy shortterm risks to generate personal rewards.
The Audit Committee has had sight of the management internal control letter submitted by our External Auditor and has reviewed the Managements response to it and discussed it directly with PwC.
We also note that no nonstandard representations have been requested from or provided to PwC in respect of the management representation letter signed by the Groups CEO and CFO.
Together with the RECC we have received regular updates from the Chief Compliance Officer on the implementation of the Banks compliance programme which we consider to be sufficiently robust.
Internal Audit seeks to complete audits of all the Banks key operating risks on a regular basis and this activity has continued in 2017.
In particular we tracked very closely all deficiencies both in terms of severity and trend and scrutinised remediation followup with historic analyses being carefully maintained.
The Banks units which showed weaknesses are routinely reinspected to confirm if improvements have been made and the Audit Committee is regularly updated on the results of these repeat audits.
The Audit Committee is increasingly holding not only senior members of the Management but also middle management executives of the Bank accountable for any recurring failures within their control.
This active enforcement has been endorsed by the
The Key Performance Indicators KPIs in respect of meeting control targets and reducing identified audit deficiencies continue to be cascaded down to the local level and also included as KPIs for members of the Management Board of the Bank.
The emphasis is on minimising and mitigating high priority process failings that may lead to real financial and reputational risk for the Bank and the Group as a whole.
We agreed in 2017 to roll out governancetype KPIs in 2018 across branch directors and managers with a significant double digit percentage of their personal variable compensation being dependent on the scores their units achieve.
By driving this cultural change we believe this will help to diminish operational risk and improve behavioural norms.
In addition as noted above we are in the process of establishing a new Internal Audit scoring system that sets clear thresholds on what level of failure is unacceptable and which processes demand zero failure rates.
In 2017 the Audit Committee liaised closely with the RECC to undertake a deepdive into the Operational Risk structures within the Bank working with the new head of this department.
One of the conclusions of this work was the need for a more streamlined approach to managing investigating and reporting fraud risk events especially given the historic dispersion of responsibilities in this regard.
As a matter of policy the Audit Committee have sought this year to elevate the oversight of all the Banks geographic e.
TBC Kredit in Azerbaijan and product e.
TBC Insurance TBC Leasing TBC Pay subsidiaries with additional reporting to central functions whilst not diminishing the authority of subsidiary executives.
We have for example started an initiative to ensure that all best practice policies are rolled out universally and policed by Internal Audit accordingly.
In 2016 the Banks whistleblowing or anonymous hotline for staff and external entities went live alerting the Bank to any potentially unsatisfactory practices.
Arrangements are in place for proportionate and independent investigation of all such cases and 156 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 appropriate follow up actions.
The Audit Committee reviews each reported case on an at least quarterly basis.
Our experience over 2017 has been that many of these cases have been small in scale and typically related to breaches of the Groups behavioural code of conduct or have involved lowlevel disclosure of confidential customer information few have been vexatious and all have been worthwhile alarms.
Most importantly we believe that our employees and customers have come to realise that speaking up is valued and taken seriously.
IT Cybersecurity and Data Protection In 2017 the Audit Committee maintained its focus on IT issues especially following the NBGs request in 2016 that the Bank as a systemic player in the local market undertake an external IT resilience audit which it has passed.
Against a backdrop of increasingly sophisticated global cyberattacks cybersecurity has risen towards the top of the Audit Committees and the Boards agenda in 2017 not only to protect against risk of immediate losses but also to protect against business disruption and reputation risk.
The Audit Committee has supervised an internal cyber health check and gap analysis and concluded that whilst there are areas for improvement the risk environment is satisfactory and that we have sufficient prevention detection and containment practices in place.
Nevertheless the Bank has initiated a plan to address certain areas for improvement and it is in the process of evaluating the availability and costbenefit of taking out some form of cyberrisk insurance policy even though such policies have historically not been available for the Georgian market.
Internal Audit has an experienced IT auditor on its staff who has a particular specialisation in IT security and we believe that this helps to monitor and maintain IT security standards.
The Management continuously seeks to raise risk standards within the organisation requiring almost all employees to pass an IT security awareness test covering vital vulnerabilities such as access control.
In 2017 the Audit Committee also sponsored a review of IT governance within the Group which has being undertaken by a specialist third party consultant and seeks primarily to validate the depth of alignment between the Groups business and IT strategies.
The digitisation and collection and use of data is proceeding everywhere at an unprecedented rate and organisations face significant uncertainty over the extent and pace of regulatory change and genuine public integrity and privacy concerns.
We are conscious that Georgia has just appointed a new data regulator the office of the Personal Data Protection Inspector PDP who we understand are currently working on amendments to the local law in order to align it with the EUs General Data Protection Regulation GDPR.
It is also possible that the Bank may have to comply to some extent with the EUs GDPR regulations and we are seeking legal advice on this but our expectation is given that the Bank has only limited exports of data outside its nonEU operational markets that the GDPR is unlikely to be triggered by the daytoday operations of the Bank and it will be able to ringfence itself against any breaches of these provisions.
AUDIT COMMITTEE REPORT CONTINUED 157 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Governance Financial Statements Additional Information Report on the audit of the financial statements
In our opinion TBC Bank Group PLCs consolidated financial statements and parent company financial statements the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the consolidated and of the parent companys affairs as at 31 December 2017 and of the consolidated and the parent companys cash flows for the year then ended have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006 and as regards the consolidated financial statements Article 4 of the IAS Regulation.
We have audited the financial statements included within the Annual Report and Accounts Annual Report which comprise the consolidated and separate statements of financial position as at 31 December 2017 the consolidated statement of profit or loss and comprehensive income the consolidated and separate statements of cash flows and the consolidated and separate statements of changes in equity for the year then ended and the notes to the consolidated financial statements which include a description of the significant accounting policies.
Our opinion is consistent with our reporting to the Audit Committee.
Basis for these opinions We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing UK ISAs UK and applicable law.
Our responsibilities under ISAs UK are further described in the auditors responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements section of our report.
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion.
Independence
We confirm that PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP remained independent of the Group in accordance with the ethical requirements that are relevant to our audit of the financial statements in the UK which includes the FRCs Ethical Standard as applicable to listed public interest entities and we have fulfilled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with these requirements.
To the best of our knowledge and belief we declare that nonaudit services prohibited by the FRCs Ethical Standard were not provided to the Group or the parent company.
Our audit approach
Audit scope Key audit matters
Overall consolidated materiality GEL19.7m 2016 GEL 15.8m based on 5% of profit before tax.
Overall parent company materiality GEL 14.7m 2016 GEL 15.8m based on 1% of total assets.
Our scoping was driven by legal entity contribution to profit before tax and also by geographical location.
This approach also ensures that we align our resources with the location of the key financial reporting functions and material operations of the Group.
We also considered overall coverage in assessing the appropriateness of our scoping.
Our primary location for scoping purposes is Tbilisi Georgia.
The area of focus which was of most significance in the audit of the consolidated financial statements was Impairment of loans and advances to customers.
There were no key audit matters to report on the audit of the parent company financial statements.
The scope of our audit As part of designing our audit we determined materiality and assessed the risks of material misstatement in the financial statements.
In particular we looked at where the directors made subjective judgements for example in respect of significant accounting estimates that involved making assumptions and considering future events that are inherently uncertain.
We gained an understanding of the legal and regulatory framework applicable to the Group and the industry in which it operates and considered the risk of acts by the Group which were contrary to applicable laws and regulations including fraud.
We designed audit procedures at Group and significant component level to respond to the risk recognising that the risk of not detecting a material misstatement due to fraud is higher than the risk of not detecting one resulting from error as fraud may involve deliberate concealment by for example forgery or intentional misrepresentations or through collusion.
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT TO THE MEMBERS OF TBC BANK GROUP PLC 158 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 We focused on laws and regulations that could give rise to a material misstatement in the Group and parent company financial statements including but not limited to the Companies Act 2006 the Listing Rules UK tax legislation and the requirements of key regulators such as the Financial Conduct Authority in the UK and the National Bank of Georgia for the operations in Georgia.
Our tests included but were not limited to review of the financial statement disclosures to underlying supporting documentation review of correspondence with the regulators review of correspondence with legal advisors enquiries of management and review of internal audit reports in so far as they related to the financial statements.
There are inherent limitations in the audit procedures described above and the further removed noncompliance with laws and regulations is from the events and transactions reflected in the financial statements the less likely we would become aware of it.
As in all of our audits we also addressed the risk of management override of internal controls including testing journals and evaluating whether there was evidence of bias by the directors that represented a risk of material misstatement due to fraud.
Key audit matters Key audit matters are those matters that in the auditors professional judgement were of most significance in the audit of the financial statements of the current period and include the most significant assessed risks of material misstatement whether or not due to fraud identified by the auditors including those which had the greatest effect on the overall audit strategy the allocation of resources in the audit and directing the efforts of the engagement team.
These matters and any comments we make on the results of our procedures thereon were addressed in the context of our audit of the financial statements as a whole and in forming our opinion thereon and we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters.
This is not a complete list of all risks identified by our audit.
Key audit matter How our audit addressed the key audit matter Impairment of loans and advances to customers Refer to page 175 Summary of Significant Accounting Policies page 181 Critical Accounting Estimates and Judgements in Applying Accounting Policies pages 182 184 note 5 New Accounting pronouncements and pages 186 to 192 note 9 Loans and advances to customers.
Impairment provisions are a key judgement representing managements best estimate of the credit losses in the underlying loan portfolios.
Determination of the appropriate provisions involves complex calculations and the effect of misstatement on the financial statements could be material.
Loss provisions are calculated on a collective basis for loan portfolios with similar characteristics and this is done mainly using statistical models driven by both observable and management determined key inputs such as probabilities of default PD and the loss given default LGD.
Individual impairment assessment is performed where individually significant loans have unique characteristics that require judgement at a loan level to determine the present value of expected future cash flows and any resulting shortfall.
We have focused our work on the following key areas Completeness of observed impaired loans and appropriateness of the assumptions used to estimate impairment events which have been incurred but not reported and Calculation of the required impairment provisions based on estimated future cash flows including the use of models and the critical assumptions and inputs used in those models.
We understood and evaluated the design of the key controls over the impairment processes and tested their operating effectiveness.
These controls included the governance over the impairment provisioning processes which includes review and approval and the review of key assumptions and identification by management of impairment events and relevant loans showing indicators of impairment including other indicators such as forbearance.
We noted no significant exceptions in the design implementation or operating effectiveness of these controls.
Accordingly we relied on them for the purposes of our audit.
We assessed whether the impairment methodology was in line with IAS 39 requirements.
In addition we performed the following substantive procedures in response to the areas of focus.
We tested a sample of performing loans including loans on managements watch list to evaluate whether impairment indicators existed as at the balance sheet date.
This included evaluating the specific circumstances of the borrower including the latest developments the basis for measuring the impairment provision and whether key judgements were appropriate.
We did not identify any further impairment events not previously identified by management.
We tested individually significant exposures on a risk basis to assess the appropriateness of recorded impairment provisions for the Corporate and Micro Small and Medium Enterprises MSME portfolios.
We reperformed managements impairment calculations testing key inputs such as expected future cash flows and discount rates.
With respect to modelled provisions we tested key assumptions including the PDs and LGDs used in the model calculations.
We compared provisions against the historical performance and market data so as to assess the estimation accuracy of the key models and consider completeness of post model adjustments.
Based on the procedures performed and the evidence obtained we found managements methodology assumptions and judgements to be reasonable.
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT TO THE MEMBERS OF TBC BANK GROUP PLC CONTINUED 159 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Governance Financial Statements Additional Information On 1 January 2018 the Group transitioned to the new financial instruments accounting standard IFRS 9 which replaced IAS 39.
The most significant change for the Group under IFRS 9 relates to the provisions for impairment which is now on an expected loss basis replacing the incurred loss provisioning under IAS 39.
In order to meet the requirements of the new standard significant changes have also been made to processes models and related controls with effect from 1 January 2018.
The estimated transition impact is disclosed in note 5 to the financial statements in accordance with IAS 8.
The most significant change relates to the provisions for impairment including changes to related systems processes and controls.
IFRS 9 transition impact disclosure In respect of the estimated impact of the adoption of IFRS 9 we understood and critically assessed classification and measurement decisions and the impairment models developed by the Group.
This included using our credit modelling experts in our assessment of judgements and assumptions supporting the expected credit loss requirements of the new standard.
We reperformed selected model calculations to confirm the model outputs tested key data inputs and assessed the reasonableness of forward looking information incorporated into the impairment calculations in particular where proxies were adopted due to limited data in the market.
Based on the evidence obtained we found that the methodologies and key data inputs used within the models were appropriate and that the model assumptions and related model outputs were reasonable.
We also assessed the disclosure of the transition impact and consider this reasonable and in accordance with the requirements of IAS 8.
How we tailored the audit scope We tailored the scope of our audit to ensure that we performed enough work to be able to give an opinion on the financial statements as a whole taking into account the structure of the Group the accounting processes and controls and the industries in which the Group operates.
TBC Bank Groups banking and insurance activities are primarily carried out in Georgia with small subsidiary operations in four other countries.
The Groups business activities comprise of 4 segments for which it manages and reports its operating results and financial position namely Retail Banking Corporate Banking Micro Small and Medium Enterprises MSME and the Corporate Centre.
JSC TBC Bank is the largest subsidiary of the London listed Group.
Its main operations are Retail and Commercial banking with a small general leasing and insurance business with all significant operations based in Georgia.
Accounting functions and management of the Group are primarily based in Georgia which represents 98% of the Group assets and 96% of profit before tax.
We performed audit procedures over this component which is considered financially significant in the context of the Group using a materiality of GEL 18.7m.
We also performed other audit procedures including testing information technology general controls and other relevant controls related to financial reporting to mitigate the risk of material misstatement.
Our audit approach and team was also designed to reflect the structure of the Group and we therefore used component auditors in PwC Georgia all of whom are familiar with the relevant businesses in their geographical locations to audit the relevant component that was in scope for the Group audit.
As part of the planning and execution of the audit the UK audit team visited the significant component in Georgia on several occasions in order to ensure that the procedures performed to support the Group audit were sufficient for our purposes.
Specific audit procedures were also performed at the UK parent company mainly related to the presentation of the Group financial statements the consolidation process taxation and elements of laws and regulation specific to the UK.
Based on the procedures we performed over the reporting units our audit scopingcoverage accounted for 96% of revenue and 98% of total assets of the Group.
Materiality
The scope of our audit was influenced by our application of materiality.
We set certain quantitative thresholds for materiality.
These together with qualitative considerations helped us to determine the scope of our audit and the nature timing and extent of our audit procedures on the individual financial statement line items and disclosures and in evaluating the effect of misstatements both individually and in aggregate on the financial statements as a whole.
Based on our professional judgement we determined materiality for the financial statements as a whole as follows Consolidated financial statements Parent company financial statements Overall materiality GEL 19.7m 2016 GEL 15.8m GEL 14.7m 2016 GEL 15.8m How we determined it 5% of profit before tax.
1% of total assets Rationale for benchmark applied We believe that profit before tax is the primary measure used by the shareholders in assessing the performance of the consolidated Group and is a generally accepted auditing benchmark.
The parent company is a holding company with investments in the trading companies within the Group.
The parent companys performance is measured based on the valuation of these investments and therefore total assets is considered an appropriate materiality benchmark.
160 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT TO THE MEMBERS OF TBC BANK GROUP PLC CONTINUED For the component in the scope of our Group audit we allocated a materiality that is less than our overall Group materiality.
The materiality allocated was GEL18.7m 2016 GEL 15.5m.
We agreed with the Audit Committee that we would report to them misstatements identified during our audit above 940000 GEL Group audit 2016 790000 GEL and 740000 GEL Parent company audit 2016 790000 GEL as well as misstatements below those amounts that in our view warranted reporting for qualitative reasons.
Going concern In accordance with ISAs UK we report as follows Reporting obligation Outcome We are required to report if we have anything material to add or draw attention to in respect of the directors statement in the financial statements about whether the directors considered it appropriate to adopt the going concern basis of accounting in preparing the financial statements and the directors identification of any material uncertainties to the Groups and the parent companys ability to continue as a going concern over a period of at least twelve months from the date of approval of the financial statements.
We have nothing material to add or to draw attention to.
However because not all future events or conditions can be predicted this statement is not a guarantee as to the Groups and parent companys ability to continue as a going concern.
We are required to report if the directors statement relating to Going Concern in accordance with Listing Rule 9.8.6R3 is materially inconsistent with our knowledge obtained in the audit.
We have nothing to report.
Reporting on other information The other information comprises all of the information in the Annual Report other than the financial statements and our auditors report thereon.
The directors are responsible for the other information.
Our opinion on the financial statements does not cover the other information and accordingly we do not express an audit opinion or except to the extent otherwise explicitly stated in this report any form of assurance thereon.
In connection with our audit of the financial statements our responsibility is to read the other information and in doing so consider whether the other information is materially inconsistent with the financial statements or our knowledge obtained in the audit or otherwise appears to be materially misstated.
If we identify an apparent material inconsistency or material misstatement we are required to perform procedures to conclude whether there is a material misstatement of the financial statements or a material misstatement of the other information.
If based on the work we have performed we conclude that there is a material misstatement of this other information we are required to report that fact.
We have nothing to report based on these responsibilities.
With respect to the Strategic Report and Directors Report we also considered whether the disclosures required by the UK Companies Act 2006 have been included.
Based on the responsibilities described above and our work undertaken in the course of the audit the Companies Act 2006 CA06 ISAs UK and the Listing Rules of the Financial Conduct Authority FCA require us also to report certain opinions and matters as described below required by ISAs UK unless otherwise stated.
161 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Governance Financial Statements Additional Information Strategic Report and Directors Report In our opinion based on the work undertaken in the course of the audit the information given in the Strategic Report and Directors Report for the year ended 31 December 2017 is consistent with the financial statements and has been prepared in accordance with applicable legal requirements.
CA06
In light of the knowledge and understanding of the Group and parent company and their environment obtained in the course of the audit we did not identify any material misstatements in the Strategic Report and Directors Report.
CA06
The directors assessment of the prospects of the Group and of the principal risks that would threaten the solvency or liquidity of the Group We have nothing material to add or draw attention to regarding The directors confirmation on page 111 of the Annual Report that they have carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Group including those that would threaten its business model future performance solvency or liquidity.
The disclosures in the Annual Report that describe those risks and explain how they are being managed or mitigated.
The directors explanation on pages 111  112 of the Annual Report as to how they have assessed the prospects of the Group over what period they have done so and why they consider that period to be appropriate and their statement as to whether they have a reasonable expectation that the Group will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the period of their assessment including any related disclosures drawing attention to any necessary qualifications or assumptions.
We have nothing to report having performed a review of the directors statement that they have carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Group and statement in relation to the longerterm viability of the Group.
Our review was substantially less in scope than an audit and only consisted of making inquiries and considering the directors process supporting their statements checking that the statements are in alignment with the relevant provisions of the UK Corporate Governance Code the Code and considering whether the statements are consistent with the knowledge and understanding of the Group and parent company and their environment obtained in the course of the audit.
Listing Rules Other Code Provisions We have nothing to report in respect of our responsibility to report when The statement given by the directors on page 113 that they consider the Annual Report taken as a whole to be fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for the members to assess the Groups and parent companys position and performance business model and strategy is materially inconsistent with our knowledge of the Group and parent company obtained in the course of performing our audit.
The section of the Annual Report on page 151 describing the work of the Audit Committee does not appropriately address matters communicated by us to the Audit Committee.
The directors statement relating to the parent companys compliance with the Code does not properly disclose a departure from a relevant provision of the Code specified under the Listing Rules for review by the auditors.
Directors Remuneration In our opinion the part of the Directors Remuneration Report to be audited has been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 2006.
CA06
Responsibilities for the financial statements and the audit Responsibilities of the directors for the financial statements As explained more fully in the Directors Responsibilities Statement set out on pages 112  113 the directors are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements in accordance with the applicable framework and for being satisfied that they give a true and fair view.
The directors are also responsible for such internal control as they determine is necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error.
In preparing the financial statements the directors are responsible for assessing the Groups and the parent companys ability to continue as a going concern disclosing as applicable matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless the directors either intend to liquidate the Group or the parent company or to cease operations or have no realistic alternative but to do so.
162 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT TO THE MEMBERS OF TBC BANK GROUP PLC CONTINUED Auditors responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error and to issue an auditors report that includes our opinion.
Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with ISAs UK will always detect a material misstatement when it exists.
Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if individually or in the aggregate they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these financial statements.
A further description of our responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements is located on the FRCs website at www. rc. auditorsresponsibilities.
This description forms part of our auditors report.
Use of this report This report including the opinions has been prepared for and only for the parent companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006 and for no other purpose.
We do not in giving these opinions accept or assume responsibility for any other purpose or to any other person to whom this report is shown or into whose hands it may come save where expressly agreed by our prior consent in writing.
Other required reporting Companies Act 2006 exception reporting Under the Companies Act 2006 we are required to report to you if in our opinion we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit or adequate accounting records have not been kept by the parent company or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or certain disclosures of directors remuneration specified by law are not made or the parent company financial statements and the part of the Directors Remuneration Report to be audited are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns.
We have no exceptions to report arising from this responsibility.
Appointment
We were appointed by the Audit Committee on 11 August 2016 to audit the financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2016.
We were reappointed by the members at the Annual General Meeting on 5 June 2017 following the recommendation by the Audit Committee to audit the year ended 31 December 2017.
The period of total uninterrupted engagement is 2 years covering the years ended 31 December 2016 to 31 December 2017.
Jeremy Foster Senior Statutory Auditor for and on behalf of PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP Chartered Accountants and Statutory Auditors
28 March 2018 163 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Governance Financial Statements Additional Information In thousands of GEL Note 31 December 31 December
Cash and cash equivalents 210 399 Due from other banks 11564 2320 Loans and advances to customers 24000 2000 Other financial assets 219 303 Investments in Subsidiaries 1429485 1424066 Other assets 8 4 TOTAL ASSETS 1465486 1429092
Other financial liabilities 825 165 TOTAL LIABILITIES 825 165
Share capital 25 1605 1581 Share premium 25 714651 677211 Retained earnings 670444 745638 ProfitLoss for the year 86789 385 Other reserves 26 8828 4882 TOTAL EQUITY 1464661 1428927 TOTAL LIABILITIES AND EQUITY 1465486 1429092 The financial statements on pages 163 to 254 were approved by the Board of Directors on 28 March 2018 and signed on its behalf by Vakhtang Butskhrikidze Giorgi Shagidze
Chief Executive Officer
Chief Financial Officer Registered No.
The notes set out on pages 170 to 254 form an integral part of these financial statements.
SEPARATE STATEMENT OF FINANCIAL POSITION 164 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 In thousands of GEL Note
Share p r e m iu m
Retained earnings Total equity Balance as of 26 February 2016 Loss for the period    385 385 Total comprehensive expense for 2016    385 385 Merger relief and capital reduction 25 1494 565030  745638 1312162 Share issue 25 87 112181   112268 Share based payment accrual 26   4882  4882 Balance as of 31 December 2016 1581 677211 4882 745253 1428927 Profit for the year    86789 86789 Total comprehensive income for 2017    86789 86789 Share issue 25 24 37440 24253  13211 Dividends declared 25    74809 74809 Share based payment accrual 26   10543  10543 Balance as of 31 December 2017 1605 714651 8828 757233 1464661 The notes set out on pages 170 to 254 form an integral part of these financial statements.
SEPARATE STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 165 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Governance Financial Statements Additional Information In thousands of GEL 2017 2016 Cash flows from used in operating activities Interest received 1348 1149 Interest paid  32 Fees and commissions paid 12 1 Salaries and other employee benefits paid 3469 631 Administrative and other operating expenses paid 1423 890 Other operating income received 11 Cash flows used in operating activities before changes in operating assets and liabilities 3545 405 Net change in operating assets Other financial assets 137 167 Other assets  4 Net change in operating liabilities Other financial liabilities 3 165 Net cash flows used in operating activities 3411 411 Cash flows from used in investing activities Acquisition of subsidiaries  3423 Proceeds from disposal of associate  112269 Dividend received 77090 Income from recharge agreement 23745 Dividend pay out 66733 Capital contributions to subsidiaries other than through issuance of shares  103600 Placement of deposit 8830 2320 Issuance of Debt 22000 2000 Net cash flows from investing activities 3272 926 Cash flows from used in financing activities Net cash flows from used in financing activities Effect of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents 50 116 Net increase decrease in cash and cash equivalents 189 399 Cash and cash equivalents at the beginning of the year 399 Cash and cash equivalents at the end of the year 210 399 The amount of proceeds from disposal of associate in 2016 is attributable to sale of minority share of JSC Bank Republic by TBCG to JSC TBC Bank.
The notes set out on pages 170 to 254 form an integral part of these financial statements.
SEPARATE STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 166 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF FINANCIAL POSITION In thousands of GEL Note 31 December 31 December 31 December
Cash and cash equivalents 6 1431477 945180 720347 Due from other banks 7 39643 24725 11042 Mandatory cash balances with the National Bank of Georgia 8 1033818 990642 471490 Loans and advances to customers 9 8325353 7133702 4444886 Investment securities available for sale 10 657938 430703 307310 Bonds carried at amortised cost 11 449538 372956 372092 Investments in finance leases 13 143836 95031 75760 Investment properties 16 79232 95615 57600 Current income tax prepayment 19084 7430 9856 Deferred income tax asset 34 2855 3511 1546 Other financial assets 12 146144 94627 64317 Other assets 14 156651 171263 103912 Premises and equipment 15 366913 314032 247767 Intangible assets 15 83492 60957 44344 Goodwill 17 28658 28658 2726 Investments in Associates 1278 TOTAL ASSETS 12965910 10769032 6934995
Due to credit institutions 18 2620714 2197577 1113574 Customer accounts 19 7816817 6454949 4177931 Other financial liabilities 22 91753 50998 39435 Current income tax liability 447 2577 912 Debt securities in issue 20 20695 23508 21714 Deferred income tax liability 34 602 5646 29244 Provisions for liabilities and charges 21 13200 16026 9461 Other liabilities 23 84440 66739 40627 Subordinated debt 24 426788 368381 283648 TOTAL LIABILITIES 11075456 9186401 5716546
Share capital 25 1605 1581 19587 Share premium 25 714651 677211 407474 Retained earnings 1232865 955173 712743 Group reorganisation reserve 25 162166 162166 Share based payment reserve 26 9828 23327 12755 Revaluation reserve for premises 70045 70460 59532 Revaluation reserve for availableforsale securities 1730 3681 5759 Cumulative currency translation reserve 7359 7538 6590 Net assets attributable to owners 1861199 1554367 1211260 Noncontrolling interest 39 29255 28264 7189 TOTAL EQUITY 1890454 1582631 1218449 TOTAL LIABILITIES AND EQUITY 12965910 10769032 6934995 The financial statements on pages 163 to 254 were approved by the Board of Directors on 28 March 2018 and signed on its behalf by Vakhtang Butskhrikidze Giorgi Shagidze
Chief Executive Officer
Chief Financial Officer Registered No.
The notes set out on pages 170 to 254 form an integral part of these financial statements.
167 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Governance Financial Statements Additional Information CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF PROFIT OR LOSS AND OTHER COMPREHENSIVE INCOME FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 In thousands of GEL Notetel Interest income 29 1033939 766426 649059 Interest expense 29 429924 275973 236885 Net interest income 604015 490453 412174 Fee and commission income 30 193944 142800 113837 Fee and commission expense 30 67983 52532 41546 Net fee and commission income 125961 90268 72291 Net insurance premiums earned 12633 1222 Net insurance claims incurred 5860 966 Insurance Profit 6773 256 Net gains from trading in foreign currencies 87099 70269 64642 Net gainslosses from foreign exchange translation 4374 2507 2579 Net losses from derivative financial instruments 36 206 575 Net gains from disposal of available for sale investment securities 93 9293 Other operating income 31 31797 23236 25883 Share of profit of associates 909 Other operating noninterest income 124236 100085 92529 Provision for loan impairment 9 93823 49202 72791 Provision for impairment of investments in finance lease 13 492 558 967 Provision forrecovery of provision for performance guarantees and credit related commitments 21 153 771 1117 Provision for impairment of other financial assets 12 12439 2853 3351 Impairment of investment securities available for sale  11 Operating income after provisions for impairment 754078 627667 501002 Staff costs 32 203100 172221 142777 Depreciation and amortisation 1516 37265 28082 26286 Provision forrecovery of provision for liabilities and charges 21 2495 2210 1102 Administrative and other operating expenses 33 121530 109475 82964 Operating expenses 359400 311988 253129 Profit before tax 394678 315679 247873 Income tax expense 34 34750 17421 29176 Profit for the year 359928 298258 218697 Other comprehensive income Items that may be reclassified subsequently to profit or loss Revaluation of availableforsale investments 10 5489 522 2436 Gains less losses recycled to profit or loss upon disposal  11611 Exchange differences on translation to presentation currency 181 948 12075 Income tax recorded directly in other comprehensive income 34  1649 479 Items that will not be reclassified to profit or loss Revaluation of premises and equipment   28755 Income tax recorded directly in other comprehensive income 34 422 10928 4319 Other comprehensive income for the year 5248 540 9446 Total comprehensive income for the year 365176 298798 228143 Profit is attributable to Owners of the Bank 354410 299145 218879 Noncontrolling interest 5518 887 182 Profit for the year 359928 298258 218697 Total comprehensive income is attributable to Owners of the Bank 359585 299685 228325 Noncontrolling interest 5591 887 182 Total comprehensive income for the year 365176 298798 228143 Earnings per share for profit attributable to the owners of the Bank Basic earnings per share 27 6.7 6.0 4.4 Diluted earnings per share 27 6.6 5.9 4.4 The notes set out on pages 170 to 254 form an integral part of these financial statements.
168 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 Net assets Attributable to owners In thousands of GEL Note
Share pr e mium
Share based payments reserve
Premises
Revaluation reserve for Available for sale securities
Retained earnings Total
Total equity Balance as of 1 January 2015 19576 405658  4624 35096 8675 5484 532992 1012105 7371 1019476 Profit loss for the year        218879 218879 182 218697 Other comprehensive income     24436 2916 12074  9446 Total comprehensive income expense for 2015     24436 2916 12074 218879 228325 182 228143 Share based payment accrual 26    8559     8559  8559 Transaction costs recognised directly in equity  1419       1419  1419 Increase in share capital arising from share based payment 12 416  428 Dividends declared        39128 39128  39128 Treasury shares returned 1 19       20  20 Balance as of 31 December 2015 19587 407474  12755 59532 5759 6590 712743 1211260 7189 1218449 Profit loss for the year        299145 299145 887 298258 Other comprehensive income     10928 9440 948  540  540 Total comprehensive income expense for 2016     10928 9440 948 299145 299685 887 298798 Share issue 87 112182       112269  112269 Share based payment accrual 26    11783     11783  11783 Change of parent company to TBCG 25 18129 156380 162166      23915 23915 Increase in share capital arising from share based payment 36 1175  1211 Dividends declared        55162 55162  55162 Purchase and cancellation of subsidiary shares        1553 1553 1953 3506 Balance as of 31 December 2016 1581 677211 162166 23327 70460 3681 7538 955173 1554367 28264 1582631 Profit for the year        354410 354410 5518 359928 Other comprehensive income     415 5411 179  5175 73 5248 Total comprehensive income expense for 2017     415 5411 179 354410 359585 5591 365176 Share issue 21 32308  24253     8076  8076 Share based payment accrual 26    10754     10754 211 10543 Conversion of shares 26 3 5132      1909 3226 3197 29 Dividends declared        74809 74809 1192 76001 Balance as of 31 December 2017 1605 714651 162166 9828 70045 1730 7359 1232865 1861199 29255 1890454 The notes set out on pages 170 to 254 form an integral part of these financial statements.
169 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Governance Financial Statements Additional Information CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 In thousands of GEL Notetel Cash flows from used in operating activities Interest received 1000571 735705 633093 Interest paid 424105 273795 235157 Fees and commissions received 195285 144247 111922 Fees and commissions paid 68036 52154 41569 Insurance premium received 23518 1591 Insurance claims paid 9127 703 Income received from trading in foreign currencies 87099 70411 64642 Other operating income received 8992 8411 18006 Staff costs paid 187520 148656 133354 Administrative and other operating expenses paid 112270 104077 79669 Income tax paid 53916 34279 48678 Cash flows from operating activities before changes in operating assets and liabilities 460491 346701 289236 Net change in operating assets Due from other banks and mandatory cash balances with the National Bank of Georgia 98586 448582 72453 Loans and advances to customers 1330105 1219501 364896 Investment in finance lease 49297 11687 12994 Other financial assets 38064 22965 13198 Other assets 73814 843 7159 Net change in operating liabilities Due to other banks 228486 265679 17351 Customer accounts 1329071 1150146 249598 Other financial liabilities 18263 5724 415 Other liabilities and provision for liabilities and charges 3487 332 1341 Net cash flows from operating activities 140588 65004 66027 Cash flows from used in investing activities Acquisition of investment securities available for sale 10 560226 143980 475417 Proceeds from disposal of investment securities available for sale 10  11868 Proceeds from redemption at maturity of investment securities available for sale 10 345748 166871 265107 Acquisition of subsidiaries net of cash acquired 273 91404 Acquisition of bonds carried at amortised cost 307248 304109 183084 Proceeds from redemption of bonds carried at amortised cost 242380 314231 193416 Acquisition of premises equipment and intangible assets 15 114383 50689 47815 Proceeds from disposal of premises equipment and intangible assets 1932 1273 1306 Proceeds from disposal of investment property 19082 7822 22166 Net cash flows used in investing activities 372988 88117 224321 Cash flows from used in financing activities Proceeds from other borrowed funds 1461191 903502 582198 Redemption of other borrowed funds 800333 666156 310267 Proceeds from subordinated debt 119859 136817 60510 Redemption of subordinated debt 59671 90416 16763 Proceeds from debt securities in issue  4354 Redemption of debt securities in issue 2123 4636 Dividends paid 67927 54560 39128 Acquisition of noncontrolling interest in subsidiary  3495 Issue of ordinary shares 29 Net cash flows from financing activities 651025 225410 276550 Effect of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents 67672 22536 69973 Net increase in cash and cash equivalents 486297 224833 188229 Cash and cash equivalents at the beginning of the year 6 945180 720347 532118 Cash and cash equivalents at the end of the year 6 1431477 945180 720347 The notes set out on pages 170 to 254 form an integral part of these financial statements.
170 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 31 DECEMBER 2017 1 Introduction Principal activity.
JSC TBC Bank hereafter the Bank was incorporated on 17 December 1992 and is domiciled in Georgia.
The Bank is a joint stock company limited by shares and was set up in accordance with Georgian regulations.
The Banks principal business activity is universal banking operations that include corporate small and medium enterprises SME retail and micro operations within Georgia.
The Bank has been operating since 20 January 1993 under a general banking license issued by the National Bank of the Georgia NBG.
The Banks registered address and place of business is 7 Marjanishvili Street 0102 Tbilisi Georgia.
The Bank has 154 2016 120 2015 128 branches within Georgia.
During 2016 the Bank acquired JSC Bank Republic which had 41 branches as of 31 December 2016 not included in number of branches above.
On 1 June 2016 TBC Bank Group PLC TBCG a public limited liability company incorporated in England and Wales on 26 February 2016 launched the Tender Offer the Tender Offer to exchange its entire ordinary share capital for an equivalent number of the Banks ordinary shares and thus to acquire the entire issued share capital including those shares represented by Global Depositary Receipts GDRs of the
Following the successful completion of the Tender Offer on 4 August 2016 as of 31 December 2017 TBCG holds 98.67% of the share capital of the Bank thus representing the Banks ultimate parent company.
Together with the Bank and subsidiaries TBCG makes up a group of companies hereafter the Group.
The Bank is a parent of a group of companies incorporated in Georgia and Azerbaijan their primary business activities include providing banking leasing brokerage and card processing services to corporate and individual customers.
The Groups list of companies is provided in Note 2.
The shares of TBCG TBCG Shares were admitted to the Premium Listing segment of the Official List of the UK Listing Authority and admitted to trading on the London Stock Exchange PLCs Main Market for listed securities effective on 10 August 2016 the Admission Note 25.
The Bank is the Groups main operating unit and it accounts for most of the Groups activities.
TBC Bank Group PLCs registered legal address is 6 St.
Andrew Street London United Kingdom EC4A3AE.
Registered number of TBC Group PLC is .
As of 31 December 2017 31 December 2016 and 31 December 2015 the following shareholders directly owned more than 5% of the total outstanding shares of the Group.
Other shareholders individually owned less than 5% of the outstanding shares.
As of 31 December 2017 31 December 2016 and 31 December 2015 the Group had no ultimate controlling party.
Shareholders Note % of ownership interest held as of 31 Decembertel TBC Holdings LTD  15.19% 15.99% Schroder Investment Management 9.53% 7.98% JPMorgan Asset Management 9.21% 7.07% European Bank for Reconstruction and Development 8.38% 12.15% Mamuka Khazaradze 6.35% Badri Japaridze 6.23% Liquid Crystal International N.
LLC 5.78% 5.19% 5.46% Societe Generale SA  5.38% Bank of New York Nominees Limited 25   70.62% Other 54.52% 47.04% 7.93% Total 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% Represents direct ownership of the shares for Mamuka Khazaradze and Badri Japaridze.
Mamuka Khazaradze has beneficial ownership of 13.87% and Badri Japaridze has beneficial ownership of 6.93% the some of which were held through TBC holding LTD in prior years.
In 2015 all GDR holders interests were held through Bank of New York Nominees Limited the custodian.
Other includes individual as well as corporate shareholders.
As a result of the conversion of the Banks shares into TBCG shares as described above and following the cancellation of GDR Programme in October 2016 the Group has no GDRs outstanding as of 31 December 2017.
Presentation currency.
These consolidated financial statements are presented in thousands of Georgian Lari GEL thousands except pershare amounts and unless otherwise indicated.
2 Summary of Significant Accounting Policies Basis of preparation.
For the year ended 31 December 2017 the separate financial statements have been prepared of TBC Bank Group PLC.
In accordance with the exemption permitted under section 408 of the Companies Act 2006 the standalone statement of comprehensive income of TBCG is not presented as part of these accounts.
These consolidated financial statements are prepared as if the Group is a continuation of the preexisting group of companies with the Bank as its ultimate parent.
Comparative financial statements as of 31 December 2015 are those of the group of companies consolidated with the Bank as its ultimate parent.
171 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Governance Financial Statements Additional Information 2 Summary of Significant Accounting Policies continued The consolidated financial statements of the Group and the separate financial statements of TBC Bank Group PLC have been prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS as adopted by the European Union EU and the Companies Act 2006 applicable to companies reporting under IFRS.
The consolidated and separate financial statements have been prepared under the historical cost convention as modified by the revaluation of premises availableforsale financial assets the initial recognition of financial instruments based on fair value and identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed in a business combination measured at their fair values at the acquisition date and financial instruments categorised as at fair value through profit or loss.
The principal accounting policies applied in the preparation of the consolidated and separate financial statements are set out below.
These policies have been consistently applied to all the periods presented unless otherwise stated refer to Note 3.
Going Concern.
The Board of Directors of TBC Bank Group PLC has prepared these financial statements on a going concern basis.
In making this judgement the management considered the Groups financial position current intentions profitability of operations and access to financial resources.
The management is not aware of any material uncertainties that may cast significant doubt upon the Groups ability to continue as a going concern.
Consolidated financial statements.
Subsidiaries are those investees including structured entities that the Group controls because it i has power to direct relevant activities of the investees that significantly affect their returns ii has exposure or rights to variable returns from its involvement with the investees and iii has the ability to use its power over the investees to affect the amount of investors returns.
The existence and effect of substantive rights including substantive potential voting rights are considered when assessing whether the Group has power over another entity.
For a right to be substantive the holder must have practical ability to exercise that right when decisions about the direction of the relevant activities of the investee need to be made.
The Group may have power over an investee even when it holds less than the majority of voting power in it.
In such a case the Group assesses the size of its voting rights relative to the size and dispersion of holdings of the other vote holders to determine if it has defacto power over the investee.
Protective rights of other investors such as those that relate to fundamental changes of investees activities or apply only in exceptional circumstances do not prevent the Group from controlling an investee.
Subsidiaries are consolidated from the date on which control is transferred to the Group and are deconsolidated from the date on which control ceases.
Subsidiaries and associates.
The TBC Bank Group PCL holds 98.67% of the Bank as of 31 December 2017.
The consolidated financial statements include the following principal subsidiaries Company Name Proportion of voting rights and ordinary share capital held as of 31 December Principal place of business or incorporation Year of i nc or p o r a ti o n Industrytel JSC TBC Bank 98.67% 98.48%  Tbilisi Georgia 1992 Banking Bank Republic Group  100.00%  Tbilisi Georgia 1992 Banking Ltd Merckhali Pirevli  100.00%  Tbilisi Georgia 2009 Operating leasing United Financial Corporation JSC 98.67% 98.67% 98.67% Tbilisi Georgia 1997 Card processing TBC Capital LLC 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% Tbilisi Georgia 1999 Brokerage TBC Leasing JSC 99.61% 99.61% 99.57% Tbilisi Georgia 2003 Leasing TBC Kredit LLC 75.00% 75.00% 75.00% Baku Azerbaijan 1999 Nonbanking credit institution Banking System Service Company LLC 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% Tbilisi Georgia 2009 Information services TBC Pay LLC 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% Tbilisi Georgia 2009 Processing Real Estate Management Fund JSC 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% Tbilisi Georgia 2010 Real estate management TBC Invest LLC 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% Ramat Gan Israel 2011 PR and marketing Mali LLC 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% Tbilisi Georgia 2011 Real estate management JSC TBC Insurance 100.00% 100.00%  Tbilisi Georgia 2014 Insurance The consolidated financial statements include the following associates Company Name Proportion of voting rights and ordinary share capital held as of 31 December Principal place of business or incorporation Year of i nc or p o r a ti o n Industrytel JSC CreditInfo Georgia 21.08%   Tbilisi Georgia 2005 Financial intermediation LLC Online Tickets 26.00%   Tbilisi Georgia 2015 Computer and Software Services The country of registration or incorporation is also the principal area of operation of each of the above subsidiaries.
On 6 May 2017 the Group has completed the legal and operational process of merging JSC Bank Republic with TBC Bank.
172 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 31 DECEMBER 2017 2 Summary of Significant Accounting Policies continued The Groups corporate structure consists of a number of related undertakings comprising subsidiaries and associates which are not consolidated or equity accounted due to immateriality.
A full list of these undertakings the country of incorporation and the ownership of each share class is set out below.
Company Name Proportion of voting rights and ordinary share capital held as of 31 December Principal place of business or incorporation Year of i nc or p o r a ti o n Industrytel UFC International Ltd 80.00% 80.00% 80.00% British Virgin Islands 2001 Investment Vehicle TBC Capital B.
90.00% 90.00% 90.00% Amsterdam Netherlands 2007 Investment Vehicle TBC Invest International Ltd 100.00% 100.00%  Tbilisi Georgia 2016 Investment Vehicle University Development Fund 33.33% 33.33% 33.33% Tbilisi Georgia 2007 Education Ltd Georgian Mill Company 100.00% 100.00%  Tbilisi Georgia 2010 Manufacturing Business Combinations and Goodwill.
Business combinations are accounted for using the acquisition method.
The cost of an acquisition is measured at the fair value of the consideration including contingent consideration given at the date of exchange.
Acquisitionrelated costs are recognised as an expense in the income statement in the period in which they are incurred.
Identifiable assets acquired and liabilities and contingent liabilities assumed in a business combination are measured at their fair values at the acquisition date irrespective of the extent of any noncontrolling interest.
The Group measures the noncontrolling interest that represents the current ownerships interest and entitles the holder to a proportionate share of net assets in the event of liquidation on a transaction by transaction basis either at a fair value or b the noncontrolling interests proportionate share of net assets of the acquired entity.
Noncontrolling interests that are not present ownership interests are measured at fair value.
Goodwill is measured by deducting the acquirees net assets from the aggregate of the consideration transferred for the acquiree the amount of noncontrolling interest in the acquiree and fair value of an interest in the acquiree held immediately before the acquisition date.
Any negative amount negative goodwill is recognised in profit or loss after the management reassesses whether it identified all the assets acquired and all liabilities and contingent liabilities assumed and reviews appropriateness of their measurement.
The consideration transferred for the acquiree is measured at the fair value of the assets given up equity instruments issued and liabilities incurred or assumed including fair value of assets or liabilities from contingent consideration arrangements but excludes acquisition related costs such as advisory legal valuation and similar professional services.
Transaction costs incurred for issuing equity instruments are deducted from the equity transaction costs incurred for issuing debt are deducted from its carrying amount and all other transaction costs associated with the acquisition are expensed.
Intercompany transactions balances and unrealised gains on transactions between group companies are eliminated unrealised losses are also eliminated unless the cost cannot be recovered.
The Bank and all of its subsidiaries use uniform accounting policies consistent with the Groups policies.
Noncontrolling interest is that part of the net results and of the equity of a subsidiary attributable to interests that are not owned directly or indirectly by the Bank.
Noncontrolling interest forms a separate component of the Groups equity.
Associates.
Associates are entities over which the Group has significant influence directly or indirectly but not control generally accompanying a shareholding of between 20 and 50 percent of the voting rights.
Investments in associates are accounted for using the equity method of accounting and are initially recognised at cost.
The carrying amount of associates includes goodwill identified on acquisition less accumulated impairment losses if any.
Dividends received from associates reduce the carrying value of the investments in associates.
Other postacquisition changes in Groups share of net assets of an associate are recognised as follows i the Groups share of profits or losses of associates is recorded in the consolidated profit or loss for the year as share of result of associates ii the Groups share of other comprehensive income is recognised in other comprehensive income and presented separately iii all other changes in the Groups share of the carrying value of net assets of associates are recognised in profit or loss within the share of result of associates.
However when the Groups share of losses in an associate equals or exceeds its interest in the associate including any other unsecured receivables the Group does not recognise further losses unless it has incurred obligations or made payments on behalf of the associate.
Unrealised gains on transactions between the Group and its associates are eliminated to the extent of the Groups interest in the associates unrealised losses are also eliminated unless the transaction provides evidence of an impairment of the asset transferred.
173 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Governance Financial Statements Additional Information 2 Summary of Significant Accounting Policies continued Disposals of subsidiaries associates or joint ventures.
When the Group ceases to have control or significant influence any retained interest in the entity is remeasured to its fair value with the change in carrying amount recognised in profit or loss.
The fair value is the initial carrying amount for the purposes of subsequently accounting for the retained interest as an associate joint venture or financial asset.
In addition any amounts previously recognised in other comprehensive income in respect of that entity are accounted for as if the Group had directly disposed of the related assets or liabilities.
This may mean that amounts previously recognised in other comprehensive income are recycled to profit or loss.
If the ownership interest in an associate is reduced but significant influence is retained only a proportionate share of the amounts previously recognised in other comprehensive income are reclassified to profit or loss where appropriate.
Financial instruments  key measurement terms.
Depending on their classification financial instruments are carried at fair value cost or amortised cost as described below.
Fair value is the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date.
The best evidence of fair value is the price in an active market.
An active market is one in which transactions for the asset or the liability take place with sufficient frequency and volume to provide pricing information on an ongoing basis.
The fair value of financial instruments traded in an active market is measured as the product of the quoted price for the individual asset or liability and the quantity owned by the entity.
This is the case even if a markets normal daily trading volume is not sufficient to absorb the quantity held and placing orders to sell the position in a single transaction might affect the quoted price.
A portfolio of financial derivatives or other financial assets and liabilities that are not traded in an active market is measured at the fair value of a group of financial assets and financial liabilities on the basis of the price that would be received to sell a net long position ie an asset for a particular risk exposure or paid to transfer a net short position ie a liability for a particular risk exposure in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date.
This is applicable for assets carried at fair value on a recurring basis in case the Group a manages the group of financial assets and financial liabilities on the basis of the entitys net exposure to a particular market risk or risks or to the credit risk of a particular counterparty in accordance with the entitys documented risk management or investment strategy b it provides information on that basis about the group of assets and liabilities to the entitys key management personnel and c the market risks including duration of the entitys exposure to a particular market risk or risks arising from the financial assets and financial liabilities is substantially the same.
Valuation techniques such as discounted cash flow models or models based on recent arms length transactions or consideration of financial data of the investees are used to measure the fair value of certain financial instruments for which external market pricing information is not available.
Fair value measurements are analysed by level in the fair value hierarchy as follows i level one are measurements at quoted prices unadjusted in active markets for identical assets or liabilities ii level two measurements are valuations techniques with all material inputs observable for the asset or liability either directly that is as prices or indirectly that is derived from prices and iii level three measurements are valuations not solely based on observable market data that is the measurement requires significant unobservable inputs.
Transfers between levels of the fair value hierarchy are deemed to have occurred at the end of the reporting period.
Refer to Note 42.
Cost is the amount of cash or cash equivalents paid or the fair value of the other consideration given to acquire an asset at the time of its acquisition and includes transaction costs.
Measurement at cost is only applicable to investments in equity instruments that do not have a quoted market price and whose fair value cannot be reliably measured and derivatives that are linked to and must be settled by the delivery of such unquoted equity instruments.
Refer to Note 10.
Transaction costs are incremental costs that are directly attributable to the acquisition issue or disposal of a financial instrument.
An incremental cost is one that would not have incurred if the transaction had not taken place.
Transaction costs include fees and commissions paid to agents including employees acting as selling agents advisors brokers and dealers levies by regulatory agencies and securities exchanges and transfer taxes and duties.
Transaction costs do not include debt premiums or discounts financing costs or internal administrative or holding costs.
Amortised cost is the amount at which the financial instrument was recognised at initial recognition less any principal repayments plus accrued interest and for financial assets less any writedown for incurred impairment losses.
Accrued interest includes the amortisation of transaction costs deferred at initial recognition and of any premium or discount to maturity amount using the effective interest method.
Accrued interest income and accrued interest expense including both accrued coupon and amortised discount or premium including fees deferred at origination if any are not presented separately and are included in the carrying values of related items in the consolidated statement of financial position.
The effective interest method is a method of allocating interest income or interest expense over the relevant period so as to achieve a constant periodic rate of interest effective interest rate on the carrying amount.
The effective interest rate is the rate that exactly discounts estimated future cash payments or receipts excluding future credit losses through the expected life of the financial instrument or a shorter period if appropriate to the net carrying amount of the financial instrument.
The effective interest rate discounts cash flows of variable interest instruments to the next interest repricing date except for the premium or discount which reflects the credit spread over the floating rate specified in the instrument or other variables that are not reset to market rates.
Such premiums or discounts are amortised over the whole expected life of the instrument.
The present value calculation includes all fees paid or received between parties to the contract that are an integral part of the effective interest rate refer to income and expense recognition policy.
174 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 31 DECEMBER 2017 2 Summary of Significant Accounting Policies continued Initial recognition of financial instruments.
Trading securities derivatives and other financial instruments at fair value through profit or loss are initially recorded at fair value.
All other financial instruments are initially recorded at fair value plus the transaction costs.
Fair value at initial recognition is best evidenced by the transaction price.
A gain or a loss on initial recognition is only recorded if there is a difference between the fair value and the transaction price which can be evidenced by other observable current market transactions in the same instrument or by a valuation technique whose inputs include only data from observable markets.
All purchases and sales of financial assets that require delivery within the time frame set by regulation or market convention regular way purchases and sales are recorded at trade date which is the date that the Group commits to deliver a financial asset.
All other purchases are recognised when the entity becomes a party to the contractual provisions of the instrument.
Derecognition of financial assets.
The Group derecognises financial assets when a the assets are redeemed or the rights to cash flows from the assets otherwise expired or b the Group has transferred the rights to the cash flows from the financial assets or entered into a qualifying passthrough arrangement while i also transferring substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership of the assets or ii neither transferring nor retaining substantially all risks and rewards of ownership but not retaining control.
Control is retained if the counterparty does not have the practical ability to sell the asset in its entirety to an unrelated third party without needing to impose additional restrictions on the sale.
Cash and cash equivalents.
Cash and cash equivalents are items which are readily convertible to known amounts of cash and are subject to an insignificant risk of changes in value.
Cash and cash equivalents include cash on hand amounts due from the National Bank of Georgia NBG excluding mandatory reserves and all interbank placements and interbank receivables with original maturities of less than three months.
Funds restricted for a period of more than three months on origination are excluded from cash and cash equivalents.
Cash and cash equivalents are carried at amortised cost.
The payments or receipts presented in the statement of cash flows represent the Groups transfers of cash and cash equivalents including amounts charged or credited to current accounts of the Groups counterparties held with the Group such as loan interest income or principal collected by charging the customers current account or interest payments or disbursement of loans credited to the customers current account which represent cash or cash equivalent from the customers perspective.
Mandatory cash balances with the National Bank of Georgia.
Mandatory cash balances with the NBG are carried at amortised cost and represent mandatory reserve deposits that are not available to finance the Groups day to day operations.
Hence they are not considered as part of cash and cash equivalents for the purposes of the consolidated statement of cash flows.
Investment securities available for sale.
This classification includes investment securities which the Group intends to hold for an indefinite period of time and which may be sold in response to needs for liquidity or changes in interest rates exchange rates or equity prices.
The Group classifies investments as available for sale at the time of purchase.
Investment securities available for sale are carried at fair value.
Interest income on available for sale debt securities is calculated using the effective interest method and recognised in profit or loss for the year.
Dividends on available for sale equity instruments are recognised in profit or loss for the year when the Groups right to receive payment is established and it is probable that the dividends will be collected.
All other elements of changes in the fair value are recognised in Other Comprehensive Income OCI until the investment is derecognised or impaired at which time the cumulative gain or loss is reclassified from OCI to profit or loss.
Impairment losses are recognised in profit or loss when incurred as a result of one or more events loss events arising after the initial recognition of investment securities available for sale.
A significant or prolonged decline in the fair value of an equity security below its cost is an indicator that it is impaired.
The cumulative impairment loss  measured as the difference between the acquisition cost and the current fair value less any impairment loss on that asset previously recognised in profit or loss  is removed from equity and reclassified from OCI.
Impairment losses on equity instruments are not reversed through profit or loss.
If in a subsequent period the fair value of a debt instrument classified as available for sale increases and the increase can be objectively related to an event occurring after the impairment loss was recognised in profit or loss the impairment loss is reversed through the current periods profit or loss for the year.
Sale and repurchase agreements.
Sale and repurchase agreements repo agreements which effectively provide a lenders return to the counterparty are treated as secured financing transactions.
The lender provides funds to the borrower and receives security as collateral.
Securities sold under such sale and repurchase agreements are not derecognised.
The securities are not reclassified in the statement of financial position unless the transferee has by contract the right or custom to sell or repledge the securities in which case they are reclassified as repurchase receivables.
The corresponding liability is presented within amounts due to credit institutions.
The repurchase agreements are shortterm in nature.
Available for sale securities or bonds carried at amortised cost reclassified to repurchase receivables continue to be carried at fair value or amortised cost respectively in accordance with the accounting policies for these categories of assets.
Securities purchased under agreements to resell reverse repo agreements which effectively provide a lenders return to the Group are recorded as due from other banks or loans and advances to customers as appropriate.
The difference between the sale and repurchase price is treated as interest income and accrued over the life of repo agreements using the effective interest rate method.
175 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Governance Financial Statements Additional Information 2 Summary of Significant Accounting Policies continued Due from other banks.
Amounts due from other banks are recorded when the Group advances money to counterparty banks with original maturity of more than three months and with no intention of trading the resulting unquoted nonderivative receivable due on fixed or determinable dates.
Amounts due from other banks are carried at amortised cost.
Loans and advances to customers.
Loans and advances to customers are recorded when the Group advances money to purchase or originate an unquoted nonderivative receivable from a customer due on fixed or determinable dates and has no intention of trading the receivable.
Loans and advances to customers are carried at amortised cost.
When financial assets are renegotiated and the renegotiated terms and conditions differ substantially from the previous terms financial asset is derecognised and the new asset is initially recognised at its fair value.
Bonds carried at amortised cost.
Investment securities that the Group intends to hold for an indefinite period and that may be sold in response to needs for liquidity or changes in interest rates exchange rates or equity prices have been classified as available for sale investments in the financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2014.
In 2015 the Group has reassessed its intention with regard to some of the securities under this category and has identified certain investments that the Group has both the intention and ability to hold to maturity.
Due to the fact that transactions for such securities do not take place with sufficient frequency and volume to provide pricing information on an ongoing basis the securities are not considered to be quoted in an active market and were reclassified to loans and receivables rather than held to maturity investments.
These securities are presented in the balance sheet under caption bonds carried at amortised cost.
When an available for sale financial asset with fixed maturity is reclassified to loans and receivables the fair value of the financial asset on that date becomes its new amortised cost.
Any previous gain or loss on that asset that has been recognised directly in other comprehensive income is amortised to profit and loss over the investments remaining life using the effective interest method.
Impairment of financial assets carried at amortised cost.
Impairment losses are recognised in profit or loss when incurred as a result of one or more events loss events that happened after the initial recognition of the financial asset and which have an impact on the amount or timing of the estimated future cash flows of the financial asset or group of financial assets that can be reliably estimated.
The Group classifies its borrowers as significant and nonsignificant ones for impairment allowance estimation purposes and assesses for impairment individually or collectively.
Specific qualitative and quantitative events are outlined for evidence of impairment of individually and collectively assessed borrowers in order to ensure that loss event is identified as early as possible.
If there is evidence that an impairment loss event on significant credit exposures has been incurred the Bank assesses the borrowers on an individual basis and measures the amount of the loss as the difference between the assets carrying amount and the present value of estimated future cash flows discounted by the exposures original effective interest rate for fixed rate loans or current effective interest rate for variable rate loans.
The Bank considers two types of sources for recoveries cash recoveries andor collateral recovery.
For cash recoveries the estimated recoverable amount is equal to the present value of the estimated future cash flows.
Collateral recoveries reflect the cash flows that may result from collateral foreclosure.
The Bank uses its best estimates to assess future recoveries applying scenario analysis and taking into account all relevant information available at the reporting date including adverse changes in general macroeconomic environment or the industry the borrower operates in.
If the Group determines that there is no objective evidence that an individually assessed financial asset incurred in impairment whether significant or not it includes the asset in a group of financial assets with similar credit risk characteristics and collectively assesses them for impairment.
For collective assessment purposes exposures are grouped into a homogenous risk pools based on similar credit risk characteristics.
Common credit risk characteristics of the group include but are not limited to type of counterparty individual vs. type of product pastdue status of the exposure restructuring status and type of collateral.
In order to calculate impairment allowance for collectively assessed loans pools the Bank estimates the following risk parameters probability of default cure rate recovery rate survival rate and loss given default based on historical experience.
In case of a change in either the internal or external environment and historical data no longer reflect the current situation the Bank adjusts risk parameters on the basis of current observable data to reflect the effects of present conditions that did not affect past periods and to remove the effects of past conditions that do no longer exist.
If the terms of an impaired financial asset held at amortised cost are renegotiated or otherwise modified because of financial difficulties of the borrower or issuer impairment is measured using the original effective interest rate before the modification of terms.
The Bank reverses previously recognised impairment loss if once identified the amount of the impairment loss decreases and the decrease is related to an objective event.
The previously recognised impairment loss is reversed by adjusting the allowance account through profit or loss.
In order to reverse provisions for individually significant borrowers there should be objective evidence that the borrowers financial standing has improved or there is improvement in collateral coverage.
For collectively assessed loans the Bank applies the notion of quarantine period defined as period necessary for an exposure to satisfy performing loans criterias in order to be reclassified in a performing loans pool.
176 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 31 DECEMBER 2017 2 Summary of Significant Accounting Policies continued Repossessed collateral.
Repossessed collateral represents nonfinancial assets acquired by the Group to settle overdue loans.
The assets are initially recognised at fair value when acquired and included in premises and equipment investment property or inventories within other assets depending on their nature and the Groups intention in respect of recovery of these assets and are subsequently remeasured and accounted for in accordance with the accounting policies for these categories of assets.
Inventories of repossessed assets are recorded at the lower of cost or net realisable value.
Credit related commitments.
The Group enters into credit related commitments including letters of credit and financial guarantees.
Financial guarantees represent irrevocable assurances to make payments in the event that a customer cannot meet its obligations to third parties and carry the same credit risk as loans.
Financial guarantees and commitments to provide a loan are initially recognised at their fair value which is normally evidenced by the amount of fees received.
This amount is amortised on a straight line basis over the life of the commitments except for those to originate loans if it is probable that the Group will enter into a specific lending arrangement and does not expect to sell the resulting loan shortly after origination Such loan commitment fees are deferred and included in the carrying value of the loan on initial recognition.
At the end of each reporting period the commitments are measured at the higher of i the unamortised balance of the amount at initial recognition and ii the best estimate of expenditure required to settle the commitment at the end of each reporting period.
Performance guarantees are contracts that provide compensation if another party fails to perform a contractual obligation.
Such contracts do not transfer credit risk.
Performance guarantees are recorded offbalance sheet at initiation.
Fee income is recognised as earned over the lifetime of a respective contract.
At the end of each reporting period the provision for performance guarantee contracts are measured at the best estimate of expenditure required to settle the contract at the end of each reporting period discounted to present value if the discounting effect is material.
The Bank has the contractual right to revert to its customer for recovering amounts paid to settle the performance guarantee contracts.
Such amounts are recognised as loans and receivables.
Goodwill.
Goodwill is carried at cost less accumulated impairment losses if any.
The Group tests goodwill for impairment at least annually and whenever there are indications that goodwill may be impaired.
Goodwill is allocated to the cashgenerating units or groups of cashgenerating units that are expected to benefit from the synergies of the business combination.
Such units or group of units represent the lowest level at which the Group monitors goodwill and are not larger than an operating segment.
Gains or losses on disposal of an operation within a cash generating unit to which goodwill has been allocated include the carrying amount of goodwill associated with the disposed operation.
This is generally measured on the basis of the relative values of the disposed operation and the portion of the cashgenerating unit which is retained.
Premises and equipment.
Premises and equipment except for land buildings and construction in progress are stated at cost less accumulated depreciation and provision for impairment where required.
Cost of premises and equipment of acquired subsidiaries is the estimated fair value at the date of acquisition.
Following initial recognition land buildings and construction in progress are carried at a revalued amount being the fair value at the date of revaluation less any subsequent accumulated depreciation and subsequent accumulated impairment losses.
Revaluations are performed frequently enough to ensure that the carrying amount does not differ materially from that which would be determined using fair values at the end of reporting period.
Any revaluation surplus is credited to the revaluation reserve for premises and equipment included in equity except to the extent that it reverses a revaluation decrease of the same asset previously recognised in profit or loss.
In this case the increase is recognised in profit or loss to the extent of the decrease previously charged.
A revaluation deficit is recognised in profit or loss except that a deficit directly offsetting a previous surplus on the same asset is recognised in other comprehensive income and reduces revaluation reserve for premises and equipment accumulated in equity.
Depreciation on revalued buildings is charged to profit or loss.
Upon disposal of revalued property any revaluation reserve relating to the particular asset being sold or retired is transferred to retained earnings.
Costs of minor repairs and maintenance are expensed when incurred.
Costs of replacing major parts or components of premises and equipment items are capitalised and the replaced part is retired.
If impaired premises and equipment are written down to the higher of their value in use and fair value less costs to sell.
The decrease in carrying amount is charged to profit or loss to the extent it exceeds the previous revaluation surplus in equity.
An impairment loss recognised for an asset in prior years is reversed if there has been a change in the estimates used to determine the assets value in use or fair value less costs to sell.
Gains and losses on disposals determined by comparing proceeds with carrying amount are recognised in profit or loss.
177 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Governance Financial Statements Additional Information 2 Summary of Significant Accounting Policies continued
Land and construction in progress are not depreciated.
Depreciation on other items of premises and equipment is calculated using the straightline method to allocate their cost or revalued amounts to their residual values over their estimated useful lives as follows
30  100 years Furniture and fixtures 5  8 years Computers and office equipment 3  8 years Motor vehicles 4  5 years Other equipment 2  10 years and Leasehold improvements The term of the underlying lease or if not defined not more than 7 years.
The residual value of an asset is the estimated amount that the Group would currently obtain from disposal of the asset less the estimated costs of disposal if the asset was already of the age and in the condition expected at the end of its useful life.
The residual value of an asset is nil if the Group expects to use the asset until the end of its physical life.
The assets residual values and useful lives are reviewed and adjusted if appropriate at the end of each reporting period.
Investment property.
Investment property is property that the Groups owns to earn rental income or for capital appreciation or both and that it does not occupy.
Investment property is stated at cost less accumulated depreciation and provision for impairment where required.
It is amortised on a straight line basis over an expected useful life of 30 to 50 years.
In case of any indication that the investment properties may be impaired the Group estimates the recoverable amount as the higher of value in use and fair value less costs to sell.
The carrying amount of an investment property is written down to its recoverable amount through a charge to profit or loss for the year.
An impairment loss recognised in prior years is reversed if there has been a subsequent change in the estimates used to determine the assets recoverable amount.
Land included in investment property is not depreciated.
Depreciation on other items of investment properties is calculated using the straight line method to allocate their cost to their residual values over their estimated useful lives of 30 to 50 years.
Residual values of investment properties are estimated to be nil.
Earned rental income is recorded in profit or loss for the year within other operating income.
Subsequent expenditure is capitalised to the assets carrying amount only when it is probable that future economic benefits associated with the expenditure will flow to the Group and the cost can be measured reliably.
All other repairs and maintenance costs are expensed when incurred.
Intangible assets.
All of the Groups intangible assets have definite useful life and primarily include capitalised computer software and licenses.
Acquired computer software licenses are capitalised on the basis of the costs incurred to acquire and bring to use the specific software.
All other costs associated with computer software eg its maintenance are expensed when incurred.
Intangible assets are amortised on a straight line basis over expected useful lives of 2 to 15 years.
Finance lease receivables Investment in finance lease.
Where the Group is a lessor in a lease that substantially transfers all risks and rewards incidental to ownership to the lessee the assets leased out are presented as investments in finance leases and carried at the present value of the future lease payments.
Investments in finance leases are initially recognised at commencement when the lease term begins using a discount rate determined at inception the early date of the lease agreement and the date of commitment by the parties to the principal provisions of the lease.
The difference between the gross receivable and the present value represents unearned finance income.
This income is recognised over the term of the lease using the net investment method before tax which reflects a constant periodic rate of return.
Incremental costs directly attributable to negotiating and arranging the lease are included in the initial measurement of the finance lease receivable and reduce the amount of income recognised over the lease term.
Finance income from leases is recorded within interest income in the profit or loss.
Impairment losses are recognised in profit or loss when incurred as a result of one or more events loss events that took place after the initial recognition of investments in leases.
The Group uses the same principal criteria to determine that there is objective evidence that an impairment loss has occurred as for loans carried at amortised costs disclosed earlier in this note.
Impairment losses are recognised through an allowance account to write down the receivables net carrying amount to the present value of expected cash flows which exclude future credit losses that have not been incurred discounted at the interest rates implicit in the finance leases.
The estimated future cash flows reflect the cash flows that may result from obtaining and selling the assets subject to the lease.
Receivables from terminated leases.
The company recognises receivables from terminated contracts at the moment of lease contract termination.
These receivables are recognised at amount comprising difference between fair value of repossessed assets and outstanding balance of net investment in finance lease.
Receivables are accounted for at amortised cost less impairment.
178 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 31 DECEMBER 2017 2 Summary of Significant Accounting Policies continued Prepayment for purchase of leasing assets.
Prepayment for purchase of leasing assets comprises of interest bearing advance payments made to purchase assets for transfer into leases.
Such advances are accounted for at amortised cost less impairment.
On commencement of the leases advances towards lease contracts are transferred into net investment in finance lease.
Insurance and reinsurance receivables.
Insurance and reinsurance receivables are recognised based on insurance policy terms and measured at cost.
The carrying value of insurance and reinsurance receivables is reviewed for impairment whenever events or circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable with any impairment loss recorded in the consolidated statement of income.
Reinsurance receivables primarily include balances due from both insurance and reinsurance companies for ceded insurance liabilities.
Insurance premiums are recognised as revenue earned premiums proportionally over the period of coverage of respective insurance contracts.
Premiums are shown before deduction of commission and are gross of any taxes or duties levied on premiums.
Amounts due to reinsurers are estimated in a manner consistent with the associated reinsured policies and in accordance with the reinsurance contract.
Premiums ceded and claims reimbursed are presented on a gross basis.
An impairment review is performed on all reinsurance assets when an indication of impairment occurs.
Reinsurance receivables are impaired only if there is objective evidence that the Group may not receive all amounts due to it under the terms of the contract that this can be measured reliably.
Liability adequacy test.
Liability adequacy tests are performed at each balance sheet date to ensure the adequacy of recognised insurance liabilities net of related deferred acquisition costs.
In performing the tests current best estimates of future contractual cash flows claims handling and administration costs in respect of claims as well as investment income from assets backing such liabilities are used.
Where tests highlight a deficiency insurance liabilities are increased with any deficiency being recognised in the consolidated statement of comprehensive income.
Due to credit institutions.
Amount due to credit institutions are recorded when counterparty banks advance money or other assets to the Group.
The nonderivative liability is carried at amortised cost.
If the Group purchases its own debt it is removed from the consolidated statement of financial position and the difference between the carrying amount of the liability and the consideration paid is included in gains or losses arising from retirement of debt.
Customer accounts.
Customer accounts are nonderivative liabilities to individuals state or corporate customers and are carried at amortised cost.
Subordinated debt.
Subordinated debt includes longterm nonderivative liabilities to international financial institutions and is carried at amortised cost.
The repayment of subordinated debt ranks after all other creditors in case of liquidation and is included in the Banks Tier 2 capital.
Debt securities in issue.
Debt securities in issue include promissory notes bonds certificates of deposit and debentures issued by the Group.
Debt securities are stated at amortised cost.
If the Group purchases its own debt securities in issue they are removed from the consolidated statement of financial position and the difference between the carrying amount of the liability and the consideration paid is included in gains arising from retirement of debt.
Derivative financial instruments.
Derivative financial instruments including foreign exchange contracts interest rate futures forward rate agreements currency and interest rate swaps currency and interest rate options are carried at their fair value.
The Group also enters into offsetting deposits with its counterparty banks to exchange currencies.
Such deposits while legally separate are aggregated and accounted for as a single derivative financial instrument currency swap on a net basis where i the deposits are entered into at the same time and in contemplation of one another ii they have the same counterparty iii they relate to the same risk and iv there is no apparent business purpose for structuring the transactions separately that could not also have been accomplished in a single transaction.
All derivative instruments are carried as assets when fair value is positive and as liabilities when fair value is negative.
Changes in the fair value of derivative instruments are included in profit or loss.
The Group does not apply hedge accounting.
Certain derivative instruments embedded in other financial instruments are treated as separate derivative instruments when their risks and characteristics are not closely related to those of the host contract.
Income taxes.
Income taxes are provided in the consolidated financial statements in accordance with the legislation enacted or substantively enacted by the end of reporting period in the respective territories that the Bank and its subsidiaries operate.
The income tax chargecredit comprises of current tax and deferred tax and is recognised in profit or loss except if it is recognised directly in other comprehensive income because it relates to transactions that are also recognised in the same or a different period directly in other comprehensive income.
Current tax is the amount expectedtobepaid to or recovered from the tax authorities in respect of taxable profits or losses for the current and prior periods.
Taxable profits or losses are based on estimates if consolidated financial statements are authorised prior to filing relevant tax returns.
Taxes other than on income are recorded within administrative and other operating expenses.
179 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Governance Financial Statements Additional Information 2 Summary of Significant Accounting Policies continued Deferred income tax is provided using the balance sheet liability method for tax loss carry forwards and temporary differences arising between the tax bases of assets and liabilities and their carrying amounts for financial reporting purposes.
In accordance with the initial recognition exemption deferred taxes are not recorded for temporary differences on initial recognition of an asset or a liability in a transaction other than a business combination if the transaction when initially recorded affects neither accounting nor taxable profit.
Deferred tax liabilities are not recorded for temporary differences on initial recognition of goodwill and subsequently for goodwill that is not deductible for tax purposes.
Deferred tax balances are measured at tax rates enacted or substantively enacted at the end of reporting period that are expected to apply to the extent of time when the temporary differences will reverse or the tax loss carry forwards will be utilised.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are netted only within the individual companies of the Group.
Deferred tax assets for deductible temporary differences and tax loss carry forwards are recorded only to the extent that it is probable that future taxable profit will be available against which the deductions can be utilised.
Deferred income tax is provided on postacquisition retained earnings of subsidiaries except where the Group controls the subsidiarys dividend policy and it is probable that the difference will not reverse through dividends or otherwise in the foreseeable future.
Uncertain tax positions.
The Groups uncertain tax positions are reassessed by the management at the end of each reporting period.
Liabilities are recorded for income tax positions that are determined by the management as more likely than not to result in additional taxes being levied if the positions were to be challenged by the tax authorities.
The assessment is based on the interpretation of tax laws that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the end of reporting period and any known Court or other rulings on such issues.
Liabilities for penalties interest and taxes other than on income are recognised based on the managements best estimate of the expenditure required to settle the obligations at the end of the reporting period.
Provisions for liabilities and charges.
Provisions for liabilities and charges are nonfinancial liabilities of uncertain timing or amount.
They are accrued when the Group has a present legal or constructive obligation as a result of past events it is probable that an outflow of resources embodying economic benefits will be required to settle the obligation and a reliable estimate of the amount of the obligation can be made.
Share capital.
Ordinary shares with discretionary dividends are classified as equity.
Incremental costs directly attributable to the issue of new shares or options are shown in equity as a deduction net of tax from the proceeds.
Any excess of the fair value of consideration received over the par value of shares issued is recorded as share premium in equity.
Dividends.
Dividends are recorded in equity in the period in which they are declared.
Any dividends declared after the end of the reporting period and before the consolidated financial statements are authorised for issue are disclosed in the subsequent events note.
Income and expense recognition.
Interest income and expense are recorded for all debt instruments on an accrual basis using the effective interest method.
As part of interest income or expense this method defers all fees paid or received between the parties to the contract that are an integral part of the effective interest rate transaction costs and all other premiums or discounts.
Fees integral to the effective interest rate include origination fees received or paid by the entity relating to the creation or acquisition of a financial asset or issuance of a financial liability for example fees for evaluating creditworthiness evaluating and recording guarantees or collateral negotiating the terms of the instrument and for processing transaction documents.
Commitment fees received by the Group to originate loans at market interest rates are integral to the effective interest rate if it is probable that the Group will enter into a specific lending arrangement and does not expect to sell the resulting loan shortly after origination.
The Group does not designate loan commitments as financial liabilities at fair value through profit or loss.
When loans and other debt instruments become doubtful of collection they are written down to present value of expected cash inflows and interest income is thereafter recorded for the unwinding of the present value discount based on the assets effective interest rate that was used to measure the impairment loss.
All other fees commissions and other income and expense items are generally recorded on an accrual basis by reference to completion of the specific transaction assessed on the basis of the actual service provided as a proportion of the total services to be provided.
Commissions and fees arising from negotiating or participating in the negotiation of a transaction for a third party such as the acquisition of loans shares or other securities or the purchase or sale of businesses that are earned on execution of the underlying transaction are recorded on its completion.
Portfolio and other management advisory and service fees are recognised based on the applicable service contracts usually on a timeproportion basis.
Asset management fees related to investment funds are recorded rateably over the period the service is provided.
The same principle is applied for wealth management financial planning and custody services that are continuously provided over an extended period of time.
Foreign currency translation.
The Groups presentation currency is the Georgian Lari.
TBCGs and the Banks functional currency is the Georgian
The functional currency of each of the Groups consolidated entities is the currency of the primary economic environment in which the entity operates.
Transactions in foreign currencies are initially recorded in the functional currency converted at the rate of exchange ruling at the date of the transaction.
180 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 31 DECEMBER 2017 2 Summary of Significant Accounting Policies continued Monetary assets and liabilities are translated into each entitys functional currency at the official exchange rate of the territories where the Bank and its subsidiaries operate at the respective reporting period.
Foreign exchange gains and losses resulting from the settlement of transactions and from the translation of monetary assets and liabilities into each entitys functional currency at yearend official exchange rates are recognised in profit or loss.
Translation at yearend rates does not apply to nonmonetary items including equity investments.
The effects of exchange rate changes on the fair value of equity securities are recorded as part of the fair value gain or loss.
The results and financial position of each group entity the functional currency of none of which is a currency of a hyperinflationary economy are translated into the presentation currency as follows i. ii. iii. iv. all resulting exchange differences are recognised in other comprehensive income.
After losing control over a foreign operation the exchange differences previously recognised in other comprehensive income are reclassified to profit or loss for the year as part of the gain or loss on disposal.
On partial disposal of a subsidiary without loss of control the related portion of accumulated currency translation differences is reclassified to noncontrolling interest within equity.
Goodwill and fair value adjustments arising on the acquisition of a foreign entity are treated as assets and liabilities of the foreign entity and translated at the closing rate.
At 31 December 2017 the closing rate of exchange used for translating foreign currency balances was GBP 1 3.5005 2016 GBP 1  GEL 3.2579 2015 GBP 1  GEL 3.5492 USD 1  2.5922 2016 USD 1  GEL 2.6468 2015 USD 1  GEL 2.3949 EUR 1 3.1044 2016 EUR 1  GEL 2.7940 2015 EUR 1  GEL 2.6169.
Offsetting.
Financial assets and liabilities are offset and the net amount reported in the consolidated statement of financial position only when there is a legally enforceable right to offset the recognised amounts and there is an intention to either settle on a net basis or to realise the asset and settle the liability simultaneously.
Staff costs and related contributions.
Wages salaries paid annual leave and sick leave bonuses and nonmonetary benefits as well as the cash settled part of the share based payment schemes are accrued in the year in which the associated services are rendered by the Groups employees.
Earnings per share.
Earnings per share EPS are determined by dividing the profit or loss attributable to owners of the Bank by the weighted average number of participating shares outstanding during the reporting year.
Diluted earnings per share.
Diluted earnings per share is calculated by adjusting the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding to assume conversion of all dilutive potential ordinary shares.
In calculating diluted EPS nonvested ordinary shares are treated as outstanding on the grant date.
Segment reporting.
Operating segments are reported in a manner consistent with the internal reporting provided to the Groups chief operating decision maker.
Segments whose revenue result or assets are ten percent or more of all the segments are reported separately.
Share based payments.
A sharebased payment arrangement is an agreement between the entity and another party including an employee that entitles the other party to receive cash or other assets of the entity for amounts that are based on the price or value of equity instruments including shares or share options of the entity or another group entity or equity instruments including shares or share options of the entity or another group entity provided the specified vesting conditions if any are met.
Under the sharebased compensation plan the Group receives services from the management as consideration for equity instruments of the Group.
The fair value of the employee services received in exchange for the grant of the equity instruments is recognised as an expense.
The total amount to be expensed is determined by the reference to the fair value of the equity instruments granted excluding the impact of any nonmarket service and performance vesting conditions.
Nonmarket vesting conditions are included in the assumptions about the number of equity instruments that are expected to vest.
The total amount expensed is recognised over the vesting period which is the period over which all of the specified vesting conditions are to be satisfied.
At each balance sheet date the Group revises its estimates of the number of equity instruments that are expected to vest based on the nonmarketing vesting conditions.
It recognises the impact of the revision of original estimates if any in profit or loss with a corresponding adjustment to equity.
Increase in equity on accrued shares resulting from the equity settled scheme is accounted for under share based payment reserve.
Upon meeting vesting conditions share based payment reserve attributable to the vested shares is transferred to share capital and share premium.
When portions of a single grant vest on two or more dates the entity applies graded vesting for accounting of share based payment arrangement.
Vesting period of each tranche of the grant ends when the employee owns the shares with no further service restrictions.
Under graded vesting scheme the expense for earlier years is higher than for later years.
Each tranche is expensed over its own service period with a credit entry being equity.
181 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Governance Financial Statements Additional Information 3 Critical Accounting Estimates and Judgements in Applying Accounting Policies The Group makes estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities within the next financial year.
Estimates and judgements are continually evaluated and are based on the managements experience and other factors including expectations of future events that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances.
The management also makes certain judgements apart from those involving estimations in the process of applying the accounting policies.
Judgements that have the most significant effect on the amounts recognised in the consolidated financial statements and estimates that can cause a significant adjustment to the carrying amount of assets and liabilities within the next financial year include Impairment losses on loans and advances and finance lease receivables.
The Group regularly reviews its loan portfolio and finance lease receivables to assess impairment.
In determining whether an impairment loss should be recorded in the statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income the Group concludes whether there is or not any observable data indicating a measurable decrease in the estimated future cash flows from a portfolio of loans or finance lease receivables before the decrease can be identified with an individual loan in that portfolio.
This evidence may include observable data indicating that there has been an adverse change in the payment status of borrowers in a group or national or local economic conditions that correlate with defaults on assets in the group.
When scheduling future cash flows the management uses estimates based on historical loss experience for assets with similar credit risk characteristics.
The methodology and assumptions used for estimating both the amount and timing of future cash flows are reviewed regularly to reduce any differences between loss estimates and actual loss experience.
A 5% increase or decrease between actual loss experience and the loss estimates used will result in an additional or lower charge for loan loss impairment of GEL 11393 thousand 2016 GEL 11251 thousand 2015 GEL 9707 thousand and additional charge for impairment of finance lease receivables of GEL 63 thousand 2016 GEL 57 thousand 2015 GEL 37 thousand respectively.
Impairment provisions for individually significant loans and leases are based on the estimate of discounted future cash flows of the individual loans and leases taking into account repayments and realisation of any assets held as collateral against the loan or the lease.
A 5% increase or decrease in the actual future discounted cash flows from individually significant loans which could arise from a mixture of differences in amounts and timing of the cash flows will result in an additional or lower charge for loan loss provision of GEL 1454 thousand 2016 GEL 2701 thousand 2015 GEL 3677 thousand respectively.
A 5% increase or decrease in the actual future discounted cash flows from individually significant leases which could arise from a mixture of differences in amounts and timing of the cash flows will result in an additional or lower charge for provision of GEL 14 thousand 2016 GEL 9 thousand 2015 GEL 2 thousand respectively.
Fair value of financial instruments.
Where the fair values of financial assets and financial liabilities recorded in the consolidated statement of financial position cannot be derived from active markets they are determined using a variety of valuation techniques that include the use of mathematical models.
The inputs to these models employ observable market data.
However certain financial instruments are valued on the basis of valuation techniques featuring one or more significant market inputs that are unobservable and for them the measurement of fair value is more judgemental.
Tax legislation.
The Group is subject to corporate income taxes in several jurisdictions and the calculation of the Groups tax charge and provisions for corporate income taxes necessarily involves a degree of estimation and judgement.
Refer to Note 34.
4 Adoption of New or Revised Standards and Interpretations The adopted accounting policies are consistent with those of the previous financial year.
There were no new or amended standards or interpretations that resulted in a change of the accounting policy.
The new disclosures are included in Note 35 in accordance with Disclosure Initiative  Amendments to IAS 7 issued on 29 January 2016 and effective for annual periods beginning on or after 1 January 2017.
182 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 31 DECEMBER 2017 5 New Accounting Pronouncements Minor amendments to IFRSs The IASB has published a number of minor amendments some of which has not yet been endorsed for use in the EU.
The Group has not early adopted any of the amendments effective after 31 December 2017 and it expects they will have an insignificant effect when adopted on the consolidated financial statements of the Group and the separate financial statements of TBC Bank Group PLC.
Major new IFRSs The IASB has published IFRS 9 Financial Instruments IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers and IFRS 16 Leases which have been endorsed for use in the EU.
IFRS 9 Financial Instruments Classification and Measurement amended in July 2014 and effective for annual periods beginning on or after 1 January 2018.
Key features of the new standard are Financial assets are required to be classified into three measurement categories i those to be measured subsequently at amortised cost ii those to be measured subsequently at fair value through other comprehensive income FVOCI and iii those to be measured subsequently at fair value through profit or loss FVPL The classification for debt instruments is driven by the entitys business model for managing the financial assets and whether the contractual cash flows represent solely payments of principal and interest SPPI.
If a debt instrument is held to collect it may be carried at amortised cost if it also meets the SPPI requirement.
Debt instruments in line with the SPPI requirement that are held in a portfolio where an entity both holds to collect assets cash flows and sells assets may be classified as FVOCI.
Financial assets that do not contain cash flows that are SPPI must be measured at FVPL for example derivatives.
Embedded derivatives are no longer separated from financial assets but will be included in assessing the SPPI condition Investments in equity instruments are always measured at fair value.
However the management can make an irrevocable election to present changes in fair value in other comprehensive income provided the instrument is not held for trading.
If the equity instrument is held for trading changes in fair value are presented in profit or loss Most of the requirements in IAS 39 for classification and measurement of financial liabilities were carried forward unchanged to IFRS 9.
The key difference is that an entity will be required to present the effects of changes in own credit risk of financial liabilities designated at fair value through profit or loss in other comprehensive income IFRS 9 introduces a new model for the recognition of impairment losses  the expected credit losses ECL model.
There is a three stage approach which is based on the change in credit quality of financial assets since initial recognition.
In practice the new rules mean that entities will have to record an immediate loss equal to the 12month ECL on initial recognition of financial assets that are not credit impaired or lifetime ECL for trade receivables.
In case of a significant increase in credit risk impairment is measured using lifetime ECL rather than 12month ECL.
The model includes operational simplifications for lease and trade receivables Hedge accounting requirements were amended to align more closely the accounting with the risk management.
The standard provides entities with an accounting policy choice between applying the hedge accounting requirements of IFRS 9 and continuing to apply IAS 39 to all hedges because the standard currently does not address accounting for macro hedging.
Based on an analysis of the Groups financial assets and financial liabilities as at 31 December 2017 and on the basis of the facts and circumstances that exist at that date the Management of the Group estimated the impact of GEL 63734 thousand on its consolidated financial statements from the adoption of the new standard on 1 January 2018.
The Group plans to use modified retrospective approach and anticipated impact of adoption will result in the decrease to shareholders equity.
IFRS 9 does not have any impact on Banks regulatory capital and capital adequacy ratios which are calculated using local regulatory accounting standards.
183 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Governance Financial Statements Additional Information 5 New Accounting Pronouncements continued The following table reconciles the carrying amounts of financial assets from their previous measurement categories in accordance with IAS 39 into their new measurement categories upon transition to IFRS 9 on 1 January 2018 In thousands of GEL Measurement category
39 closing balance at 31
Effect Carrying value per IFRS 9 opening balance at 1 January Remeasurement Reclassification IAS 39 IFRS 9 ECL Other Mandatory Voluntary Cash and cash equivalents LandR AC 1431477 491    1430986 Mandatory cash balances with the National Bank of Georgia LandR AC 1033818     1033818 Investments in debt securities AFS FVOCI 656234 1051    655183 Investments in debt securities LandR AC 449538 628    448910 Total investments in debt securities 1105772 1679    1104093 Investments in equity securities AFS FVOCI 1704     1704 Total investments in equity securities 1704     1704 Due from other banks LandR AC 39643 36    39607 Loans and advances to customers LandR AC 8325353 63731    8261622 Total loans and advances to customers 8325353 63731    8261622 Investment in Finance Lease FLR AC 143836 739    143097 Total Investment in Finance Lease 143836 739    143097 Other financial assets LandR AC 146144 1019    145125 Total other financial assets 146144 1019    145125 Total financial assets 12227747 67695    12160052 Positive figures mean increase in the estimated credit loss whilst the negative figures stand for decrease in ECL.
The GEL 67.7 million increase was offset by GEL 4.0 million release of provision level for Credit related commitments and performance guarantees resulting in 63.7 million increase in total provision level.
No significant changes are expected for financial liabilities.
Impairment of financial assets Per IFRS 9 impairment methodology the Bank classifies its portfolio into three stages Stage I  assets for which no significant increase of credit risk since initial recognition is identified Stage II  assets for which significant increase in credit risk since initial recognition is identified Stage III  creditimpaired exposures.
For stage I exposures the Bank creates 12 months expected credit losses whereas for stage II and stage III lifetime expected credit losses are created.
The key impact of IFRS 9 comes from Stage II classification and incorporation of forward looking information in allowance calculation.
For the Stage II classification purposes the Bank applies both quantitative and the qualitative criteria including but not limited to 30 DPD overdue downgrade of the risk category of the borrower since initial recognition deterioration of the probability of default parameter above the predefined threshold.
Under IFRS 9 methodology the Bank updated its default definition criteria as well in order to make it consistent with the Banks internal guidelines.
Updated default definition includes criteria such as i 90 DPD overdue and ii other criteria indicating the borrowers unlikeness to repay the liabilities.
For Corporate and SME business borrowers the Bank applies borrower based default definition.
As for the retail and macro segments facility level default definition is utilised with additional pulling effect criteria being applied.
184 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 31 DECEMBER 2017 5 New Accounting Pronouncements continued Another significant driver of IFRS 9 impact on allowance level is incorporation of the forward looking information FLI.
The Bank incorporates forward looking information for both individual and collective assessment.
For FLI purposes the Bank defines three scenarios which are baseline most likely upside better than most likely downside worse than most likely.
The Bank derives the baseline macro scenario and takes into account projections from various external sources  the National Bank of Georgia Ministry of Finance IMF as well as other IFIs to ensure the alignment to the consensus market expectations.
Upside and downside scenarios are defined based on the framework developed by the Banks macroeconomic unit.
The Bank calculates expected impairment losses for each scenario.
In order to come up with the final expected credit loss figures the bank applies probability weighted average approach where probabilities of each scenario are used as weights.
The new standard also introduces expanded disclosure requirements and changes in presentation.
These are expected to change the nature and extent of the Groups disclosures about its financial instruments particularly in the year of the adoption of the new standard.
IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers issued on 28 May 2014 and effective for the periods beginning on or after 1 January 2018.
The new standard introduces the core principle that revenue must be recognised when the goods or services are transferred to the customer  at the transaction price.
Any bundled goods or services that are distinct must be separately recognised and any discounts or rebates on the contract price must generally be allocated to the separate elements.
When the consideration varies for any reason minimum amounts must be recognised if they are not at significant risk of reversal.
Costs incurred to secure contracts with customers have to be capitalised and amortised over the period when the benefits of the contract are consumed.
No material effect is expected on the Group due to introduction of the new standard.
IFRS 16 Leases issued on 13 January 2016 and effective for annual periods beginning on or after 1 January 2019.
The new standard sets out the principles for the recognition measurement presentation and disclosure of leases.
All leases result in the lessee obtaining the right to use an asset at the start of the lease and if lease payments are made over time also to access financing.
Accordingly IFRS 16 eliminates the classification of leases as either operating leases or finance leases as is required by IAS 17 and instead introduces a single lessee accounting model.
Lessees will be required to recognise a assets and liabilities for all leases with a term of more than 12 months unless the underlying asset is of low value and b depreciation of lease assets separately from interest on lease liabilities in the income statement.
IFRS 16 substantially carries forward the lessor accounting requirements in IAS 17.
Accordingly a lessor continues to classify its leases as operating leases or finance leases and to account for those two types of leases differently.
The Group is currently assessing the impact of the new standard on its financial statements.
IFRS 17 Insurance Contracts issued on 18 May 2017 and effective for annual periods beginning on or after 1 January 2021.
IFRS 17 replaces IFRS 4 which has given companies dispensation to carry on accounting for insurance contracts using existing practices.
As a consequence it was difficult for investors to compare and contrast the financial performance of otherwise similar insurance companies.
IFRS 17 is a single principlebased standard to account for all types of insurance contracts including reinsurance contracts that an insurer holds.
The standard requires recognition and measurement of groups of insurance contracts at i a riskadjusted present value of the future cash flows the fulfilment cash flows that incorporates all of the available information about the fulfilment cash flows in a way that is consistent with observable market information plus if this value is a liability or minus if this value is an asset ii an amount representing the unearned profit in the group of contracts the contractual service margin.
Insurers will be recognising the profit from a group of insurance contracts over the period they provide insurance coverage and as they are released from risk.
If a group of contracts is or becomes lossmaking an entity will be recognising the loss immediately The Group is currently assessing the impact of the interpretation on its financial statements.
IFRIC 22 Foreign currency transactions and advance consideration issued on 8 December 2016 and effective for annual periods beginning on or after 1 January 2018.
This interpretation considers how to determine the date of the transaction when applying the standard on foreign currency transactions IAS 21.
The interpretation applies where an entity either pays or received consideration in advance for foreign currencydenominated contracts.
The interpretation specifies that the date of transaction is the date on which the entity initially recognises the nonmonetary asset or nonmonetary liability arising from the payment or receipt of advance consideration.
If there are multiple payments or receipts in advance the Interpretation requires an entity to determine the date of transaction for each payment or receipt of advance consideration.
No material effect is expected on the Group due to introduction of the new standard.
IFRIC 23 Uncertainty over Income Tax Treatments issued on 7 June 2017 and effective for annual periods beginning on or after 1 January 2019.
IAS 12 specifies how to account for current and deferred tax but not how to reflect the effects of uncertainty.
The interpretation clarifies how to apply the recognition and measurement requirements in IAS 12 when there is uncertainty over income tax treatments.
An entity should determine whether to consider each uncertain tax treatment separately or together with one or more other uncertain tax treatments based on which approach better predicts the resolution of the uncertainty.
An entity should assume that a taxation authority will examine amounts it has a right to examine and have full knowledge of all related information when making those examinations.
If an entity concludes it is not probable that the taxation authority will accept an uncertain tax treatment the effect of uncertainty will be reflected in determining the related taxable profit or 185 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Governance Financial Statements Additional Information 5 New Accounting Pronouncements continued loss tax bases unused tax losses unused tax credits or tax rates by using either the most likely amount or the expected value depending on which method the entity expects to better predict the resolution of the uncertainty.
An entity will reflect the effect of a change in facts and circumstances or of new information that affects the judgments or estimates required by the interpretation as a change in accounting estimate.
Examples of changes in facts and circumstances or new information that can result in the reassessment of a judgment or estimate include but are not limited to examinations or actions by a taxation authority changes in rules established by a taxation authority or the expiry of a taxation authoritys right to examine or reexamine a tax treatment.
The absence of agreement or disagreement by a taxation authority with a tax treatment in isolation is unlikely to constitute a change in facts and circumstances or new information that affects the judgments and estimates required by the Interpretation.
The Group is currently assessing the impact of the interpretation on its financial statements.
6 Cash and Cash Equivalents In thousands of GELtel Cash on hand 419605 402532 320363 Cash balances with the National Bank of Georgia other than mandatory reserve deposits 371342 135557 121494 Correspondent accounts and overnight placements with other banks 571078 406319 219275 Placements with and receivables from other banks with original maturities of less than three months 69452 772 59215 Total cash and cash equivalents 1431477 945180 720347 97% of the correspondent accounts and overnight placements with other banks are placed with OECD banking institutions 31 December 2016 96% 31 December 2015 91%.
As of 31 December 2017 GEL 12421 thousand was placed on interbank term deposits with one nonOECD bank and GEL 57031 thousand with one OECD bank 31 December 2016 GEL 772 thousand with four nonOECD banks 31 December 2015 GEL 59215 thousand with eight nonOECD banks.
Interest rate analysis of cash and cash equivalents is disclosed in Note 36.
Credit rating of correspondent accounts and overnight placements with other banks is as follows In thousands of GELtel A 271366 78324 13245 A 62434 258025 1 A 213247 27997 152044 BBB 3235  30304 BBB 383 23174 3039 BBB 45 464 2656 BB 300 1147 BB 224 BB 15919 3039 11671 B 185 2288 164 Not rated 3298 11861 6151 Total 571078 406319 219275 Credit rating of placements with and receivables from other banks with original maturities of less than three months stands as follows In thousands of GELtel BBB 57031 B   23769 Not rated 12421  35446 Total 69452 772 59215 The table illustrates the ratings by international agencies Standard and Poors and Fitch Ratings.
When different credit ratings are designated by the agencies the highest designated rating for this asset is used.
As of 31 December 2017 there were no investment securities held as collateral against placements with other banks under the reverse repo agreements 31 December 2016 nil 2015 GEL 50200 thousand.
186 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 31 DECEMBER 2017 7 Due from Other Banks Amounts due from other banks include placements with original maturities of more than three months that are not collateralised and represent neither past due nor impaired amounts at the end of 2017 2016 and 2015.
Credit ratings of placements with other banks with original maturities of more than three months were as follows In thousands of GELtel A 8632 13210 7975 BBB  5541 BB 4041 801 1507 B 1520 5073 1268 Not rated 24711 21 220 Total 39643 24725 11042 As of 31 December 2017 the Group had one placement with one bank with original maturities of more than three months and with aggregated amounts above GEL 5000 thousand 2016 nil 2015 nil.
The total aggregated amount of these placement was GEL 23147 thousand 2016 nil 2015 nil or 58% of the total amount due to other 2016 nil 2015 nil.
As of 31 December 2017 GEL 13121 thousand 2016 GEL 19511 thousand 2015 GEL 8711 thousand were kept on deposits as restricted cash under an arrangement with a credit card company or credit card related services with other banks.
Refer to Note 42 for the estimated fair value of amounts due from other banks.
Interest rate analysis of due from other banks is disclosed in Note 36.
8 Mandatory cash balances with the National Bank of Georgia Mandatory cash balances with the National Bank of Georgia NBG represent amounts deposited with the NBG.
Resident financial institutions are required to maintain an interestearning obligatory reserve with the NBG the amount of which depends on the level of funds attracted by the financial institutions.
The Group earned up to 5.0% 0.6% and 0.4% annual interest in GEL USD and EUR respectively on mandatory reserve with NBG in 2017 2016 5.0% 0.0% and 0.4% in GEL USD and EUR respectively.
The Group did not earn annual interest on the mandatory reserve with the NBG for year ended 31 December 2015.
In September 2017 Fitch Ratings reaffirmed Georgias longterm foreign and local currency Issuer Default Ratings IDRs at BB with Stable
The issue ratings on Georgias senior unsecured foreign and localcurrency bonds are also affirmed at BB.
The Country Ceiling is affirmed at BB and the Shortterm foreigncurrency IDR at B.
9 Loans and Advances to Customers In thousands of GELtel Corporate loans 2475392 2062229 1500104 Consumer loans 2163425 1872142 1170100 Mortgage loans 2069728 1808434 905274 Loans to micro small and medium enterprises 1844672 1615920 1063551 Total loans and advances to customers before impairment 8553217 7358725 4639029 Less Provision for loan impairment 227864 225023 194143 Total loans and advances to customers 8325353 7133702 4444886 As of 31 December 2017 loans and advances to customers carried at GEL 246267 thousand have been pledged to local banks or other financial institutions as collateral with respect to other borrowed funds 2016 GEL 120093 thousand 2015 GEL 34012 thousand.
Following the merger of Bank Republic with TBC Bank the Group has reassessed its definition of segments as disclosed in Note 28.
Some of the clients were reallocated to different segments.
Relevant changes are applied to all periods presented in this report except for the profit and loss items for the year ended 31 December 2015 as recalculation was impracticable.
Therefore provision movement for the year ended 31 December 2015 is per old segmentation and contains resegmentation effect line to adjust opening provision levels for 1 January 2016.
Balance sheet amounts as at 31 December 2017 2016 and 2015 are comparable.
As per current report micro and SME loans are combined in one MSME category.
Consumer loans include all retail loans except mortgage loans.
187 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Governance Financial Statements Additional Information 9 Loans and Advances to Customers continued Movements in the provision for loan impairment during 2017 are as follows In thousands of GEL
Consumer loans
Loans to micro small and medium enterprises Total Provision for loan impairment as of 1 January 2017 90100 73730 23602 37591 225023 Total provision for impairment during the year 11088 130333 384 21521 141150 Provision for impairment creditedcharged to income statement during the year 27031 111922 5343 14275 93823 Recoveries of loans previously written off 15943 18411 5727 7246 47327 Amounts written off during the year as uncollectible 29386 82601 6507 20265 138759 Effect of translation to presentation currency  Provision for loan impairment as of 31 December 2017 49626 121538 17577 39123 227864 Loans and advances to customers written off in 2017 included loans to customers in the gross amount of GEL 21056 thousand issued in 2017 a previously issued performance guarantee of GEL 6 thousand which was transformed into loan in 2017 and GEL 117697 thousand issued in previous years.
Movements in the provision for loan impairment during 2016 were as follows In thousands of GEL
Consumer loans
Loans to micro small and medium enterprises Total Provision for loan impairment as of 1 January 2016 108050 42433 13135 30525 194143 Resegmentation effect  10092  10092 Total provision for impairment during the year 11841 71369 15108 31136 105772 Provision for impairment charged to income statement during the year 48948 60438 12572 25140 49202 Recoveries of loans previously written off 37107 10931 2536 5996 56570 Amounts written off during the year as uncollectible 6109 50121 4580 13755 74565 Effect of translation to presentation currency  43 61 223 327 Provision for loan impairment as of 31 December 2016 90100 73730 23602 37591 225023 Loans and advances to customers written off in 2016 included loans to customers in the gross amount of GEL 9830 thousand issued in 2016 a previously issued performance guarantee of GEL 0.14 thousand which was transformed into loan in 2016 and GEL 64735 thousand issued in previous years.
At yearend 2016 the Bank updated its methodology for loan loss provisioning purposes to include impairment assessment of acquired portfolios.
As per the upgraded methodology an impairment allowance is not created on the initial recognition of purchased portfolio considering that expected losses are reflected in fair value of the portfolio.
For the next reporting periods the impairment allowance is recognised if the incurred losses at the reporting date have increased compared to the level of incurred losses at the moment of acquisition.
The Bank applies updated provisioning methodology since yearend 2015.
The updated methodology enables the Bank to assess impairment allowances in an accurate manner given granular segmentation of the portfolio and the various risk parameters applied.
The credit portfolio is assessed for impairment on an individual and collective basis.
For provisioning purposes borrowers or groups of borrowers are classified as significant or nonsignificant.
Borrowers with total liabilities of GEL 2 million or more are regarded as significant and assessed individually for impairment.
In order to calculate the impairment allowance for collectively assessed loan pools the certain risk parameters are estimated based on various statistical models.
Following the merger of Constanta Bank with TBC Bank the Group has reassessed the segment definition as disclosed in Note 28.
A few clients were reallocated to different segments.
Relevant changes in the provision groups are highlighted in the table above under Postmerger classification effect.
188 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 31 DECEMBER 2017 9 Loans and Advances to Customers continued Movements in the provision for loan impairment during 2015 are as follows In thousands of GEL C or po r at e loans
Mortgage loans Loans to micro small and medium enterprises Total Provision for loan impairment as of 1 January 2015 91226 36753 8889 12896 149764 Postmerger reclassification effect  2373 245 2618 Total provision for impairment during the year 22890 34003 95620 Provision for impairment charged to income statement during the year 15396 28391 72791 Recoveries of loans previously written off 7494 5612 22829 Amounts written off during the year as uncollectible 6066 22937 2714 17734 49451 Effect of translation to presentation currency  256 276 1258 1790 Provision for loan impairment as of 31 December 2015 108050 42433 13135 30525 194143 Loans and advances to customers written off in 2015 included loans to customers in the gross amount of GEL 7134 thousand issued in 2015 a previously issued performance guarantee of GEL 1720 thousand which was transformed into loan in 2015 and GEL 40597 thousand issued in previous years.
Economic sector risk concentrations within the customer loan portfolio are as follows 31 December 2017 31 December 2016 31 December 2015 In thousands of GEL Amount % Amount % Amount % Individual 4198386 49% 3721450 51% 2039612 44% Energy and Utilities 719854 9% 540116 7% 333172 7% Food Industry 524286 7% 301290 4% 255795 6% Real Estate 453415 5% 252112 3% 222235 5% Hospitality and Leisure 450741 5% 319497 4% 266917 6% Trade 394495 5% 447541 6% 232599 5% Pawn Shops 279410 3% 305031 4% 260373 6% Agriculture 269844 3% 212148 3% 157193 3% Construction 233771 3% 210888 3% 100680 2% Healthcare 172255 2% 182131 3% 131276 3% Automotive 160795 2% 144157 2% 109556 2% Communication 114032 1% 45864 1% 114401 2% Services 108186 1% 109187 1% 60340 1% Transportation 96427 1% 89467 1% 61432 1% Financial Services 87501 1% 188646 3% 85926 2% Metals and Mining 84419 1% 62464 1% 75785 2% Other 205400 2% 226736 3% 131737 3% Total loans and advances to customers before impairment 8553217 100% 7358725 100% 4639029 100% In 2016 the Group reassessed the allocation of loans into the economic sectors.
The Group has revised the sector split for 2015 in order to make it consistent with 2016 and 2017.
As of 31 December 2017 the Group had 142 borrowers 2016 112 borrowers 2015 84 borrowers with aggregated gross loan amounts above GEL 5000 thousand.
The total aggregated amount of these loans was GEL 2437750 thousand 2016 GEL 1900916 thousand 2015 GEL 1378892 thousand or 28.5% of the gross loan portfolio 2016 25.8% 2015 29.7%.
189 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Governance Financial Statements Additional Information 9 Loans and Advances to Customers continued Analysis by credit quality of loans outstanding as of 31 December 2017 is as follows In thousands of GEL C or po r at e loans
Mortgage loans Loans to micro small and medium enterprises Total Neither past due nor impaired Borrowers with credit history over two years 1679029 New borrowers 708038 Total neither past due nor impaired 2387067 2035928 2017951 1754031 8194977 Past due but not impaired 1 to 30 days overdue  41088 15089 31598 87775 31 to 90 days overdue 91 to 180 days overdue 23029 181 to 360 days overdue More than 360 days overdue  48   22 Total past due but not impaired 23029 67850 25709 44993 161581 Individually assessed impaired loans Not overdue 39443 1 to 30 days overdue 10351 31 to 90 days overdue 4455 91 to 180 days overdue 48 181 to 360 days overdue More than 360 days overdue 8740 Total individually assessed impaired loans 63037 2420 65457 Collectively assessed impaired loans Not overdue 1266 6669 5912 6744 20591 1 to 30 days overdue 668 31 to 90 days overdue 91 to 180 days overdue 10009 41179 181 to 360 days overdue 8969 23550 More than 360 days overdue 325 Total collectively assessed impaired loans 2259 59647 26068 43228 131202 Total loans and advances to customers before impairment 2475392 2163425 2069728 1844672 8553217 Total provision 49626 121538 17577 39123 227864 Total loans and advances to customers 2425766 2041887 2052151 1805549 8325353 190 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 31 DECEMBER 2017 9 Loans and Advances to Customers continued Analysis by credit quality of loans outstanding as of 31 December 2016 is as follows In thousands of GEL C or po r at e loans
Mortgage loans Loans to micro small and medium enterprises Total Neither past due nor impaired Borrowers with credit history over two years 1279999 1030204 1203461 836773 4350437 New borrowers 647613 738255 557777 689106 2632751 Total neither past due nor impaired 1927612 1768459 1761238 1525879 6983188 Past due but not impaired 1 to 30 days overdue 10369 38214 7565 31904 88052 31 to 90 days overdue 1714 21205 8241 14269 45429 91 to 180 days overdue  146  227 373 181 to 360 days overdue  91   91 More than 360 days overdue 2864 28   2892 Total past due but not impaired 14947 59684 15806 46400 136837 Individually assessed impaired loans Not overdue 101273  195 2832 104300 1 to 30 days overdue 1059    1059 31 to 90 days overdue 7966    7966 91 to 180 days overdue    88 88 181 to 360 days overdue 2455  34 436 2925 More than 360 days overdue 4000  167  4167 Total individually assessed impaired loans 116753  396 3356 120505 Collectively assessed impaired loans Not overdue 776 5493 7129 5301 18699 1 to 30 days overdue  1488 2316 1316 5120 31 to 90 days overdue 908 2622 2443 5223 11196 91 to 180 days overdue  21779 6569 10074 38422 181 to 360 days overdue 1233 7660 8371 11291 28555 More than 360 days overdue  4957 4166 7080 16203 Total collectively assessed impaired loans 2917 43999 30994 40285 118195 Total loans and advances to customers before impairment 2062229 1872142 1808434 1615920 7358725 Total provision 90100 73730 23602 37591 225023 Total loans and advances to customers 1972129 1798412 1784832 1578329 7133702 191 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Governance Financial Statements Additional Information 9 Loans and Advances to Customers continued Analysis by credit quality of loans outstanding as of 31 December 2015 is as follows In thousands of GEL C or po r at e loans
Mortgage loans Loans to micro small and medium enterprises Total Neither past due nor impaired Borrowers with credit history over two years 888642 632618 626293 576079 2723632 New borrowers 399615 468811 246968 412391 1527785 Total neither past due nor impaired 1288257 1101429 873261 988470 4251417 Past due but not impaired 1 to 30 days overdue 66 23207 5077 28391 56741 31 to 90 days overdue 3718 15285 9803 13272 42078 91 to 180 days overdue 2829 85   2914 181 to 360 days overdue  53   53 More than 360 days overdue  22   22 Total past due but not impaired 6613 38652 14880 41663 101808 Individually assessed impaired loans Not overdue 187802   2747 190549 1 to 30 days overdue 10491   5203 15694 31 to 90 days overdue 5109    5109 91 to 180 days overdue 940    940 181 to 360 days overdue 214    214 More than 360 days overdue 350    350 Total individually assessed impaired loans 204906   7950 212856 Collectively assessed impaired loans Not overdue 228 5933 9524 4053 19738 1 to 30 days overdue 100 793 858 3582 5333 31 to 90 days overdue  1983 1078 1980 5041 91 to 180 days overdue  13881 2901 7424 24206 181 to 360 days overdue  5967 2692 7980 16639 More than 360 days overdue  1462 80 449 1991 Total collectively assessed impaired loans 328 30019 17133 25468 72948 Total loans and advances to customers before impairment 1500104 1170100 905274 1063551 4639029 Total provision 108050 52526 13135 20432 194143 Total loans and advances to customers 1392054 1117574 892139 1043119 4444886 The retail segment in Note 28 includes the following classes from the above tables consumer and mortgage.
The Group applied the portfolio provisioning methodology prescribed by IAS 39 Financial Instruments Recognition and Measurement and it created portfolio provisions for impairment losses that were incurred but have not been specifically identified with any individual loan by the end of reporting period.
The tables above provide an analysis of the loan portfolio based on credit quality.
The Groups policy for credit risk management purposes is to classify each loan as neither past due nor impaired past due but not impaired individually assessed impaired loans and collectively assessed impaired loans.
The pool of neither past due nor impaired loans includes exposures that are not overdue and are not classified as impaired.
Past due but not impaired loans include overdue performing loans but with no objective evidence of impairment identified.
The classification includes as well triggered loans that are not impaired because the current value of the expected cash and collateral recoveries are sufficient for full repayment.
Individually assessed impaired loans include exposures which were assessed for impairment on an individual basis and an adhoc impairment allowance was created.
Collectively assessed impaired loans include exposures for which objective evidence of impairment was identified and the respective collective impairment allowance was created.
The Group conducts collective assessment of the borrowers on a monthly basis.
As for the individual assessment it is performed quarterly.
192 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 31 DECEMBER 2017 9 Loans and Advances to Customers continued The amount and type of collateral required depend on an assessment of the credit risk of the counterparty.
There are three key types of collateral Real estate Movable property including fixed assets inventory and precious metals Financial assets including deposits stocks and third party guarantees.
The financial effect of collateral is presented by disclosing the collateral values separately for i those assets where collateral and other credit enhancements are equal to or exceed the assets carrying value overcollateralised assets and ii those assets where collateral and other credit enhancements are less than the assets carrying value undercollateralised assets.
The effect of collateral as of 31 December 2017 In thousands of GEL
Undercollateralised assets Carrying value of the assets Value of collateral Carrying value of the assets Value of collateral Corporate loans 2129927 5194598 345465 97386 Consumer loans 908387 2132566 1255038 25781 Mortgage loans 2042001 4429201 27727 17189 Loans to micro small and medium enterprises 1688438 3970931 156234 146949 Total 6768753 15727296 1784464 287305 The effect of collateral as of 31 December 2016 In thousands of GEL
Undercollateralised assets Carrying value of the assets Value of collateral Carrying value of the assets Value of collateral Corporate loans 1849202 5683279 213027 109076 Consumer loans 1040644 2761580 831498 28102 Mortgage loans 1780553 4694003 27881 16360 Loans to micro small and medium enterprises 1479200 4959947 136720 131967 Total 6149599 18098809 1209126 285505 The effect of collateral as of 31 December 2015 In thousands of GEL
Undercollateralised assets Carrying value of the assets Value of collateral Carrying value of the assets Value of collateral Corporate loans 1312561 2810880 187543 64905 Consumer loans 808304 1795061 361796 33532 Mortgage loans 891639 2241109 13635 3935 Loans to micro small and medium enterprises 980133 2445336 83418 79653
3992637 9292386 646392 182025 The effect of collateral is determined by comparing the fair value of collateral to outstanding gross loans and advances in the reporting date.
At the central level a specific unit manages collateral to ensure that they serve as an adequate mitigation for credit risk management purposes.
In line with the Groups internal policies collateral provided to loans are evaluated by the Internal Appraisal Group external reviewers are used in case of loans to related parties or specific cases when complex objects are appraised.
The Internal Appraisal Group is part of the collateral management unit and in order to ensure adequate and objective appraisal procedures it is independent from the loan granting process.
Real estate collateral of significant value is reevaluated annually by internal appraisers.
Statistical methods are used to monitor the value of real estate collateral that are of nonsignificant value and other types of collaterals such as movable assets and precious metals.
Collateral values include the contractual price of thirdparty guarantees which due to their nature are capped at the loans carrying value.
The values of thirdparty guarantees in the tables above amounted to GEL 527498 thousand GEL 608058 thousand and GEL 358907 thousand as of 31 December 2017 2016 and 2015 respectively.
These thirdparty guarantees are not taken into consideration when assessing the impairment allowance.
Refer to Note 42 for the estimated fair value of each class of loans and advances to customers.
Interest rate analysis of loans and advances to customers is disclosed in Note 36.
Information on related party balances is disclosed in Note 44.
193 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Governance Financial Statements Additional Information 10 Investment Securities Available for Sale In thousands of GELtel Corporate bonds 328761 150073 174916 Ministry of Finance of Georgia Treasury Bills 319745 241810 33445 Certificates of Deposit of the National Bank of Georgia 7728 36002 84849 Georgian Government notes  1016 998 Total debt securities 656234 428901 294208 Corporate shares  quoted VISA Inc   9335 Corporate shares  unquoted 1704 1802 3767 Total investment securities available for sale 657938 430703 307310 All debt securities except for corporate bonds are issued by the Government of Georgia and National Bank of Georgia.
Country rating for Georgia stands at BB with stable outlook as assigned by international rating agencies in September 2017.
67.6% of corporate bonds are issued by triple A rated international financial institutions 14.8% of corporate bonds are issued by A rated international financial institutions 15.5% and 0.9% of corporate bonds are issued by B and B rated corporations respectively whereas 1.3% is issued by two nonrated corporations.
The management could not reliably estimate the fair value of the Groups investment in shares of its unquoted equity investment securities available for sale.
Therefore these investments are carried at cost of GEL 1704 thousand 2016 GEL 1802 thousand 2015 GEL 3767 thousand.
The investees have not published recent financial information about their operations their shares are not quoted and recent trade prices are not publicly accessible.
As of 31 December 2017 investment securities available for sale carried at GEL 424892 thousand have been pledged to local banks or financial institutions as collateral with respect to other borrowed funds 2016 GEL 205216 thousand 2015 GEL 208467 thousand.
Refer to Note 18.
None of the debt securities available for sale are overdue or impaired.
As of 31 December 2017 the principal equity investment securities available for sale are as follows
In thousands of GEL Nature of business Country of registration Carrying value as of 31 Decembertel Visa Inc.
Card Processing USA   9335 LTD Caucasus Online Telecommunication Georgia   3014 JSC GRDC Property development Netherlands Antilles 365 365 365 Georgian Stock Exchange Stock exchange Georgia 1004 1004 Total 1704 1802 13102 The movements in investment securities available for sale are as follows In thousands of GEL Notetel Carrying amount as of 1 January 430703 307310 466510 Business Combination  153004 Purchases 560226 143783 475417 Disposals  14679 Reclassified to Bonds carried at amortised cost   372063 Redemption at maturity 345748 167115 265107 Revaluation 5489 522 2436 Interest income accrued 29 43735 25707 20927 Interest income received 36214 17900 15938 Impairment related to investment in equity security  11 Effect of translation to presentation currency 158 82 Transfer to investments in associate 95 Carrying amount as of 31 December 657938 430703 307310 194 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 31 DECEMBER 2017 11 Bonds Carried at Amortised Cost In thousands of GELtel Ministry of Finance Treasury Bills 424876 323478 316822 Certificates of Deposit of the National Bank of Georgia 24662 43408 39870 Georgian Government notes  6070 15400 Total Bonds carried at amortised cost 449538 372956 372092 All debt securities except for corporate bonds are issued by the Government of Georgia and National Bank of Georgia.
Country rating for Georgia stands at BB with stable outlook as per international rating agencies in September 2017.
The movements in bonds carried at amortised cost are as follows In thousands of GEL Notetel Gross amount as of 1 January 372956 372092 Reclassified from available for sale securities 10   372063 Purchases 307248 304109 183084 Redemption at maturity 242380 314231 193416 Interest income accrual 32328 30714 22950 Interest income received 20601 19740 12589 Effect of translation to presentation currency 13 12 Gross amount as of 31 December 449538 372956 372092 For the disclosure of bonds fair value carried at amortised cost refer to Note 42.
An analysis on interest rate for bonds carried at amortised cost is disclosed in Note 36.
As of 31 December 2017 bonds carried at amortised cost of GEL 223860 thousand have been pledged to local banks or financial institutions as collateral with respect to other borrowed funds 2016 GEL 273311 thousand 2015 GEL 136472 thousand.
Refer to Note 18.
None of the bonds carried at amortised cost as of 31 December 2017 31 December 2016 and 31 December 2015 were either overdue or impaired.
During 2015 the Group reclassified investment securities available for sale to bonds carried at amortised cost with carrying amount of GEL 372063 thousand.
At the end of the reporting period the carrying amounts and fair values of all financial assets that have been reclassified from trading securities and which were not yet sold or otherwise derecognised were as follows In thousands of GEL 31 December 2017 31 December 2016 31 December 2015
Fair value
Fair value
Fair value Certificates of Deposit of National Bank of Georgia Ministry of Finance Treasury Bills 101876 Government notes   6070
The income or loss recognised after reclassification and fair value gain or loss that would have been recognised if the assets had not been reclassified were as follows In thousands of GEL Certificates of Deposit of National Bank of
Ministry of Finance Treasury Bills Government notes Income after reclassification
Income after reclassification
Income after reclassification
Year
2015 13 195 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Governance Financial Statements Additional Information 11 Bonds Carried at Amortised Cost continued In addition for assets reclassified from available for sale category income or loss recognised in other comprehensive income would have been as follows In thousands of GEL
Bank of
Ministry of
Treasury Bills
Year
2015  16185 280 2016  3694 24 12 Other Financial Assets In thousands of GELtel Receivables on credit card services and money transfers 26703 24801 15072 Prepayments for purchase of leasing assets 25478 10628 9390 Receivables on guaranteesletters of credit 20983 18215 16435 Bank assurance income receivable 15923 4549 4450 Insurance and reinsurance receivables 15742 2249 Trade receivable 13862 2232 1202 Receivable on terminated leases 8961 7832 4404 Receivables on repossessed assets disposed 6619 10603 672 Factored receivables 6182 900 2859 Rental income receivables 4414 3816 4309 Other 19297 15462 11416 Less Provision for impairment 18020 6660 5892 Total other financial assets 146144 94627 64317 Movements in the provision for impairment of other financial assets during 2017 were as follows In thousands of GEL
Provision for impairment as of 1 January 2017 4666 1994 6660 Provision for impairment during the year 1568 10645 12213 Amounts written off during the year as uncollectible  1011 1011 Recovery of amounts previously written off  189 189 Foreign exchange translation gains less losses  31 31 Provision for impairment as of 31 December 2017 6234 11786 18020 Additions less releases recorded in profit or loss for provision for impairment of other financial assets include writeoff of insurance debtors in the amount of GEL 226 thousand that are included in insurance and reinsurance receivables.
Movements in the provision for impairment of other financial assets during 2016 were as follows In thousands of GEL
Provision for impairment as of 1 January 2016 3561 2331 5892 Business combination  72 72 Provision for impairment during the year 1105 1748 2853 Amounts written off during the year as uncollectible  2370 2370 Recovery of amounts previously written off  213 213 Provision for impairment as of 31 December 2016 4666 1994 6660 196 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 31 DECEMBER 2017 12 Other Financial Assets continued Movements in the provision for impairment of other financial assets during 2015 are as follows In thousands of GEL
Provision for impairment as of 1 January 2015 2573 1657 4230 Provision for impairment during the year 988 2363 3351 Amounts written off during the year as uncollectible  1721 1721 Recovery of amounts previously written off  32 32 Provision for impairment as of 31 December 2015 3561 2331 5892 The table below illustrates the credit quality of other financial receivables In thousands of GELtel Neither past due nor impairment Receivables on credit card services and money transfers 26703 24801 15072 Prepayments for purchase of leasing assets 25478 10628 9390 Bank assurance income receivable 15923 4549 4450 Insurance and reinsurance receivables 15742 2249 Trade receivable 13862 2232 1202 Receivables on repossessed assets disposed 6481 5700 534 Factored receivables 6182 900 2859 Rental income receivables 4414 3816 4309 Receivables on guaranteesletters of credit 2990 1089 939 Other 14120 9496 9087 Total neither past due nor impaired 131895 65460 47842 Past due but not impaired Receivables on guarantees More than 90 days overdue 16773 17126 15496 Total past due but not impaired 16773 17126 15496 Receivables individually determined to be impaired gross Receivables on terminated leases 8961 7832 4404 Less than 90 days overdue More than 90 days overdue 8961 7832 4404 Receivables on guarantees and letters of credit 1220 Less than 90 days overdue More than 90 days overdue 1220 Receivables on repossessed assets disposed 138 4903 138 Less than 90 days overdue More than 90 days overdue 138 4903 138 Other receivables 5177 5966 2329 Less than 90 days overdue More than 90 days overdue 5177 5966 2329 Total individually impaired gross 15496 18701 6871 Less impairment provision 18020 6660 5892 Total other financial assets 146144 94627 64317 197 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Governance Financial Statements Additional Information 12 Other Financial Assets continued Credit rating of other financial assets neither past due nor impaired is as follows In thousands of GELtel A 13003 2508 2018 A 4116 14086 8700 BBB 6265 845 286 BB 217 BB 7 B 4332 1007 322 B 726 2645 2281 Not rated 103229 44369 34235 Total 131895 65460 47842 Impaired receivables include receivables on terminated leases and other receivables for which impairment provision was assessed individually. receivables overdue status is a primary factor for the Group to consider a receivable as impaired.
Receivables on terminated leases individually determined to be impaired are undercollateralised and their estimated fair value of collateral amounts to GEL 1206 thousand 2016 GEL 2039 thousand 2015 GEL 1253 thousand.
The remaining assets are not collateralised.
13 Investments in Finance Lease As of 31 December 2017 investments in finance lease of GEL 143836 thousand 2016 GEL 95031 thousand 2015 GEL 75760 thousand are represented by leases of fixed assets excluding land and buildings.
Finance lease payments receivable gross investment in the leases and their present values are as follows In thousands of GEL Due in 1 year Due between 1 and 5 years Total Finance lease payments receivable as of 31 December 2017 86186 105595 191781 Unearned finance income 23720 22727 46447 Impairment loss provision 765 733 1498 Present value of lease payments receivable as of 31 December 2017 61701 82135 143836 Finance lease payments receivable as of 31 December 2016 65265 56672 121937 Unearned finance income 15302 10462 25764 Impairment loss provision 678 464 1142 Present value of lease payments receivable as of 31 December 2016 49285 45746 95031 Finance lease payments receivable as of 31 December 2015 54546 43091 97637 Unearned finance income 13147 7992 21139 Impairment loss provision 459 279 738 Present value of lease payments receivable at 31 December 2015 40940 34820 75760 For fair values refer to Note 42.
The table below illustrates the movements in the provision for impairment of net investment in finance lease In thousands of GEL 31 December 31 December 31 December Provision for impairment at the beginning of the year 1142 738 195 Provision for impairment during the year 492 558 967 Amounts written off during the year as uncollectible 136 154 424 Provision for impairment at the end of the year 1498 1142 738 198 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 31 DECEMBER 2017 13 Investments in Finance Lease continued Credit quality of net investment in finance lease is analysed below In thousands of GEL 31 December 31 December 31 December Neither past due nor impaired Customers with more than two year experience 22705 28084 20612 New customers 90668 45404 46431 Total neither past due nor impaired 113373 73488 67043 Past due but not impaired Less than 30 days overdue 19047 15357 4285 31 to 90 days overdue 9310 5101 1694 Total past due but not impaired 28357 20458 5979 Impaired leases Not overdue   1639 1 to 30 days overdue   332 31 days to 90 days overdue 343  33 From 91 to 180 days 2204 1079 950 From 181 to 360 days 339 966 522 More than 360 days 718 182 Total impaired gross 3604 2227 3476 Total investment in finance lease 145334 96173 76498 Impairment loss provision 1498 1142 738 Total net investment in finance lease 143836 95031 75760 Total impaired leases include both collectively and individually impaired leases The Group applied the portfolio provisioning methodology prescribed by IAS 39 Financial Instruments Recognition and Measurement and created portfolio provisions for impairment losses that were incurred but have not been specifically identified with any individual lease by the reporting date.
The Groups policy is to classify each lease as neither past due nor impaired until specific objective evidence of impairment of the lease is identified.
The primary factors taken into account to consider whether or not a lease is impaired are the deterioration of the lessees financial position its overdue status and liquidity of the leased asset.
The Group normally structures its finance lease contracts so that the lessee makes a minimum prepayment of 20% of the equipment purchase price at the inception of the lease term.
The Group holds title to the leased assets during the lease term.
The title to the asset under the finance lease contract is transferred to the lessees at the end of the contracts terms including full repayment of lease payments.
Generally the lease terms are up to five years.
The amount and type of collateral required depends on an assessment of the credit risk of the counterparty.
The main types of collateral obtained are Leased assets inventory and equipment Down payment Real estate properties Third party guarantees.
The financial effect of collateral is presented by disclosing the collateral values separately for i those assets where collateral and other credit enhancements are equal to or exceed the assets carrying value overcollateralised assets and ii those assets where collateral and other credit enhancements are less than the assets carrying value undercollateralised assets.
The effect of collateral as of 31 December 2017 In thousands of GEL
Undercollateralised assets
Fair value of collateral
Fair value of collateral Investment in leases 96015
199 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Governance Financial Statements Additional Information 13 Investments in Finance Lease continued The effect of collateral as of 31 December 2016 In thousands of GEL
Undercollateralised assets
Fair value of collateral
Fair value of collateral Investment in leases 75364 112917 20809 16817 Total 75364 112917 20809 16817 The effect of collateral as of 31 December 2015 In thousands of GEL
Undercollateralised assets
Fair value of collateral
Fair value of collateral Investment in leases 69048 103416 7450 5532 Total 69048 103416 7450 5532 14 Other Assets In thousands of GELtel Current other assets Inventories of repossessed collateral 116809 90873 85216 Other inventories 4194 3973 3666 Prepayments for other assets 9721 28660 3134 Prepaid taxes other than income tax 5788 3326 2659 Other debtor  35497 Total current other assets 136512 162329 94675 Noncurrent other assets Assets repossessed from terminated leases 3210 2673 4543 Prepayments for construction in progress 2745 2445 2578 Assets purchased for leasing purposes 2733 286 865 Prepaid insurance of leasing assets 1884 937 739 Other 9567 2593 512 Total noncurrent other assets 20139 8934 9237 Total other assets 156651 171263 103912 Included in Other Debtors is receivable from one corporate client in respect of settlement of previously writtenoff loan.
Inventories of repossessed collateral represent real estate assets and equipment acquired by the Group in settlement of impaired loans other than those classified as investment property or premises and equipment.
The Group expects to dispose these assets in the foreseeable future.
Such assets are initially recognised at fair value and subsequently measured at lower of cost and net realisable value.
In 2017 collateral repossessed for settlement of impaired loans amounted to GEL 53 million 2016 GEL 39 million 2015 GEL 34 million.
With regards to certain inventories of repossessed collaterals the Group has granted previous owners a right to repurchase the inventories at prices equal to or higher than the carrying value of the loan at the date of repossession.
This right is usually effective for a period of 6 to 18 months from the date of repossession during this time the Group is obliged not to dispose of the repossessed collateral to third parties.
As of 31 December 2017 the carrying value of the inventories of repossessed collateral subjected to the repurchase agreement was GEL 11170 thousand 2016 GEL 20342 thousand 2015 GEL 23639 thousand.
200 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 31 DECEMBER 2017 15 Premises Equipment and Intangible Assets In thousands of GEL Note
Premises and leasehold improvements Office and
Construction in progress
Intangible
Assets Total Cost or valuation as of 1 January 2015 142724 130543 35267 308534 55231 363765 Accumulated depreciationamortisation Including accumulated impairment loss 26622 73220  99842 17475 117317 Carrying amount as of 1 January 2015 116102 57323 35267 208692 37756 246448 Additions 2470 24167 3841 30478 17337 47815 Transfers within premises and equipment 1717 0 1717 0  0 Transfers from Investment Property net 16 646   646  646 Disposals 324 1201 864 2389 199 2588 Revaluation 15249  13506 28755  28755 Effect of translation to presentation currency Cost 374 536  910 43 953 Impairment charge to profit and loss 18 311  293 4982 5275 Depreciationamortisation charge 3502 15632  19134 5758 24892 Elimination of accumulated depreciationamortisation on disposals 217 952  1169 197 1366 Effect of translation to presentation currency Accumulated depreciation 362 391  753 36 789 Carrying amount as of 31 December 2015 132581 65153 50033 247767 44344 292111 Cost or valuation as of 31 December 2015 162126 152662 50033 364821 67344 432165 Accumulated depreciationamortisation including accumulated impairment loss 29545 87509  117054 23000 140054 Carrying amount as of 31 December 2015 132581 65153 50033 247767 44344 292111 Additions 5555 19369 6206 31130 18904 50034 Business combination 50049 8260 36 58345 6761 65106 Transfers within premises and equipment 3042  3042 Transfers to Repossessed assets 298   298  298 Disposals 2571 3836 69 6476 4 6480 Effect of translation to presentation currency Cost 31 45  76 12 88 Impairment charge to profit and loss 574 675  1249 2043 Depreciationamortisation charge 3269 16895  20164 6981 27145 Elimination of accumulated depreciationamortisation on disposals 2439 2555  4994  4994 Effect of translation to presentation currency Accumulated depreciation 27 32  59 12 47 Carrying amount as of 31 December 2016 186950 73918 53164 314032 60957 374989 Cost or valuation as of 31 December 2016 217299 175636 53164 446099 90950 Accumulated depreciationamortisation including accumulated impairment loss 30349 101718  132067 29993 162060 Carrying amount as of 31 December 2016 186950 73918 53164 314032 60957 374989 201 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Governance Financial Statements Additional Information In thousands of GEL Note
Premises and leasehold improvements Office and
Construction in progress
Intangible
Assets Total Additions 5684 26179 48663 80526 34877 115403 Transfers within premises and equipment 11326  11326 Transfer from investment property 1114   1114  1114 Disposals 2324 9638  11962 88 12050 Revaluation  261  261  261 Effect of translation to presentation currency Cost 25 54  79 11 90 Impairment charge to profit and loss 6 730 46 782 1916 2698 Depreciationamortisation charge 5567 20096  25663 10436 36099 Elimination of accumulated depreciationamortisation on disposals 747 8636  9383 30 9413 Effect of translation to presentation currency Accumulated depreciation 25 50  75 57 18 Carrying amount as of 31 December 2017 197924 78534 90455 366913 83492 450405 Cost or valuation as of 31 December 2017 233118 191762 90455 515335 123834 639169 Accumulated depreciationamortisation including accumulated impairment loss 35194 113228  148422 40342 188764 Carrying amount as of 31 December 2017 197924 78534 90455 366913 83492 450405 Office and other equipment include furniture and fixtures computer and office equipment motor vehicles as well as other equipment.
In year 2017 in additions of construction in progress is included property repossessed from debtor in the amount of GEL 39 million.
Depreciation and amortisation charge presented on the face of the statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income include depreciation and amortisation charge of premises and equipment investment properties and intangible assets.
Construction in progress consists of construction and refurbishment of branch premises and the Banks new headquarters.
Upon completion assets are to be transferred to premises.
Premises were revalued to market value on 30 September 2015.
The valuation was carried out by an independent firm of valuators which holds a recognised and relevant professional qualification and who have recent experience in valuation of assets of similar location and category.
In the process of comparison they have used three comparative analogues registered sale andor offer for sale in which prices were applied adjustments based on the difference between subject assets and analogues.
Most of the assets have been estimated by using the market approachmethod due to the market situation namely by existence of a sufficient number of registered sales and proposals by the date of valuation.
At acquisition date valuation of Bank Republics assets has been performed.
Fair value of respective assets disclosure is below.
The management considers that the fair value has not changed significantly between 30 September 2015 and 31 December 2017.
In thousands of GEL except for range of inputs Fair value as of 20 October 2016 acquisition date Fair value as of 30 September 2015 valuation date Valuation technique Other key information Unobservable inputs Range of unobser vable inputs weighted average Office buildings 30753 51115 Sales comparison approach
Price per square metre 472  3432 797 Buildings 601  6598 1781 Branches 18645 124069 Sales comparison approach
Price per square metre 2  3427 280 Buildings 452  11514 2360 As of 31 December 2017 the carrying amount of premises would have been GEL 144778 thousand 2016 GEL 134352 thousand 2015 GEL 79952 thousand had the assets been carried at cost less depreciation and impairment losses.
At 31 December 2017 the carrying amount of construction in progress would have been GEL 67033 thousand 2016 GEL 30394 thousand 2015 GEL 27284 thousand had the assets been carried at cost less impairment losses.
15 Premises Equipment and Intangible Assets continued 202 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 31 DECEMBER 2017 16 Investment Properties In thousands of GEL Notetel Gross book value as of 1 January 99347 60648 78699 Accumulated depreciation as of 1 January 3732 3048 2483 Carrying amount as of 1 January 95615 57600 76216 Transfer to premises and equipment 15 1143  646 Transfer from inventories of repossessed collateral 752 15935 778 Transfer to Repossessed Collateral 590 Addition from foreclosure 943 6820 Disposals at cost 15438 6892 18101 Elimination of depreciation on disposal 259 253 829 Depreciation charge 1166 937 1394 Acquisition through business combination  22836 Effect of translation to presentation currency   82 Gross book value as of 1 January 83871 99347 60648 Accumulated depreciation as of 1 January 4639 3732 3048 Carrying amount as of 31 December 79232 95615 57600 As of 31 December 2017 investment properties comprised of 102 lots 2016 62 lots 2015 8 lots of land and 144 buildings 2016 141 buildings 2015 59 buildings located in Tbilisi and other regions of Georgia with the fair value amounting to GEL 85012 thousand 2016 GEL 123852 thousand 2015 GEL 105972 thousand.
For disclosure purposes a fair valuation exercise was carried out for Investment Properties as of 31 December 2017.
The valuation was carried out by internal valuators who hold a recognised and relevant professional qualification and who have recent experience in valuation of assets of similar location and category.
In the process of comparison they have used three comparative analogues registered sale andor offer for sale in which prices were applied with adjustments based on the difference between subject assets and analogues.
Most of the assets have been estimated by using the market approachmethod due to the market situation particularly based on a sufficient number of registered sales and proposals by the date of valuation.
In thousands of GEL except for range of inputs Fair value as of 20 October 2016 acquisition date Fair value as of 31 December 2017 valuation date Valuation technique Unobservable inputs Range of unobser vable inputs weighted average Land 3398 29611 Sales comparison approach Price per square metre 0.05  1512 97 Buildings 19438 55401 Sales comparison approach Price per square metre 11  2446 798 Where the Group is the lessor the future minimum lease payments receivable under noncancellable operating leases were as follows In thousands of GELtel Not later than 1 year 177 463 186 Later than 1 year and not later than 5 years  805 Total operating lease payments receivable 177 1268 186 203 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Governance Financial Statements Additional Information 17 Goodwill Movements in goodwill arising on the acquisition of subsidiaries aretel Carrying amount as of 1 January 28658 2726 2726 Acquisition of subsidiaries  25932 Carrying amount as of 31 December 28658 28658 2726 Goodwill Impairment Test Goodwill is allocated to cashgenerating units CGUs which represent the lowest level within the Group at which the goodwill is monitored by Management and which are not larger than a segment as follows In thousands of GELtel JSC Bank Republic 24166 24166 Bank Republic Retail 11088 Bank Republic Corporate 7491 Bank Republic MSME 4791 Bank Republic Other 796 CGU Micro 769 769 769 JSC United Financial Corporation 695 695 695 LLC TBC Kredit 1262 1262 1262 JSC TBC Insurance 1766 1766 Total carrying amount of goodwill 28658 28658 2726 Due to Bank Republic merger in 2017 carrying amount of goodwill was allocated across multiple CGUs of the Bank that is also equal to the operating and reporting segments.
The recoverable amount of each CGU was determined based on valueinuse calculations.
These calculations use cash flow projections based on financial budgets approved by the management covering a fiveyear period.
Cash flows beyond the fiveyear period are extrapolated using the estimated growth rates stated below.
Assumptions used for valueinuse calculations to which the recoverable amount is most sensitive weretel JSC Bank Republic Growth rate beyond five years of Free Cash Flow to equity 4.17% p.
4.00% p.
Pretax discount rate 18.71% p.
21.72% p.
CGU SMEJSC Bank Constanta Growth rate beyond five years of Free Cash Flow to equity 4.17% p.
4.00% p.
5.00% p.
Pretax discount rate 12.01% p.
14.39% p.
24.74% p.
JSC United Financial Corporation Growth rate beyond five years of Free Cash Flow to equity 4.17% p.
4.00% p.
5.00% p.
Pretax discount rate 18.16% p.
19.18% p.
29.73% p.
LLC TBC Kredit Growth rate beyond five years of Free Cash Flow to equity 1.3% p.
4.00% p.
5.00% p.
Pretax discount rate 31.35% p.
28.10% p.
27.05% p.
JSC TBC Insurance Growth rate beyond five years of Free Cash Flow to equity 4.17% p.
4.00% p.
Pretax discount rate 18.15% p.
19.50% p.
Assumptions related to JSC Bank Republic are similar for all related CGUs.
The management determined the budgeted gross margin based on past performance and its market expectations.
The weighted average growth rates used are consistent with the forecasts included in the industry reports.
The discount rates reflect specific risks related to the relevant CGUs.
If the revised estimated pretax discount rate applied to the discounted cash flows of CGU Bank Republic Retail had been 10 percentage points higher than the managements estimates the Group would not need to reduce the carrying value of either goodwill or carrying value of net assets of the CGU.
Recoverable amount of Bank Republic Retail CGU exceeds its carrying amount by GEL 781330 thousand.
The CGUs carrying amount would equal its value in use at a discount rate of 29.92% p.
204 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 31 DECEMBER 2017 17 Goodwill continued If the revised estimated pretax discount rate applied to the discounted cash flows of CGU Bank Republic Corporate had been 10 percentage points higher than the managements estimates the Group would not need to reduce the carrying value of either goodwill or carrying value of net assets of the CGU.
Recoverable amount of Bank Republic Retail CGU exceeds its carrying amount by GEL 402679 thousand.
The CGUs carrying amount would equal its value in use at a discount rate of 27.97% p.
If the revised estimated pretax discount rate applied to the discounted cash flows of CGU Bank Republic MSME had been 10 percentage points higher than the managements estimates the Group would not need to reduce the carrying value of either goodwill or carrying value of net assets of the CGU.
Recoverable amount of Bank Republic Retail CGU exceeds its carrying amount by GEL 246759 thousand.
The CGUs carrying amount would equal its value in use at a discount rate of 27.11% p.
If the revised estimated pretax discount rate applied to the discounted cash flows of JSC Bank Republic as of 31 December 2016 had been 10 percentage points higher than the managements estimates the Group would not need to reduce the carrying value of either goodwill or carrying value of net assets of the CGU 2015 nil.
Recoverable amount of JSC Bank Republic CGU exceeds its carrying amount by GEL 1295196 thousand 2015 nil.
The CGUs carrying amount would equal its value in use at a discount rate of 71.58% p.
2015 nil.
If the revised estimated pretax discount rate applied to the discounted cash flows of CGU MicroJSC Bank Constanta had been 10 percentage points higher than the managements estimates the Group would not need to reduce the carrying value of either goodwill or carrying value of net assets of the CGU 2016 nil 2015 nil.
Recoverable amount of CGU MicroJSC Bank Constanta CGU exceeds its carrying amount by GEL 440075 thousand 2016 GEL 284402 thousand 2015 GEL 156283 thousand.
The CGUs carrying amount would equal its value in use at a discount rate of 34.60% p.
2016 30.74% p.
2015 49.35% p.
If the revised estimated pretax discount rate applied to the discounted cash flows of JSC United Financial Corporation had been 10 percentage points higher than the managements estimates the Group would not need to reduce the carrying value of either goodwill or carrying value of net assets of the CGU 2016 nil and nil 2015 nil and nil.
Recoverable amount of JSC United Financial Corporation CGU exceeds its carrying amount by GEL 17866 thousand 2016 GEL 13073 thousand 2015 GEL 6856 thousand.
The CGUs carrying amount would equal its value in use at a discount rate of 39.27% p.
2016 46.36% p.
2015 119.58% p.
If the revised estimated pretax discount rate applied to the discounted cash flows of LLC TBC Kredit had been 10 percentage points higher than the managements estimates the Group would not need to reduce the carrying value of goodwill 2016nil 2015 nil.
Recoverable amount of LLC TBC Kredit CGU exceeds its carrying amount by GEL 36420 thousand 2016 GEL 20505 thousand 2015 GEL 61268 thousand.
The CGUs carrying amount would equal its value in use at a discount rate 119.51% of p.
2016 68.64% p.
2015 165.08% p.
If the revised estimated pretax discount rate applied to the discounted cash flows of JSC TBC Insurance had been 10 percentage points higher than the managements estimates the Group would not need to reduce the carrying value of either goodwill or carrying value of net assets of the CGU 2016 nil 2015 nil.
Recoverable amount of JSC TBC Insurance CGU exceeds its carrying amount by GEL 51549 thousand 2016 GEL 58588 thousand 2015 nil.
The CGUs carrying amount would equal its value in use at a discount rate of 63.63% p.
2016 62.29% 2015 nil.
18 Due to Credit Institutions In thousands of GELtel Due to other banks Correspondent accounts and overnight placements 21777 22872 47342 Deposits from banks 64441 176443 25936 Shortterm loans from banks  117592 Total due to other banks 86218 316907 73278 Other borrowed funds Borrowings from foreign banks and financial institutions 1591778 1412095 678946 Borrowings from local banks and financial institutions 908271 439234 355664 Borrowings from Ministry of Finance 2914 4203 5686 Borrowings from other financial institutions 31533 25138 Total other borrowed funds 2534496 1880670 1040296 Total amounts due to credit institutions 2620714 2197577 1113574 As of 31 December 2017 for the purposes of maturity analysis of financial liabilities Note 36 the abovementioned loans are included within the amounts for which repayment is expected within 3 months.
205 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Governance Financial Statements Additional Information 19 Customer Accounts In thousands of GELtel State and public organisations Currentsettlement accounts 810783 240743 152438 Term deposits 209641 78990 86828 Other legal entities Currentsettlement accounts 2207630 2143483 1276141 Term deposits 210498 243582 126042
Currentdemand accounts 1973685 1618434 944215 Term deposits 2404580 2129717 1592267 Total customer accounts 7816817 6454949 4177931 State and public organisations include government owned profit orientated businesses.
Economic sector concentrations within customer accounts are as follows 31 December 2017 31 December 2016 31 December 2015 In thousands of GEL Amount % Amount % Amount % Individual 4378265 56% 3748151 58% 2536482 61% Energy and Utilities 429722 5% 283497 4% 152636 4% Financial Services 379772 5% 501591 8% 219888 5% Construction 377944 5% 222372 4% 118035 3% Transportation 376333 5% 188388 3% 135356 3% Government sector 330356 4% 140852 2% 172185 4% Services 236128 3% 269824 4% 115563 3% Trade 209339 3% 305022 5% 161417 4% Food Industry 175676 2% 82984 1% 52363 1% Hotels and Leisure 174777 2% 104066 2% 73071 2% Real Estate 119507 2% 82893 1% 66773 2% Healthcare 106439 1% 64493 1% 95280 2% Automotive 71628 1% 53865 1% 40058 1% Communication 50059 1% 56787 1% 48669 1% Agriculture 29199 0% 37850 1% 10906 0% Metals and Mining 16976 0% 22817 0% 16537 0% Other 354697 5% 289497 4% 162712 4% Total customer accounts 7816817 100% 6454949 100% 4177931 100% In 2016 the Group reassessed the allocation of customer accounts per economic sectors the classification for 2015 was revised to make it consistent with 2016 and 2017.
As of 31 December 2017 the Group had 261 customers 2016 222 customers 2015 140 customers with balances above GEL 3000 thousand.
Their aggregate balance was GEL 3439673 thousand 2016 GEL 2539513 thousand 2015 GEL 1432724 thousand or 44% of total customer accounts 2016 39% 2015 34%.
As of 31 December 2017 included in customer accounts are deposits of GEL 11040 thousand and GEL 120406 thousand 2016 GEL 13355 thousand and GEL 119146 thousand 2015 GEL 999 thousand and GEL 77304 thousand held as collateral for irrevocable commitments under letters of credit and guarantees issued respectively.
Refer to Note 38.
As of 31 December 2017 deposits held as collateral for loans to customers amounted to GEL 224899 thousand 2016 GEL 342365 thousand 2015 241782 thousand.
Refer to Note 42 for the disclosure of the fair value of each class of customer accounts.
Information on related party balances is disclosed in Note 44.
206 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 31 DECEMBER 2017 20 Debt Securities in Issue In thousands of GEL Currency Carrying amount in GEL as of 31 December 2017 Maturity Date Coupon rate
Bonds issued on Georgian market USD 7637 22Jul19 7.3% 8.1% Bonds issued on Georgian market USD 5224 16May19 8.0% 8.7% Bonds issued on Georgian market USD 7834 15Aug18 7.8% 8.6% Total debt securities in issue 20695 In thousands of GEL Currency Carrying amount in GEL as of 31 December 2016 Maturity Date Coupon rate
Bonds issued on Georgian market USD 5312 3Sep17 8.4% 9.2% Bonds issued on Georgian market USD 5237 15Aug18 7.8% 8.6% Bonds issued on Georgian market USD 5198 16May19 8.0% 8.7% Bonds issued on Georgian market USD 7761 22Jul19 7.3% 8.1% Total debt securities in issue 23508 In thousands of GEL Currency Carrying amount in GEL as of 31 December 2015 Maturity Date Coupon rate
Bonds issued on Georgian market USD 12220 21Jul16 9.0% 9.7% Bonds issued on Georgian market USD 4798 3Sep17 8.4% 9.2% Bonds issued on Azerbaijani market AZN 4696 16Apr16 9.0% 9.7% Total debt securities in issue 21714 Refer to Note 42 for the disclosure of the fair value of debt securities in issue.
21 Provisions for Performance Guarantees Credit Related Commitments and Liabilities and Charges Movements in provisions for performance guarantees credit related commitment and liabilities and charges are as follows In thousands of GEL P erf or manc e guarantees Credit related commitments Other Total Carrying amount as of 1 January 2015 4912 3266 3720 11898 Charges less releases recorded in profit or loss 3440 2323 1102 15 Utilisation of provision   2422 2422 Carrying amount as of 31 December 2015 1472 5589 2400 9461 Charges less releases recorded in profit or loss 452 1223 2528 3299 Assuming guarantees following asset purchase 909   909 Additions through Business Combinations 706 1237 414 2357 Carrying amount as of 31 December 2016 2635 8049 5342 16026 Charges less releases recorded in profit or loss 579 190 332 721 Utilisation of provision   2116 2116 Effect of translation to presentation currency 11   11 Carrying amount as of 31 December 2017 2067 8239 2894 13200 Credit related commitments and performance guarantees Provision was created against losses incurred on financial and performance guarantees and commitments to extend credit to borrowers whose financial conditions deteriorated.
Impairment allowance estimation methods differ for i letter of credits and guarantees and ii undrawn credit lines.
207 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Governance Financial Statements Additional Information 21 Provisions for Performance Guarantees Credit Related Commitments and Liabilities and Charges continued For letter of credits and guarantees allowance estimation purposes the Bank classifies borrowers as significant and nonsignificant ones.
Triggered significant guarantees and letter of credits are assessed for impairment on an individual basis whereas for not triggered significant and all nonsignificant ones the Bank estimates allowances applying statistical risk parameters such as credit conversion factor and loss given default.
Undrawn credit lines are classified as committed and uncommitted exposures with impairment allowance created for committed ones.
The undrawn part of the credit lines is multiplied by the respective credit conversion factor and provisioned in the similar manner as corresponding on balance sheet exposures.
Provisions for liabilities charges performance guarantees and credit related commitments are primarily expected to be utilised within twelve months after the yearend.
Additions less releases recorded in profit or loss for Other provisions does not include gross change in total reserves for insurance claims in amount of GEL 1621 thousands 2016 GEL 318 thousand that are included in net claims incurred.
Additions less releases recorded in profit or loss for provision for impairment of credit related commitments include provision for insurance receivables in the amount of GEL 542 thousand that are included in charges less releases recorded in profit or loss for Other provision.
22 Other Financial Liabilities Other financial liabilities comprise the following In thousands of GEL Notetel Trade payables 31497 16612 10264 Security deposits for finance lease 20647 8241 6022 Insurance Contracts Liabilities 10992 486 Debit or credit card payables 10567 12066 12478 Derivative financial liabilities 41 575 1298 2411 Other accrued liabilities 17475 12295 8260 Total other financial liabilities 91753 50998 39435 Refer to Note 42 for disclosure of the fair value of other financial liabilities.
23 Other Liabilities Other liabilities comprise the following In thousands of GELtel Accrued employee benefit costs 42497 38317 22385 Taxes payable other than on income 14180 16723 11584 Advances received 10350 6284 4764 Other 17413 5415 1894 Total other liabilities 84440 66739 40627 All of the above liabilities are expected to be settled within twelve months after the yearend.
208 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 31 DECEMBER 2017 24 Subordinated Debt As of 31 December 2017 subordinated debt comprised of In thousands of GEL Grant Date Maturity Date Currency
Outstanding
GEL
Deutsche Investitions und Entwicklungsgesellschaft MBH 19Feb08 15Jul18 USD 10467 27134 Deutsche Investitions und Entwicklungsgesellschaft MBH 26Jun13 15Jun20 USD 7496 19430 Nederlandse FinancieringsMaatschappij Voor Ontwikkelingslanden N.
19Dec13 15Apr23 USD 35577 92222 Kreditanstalt fr Wiederaufbau Bankengruppe 10Jun14 8May21 GEL 6161 6161 Kreditanstalt fr Wiederaufbau Bankengruppe 4May15 8May21 GEL 6737 Green for Growth Fund 18Dec15 18Dec25 USD 15259 39554 European Fund for Southeast Europe 18Dec15 18Dec25 USD 7640 19805 European Fund for Southeast Europe 15Mar16 15Mar26 USD 7639 19802 Asian Development Bank ADB 18Oct16 18Oct26 USD 50467 130822 Private lenders 30Jun17 30Jun23 USD 24114 62508 THALES 5Nov14 5Dec18 USD 1008 Total subordinated debt 426788 As of 31 December 2016 subordinated debt comprised of In thousands of GEL Grant Date Maturity Date Currency
Outstanding
GEL
Deutsche Investitions und Entwicklungsgesellschaft MBH 19Feb08 15Jul18 USD 10446 27649 Deutsche Investitions und Entwicklungsgesellschaft MBH 26Jun13 15Jun20 USD 7480 19799 Nederlandse FinancieringsMaatschappij Voor Ontwikkelingslanden N.
19Dec13 15Apr23 USD 35474 93891 Kreditanstalt fr Wiederaufbau Bankengruppe 10Jun14 8May21 GEL 6162 6162 Kreditanstalt fr Wiederaufbau Bankengruppe 4May15 8May21 GEL 6737 6737 Green for Growth Fund 18Dec15 18Dec25 USD 15239 40335 European Fund for Southeast Europe 18Dec15 18Dec25 USD 7631 20197 European Fund for Southeast Europe 15Mar16 15Mar26 USD 7629 20194 Asian Developement Bank ADB 18Oct16 18Oct26 USD 50407 133417 Total subordinated debt 368381 As of 31 December 2015 subordinated debt comprised of In thousands of GEL Grant Date Maturity Date Currency
Outstanding
GEL
Deutsche Investitions und Entwicklungsgesellschaft MBH 19Feb08 15Jul18 USD 10427 24971 European Bank for Reconstruction and Development 23Apr09 12Nov18 USD 18729 44855 International Financial Corporation 23Apr09 12Nov18 USD 18716 44823 Deutsche Investitions und Entwicklungsgesellschaft MBH 26Jun13 15Jun20 USD 7466 17880 Nederlandse FinancieringsMaatschappij Voor Ontwikkelingslanden N.
19Dec13 15Apr23 USD 35373 84715 Kreditanstalt fr Wiederaufbau Bankengruppe 10Jun14 8May21 GEL 6162 6162 Kreditanstalt fr Wiederaufbau Bankengruppe 4May15 8May21 GEL 6739 6739 Green for Growth Fund 18Dec15 18Dec25 USD 14892 35666 European Fund for Southeast Europe 18Dec15 18Dec25 USD 7448 17837 Total subordinated debt 283648 The debt ranks after all other creditors in case of liquidation.
Refer to Note 42 for the disclosure of the fair value of subordinated debt.
Information on related party balances is disclosed in Note 44.
209 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Governance Financial Statements Additional Information 25 Share Capital In thousands of GEL except for number of shares Number of ordinary shares Share capital As of 1 January 2015 49246308 19699 Share split 284560 113 Shares issued 1405 1 As of 31 December 2015 49529463 19811 Increase in share capital arising from share based payment 525456 210 Conversion of shares following the Tender Offer 895039 358 Share capital adjustment for new nominal value  18169 Shares issued 3006823 87 As of 31 December 2016 52166703 1581 Shares issued 516140 16 Scrip dividend issued 146903 Share exchange 102121 As of 31 December 2017 52931867 895039 is the number of JSC TBC Bank shares that were not converted into the TBC Bank Group PLC shares Negative GEL 18169 thousand is effect of nominal value adjustment whereby the nominal value of 49159880 TBC Bank Group PLC shares was changed from GEL 0.4 to one British Penny translated in GEL with the official exchange rate on share conversion date On 4 March 2014 Shareholders of the Bank approved the spilt of the ordinary shares 250for1 and authorised the issue of additional 10445387 shares.
In June 2014 19684322 shares of the Bank were sold in the form of Global Depositary Receipts GDRs on the London Stock Exchange the LSE pursuant to an initial public offering to institutional investors.
7692308 shares in the form of GDRs were sold by the Bank while the balance was sold by the selling shareholders.
Bank of New York BNY acted as a depositary of these shares.
Each GDR represented 1 ordinary share of the Bank.
On 4 August 2016 the Group completed the Tender Offer under which 49159880 of the Banks shares then outstanding or 98.21% were converted into 49159880 shares of TBC Bank Group PLC Note 1.
As of 31 December 2017 the total authorised number of ordinary shares was 52931867 shares 31 December 2016 52166703 shares 31 December 2015 49529463 shares.
Each share has a nominal value of one British Penny 31 December 2015 GEL 0.4 per share.
All issued ordinary shares are fully paid and entitled to dividends.
Following the Admission Note 1 TBCGs Directors undertook a reduction of capital in order to create distributable reserves for TBCG.
The original difference between the fair value of the Banks shares and the nominal value of TBCGs shares was credited to the merger reserve created in connection with the Tender Offer.
Each TBCG share had an original Tender Offer nominal value of GBP 5.00 and the minimum premium amount required by the Company Act 2006 of GEL 565030 thousand was transferred to share premium.
Following the capital cut the nominal value of TBCG shares was reduced to GBP 0.01.
The capital cut created a new reserve on the statement of TBCGs financial position comprising of the reduction of the original nominal value from GBP 5.00 to GBP 0.01 per share amounting to GEL 745637 thousand.
The reduction represents a legal and accounting adjustment and did not in itself have any direct impact on TBCG shares market value.
As a result of the reduction the Groups total additional paidin capital outstanding at the time became distributable to the shareholders and was fully reclassified to retained earnings.
These transactions were treated as a reorganisation of an existing entity that has not changed the substance of the reporting entity.
The consolidated financial statements of TBCG are presented using the values from the consolidated financial statements of JSC TBC Bank.
On the date that TBCG became the new parent of the Group the statutory amounts of share capital and share premium of the Company have been recognised through an adjustment in the Statement of Changes in Equity under the heading Change of parent company to TBCG.
The resulting difference has been recognised as a component of equity under the heading Group reorganisation reserve.
On 5 June 2017 at the annual general meeting TBC Bank Group PLCs shareholders agreed on a dividend of GEL 1.42 per share based on the 2016 audited financial statements.
The dividend was recorded on 9 June 2017 and on 14 July 2017 shareholders received the payment of the total GEL 74809 dividends.
210 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 31 DECEMBER 2017 25 Share Capital continued On 25 April 2016 at the annual general meeting JSC TBC Banks shareholders agreed on a dividend of GEL 1.09 per share based on the 2015 audited financial statements.
The dividend was recorded on 3 May 2016 and on 11 May 2016 shareholders received the payment of the total GEL 54560 thousand dividends.
On 19 May 2015 at the annual general meeting JSC TBC Banks shareholders agreed on a dividend of GEL 0.79 per share based on the 2014 audited financial statements.
The dividend was recorded on 26 May 2015 and on 2 June 2015 shareholders received the payment of the total GEL 39128 thousand dividends.
26 Share Based Payments June 2013 arrangement In June 2013 the Banks Supervisory Board approved a new management compensation scheme for the years 2013  2015 and authorised a maximum of 4150 new shares to be issued in accordance with the scheme.
The authorised number of new shares has increased to 1037500 in order to reflect the share split 250for1 approved by the shareholders on 4 March 2014.
According to the scheme each year subject to predefined performance conditions a certain number of shares were awarded to the top management and some of the middle managers of the Group.
The performance evaluation is divided into i team goals and ii individual performance indicators.
The total number of the shares to be awarded legally transferred depends on meeting the team goals and the book value per share according to the audited IFRS consolidated financial statements of the Group for the year preceding the award date.
The team goals primarily focus on meeting the target for growth profitability and portfolio quality metrics set by the Supervisory Board as well as compliance with certain regulatory requirements.
The total number of shares in the bonus pool depends on achieving the team goals.
Individual performance indicators are defined on an individual basis and are used to calculate the number of shares to be awarded to each employee out of the total bonus pool.
Once awarded these shares carry service conditions and before those conditions are met are eligible to dividends.
However they do not carry voting rights and cannot be sold or transferred to third parties.
Service conditions foresee continuous employment until the gradual transfer of the full title to the scheme participants is complete.
Shares for each of the 2013 2014 and 2015 tranche gradually ran over on the second third and fourth year following the performance appraisal.
Eighty percent of the shares were vested in the fourth year after being awarded.
Under this compensation system the total vesting period extends to June 2019.
Under the new management compensation scheme both shareholders and Supervisory Board hold put options on the shares to be awarded.
In addition they both hold put options on all bonus shares awarded under the previous share based payment arrangements.
All the put options became null and void upon the listing on the LSE in June 2014.
At no point of the operation of the share based payment scheme did the management expect the put options to be exercised.
Consequently the scheme was accounted for as equitysettled scheme and no obligation was recognised for the putoptions.
In 2013 the Group considered 20 June as the grant date.
Based on the managements expectation of performance and service conditions 732000 shares have been granted and will be gradually awarded to the members of the described scheme.
An external evaluator assessed the fair value per share at the grant date at GEL 13.93 adjusted for the effect of 250for1 share split Income and market approaches were applied for the evaluation.
The market approach involved an estimate of the market capitalisation to book value of equity multiple and deal price to book value of equity multiple for comparable banks.
When selecting comparable banks the appraiser chose lenders operating in the Black Sea region and Central and Eastern Europe with a portfolio mix and growth priorities similar to TBC Bank.
The income approach involved discounting free cash flows to equity estimated over a 10year horizon.
When developing the projections the following major assumptions were made Over the 2013  2023 periods the compound annual growth rate was assumed at 15.2% for loans and at 15.1% for customer accounts The spread on the Banks customer business was assumed to gradually decline from an estimated 10.2% in 2013 to stabilize at 5.8% by 2021 Over 2013  2023 period noninterest income was forecast to average 1.8% of customer volume ie gross loans and deposits Yearonyear growth in various components of employees compensation was assumed at 37.6%  56.0% in 2014 2.4%  9.8% in 2015 and was then assumed to gradually decline to 2.1%  3.6% in 2023.
Yearonyear growth in administrative expenses was assumed at 38.3% in 2014 10.4% in 2015 and to gradually decline to 3.3% in 2023 The Banks terminal value was estimated using the Gordon growth model applying US longterm inflation forecast 2.1% as the Banks terminal cash flows growth rate Banks cost of equity was estimated at 15.10%.
The final valuation was based on the income approach and the market one was used to check the results obtained by the former.
The calculated value of Banks equity was then divided by the number of ordinary shares issued as of date and further reduced with the discount for lack of control.
211 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Governance Financial Statements Additional Information 26 Share Based Payments continued June 2015 arrangement In June 2015 the Banks Supervisory Board approved a new management compensation scheme for the top and middle management and it accordingly authorised the issue of a maximum 3115890 new shares.
The new system will be enforced from 2015 through 2018 replacing the system introduced in June 2013  the performance evaluation as well as the respective compensation for 2015 yearend results will be paid under the new system.
According to the scheme each year subject to predefined performance conditions a certain number of shares will be awarded to the Groups top managers and most of the middle ones.
The performance features key performance indicators KPIs divided into i corporate and ii individual.
The corporate KPIs are mainly related to achieving profitability efficiency and portfolio quality metrics set by the Supervisory Board as well as nonfinancial indicators with regards to customers experience and employees engagement.
The individual performance indicators are set on an individual basis and are used to calculate the number of shares to be awarded to each employee.
According to the scheme members of top management will also receive the fixed number of shares.
Once awarded all shares carry service conditions and before those conditions are met are eligible to dividends however they do not carry voting rights and cannot be sold or transferred to third parties.
Service conditions foresee continuous employment until the gradual transfer of the full title to the scheme participants is complete.
Shares for each of the 2015 2016 2017 and 2018 tranche gradually ran over on the second third and fourth year following the performance appraisal.
Eighty percent of the shares were vested in the fourth year after being awarded.
Under this compensation system the total vesting period extends to March 2022.
In 2015 the Group considered 17 June as the grant date.
Based on the managements estimate of reached targets as of 31 December 2015 1908960 shares were granted.
The shares will be gradually awarded to the members as per the described scheme.
At the grant date the fair value amounted to GEL 24.64 per share as quoted on the London Stock Exchange.
Following the listing on the Premium segment of the London Stock Exchange the sharebased payment scheme was updated and TBC Bank Group PLC distributes its shares to the schemes participants.
The shares value is recharged to the JSC TBC Bank.
As a result the accounting of the scheme did not change in the consolidated financial statements.
The Bank also pays personal income tax on behalf of equity settled scheme beneficiaries which is accounted as cash settled part.
Tabular information on both of the schemes is given below In GEL except for number of shares 31 December 31 December 31 December Number of unvested shares at the beginning of the period 2622707 2756605 803336 Number of shares granted   1908963 Change in estimate of number of shares expected to vest based on performance conditions 13100 11904 75016 Forfeited during the period  35146 Number of shares vested 324834 86848 30710 Number of unvested shares at the end of the period 2284773 2622707 2756605 Value at grant date per share GEL old remuneration system 13.93 13.93 13.93 Value at grant date per share GEL new remuneration system 24.64 24.64 24.64 Expense on equitysettled part GEL thousand 10543 12599 8559 Decrease in equity due to utilisation of cash compensation alternative GEL thousand  817 Expense on cashsettled part GEL thousand 5119 10271 5967 Expense recognised as staff cost during the period GEL thousand 15662 22053 14526 Liability in respect of the cashsettled part of the award amounted to GEL 12675 thousand as of 31 December 2017 2016 GEL 13725 thousand 2015 GEL 6560 thousand.
Staff costs related to equity settled part of the share based payment schemes are recognised in the income statement on a straight line basis over the vesting period of each relevant tranche and corresponding entry is credited to share based payment reserve in equity.
On 31 December 2017 based on level of achievement of key performance indicators the management has reassessed the number of shares that will have to be issued to the participants of the share based payment system and decreased estimated number of shares to vest by 13100 31 December 2016 11904 shares 31 December 2015 75016 shares.
212 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 31 DECEMBER 2017 27 Earnings per Share Basic earnings per share are calculated by dividing the profit or loss attributable to the owners of the Bank by the weighted average number of ordinary shares in issue during the year.
In thousands of GEL except for number of sharestel Profit for the period attributable to the owners of the Bank excluding the profit attributable to the shares encumbered under the share based payment scheme 354410 298130 216400 Weighted average number of ordinary shares in issue 52685702 49592658 48962112 Basic earnings per ordinary share attributable to the owners of the Bank expressed in GEL per share 6.7 6.0 4.4 Diluted earnings per share are calculated by dividing the profit or loss attributable to owners of the Bank by the weighted average number of ordinary shares adjusted for the effects of all dilutive potential ordinary shares during the year In thousands of GEL except for number of sharestel Profit for the period attributable to the owners of the Bank excluding the profit attributable to the shares encumbered under the share based payment scheme 354410 299037 218227 Weighted average number of ordinary shares in issue adjusted for the effects of all dilutive potential ordinary shares during the period 53480632 50946636 49607204 Diluted earnings per ordinary share attributable to the owners of the Bank expressed in GEL per share 6.6 5.9 4.4 28 Segment Analysis The Management Board the Board is the chief operating decision maker and it reviews the Groups internal reporting in order to assess the performance and to allocate resources.
Following the merger of Bank Republic with TBC Bank the Group has reassessed its definition of segments as disclosed in this note.
Some of the clients were reallocated to different segments.
As per current report micro and SME loans are combined in one MSME category.
Consumer loans include all retail loans except mortgage loans.
Comparative information as of 31 December 2016 has been updated respectively.
Comparative information as of 31 December 2015 has not been updated due to impracticability.
The operating segments according to the new definition are now determined as follows Corporate  all business customers with an annual revenue of GEL 8.0 million or more or who have been granted a loan in an amount equivalent to USD 1.5 million or more.
Some other business customers may also be assigned to the Corporate segment on a discretionary basis Micro small and medium enterprises  all business customers who are not included in Corporate segment.
Some other customers may also be assigned to the MSME segment on a discretionary basis Retail  all individual customers not included in the other categories Corporate Centre and Other Operations  comprises of the Treasury other support and back office functions and nonbanking subsidiaries of the Group.
For the profit and loss items for the year ended 31 December 2015 the recalculation was impracticable.
The operating segments for the year ended 31 December 2015 are as follows Corporate  business customers with an annual revenue of GEL 8.0 million or more or who have been granted a loan in an amount equivalent to USD 1.5 million or more.
Some other significant legal entity customers may also be assigned to the corporate segment on a discretionary basis for example clients that the Group assessed as having strong growth potential Micro small and medium enterprises  all business customers who are not included in Corporate segment.
Some other customers may also be assigned to the MSME segment on a discretionary basis Retail  all individual customers of the Group as well as customers that have been granted goldpawn loans Corporate Centre and Other Operations  comprises of the Treasury other support and back office functions and nonbanking subsidiaries of the Group.
Statement of financial position amounts as at 31 December 2017 2016 and 2015 are comparable.
The Board of Directors assesses the performance of the operating segments based on a measure of adjusted profit before income tax.
213 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Governance Financial Statements Additional Information 28 Segment Analysis continued The reportable segments are the same as the operating segments.
No revenue from transactions with a single external customer or counterparty amounted to 10% or more of the Groups total revenue in 2017 2016 or 2015.
The vast majority of the entitys revenues are attributable to Georgia.
A geographic analysis of origination of the Groups assets and liabilities is given in Note 36.
A summary of the Groups reportable segments for the years ended 31 December 2017 2016 and 2015 is provided below In thousands of GEL Corpo r at e Retail Micro small and medium enterprises Corpo r at e centre and other operations Total 31 December 2017 Interest income 203082 535851 184008 110998 1033939 interest expense 103707 118516 11661 196040 429924 Intersegment interest incomeexpense 22489 73141 51488 102140 Net interest income 121864 344194 120859 17098 604015 Fee and commission income 30037 140582 20335 2990 193944 Fee and commission expense 6942 51199 8949 893 67983 Net Fee and commission income 23095 89383 11386 2097 125961 Insurance Profit    6773 6773 Net gains from trading in foreign currencies 38885 22597 26885 1268 87099 Net losses from foreign exchange translation    4374 4374 Net losses from derivative financial instruments    36 36 Net gains from disposal of available for sale investment securities    93 93 Other operating income 13465 12670 1726 3936 31797 Share of profit of associates    909 909 Other operating noninterest income 52350 35267 28611 14781 Provision for loan impairment 27031 106579 14275  93823 Provision for performance guarantees and credit related commitments 183 261 467 542 153 Provision for impairment of investments in finance lease    492 492 Provision for impairment of other financial assets 7666 17 64 4692 12439 Profit before administrative and other expenses and income taxes 216857 361987 28250 754078 Staff costs 25989 128331 31225 17555 203100 Depreciation and amortisation 1438 29813 4972 1042 37265 Provision for liabilities and charges    2495 2495 Administrative and other operating expenses 7457 81356 15118 17599 121530 Operating expenses 34884 239500 51315 33701 359400 Profitloss before tax 181973 5451 394678 Income tax expense 27738 15527 13820 22335 34750 Profit for the year 154235 16884 359928 Total gross loans and advances to customers reported 2475392 4233153 1844672  8553217 Total customer accounts reported 2410862 4378265 1027690  7816817 Total credit related commitments and performance guarantees 1160517 229178 199662  1589357 214 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 31 DECEMBER 2017 28 Segment Analysis continued In thousands of GEL C or po r at e Retail Micro small and medium enterprises C or po r at e centre and other operations Total 31 December 2016 Interest income 160998 386193 141533 77702 766426 interest expense 45206 101520 8114 121133 275973 Intersegment interest income expense 22186 34056 36752 92994 Net interest income 93606 250617 96667 Fee and commission income 21884 100637 16331 Fee and commission expense 3977 42905 4689 961 52532 Net Fee and commission income 17907 57732 11642 Insurance Profit    256 256 Net gains from trading in foreign currencies 23945 Net losses from foreign exchange translation    2507 2507 Net losses from derivative financial instruments    206 206 Net gains from disposal of available for sale investment securities    9293 9293 Other operating income 9837 Other operating noninterest income 33782 Provision for loan impairment 48948 73010 25140 Provision for performance guarantees and credit related commitments 388 902 519  771 Provision for impairment of investments in finance lease    558 558 Provision for impairment of other financial assets 863 207 38 1745 2853 Impairment of investment securities available for sale    11 11 Profit before administrative and other expenses and income taxes 192992 Staff costs 23068 100888 28188 20077 172221 Depreciation and amortisation 1062 21560 3507 1953 28082 Provision for liabilities and charges    2210 2210 Administrative and other operating expenses 5944 59365 12793 31373 109475 Operating expenses 30074 181813 44488 55613 311988 Profit before tax 162918 76006 66509 10246 315679 Income tax expense 24513 7407 10325 24824 Profit for the year 138405 Total gross loans and advances to customers reported 2062229 3680576 1615920  7358725 Total customer accounts reported 1875576 3747775 831598  6454949 Total credit related commitments and performance guarantees 802971 188574 155275  1146820 215 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Governance Financial Statements Additional Information 28 Segment Analysis continued In thousands of GEL C or po r at e Retail Micro small and medium enterprises C or po r at e centre and other operations Total 31 December 2015 Interest income 135615 271083 175629 66732 649059 interest expense 31189 94656 11644 99396 236885 Intersegment interest income expense 34855 12828 29243 51270 Net interest income 69571 189255 134742 18606 412174 Fee and commission income 18397 72242 18619 4579 113837 Fee and commission expense 3864 31698 5159 825 41546 Net Fee and commission income 14533 40544 13460 3754 72291 Net gains from trading in foreign currencies 23647 15038 23275 2682 64642 Net gains from foreign exchange translation    2579 2579 Net losses from derivative financial instruments    575 575 Other operating income 13808 2299 1184 8592 25883 Other operating noninterest income 37455 17337 24459 13278 92529 Provision for loan impairment 15396 29004 28391  72791 Provision for performance guarantees and credit related commitments 4581 4113 649  1117 Provision for impairment of investments in finance lease    967 967 Provision for impairment of other financial assets 561 735 705 1350 3351 Profit before administrative and other expenses and income taxes 110183 213284 144214 33321 501002 Staff costs 16947 69497 46909 9424 142777 Depreciation and amortisation 1092 15295 8574 1325 26286 Provision for liabilities and charges    1102 1102 Administrative and other operating expenses 4879 46438 22243 9404 82964 Operating expenses 22918 131230 77726 21255 253129 Profit before tax 87265 82054 66488 12066 247873 Income tax expense 13384 11119 10297 5624 29176 Profit for the year 73881 70935 56191 17690 218697 Total gross loans and advances to customers reported 1500104 2075374 1063551  4639029 Total customer accounts reported 1001341 2536482 640108  4177931 Total credit related commitments and performance guarantees 446380 132670 79925  658975 216 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 31 DECEMBER 2017 28 Segment Analysis continued Reportable segments assets were reconciled to total assets as follows In thousands of GEL 31 December 31 December 31 December Total segment assets gross loans and advances to customers 8553217 7358725 4639029 Provision for loan impairment 227864 225023 194143 Cash and cash equivalents 1431477 945180 720347 Mandatory cash balances with National Bank of Georgia 1033818 990642 471490 Due from other banks 39643 24725 11042 Investment securities available for sale 657938 430703 307310 Bonds carried at amortised cost 449538 372956 372092 Current income tax prepayment 19084 7430 9856 Deferred income tax asset 2855 3511 1546 Other financial assets 146144 94627 64317 Investments in finance leases 143836 95031 75760 Other assets 156651 171263 103912 Premises and equipment 366913 314032 247767 Intangible assets 83492 60957 44344 Investment properties 79232 95615 57600 Goodwill 28658 28658 2726 Investments in Subsidiaries and Associates 1278 Total assets per statement of financial position 12965910 10769032 6934995 Reportable segments liabilities are reconciled to total liabilities as follows In thousands of GEL 31 December 31 December 31 December Total segment liabilities customer accounts 7816817 6454949 4177931 Due to Credit institutions 2620714 2197577 1113574 Debt securities in issue 20695 23508 21714 Current income tax liability 447 2577 912 Deferred income tax liability 602 5646 29244 Provisions for liabilities and charges 13200 16026 9461 Other financial liabilities 91753 50998 39435 Other liabilities 84440 66739 40627 Subordinated debt 426788 368381 283648 Total liabilities per statement of financial position 11075456 9186401 5716546 217 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Governance Financial Statements Additional Information 29 Interest Income and Expense In thousands of GELtel Interest income Loans and advances to customers 919796 688724 582327 Bonds carried at amortised cost 32328 30714 22950 Investment securities available for sale Note 10 43735 25707 20927 Investments in leases 23273 16566 15217 Due from other banks 14807 4550 7638 Other  165 Total interest income 1033939 766426 649059 Interest expense Customer accounts 233884 154840 137489 Due to credit institutions 157122 85030 70834 Subordinated debt 36975 34325 26363 Debt securities in issue 1943 1778 2105 Other   94 Total interest expense 429924 275973 236885 Net interest income 604015 490453 412174 In the year ended 31 December 2017 the interest accrued on impaired loans amounted to GEL 16332 thousand 2016 23825 thousand 2015 25756 thousand.
30 Fee and Commission Income and Expense In thousands of GELtel Fee and commission income Fee and commission income in respect of financial instruments not at fair value through profit or loss Card operations 82525 61115 49424 Settlement transactions 59739 43434 31218 Cash transactions 17424 13013 10930 Guarantees issued 15121 11699 8949 Issuance of letters of credit 5735 6215 5859 Foreign exchange operations 1339 1277 1410 Other 12061 6047 6047 Total fee and commission income 193944 142800 113837 Fee and commission expense Fee and commission expense in respect of financial instruments not at fair value through profit or loss Card operations 46360 34906 27169 Settlement transactions 7421 5795 3904 Guarantees received 2873 2420 3165 Cash transactions 4393 2633 2707 Selfservice and POS terminal transactions 6436 4692 3556 Other 500 2086 1045 Total fee and commission expense 67983 52532 41546 Net fee and commission income 125961 90268 72291 218 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 31 DECEMBER 2017 31 Other Operating Income In thousands of GELtel Revenues from operational leasing 6544 5772 8539 Gain from sale of investment properties 4353 2623 4896 Gain from sale of receivables 4090 58 Reimbursement of taxes 2486 349 Gain from sale of inventories of repossessed collateral 2383 2382 1836 Gain from marketing promotional services 2077 Revenues from noncredit related fines 1408 658 286 Revenues from sale of cashin terminals 1093 1100 777 Gain on disposal of premises and equipment 1017 208 118 Recovery from repayment of purchased impaired loans  4995 Administrative fee income from international financial institutions  644 708 Gain on sale of financial asset   4692 Other 6346 4447 4031 Total other operating income 31797 23236 25883 Revenue from operational leasing is wholly attributable to investment properties.
The carrying value of the inventories of repossessed collateral disposed in the year ended 31 December 2017 was GEL 24284 thousand 2016 GEL 26972 thousand 2015 GEL 9777 thousand.
32 Staff Costs In thousands of GELtel Salaries and bonuses 182784 146840 124676 Share based compensation 15662 22053 14526 Other compensation cost 4654 3328 3575 Salaries and other employee benefits 203100 172221 142777 In 2017 the monthly average number of persons employed by the Group was 6993 people 2016 5537 2015 5241.
Breakdown of monthly average number of employees by categories is as followstel Headquarters 2788 2243 2084 Branches 3773 2902 2827 Other administrative staff  432 392 330 Under monthly average number of employees in headquarters and branches employees in JSC TBC Bank JSC Bank Republic JSC TBC Insurance Bank Constanta JSC and LLC TBC Kredits are considered.
Employees from other subsidiaries are considered under other administrative staff.
Monthly average number of employees in TBC PLC was 10 individuals 2016 9.
219 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Governance Financial Statements Additional Information 33 Administrative and Other Operating Expenses In thousands of GELtel Rent 23132 18294 16468 Advertising and marketing services 18430 13796 11451 Professional services 14332 29926 8418 Intangible asset enhancement 10304 7446 6062 Utility services 6067 5108 4501 Taxes other than on income 5670 4699 4598 Premises and equipment maintenance 5413 3889 2959 Stationery and other office expenses 4936 3448 3471 Communications and supply 4063 4183 3433 Insurance 2461 2687 2301 Business trip expenses 2021 1880 1589 Security services 1965 1883 1622 Impairment of intangible assets 1916 2043 4982 Transportation and vehicle maintenance 1637 1386 1328 Personnel training and recruitment 1444 1272 1230 Loss on disposal of inventories 1239 1690 86 Charity 1045 884 928 Loss on disposal of premises and equipment 492 423 34 Reversal of previously writtendown current assets to fair value less costs to sell 538 4424 178 Other 15501 8962 7678 Total administrative and other operating expenses 121530 109475 82964 Included in professional services in the year ended 31 December 2016 are transaction costs related to the acquisition of Bank Republic comprising GEL 8000 thousands.
Auditors remuneration is included within professional services expenses above and comprises In thousands of GEL Audit Audit Related
Services Total Audit of TBC Bank Group and subsidiaries annual financial statements 1700   1700 Review of TBC Bank Group and subsidiaries interim financial statements  251  251 Other assurance services   231 231 Total auditors remuneration 1700 251 231 2182 Audit of TBC Bank Group and subsidiaries annual financial statements 1588   1588 Review of TBC Bank Group and subsidiaries interim financial statements  360  360 Other assurance services  5 5432 5437 Total auditors remuneration 1588 365 5432 7385 Audit of TBC Bank Group and subsidiaries annual financial statements 1104   1104 Review of TBC Bank Group and subsidiaries interim financial statements  163  163 Other assurance services  102 231 333 Total auditors remuneration 1104 265 231 1600 Included in Other assurance services as of 31 December 2016 GEL 3797 thousands is attributable to reporting accountant fees related to listing of TBCG shared on LSE.
220 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 31 DECEMBER 2017 34 Income Taxes Income tax expenses comprises of the following In thousands of GELtel Current tax charge 39313 36601 29697 Deferred tax creditcharge 4563 19180 521 Income tax expense for the year 34750 17421 29176 The income tax rate applicable to the majority of the Groups income was 15% 2016 15% 2015 15%.
The income tax rate applicable to the majority of subsidiaries income ranged from 15% to 20% 2016 15%20% 2015 15% 20%.
Reconciliation between the expected and the actual taxation charge is provided below.
In thousands of GELtel Profit before tax 394678 315679 247873 Theoretical tax charge at statutory rate 201715%20% 201615%20% 201515%20% 59119 46703 37181 Tax effect of items which are not deductible or assessable for taxation purposes Income which is exempt from taxation 12958 9638 7281 Nondeductible expenses and other differences 117 3706 724 Effect of change in tax legislation 11794 24204 Other differences 500 854 Income tax expense for the year 34750 17421 29176 Differences between IFRS as adopted by the EU and statutory taxation regulations in Georgia and Azerbaijan give rise to temporary differences between the carrying amount of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and their tax bases.
The tax effect of the movements in these temporary differences is detailed below and is recorded at the rate of 15% 2016 15% 2015 15% for Georgia and 20% for Azerbaijan and United Kingdom 2016 20% 2015 20%.
On 13 May 2016 the Government of Georgia enacted the changes in the Tax Code of Georgia effective from 1 January 2019 for commercial banks credit unions insurance organisations microfinance organisations and pawnshops and from 1 January 2017 for other entities.
The new code impacts the recognition and measurement principles of the Groups income tax and it also affects the Groups deferred income tax assets liabilities.
Companies do not have to pay income tax on their profit before tax earned since 1 January 2017 or 1 January 2019 for commercial banks credit unions insurance organisations microfinance organisations and pawnshops until that profit is distributed in a form of dividend or other forms of profit distributions.
Once dividend is paid 15% income tax is payable at the moment of the dividend payment regardless of whether in monetary or nonmonetary form to the foreign nonresident legal entities and foreign and domestic individuals.
The dividends paid out to the resident legal entities are tax exempted.
Apart from dividends distribution the tax is still payable on expenses or other payments incurred not related to economic activities free delivery of goodsservices andor transfer of funds and representation costs that exceed the maximum amount determined by the Income Tax Code of Georgia in the same month they are incurred.
As of 31 December 2017 deferred tax assetsliabilities are remeasured to the amounts that are estimated to be utilised in the period from 1 January 2018 to 31 December 2018.
221 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Governance Financial Statements Additional Information 34 Income Taxes continued In thousands of GEL 1 January 2017
Charged directly to other comprehensive income 31 December Tax effect of deductibletaxable temporary differences and tax loss carry forward Premises and equipment 5323 648 Loan impairment provision 92 2400 Fair valuation of investment securities available for sale 165 Other financial assets 2368 104  2266 Other assets 39 Investment in leases Investment property 982 640 Due to credit institutions 1295 479 Subordinated debt 85 62 Other financial liabilities 197 Other liabilities 2226 Share based payment 676 Tax loss carry forwards 29 Net deferred tax asset liability 2135 4563 271 2253 Recognised deferred tax asset 3511 753  2855 Recognised deferred tax liability 5646 5316 Net deferred tax asset liability 2135 4563 271 2253 In thousands of GEL 1 January 2016
Credited directly to other comprehensive income Changes due to the business combination 31 December Tax effect of deductibletaxable temporary differences and tax loss carry forwards Premises and equipment 25802 11112 11011 1644 5323 Loan impairment provision 9167 11729  2574 92 Fair valuation of investment securities available for sale 1595 461 1565 267 165 Other financial assets 5952 3830  246 2368 Other assets 6407 5734  634 39 Investment in leases 556 556 Investment property 4247 4275  1010 982 Due to credit institutions 475 820   1295 Subordinated debt 327 242   85 Other financial liabilities 60 137   197 Other liabilities 1311 1146  232 2226 Share based payment 741 65   676 Tax loss carry forwards  29   29 Net deferred tax asset liability 27698 19180 12576 6115 2135 Recognised deferred tax asset 1546 1719 246 3511 Recognised deferred tax liability 29244 17461 12576 6361 5646 Net deferred tax asset liability 27698 19180 12576 6115 2135 As of 31 December 2017 deferred tax assetsliabilities are remeasured to the amounts that are estimated to be utilised in the period from 1 January 2018 to 31 December 2018.
222 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 31 DECEMBER 2017 34 Income Taxes continued In thousands of GEL 1 January
Charged directly to other comprehensive income 31 December Tax effect of deductibletaxable temporary differences and tax loss carry forward Premises and equipment 20040 1393 4369 25802 Loan impairment provision 4718 3858 591 9167 Fair valuation of investment securities available for sale 1224 108 479 1595 Other financial assets 4483 1469  5952 Other assets 4164 2211 32 6407 Investment in leases 29 585  556 Investment property 6436 2189  4247 Due to credit institutions 292 183  475 Subordinated debt 259 68  327 Other Financial liabilities 1817 1757  60 Other Liabilities 380 1697 6 1311 Share based payment 52 689  741 Net deferred tax asset liability 22804 519 5413 27698 Recognised deferred tax asset 383 1163  1546 Recognised deferred tax liability 23187 644 5413 29244 Net deferred tax asset liability 22804 519 5413 27698 In the context of the Groups current structure and Georgian tax legislation tax losses and current tax assets of different group companies may not be offset against current tax liabilities and taxable profits of other group companies and accordingly taxes may accrue even where there is a consolidated tax loss.
Therefore deferred tax assets and liabilities are offset only when they relate to the same taxable entity and the same taxation authority.
35 Net Debt Reconciliation The table below sets out an analysis of our debt and the movements in our debt for each of the periods presented.
The debt items are those that are reported as financing in the statement of cash flows.
Liabilities from financing activities In thousands of GEL
Debt
Securities in
Subordinated debt Total Net debt at 1 January 2017 1880670 23508 368381 2272559 Cash flows 519289 3251 22837 Foreign exchange adjustments 13266 1505 765 15536 Other noncash movements Net debt at 31 December 2017 2534496 Due to the amendments being issued one year before the effective date the Group need not provide comparative information as it applied the amendment for the first time.
223 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Governance Financial Statements Additional Information 36 Financial and Other Risk Management TBC Bank Groups strong risk governance reflects the importance placed by the Board and the Groups Risks Ethics and Compliance Committee on shaping the risk strategy and managing credit financial and nonfinancial risks.
All components necessary for comprehensive risk governance are embedded into risk organisation structure enterprise risk management credit financial and nonfinancial risks management risk reporting and supporting IT infrastructure crossrisk analytical tools and techniques such as capital adequacy management and stress testing.
Comprehensive transparent and prudent risk governance facilitates understanding and trust from multiple stakeholders ensures sustainability and resiliency of the business model and positioning of risk management as Groups competitive advantage and strategic enabler.
The TBC Bank Groups governance structure ensures adequate oversight and accountabilities as well as clear segregation of duties.
The Risks Ethics and Compliance Committee is responsible for taking all the daytoday decisions relating to the Group apart from those that are reserved for the Board.
Namely the committee carries out following duties 1 Review and assessment of the Groups risk management strategy risk appetite and tolerance risk management system and risk policies 2 Review and monitoring of the processes for compliance with laws regulations and ethical codes of practice 3 monitoring of the remediation of internal control deficiencies identified by internal and external auditors around compliance ethics and risk management functions 4 Annual selfassessment of the committees performance and reporting of the results to the Board 5 Review of the key risk management framework and other policy documents and make recommendations to the Board for their approval.
On the Bank level risk management is the duty of the Supervisory Board which has the overall responsibility to set the tone at the top and monitor compliance with established objectives.
At the same time the Management Board governs and directs Groups daily activities.
Both the Supervisory Board and the Management Board have established dedicated risk committees.
The Risk Ethics and Compliance Committee of Supervisory Board approves Banks Risk Appetite supervises risk profile and risk governance practice within the Bank while the Audit Committee is responsible for implementation of key accounting policies and facilitation of activities of internal and external auditors.
The
Management Board Risk Committee is established to guide groupwide risk management activities and monitor major risk trends to make sure risk profile complies with the established Risk Appetite of the Group.
The Operational Risk Committee makes decisions related to operational risk governance while the AssetLiability Management Committee ALCO is responsible for implementation of ALM policies.
The Board the Supervisory Board and Senior Management govern risk objectives through Risk Appetite Statement RAS which sets desired risk profile and respective risk limits for different economic environments.
Risk Appetite RA establishes monitoring and reporting responsibilities as well as escalation paths for different trigger events and limit breaches which as well prompt risk teams to establish and implement agreed mitigation actions.
In order to effectively implement Risk Appetite in the Groups daytoday operations the RA metrics are cascaded into more granular business unit level limits.
That way risk allocation is established across different segments and activities.
The Board level oversight coupled with the permanent involvement of the Senior Management in TBC Group risk management ensures the clarity regarding risk objectives intense monitoring of risk profile against risk appetite prompt escalation of riskrelated concerns and establishment of remediation actions.
The daily management of individual risks is based on the principle of the three lines of defense.
While business lines are primary risk owners risk teams assume the function of the second line defense.
This role is performed through sanctioning transactions as well as tools and techniques for risk identification analysis measurement monitoring and reporting.
The committees are established at operational levels in charge of making transactionlevel decisions that comprise of components of clear and sophisticated delegations of the authority framework based on foureye principle.
All new productsprojects go through the risk teams to assure risks are analysed comprehensively.
Such control arrangements guarantee that the Bank takes informed risktaking decisions that are adequately priced avoiding taking risks that are beyond the Groups established threshold.
Within the Risk Organisation the below teams manage the credit liquidity market operational and other nonfinancial risks
Enterprise Risk Management ERM
Credit Risk Management
Underwriting Credit sanctioning Restructuring and Collections
Financial Risk Management
Operational Risk Management.
224 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 31 DECEMBER 2017 36 Financial and Other Risk Management continued The strong and independent structure enables fulfillment of all the required risk management functions within the second line of defense by highly skilled professionals with a balanced mix of credentials in banking and real sectors both on the local and international markets.
In addition to the abovementioned risk teams the Compliance Department reporting directly to CEO is specifically in charge of AML and compliance risk management.
As the third line of defense the Internal Audit Department provides an independent and objective assurance and recommendations to the Group that facilitates further improvement of operations and risk management.
For the management of each significant risk the Bank puts in place specific policies and procedures governance tools and techniques methodologies for risk identification assessment and quantification.
Sound risk reporting systems and IT infrastructure are important tools for efficient risk management of TBC Bank.
Thus significant emphasis and investments are made by the Bank to constantly drive the development of required solutions.
Comprehensive reporting framework is in place for the Management Board the Supervisory Board and the Board that enables intense oversight over risk developments and taking early remedial actions upon necessity.
Beyond the described risk governance components the compensation system features one of the most significant tools for introducing incentives for staff aligned with the Banks longterm interests to generate sustainable riskadjusted returns.
The risk Key Performance Indicators KPIs are incorporated into both the business line and the risk staff remunerations.
The performance management framework differentiates risk staff incentives to safeguard the independence from business areas that they supervise and at the same time enable attraction and maintenance of qualified professionals.
For that purpose the Bank overweighs risk KPIs for risk and control staff and caps the share of variable remuneration.
Credit risk The Group is exposed to credit risk which is the risk that a customer or counterparty will be unable to meet its obligation to settle outstanding amounts.
The Groups exposure to credit risk arises as a result of its lending operations and other transactions with counterparties giving rise to financial assets.
Maximum exposure to credit risk of onbalance sheet items equals their carrying values.
For maximum exposure on offbalance sheet commitments refer to Note 38.
Credit risks include risks arising from transactions with individual counterparties concentration risk currencyinduced credit risks and residual risks.
Risks arising from transactions with individual counterparties are the loss risk related to default or nonfulfillment of contracts due to deterioration in the counterpartys credit quality.
Concentration risk is the risk related to the quality deterioration due to large exposures provided to single borrowers or a group of connected. borrowers or loan concentration in certain economic industries.
Currencyinduced credit risks relate to risks arising from foreign currencydenominated loans in the Groups portfolio.
Residual risks result from applying credit riskmitigation techniques which could not satisfy expectation in relation to received collateral.
Comprehensive risk management methods and processes are established as part of the Groups risk management framework to manage credit risk effectively.
The main principles for the Groups credit risk management are establish a prudent credit risk environment operate under a sound creditgranting process and maintain efficient processes for credit risk identification measurement control and monitoring.
Respective policies and procedures establish a framework for lending decisions reflecting the Groups tolerance for credit risk.
This framework includes detailed and formalised credit evaluation and collateral appraisal processes administration and documentation credit approval authorities at various levels counterparty and industry concentration limits and clearly defined roles and responsibilities of entities and staff involved in the origination monitoring and management of credit.
Credit Approval The Group strives to ensure a sound creditgranting process by establishing welldefined credit granting criteria and building up an efficient process for the comprehensive assessment of a borrowers risk profile.
The concept of three lines of defense is embedded in the credit risk assessment framework with a clear segregation of duties among the parties involved in the credit assessment process.
The credit assessment process differs across segments being further differentiated across various product types reflecting the different natures of these asset classes.
Corporate SME and larger retail and micro loans are assessed on an individual basis with thorough analysis of the borrowers creditworthiness and structure of the loan whereas smaller retail and micro loans are mostly assessed in an automated way applying respective scoring models for the loan approval.
Lending guidelines for business borrowers have been tailored to individual economic sectors outlining key lending criteria and target ratios within each industry.
The Loan Approval Committees are responsible to review the credit applications and approve the credit products.
Different Loan Approval Committees with clearly defined delegation authority are in place for the approval of credit exposures to Corporate SME Retail and Micro customers except those products which are assessed applying scorecards.
The composition of a Loan Approval Committee depends on aggregated liabilities of the borrower and the borrowers risk profile.
Credit risk managers as members of respective Loan Approval Committees ensure that the borrower and the proposed credit exposure risks are thoroughly analysed.
A loan to the Banks top 20 borrowers or exceeding 5% of the Banks regulatory capital requires the review and the approval of the Supervisory Boards Risk Ethics and Compliance
This committee also approves transactions with related parties resulting in exposures to individuals and legal entities exceeding GEL 150 and 200 thousand respectively.
225 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Governance Financial Statements Additional Information 36 Financial and Other Risk Management continued Credit Risk Monitoring The Groups risk management policies and processes are designed to identify and analyse risk in a timely manner and monitor adherence to predefined limits by means of reliable and timely data.
The Group dedicates considerable resources to gain a clear and accurate understanding of the credit risk faced across various business segments.
The Group uses a robust monitoring system to react timely to macro and micro developments identify weaknesses in the credit portfolio and outline solutions to make informed risk management decisions.
Monitoring processes are tailored to the specifics of individual segments as well encompassing individual credit exposures overall portfolio performance and external trends that may impact the portfolios risk profile.
Early warning signals serve as an important early alert system for the detection of credit deteriorations leading to mitigating actions.
Reports relating to the credit quality of the credit portfolio are presented to the Boards Risk Ethics and Compliance Committees on a quarterly basis.
By comparing current data with historical figures and analysing forecasts the management believes that it is capable of identifying risks and responding to them by amending its policies in a timely manner.
Credit Risk Mitigation Credit decisions are based primarily on the borrowers repayment capacity and creditworthiness in addition the Group uses credit risk mitigation tools such as collateral and guarantees to reduce the credit risk.
The reliance that can be placed on these mitigation factors is carefully assessed for legal certainty and enforceability market valuation of collateral and counterparty risk of the guarantor.
A centralised unit for collateral management governs the Groups view and strategy in relation to collateral management and ensures that collateral serves as an adequate mitigating factor for credit risk management purposes.
The collateral management framework consists of a sound independent appraisal process haircut system throughout the underwriting process monitoring and revaluations.
Credit Risk Restructuring and Collection A comprehensive portfolio supervision system is in place to identify weakened or problem credit exposures in a timely manner and to take prompt remedial actions.
Dedicated restructuring units manage weakened borrowers across all business segments.
The primary goal of the restructuring units is to rehabilitate the borrower and return to the performing category.
The sophistication and complexity of the rehabilitation process differs based on the type and size of exposure.
A centralised monitoring team monitors retail borrowers in delinquency which coupled with branches efforts are aimed at maximising collection.
The specialised software is applied for early collection processes management.
Specific strategies are tailored to different subgroups of customers reflecting respective risk levels so that greater effort is dedicated to customers with a higher risk profile.
Dedicated recovery units manage loans with higher risk profile.
Corporate and SME borrowers are transferred to a recovery unit in case of a strong probability that a material portion of the principal amount will not be paid and the main stream of recovery is no longer the borrowers cash flow.
Retail and micro loans are generally transferred to the recovery unit or external collection agencies in the case of unsecured loans at 90 days overdue although they may be transferred earlier if it is evident that the borrower is unable to repay the loan.
Geographical risk concentrations Assets liabilities credit related commitments and performance guarantees have generally been attributed to geographic regions based on the country in which the counterparty is located.
Balances legally outstanding tofrom offshore companies which are closely related to Georgian counterparties are allocated to the caption Georgia.
Cash on hand and premises and equipment have been allocated based on the country in which they are physically held.
226 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 31 DECEMBER 2017 36 Financial and Other Risk Management continued The geographical concentration of the Groups assets and liabilities as of 31 December 2017 is set out below In thousands of GEL Georgia OECD NonOECD Total
Cash and cash equivalents 820647 608728 2102 1431477 Due from other banks 27183 8733 3727 39643 Mandatory cash balances with National Bank of Georgia 1033818   1033818 Loans and advances to customers 7960107 67805 297441 8325353 Investment securities available for sale 657068  870 657938 Bonds carried at amortised cost 449538   449538 Investments in leases 143836   143836 Other financial assets 14579tel144 Total financial assets 11237995 685407 304345 12227747 Nonfinancial assets 733417 55 4691 738163 Total assets 11971412 685462 309036 12965910
Due to credit institutions 1069211 1535644 15859 2620714 Customer accounts 6499134 694821 622862 7816817 Debt securities in issue 7821  12874 20695 Other financial liabilities 90649 474 630 91753 Subordinated debt 62508 232263 132017 426788 Total financial liabilities 7729323 2463202 784242 10976767 Nonfinancial liabilities 96759 1084 846 98689 Total liabilities 7826082 2464286 785088 11075456 Net balance sheet position 4145330 1778824 476052 1890454 Performance guarantees 387890 151502 72905 612297 Credit related commitments 968019 2996 6045 977060 227 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Governance Financial Statements Additional Information 36 Financial and Other Risk Management continued The geographical concentration of the Groups assets and liabilities as of 31 December 2016 is set out below In thousands of GEL Georgia OECD NonOECD Total
Cash and cash equivalents 549279 389223 6678 945180 Due from other banks 5874 18851  24725 Mandatory cash balances with National Bank of Georgia 990642   990642 Loans and advances to customers 6923037 88616 122049 7133702 Investment securities available for sale 429985  718 430703 Bonds carried at amortised cost 372956   372956 Investments in leases 95031   95031 Other financial assets 94398 229  94627 Total financial assets 9461202 496919 129445 10087566 Nonfinancial assets 676665 29 4772 681466 Total assets 10137867 496948 134217 10769032
Due to credit institutions 718699 1408693 70185 2197577 Customer accounts 5421782 530370 502797 6454949 Debt securities in issue 13261  10247 23508 Other financial liabilities 49092 1286 620 50998 Subordinated debt  233657 134724 368381 Total financial liabilities 6202834 2174006 718573 9095413 Nonfinancial liabilities 89298 1098 592 90988 Total liabilities 6292132 2175104 719165 9186401 Net balance sheet position 3845735 1678156 584948 1582631 Performance guarantees 274614 56406 95588 426608 Credit related commitments 706646 10175 3391 720212 228 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 31 DECEMBER 2017 36 Financial and Other Risk Management continued The geographical concentration of the Groups assets and liabilities as of 31 December 2015 is set out below In thousands of GEL Georgia OECD NonOECD Total
Cash and cash equivalents 509000 199383 11964 720347 Due from other banks 2976 8066  11042 Mandatory cash balances with National Bank of Georgia 471490   471490 Loans and advances to customers 4192155 123643 129088 4444886 Investment securities available for sale 297975 9335  307310 Bonds carried at amortised cost 372092   372092 Investments in leases 75760   75760 Other financial assets 64302 15  64317 Total financial assets 5985750 340442 141052 6467244 Nonfinancial assets 465094 39 2618 467751 Total assets 6450844 340481 143670 6934995
Due to credit institutions 408475 637367 67732 1113574 Customer accounts 3378566 462400 336965 4177931 Debt securities in issue 4798  16916 21714 Other financial liabilities 36772 2591 72 39435 Subordinated debt  283648  283648 Total financial liabilities 3828611 1386006 421685 5636302 Nonfinancial liabilities 78624 834 786 80244 Total liabilities 3907235 1386840 422471 5716546 Net balance sheet position 2543609 1046359 278801 1218449 Performance guarantees 234695 1786 6702 243183 Credit related commitments 401590 13199 1003 415792 Market risk The Bank follows the Basel Committees definition of market risk as the risk of losses in on and offbalance sheet positions arising from movements in market prices.
This risk is principally made up of a risks pertaining to interest rate instruments and equities in the trading book and b foreign exchange rate risk or currency risk and commodities risk throughout the Bank.
The Banks strategy is not to be involved in trading book activity or investments in commodities.
Accordingly the Banks exposure to market risk is primarily limited to foreign exchange rate risk in the structural book.
Currency risk Foreign exchange rate risk arises from the potential change in foreign currency exchange rates which can affect the value of a financial instrument.
This risk stems from the open currency positions created due to mismatches in foreign currency assets and liabilities.
The
NBG requires the Bank to monitor both balancesheet and total aggregate including offbalance sheet open currency positions and to maintain the latter within 20% of the Banks regulatory capital.
As of 31 December 2017 the Bank maintained an aggregate open currency position of 1.5% of regulatory capital 2016 3.2% 2015 1.6%.
The AssetLiability Management Committee ALCO has set limits on the level of exposure by currency as well as on aggregate exposure positions which are more conservative than those set by the NBG.
The Banks compliance with such limits is monitored daily by the heads of the Treasury and Financial Risk Management Departments.
229 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Governance Financial Statements Additional Information 36 Financial and Other Risk Management continued Currency risk management framework is governed through the Market Risk Management Policy market risk management procedure and relevant methodologies.
Under the ICAAP framework the Bank developed methodology for allocating capital charges for FX risk following Basel guidelines.
The table below summarises the Groups exposure to foreign currency exchange rate risk at the balance sheet date.
While managing open currency position the Group considers all provisions to be denominated in the local currency.
Gross amount of currency swap deposits is included in Derivatives.
Therefore total financial assets and liabilities below are not traceable with either balance sheet or liquidity risk management tables where net amount of gross currency swaps is presented In thousands of GEL As of 31 December 2017
Monetary financial liabilities Derivatives Net balance sheet position Georgian Laris 4814429 3767858 164521 1211092 US Dollars 6475155 6299024 153449 22682 Euros 816565 805153 9315 2097 Other 121579 104732 899 15948 Total 12227728 10976767 858 1251819 In thousands of GEL As of 31 December 2016 As of 31 December 2015
Monetary financial liabilities Derivatives Net balance sheet position
Monetary financial liabilities Derivatives Net balance sheet position Georgian Laris 3484840 2478715 9394 1015519 2442850 1646864 3430 799416 US Dollars 5821734 5848266 8905 35437 3507494 3428146 71933 7415 Euros 690728 697568 13 6853 466450 499702 32715 537 Other 90264 70864 288 19112 50436 61531 36285 25190 Total 10087566 9095413 188 992341 6467230 5636243 497 831484 To assess the currency risk the Bank performs a valueatrisk VAR sensitivity analysis on a quarterly basis.
The analysis calculates the effect on the Groups income determined by possible worst movement of currency rates against the Georgian Lari with all other variables held constant.
To identify the maximum expected losses resulting from currency fluctuations a 99% confidence level is defined based on the monthly variations in exchange rates over a 3year lookback period.
During the years ended 31 December 2017 2016 and 2015 the sensitivity analysis did not reveal any significant potential effect on the Groups equity In thousands of GEL As of 31 December As of 31 December As of 31 December Maximum loss VAR 99% confidence level 2206 1184 449 Maximum loss VAR 95% confidence level 1462 868 285 Interest rate risk Interest rate risk arises from potential changes in the market interest rates that can adversely affect the fair value or future cash flows of the financial instrument.
This risk can arise from maturity mismatches of assets and liabilities as well as from the repricing characteristics of such assets and liabilities.
The Banks deposits and the most loans are at fixed interest rates while a portion of the Banks borrowings is at a floating interest rate.
The
Banks floating rate borrowings are to a certain extent hedged by the NBG paying a floating rate on the minimum reserves that the Bank holds with the NBG.
The Bank has also entered into interest rate swap agreements in order to mitigate interest rate risk.
Furthermore many of the Banks loans to customers contain a clause allowing it to adjust the interest rate on the loan in case of adverse interest rate movements thereby limiting the Banks exposure to interest rate risk.
The management also believes that the Banks interest rate margins provide a reasonable buffer to mitigate the effect of possible adverse interest rate movements.
230 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 31 DECEMBER 2017 36 Financial and Other Risk Management continued The table below summarises the Groups exposure to interest rate risks.
It illustrates the aggregated amounts of the Groups financial assets and liabilities at the amounts monitored by the management and categorised by the earlier of contractual interest repricing or maturity dates.
Currency and interest rate swaps are not netted when assessing the Groups exposure to interest rate risks.
Therefore total financial assets and liabilities below are not traceable with either balance sheet or other financial risk management tables.
The tables consider both reserves placed with NBG and Interest bearing Nostro accounts.
Income on NBG reserves and Nostros are calculated as benchmark minus margin whereby for benchmark Federal funds rate and ECB rates are considered in case of USD and EUR respectively.
Therefore they have impact on the TBCs Net interest income in case of both upward and downward shift of interest rates.
In thousands of GEL Less than 1 month From 1 to 6 months From 6 to 12 months More than 1 year Total 31 December 2017 Total financial assets 3427631 5302335 12248483 Total financial liabilities 4094978 3229143 10997481 Net interest sensitivity gap as of 31 December 2017 667347 185489 30646 31 December 2016 Total financial assets 2708398 4606991 10126737 Total financial liabilities 3601798 Net interest sensitivity gap as of 31 December 2016 893400 211496 8362 2105411 992153 31 December 2015 Total financial assets 1582056 1366740 686171 2847165 6482132 Total financial liabilities 1758301 678569 1903627 5651222 Net interest sensitivity gap as of 31 December 2015 176245 56015 7602 943538 830910 As of 31 December 2017 if interest rates had been 100 basis points lower with all other variables held constant profit for the year would have been GEL 7.4 million higher 2016 GEL 9.5 million 2015 GEL 6748 thousand mainly as a result of lower interest expense on variable interest liabilities.
Other comprehensive income would have been GEL 6131 thousand higher 2016 GEL 1516 thousand 2015 GEL 927 thousand as a result of an increase in the fair value of fixed rate financial assets classified as available for sale and repurchase receivables.
If interest rates had been 100 basis points higher with all other variables held constant profit would have been GEL 7.4 million lower 2016 GEL 9.5 million 2015 GEL 777 thousand mainly as a result of higher interest expense on variable interest liabilities.
Other comprehensive income would have been GEL 5861 thousand lower 2016 GEL 2118 thousand 2015 GEL 911 thousand as a result of decrease in the fair value of fixed rate financial assets classified as available for sale.
With the assistance of Ernst and Young LLC the Bank has developed an advanced model to manage the interest rate risk on a standalone basis.
The interest rate risk analysis is performed monthly by the Financial Risk Management Department.
The Bank calculates the impact of changes in interest rates using both Net Interest Income and Economic Value sensitivity.
Net Interest Income sensitivity measures the impact of a change of interest rates along the various maturities on the yield curve on the net interest revenue for the nearest year.
Economic Value measures the impact of a change of interest rates along the various maturities on the yield curve on the present value of the Groups assets liabilities and offbalance sheet instruments.
When performing Net Interest Income and Economic Value sensitivity analysis the Bank uses parallel shifts in interest rates as well as number of different scenarios.
Under the ICAAP framework TBC Bank reserves capital in the amount of the adverse effect of possible parallel yield curve shift scenarios on net interest income over a oneyear period for Basel II Pillar 2 capital calculation purposes.
In order to manage Interest Rate risk the Bank establishes appropriate limits.
The Bank monitors compliance with the limits and prepares forecasts.
ALCO decides on actions that are necessary for effective interest rate risk management and follows up on the implementation.
Periodic reporting is done to Management Board and the Boards Risk Ethics and Compliance Committee.
Liquidity Risk The liquidity risk is the risk that TBC Bank either does not have sufficient financial resources available to meet all of its obligations and commitments as they fall due or can access those resources only at a high cost.
The risk is managed by the Financial Risk Management and Treasury Departments and is monitored by the ALCO.
The principal objectives of the TBC Banks liquidity risk management policy are to i ensure the availability of funds in order to meet claims arising from total liabilities and offbalance sheet commitments both actual and contingent at an economic price ii recognise any structural mismatch existing within TBC Banks statement of financial position and set monitoring ratios to manage funding in line with wellbalanced growth and iii monitor liquidity and funding on an ongoing basis to ensure that approved business targets are met without compromising the risk profile of the Bank.
The liquidity risk is categorised into two risk types the funding liquidity risk and the market liquidity risk.
231 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Governance Financial Statements Additional Information 36 Financial and Other Risk Management continued Funding liquidity risk is the risk that TBC will not be able to efficiently meet both expected and unexpected current and future cash flow and collateral needs without affecting either its daily operations or its financial condition.
To manage funding liquidity risk TBC Bank internally developed Liquidity Coverage ratio and a Net Stable Funding ratio models both under Basel III guidelines.
In addition the Bank performs stress tests and whatif scenario analysis and minimum liquidity ratio defined by the NBG.
In 2017 for liquidity risk management purposes National Bank of Georgia introduced Liquidity Coverage Ratio NBG LCR where in addition to Basel III guidelines conservative approaches were applied to Mandatory Reserves weighting and to the deposits withdrawal rates depending on the clients groups concentration.
From September 2017 the Bank also monitors compliance with NBG LCR limits.
The Liquidity Coverage Ratio is used to help manage shortterm liquidity risks.
The Banks liquidity risk management framework is designed to comprehensively project cash flows arising from assets liabilities and offbalance sheet items over certain time buckets and ensure that NBG LCR limits are met on a daily basis.
TBC Bank also stress tests the results of liquidity through large shock scenarios provided by the NBG.
The Net Stable Funding ratio is used for longterm liquidity risk management to promote resilience over a longer time horizon by creating additional incentives for TBC Bank to rely on more stable sources of funding on a continuous basis.
The Bank also sets deposit concentration limits for large deposits and deposits of nonGeorgian residents in its deposit portfolio.
Net Stable Funding ratio is calculated based on the IFRS consolidated financial statements.
In addition for internal purposes TBC Bank calculates NSFR ratio on the basis of standalone financial statements prepared in accordance with NBGs accounting rules.
The management believes that a strong and diversified funding structure is one of TBC Banks differentiators.
The Bank relies on relatively stable deposits from Georgia as the main source of funding.
In order to maintain and further enhance the liability structure TBC Bank sets the targets for retail deposits in its strategy and sets the loan to deposit ratio limits.
The loan to deposit ratio defined as total value of net loans divided by total value of deposits stood at 106.5% 110.5% and 106.4% at 31 December 2017 2016 and 2015 respectively.
Market liquidity risk is the risk that the Bank cannot easily offset or eliminate a position at the thencurrent market price because of inadequate market depth or market disruption.
To manage it TBC Bank follows Basel III guidelines on highquality liquidity asset eligibility in order to ensure that the Banks highquality liquid assets can be sold without causing a significant movement in the price and with minimum loss of value.
In addition TBC Bank has a liquidity contingency plan which is part of the Banks overall prudential liquidity policy and is designed to ensure that TBC Bank is able to meet its funding and liquidity requirements and maintain its core business operations in deteriorating liquidity conditions that could arise outside the ordinary course of its business.
The Bank calculates its liquidity ratios on a daily basis in accordance with the NBGs requirements.
The Liquidity Ratio The limit is set by the NBG for average liquidity ratio which is calculated as the ratio of average liquid assets to average liabilities for the respective month including borrowings from financial institutions and part of offbalance sheet liabilities with residual maturity up to 6 months.
NBG LCR is calculated by reference to the qualified liquid assets divided by 30day cash net outflows defined as per NBG guidelines.
The limit is set by the NBG as per total LCR also by currency GEL FX.
To promote larisation in the country of Georgia NBG defines a lower limit for GEL LCR than that for FX LCR.
In addition NBG mandatory Regulatory reserves in FX currency is only considered at 75% per LCR calculation purposes.
NBG guidelines apply higher withdrawal rates to the deposits and offbalance instruments depending on the clients groups concentration than those rates defined per Basel III requirements.
As of 31 December the ratios were well above the prudential limit set by the NBG as followstel Average Liquidity Ratio 32.5% 30.8% 34.4% Total Liquidity Coverage Ratio 11272% GEL Liquidity Coverage Ratio 95.62% FX Liquidity Coverage Ratio 122.88% According to daily cash flow forecasts and the surplus in liquidity standing the Treasury Department places funds in shortterm liquid assets largely made up of shortterm riskfree securities interbank deposits and other interbank facilities to ensure that sufficient liquidity is maintained within the Group as a whole.
232 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 31 DECEMBER 2017 36 Financial and Other Risk Management continued Maturity analysis The table below summarises the maturity analysis of the Groups financial liabilities based on remaining undiscounted contractual obligations as of 31 December 2017.
Subjecttonotice repayments are treated as if notice were to be given immediately.
However the Group expects that many customers will not request repayment on the earliest date the Group could be required to pay and the table does not reflect the expected cash flows indicated by the Groups deposit retention history.
The maturity analysis of financial liabilities as of 31 December 2017 is as follows In thousands of GEL Less than 3 months From 3 to 12 months
12 months to 5 years Over 5 years Total
Due to Credit institutions 1142865 418613 1167970 151417 2880865 Customer accounts  individuals 2532039 1378835 522104 40727 4473705 Customer accounts  other 3068027 192852 133236 80976 3475091 Other financial liabilities 82685 Subordinated debt 5060 74191 198042 346703 623996 Debt securities in issue 504 8814 13687  23005 Gross settled forwards 176822 5509   182331 Performance guarantees 55914 241460 306788 8135 612297 Financial guarantees 52256 122014 74457 155 248882 Other credit related commitments 728178    728178 Total potential future payments for financial obligations 7844350 2451096 2416544 628113 13340103 The maturity analysis of financial liabilities as of 31 December 2016 is as follows In thousands of GEL Less than 3 months From 3 to 12 months
12 months to 5 years Over 5 years Total
Due to Credit institutions 837188 310447 1103959 168271 2419865 Customer accounts  individuals 2147015 1284067 360609 39578 3831269 Customer accounts  other 2287043 238551 134293 74180 2734067 Other financial liabilities 46971 2883 1144  50998 Subordinated debt 4853 29510 238224 360551 633138 Debt securities in issue 616 6584 22745  29945 Gross settled forwards 16084 3641 369  20094 Performance guarantees 60552 154616 210595 845 426608 Financial guarantees 117994 102311 50657 140 271102 Other credit related commitments 449110    449110 Total potential future payments for financial obligations 5967426 2132610 2122595 643565 10866196 The maturity analysis of financial liabilities as of 31 December 2015 is as follows In thousands of GEL Less than 3 months From 3 to 12 months
12 months to 5 years Over 5 years Total
Due to Credit institutions 518915 148380 520673 24181 1212149 Customer accounts  individuals 1346154 889799 348627 23859 2608439 Customer accounts  other 1419830 119695 98836 23739 1662100 Other financial liabilities 36099 1196 2140  39435 Subordinated debt 2284 54214 215062 132636 404196 Debt securities in issue 480 17996 5061  23537 Gross settled forwards 94368 1967   96335 Performance guarantees 16023 88666 137944 550 243183 Financial guarantees 75707 65959 26836 131 168633 Other credit related commitments 247159    247159 Total potential future payments for financial obligations 3757019 1387872 1355179 205096 6705166 233 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Governance Financial Statements Additional Information 36 Financial and Other Risk Management continued The undiscounted financial liability analysis gap does not reflect the historical stability of the current accounts.
Their liquidation has historically taken place over a longer period than the one indicated in the tables above.
These balances are included in amounts due in less than three months in the tables above.
Term Deposits included in the customer accounts are classified based on remaining contractual maturities according to the Georgian Civil Code however individuals have the right to withdraw their deposits prior to maturity if they partially or fully forfeit their right to accrued interest and the Group is obliged to repay such deposits upon the depositors demand.
Based on the Banks deposit retention history the management does not expect that many customers will require repayment on the earliest possible date accordingly the table does not reflect the managements expectations as to actual cash outflows.
The Group does not use the above undiscounted maturity analysis to manage liquidity.
Instead the Group monitors the liquidity gap analysis based on the expected maturities.
In particular the customers deposits are distributed in the given maturity gaps following their behavioural analysis.
As of 31 December 2017 the analysis by expected maturities may be as follows In thousands of GEL Less than 3 months From 3 to 12 months From 1 to 5 Years Over 5 years Total
Cash and cash equivalents 1431477    1431477 Due from other banks 32845 3071 3727  39643 Mandatory cash balances with National Bank of Georgia 1033818    1033818 Loans and advances to customers 1031608 1767797 3438180 2087768 8325353 Investment securities available for sale 657938    657938 Bonds carried at amortised cost 81859 105956 216177 45546 449538 Finance lease receivables 22896 38526 82414  143836 Other financial assets 110604 22207 13333  146144 Total financial assets 4403045 1937557 3753831 2133314 12227747
Due to Credit institutions 1137076 351381 990480 141777 2620714 Customer accounts 844123 136821  6835873 7816817 Debt securities in issue 47 7778 12870  20695 Other financial liabilities 82685 8808 260  91753 Subordinated debt 3471 49694 97372 276251 426788 Total financial liabilities 2067402 554482 1100982 7253901 10976767 Credit related commitments and performance guarantees Performance guarantees 2067 Financial guarantees 8239 Other credit related commitments 105268    105268 Credit related commitments and performance guarantees 115574    115574 Net liquidity gap as of 31 December 2017 2220069 1383075 2652849 5120587 1135406 Cumulative gap as of 31 December 2017 2220069 3603144 6255993 1135406 The management believes that the Group has sufficient liquidity to meet its current on and offbalance sheet obligations.
234 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 31 DECEMBER 2017 36 Financial and Other Risk Management continued As of 31 December 2016 the analysis by expected maturities may be as follows In thousands of GEL Less than 3 months From 3 to 12 months From 1 to 5 Years Over 5 years Total
Cash and cash equivalents 945180    945180 Due from other banks 4417 5210 5544 9554 24725 Mandatory cash balances with National Bank of Georgia 990642    990642 Loans and advances to customers 1119128 1481095 2949227 1584252 7133702 Investment securities available for sale 430703    430703 Bonds carried at amortised cost 123763 94250 128201 26742 372956 Finance lease receivables 18770 30600 45661  95031 Other financial assets 64328 10595 19704  94627 Total financial assets 3696931 1621750 3148337 1620548 10087566
Due to Credit institutions 796148 260046 986857 154526 2197577 Customer accounts 723340 154513  5577096 6454949 Debt securities in issue 145 5277 18086  23508 Other financial liabilities 46971 2883 1144  50998 Subordinated debt 3333 4893 125174 234981 368381 Total financial liabilities 1569937 427612 1131261 5966603 9095413 Credit related commitments and performance guarantees Performance guarantees 2635    2635 Financial guarantees 8049    8049 Other credit related commitments 45854    45854 Credit related commitments and performance guarantees 56538    56538 Net liquidity gap as of 31 December 2016 2070456 1194138 2017076 4346055 935615 Cumulative gap as of 31 December 2016 2070456 3264594 5281670 935615 235 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Governance Financial Statements Additional Information 36 Financial and Other Risk Management continued As of 31 December 2015 the analysis by expected maturities may be as follows In thousands of GEL Less than 3 months From 3 to 12 months From 1 to 5 Years Over 5 years Total
Cash and cash equivalents 720347    720347 Due from other banks 1290 1059  8693 11042 Mandatory cash balances with National Bank of Georgia 471490    471490 Loans and advances to customers 697228 950170 1907830 889658 4444886 Investment securities available for sale 307310    307310 Bonds carried at amortised cost 86357 113248 145720 26767 372092 Finance lease receivables 16555 24444 34761  75760 Other financial assets 41544 5704 17069  64317 Total financial assets 2342121 1094625 2105380 925118 6467244
Due to Credit institutions 513415 114093 462636 23430 1113574 Customer accounts 346674 27885  3803372 4177931 Debt securities in issue 32 16916 4766  21714 Other financial liabilities 36099 1196 2140  39435 Subordinated debt 1303 33042 145566 103737 283648 Total financial liabilities 897523 193132 615108 3930539 5636302 Credit related commitments and performance guarantees Performance guarantees 1472    1472 Financial guarantees 5589    5589 Other credit related commitments 36982    36982 Credit related commitments and performance guarantees 44043    44043 Net liquidity gap as of 31 December 2015 1400555 901493 1490272 3005421 786899 Cumulative gap as of 31 December 2015 1400555 2302048 3792320 786899 In order to assess the possible outflow of the banks customer accounts management applied valueatrisk analysis.
The statistical data was used on the basis of a holding period of one month for a lookback period of five years with a confidence level of 99%.
The value at risk analysis was performed for the following maturity gaps 01 months 03 months 06 months and 012 months based on which the maximum percentage of deposits outflow was calculated.
Management believes that in spite of a substantial portion of customers accounts being on demand diversification of these deposits by number and type of depositors and the past experience of the Group would indicate that these customer accounts provide a longterm and stable source of funding for the Group.
Moreover the Groups liquidity risk management includes estimation of maturities for its current deposits.
The estimate is based on statistical methods applied to historic information on the fluctuations of customer account balances.
Operating environment Most of the Groups business is based in Georgia.
Emerging economies such as Georgias are subject to rapid change and are vulnerable to global market conditions and economic downturns.
As a consequence operations in Georgia may be exposed to certain risks that are not typically associated with those in developed markets.
Nevertheless over the last few years the Georgian government has embarked on a number of civil criminal tax administrative and commercial reforms that have positively affected the overall investment climate of the country.
Today Georgia has an international reputation as a country with a favourable investment environment.
Georgia continued to progress in the report Doing Business 2018 by the World Bank WB and International Financing Corporation IFC ranking as the 9th easiest country in the world to do business out of 190 up by 7 steps compared to the previous year rankings.
The country improved its ranking in almost all categories confirming its position as a regional leader and outperforming most of the EU economies.
Georgia also boasts low corruption levels a low tax burden and high transparency of its institutions according to the number of surveys by international institutions.
The domestic economic environment remains stable and the banking sector continues to grow supported by broader macroeconomic stability and attractive business climate.
GDP growth stood at 5.0% YoY growth in 2017.
Growth was broad based across different sectors of the economy and was mostly driven by construction trade and repairs real estate transport and communications sectors.
236 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 31 DECEMBER 2017 36 Financial and Other Risk Management continued Economic recovery in almost all trading partner countries of Georgia continues to underpin growth in export tourism and remittances inflows.
Exports of goods went up by 29.1% YoY in 2017 growth was diversified across different regions.
Exports increased most to CIS countries 60.0% YoY exports continued to grow to EU 13.0% YoY as well as to other countries 12.2% YoY.
Imports of goods also went up by 9.4% making the balance of trade in goods worsen slightly by 1.4% YoY in 2017.
Tourism inflows went up by an estimated 28.0% YoY with the total number of visitors exceeding 7.5 million.
Sharp growth in tourism revenues have a sizeable positive impact on Georgias Current Account balance.
Remittance inflows increased by 19.8% YoY in 2017 with remittances up by 15.1% YoY from EU and 15.6% YoY from CIS countries.
Growth of remittances from other countries stood at 31.3% YoY.
In the latter group of countries Israel and Turkey had the highest contribution to growth as remittances from these countries went up by 96.1% YoY and 25.6% YoY respectively.
Given the positive trend in external inflows CA balance improved markedly in the first 9 months of 2017 CA deficit as a % of GDP stood at 7.1% compared to the 11.2% over the same period last year.
Annual CPI inflation peaked in June 2017 at 7.1% and declined slightly to 6.7% by the end of 2017.
Increased excise taxes in the beginning of 2017 higher oil prices and depreciation of the nominal effective exchange rate of GEL were among the factors that kept inflation close to 7% by the end of the year.
To address above target inflation NBG increased policy rate by 0.25 PP from 7% to 7.25% in December 2017.
Overall in 2017 NBG raised policy rate by 0.75 PP from 6.5% in the beginning of 2017 to 7.25% by the end of 2017.
Fiscal deficit narrowed from 3.9% in 2016 to an estimated 3.8% in 2017 in line with the governments strategy to gradually bring down the budget deficit below 3% over the medium term.
Reduction in budget deficit mostly reflected better than expected growth of tax revenues as well as more prudent approach towards current spending.
Budget project for 2018 envisages further reduction of budget deficit to c.
3% of GDP which should further strengthen the fiscal position of the country.
37 Management of Capital The Groups objectives in terms of capital management are to maintain appropriate levels of capital to support the business strategy meet regulatory and stress testingrelated requirements and safeguard the Groups ability to continue as a going concern.
Additionally the Groups capital management objectives entail ensuring that the Bank complies with the capital requirements set by the Basel Capital Accord 1988 capital adequacy ratios as stipulated by borrowing agreements.
The compliance with capital adequacy ratios set by the NBG is monitored monthly with the reports outlining their calculation and are reviewed and signed by the Banks CFO and Deputy CFO.
The Bank and the Group complied with all its internally and externally imposed capital requirements throughout 2015 2016 and 2017.
In December 2017 the NBG has introduced updated capital framework that is more compliant with Basel III guidelines.
Under updated capital framework capital requirements are divided into Pillar 1 and Pillar 2 buffers.
Details regarding the capital buffers are outlined below The capital conservation buffer which was incorporated in minimum capital requirements is separated and set at 2.5% A systemic risk buffer will be introduced for systematically important banks over the 4 years period A countercyclical capital buffer is currently set at 0% A currency induced credit risk CICR buffer replaced conservative weighting for unhedged FX loans denominated in foreign currencies Concentration buffer for sectoral and single borrower exposure will be introduced A net stress buffer will be introduced based on stress testing results provided by the Group A General Riskassessment Programme GRAPE buffer defined by the regulator will be applied based on the Banks specific risks.
In addition based on the updated methodology specific PTI payment to income and LTV loan to value thresholds were introduced.
For the exposures which do not fall into predefined limits for PTI and LTV ratios higher risk weights were applied.
NBG Basel I Capital adequacy ratio Under the NBG Basel I capital requirements set by the NBG in 2017 banks have to maintain a ratio of regulatory capital to risk weighted assets statutory capital ratio above the minimum level of 9.6% and a ratio of Tier 1 capital to risk weighted assets above the minimum level of 6.4%.
No additional addons are in place.
In mid2015 the NBG removed previously established 3% capital addon.
2017 is the last phase for Basel I and will be ruled out fully from January 2018.
The regulatory capital is based on the Banks standalone reports prepared in accordance with the NBG accounting rules 237 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Governance Financial Statements Additional Information 37 Management of Capital continued In thousands of GEL 2017 Share capital 575140 Retained earnings and other disclosed reserves 937041 General loan loss provisions up to 1.25 % of riskweighted assets 171791 Less intangible assets 103072 Less Investments into subsidiary companies and capital of other banks 55138 Less Investments in the capital of the resident banks Subordinated debt included in regulatory capital 375813 Total regulatory capital 1901575 Riskweighted exposures Credit riskweighted assets including offbalance obligations 10191259 Currency Induced Credit Risk 3638814 Minus general and special reserves 217643 Riskweighted assets 13612430 Tier 1 Capital adequacy ratio 8.2% Total Capital adequacy ratio 14.0% The breakdown of the Banks assets into the carrying amounts based on the NBG accounting rules and relevant riskweighted exposures as of the end of 2017 are given in the tables below In thousands of GEL Riskweighted Exposures Carrying Value RW amount Cash cash equivalents Interbank Deposits and Securities 3547937 259870 Gross Loans and accrued interests 8609951 11979513 Repossessed assets 58530 58530 Fixed assets and intangible assets 486160 383087 Other assets 271091 251573 Total 12973669 12932573 Total Offbalance sheet 1820064 897500 Minus general and special reserves 217643 217643 Total Amount 14576090 13612430 Under the previous capital requirements set by the NBG banks had to maintain a ratio of regulatory capital to riskweighted assets statutory capital ratio above the minimum level of 10.8% and a ratio of Tier 1 capital to riskweighted assets above the minimum level of 7.2%.
No additional addons are in place.
In mid2015 the NBG removed previously established 3% capital addon.
The regulatory capital is based on the Banks standalone reports prepared in accordance with the NBG accounting rules In thousands of GEL 2016 2015 Share capital 567089 443987 Retained earnings and other disclosed reserves 770345 568604 General loan loss provisions up to 1.25 % of riskweighted assets 115559 87037 Less intangible assets 53074 41080 Less Investments into subsidiary companies and capital of other banks 61855 50840 Less Investments in the capital of the resident banks 351040 Subordinated debt included in regulatory capital 342653 173652 Total regulatory capital 1329677 1181360 Riskweighted exposures Credit riskweighted assets including offbalance obligations 6750917 5304184 Currency Induced Credit Risk 2855296 2056062 Minus general and special reserves 205968 205131 Riskweighted assets 9400245 7155115 Tier 1 Capital adequacy ratio 10.9% 11.0% Total Capital adequacy ratio 14.1% 16.5% 238 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 31 DECEMBER 2017 37 Management of Capital continued The breakdown of the Banks assets into the carrying amounts based on the NBG accounting rules and relevant riskweighted exposures as of the end of 2016 and 2015 are given in the tables below In thousands of GEL Risk weighted Exposures Carrying Value RW amount Cash cash equivalents interbank deposits and securities 2372263 163294 Gross loans and accrued interests 5979125 8427081 Repossessed assets 46441 46441 Fixed assets and intangible assets 328184 275110 Other assets 620428 278394 Total 9346441 9190320 Total offbalance sheet 875585 415893 Minus general and special reserves 205968 205968 Total amount 10016058 9400245 In thousands of GEL Riskweighted Exposures Carrying Value RW amount Cash cash equivalents interbank deposits and securities 1794873 85733 Gross loans and accrued interests 4671693 6445027 Repossessed assets 44253 44253 Fixed assets and intangible assets 306368 265288 Other assets 177111 151073 Total 6994298 6991374 Total offbalance sheet 696260 368872 Minus general and special reserves 205131 205131 Total Amount 7485427 7155115 NBG Basel II Capital adequacy ratio By the end of 2017 both Tier 1 and Total capital adequacy ratios are calculated based on the Basel III methodology introduced by NBG.
The details are described on page 236.
The table below presents the capital adequacy ratios as well as minimum requirements set by the NBG.
In thousands of GEL 2017 Tier 1 Capital 1437218 Tier 2 Capital 448069 Regulatory capital 1885287 Riskweighted Exposures Credit riskweighted exposures 9754146 Riskweighted exposures for market risk 28802 Riskweighted exposures for operational risk 970241 Total riskweighted exposures 10753189 Minimum Tier 1 ratio 10.3% Tier 1 Capital adequacy ratio 13.4% Minimum total capital adequacy ratio 12.9% Total Capital adequacy ratio 17.5% 239 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Governance Financial Statements Additional Information 37 Management of Capital continued The breakdown of the Banks assets into the carrying amounts based on NBG accounting rules and relevant riskweighted exposures as of 31 December 2017 are given in the tables below In thousands of GEL Carrying Value RW amount Cash cash equivalents Interbank Exposures and Securities 3510760 1275017 Gross loans and accrued interests Repossessed assets 58530 Fixed assets and intangible assets 437878 Other assets 553176 Minus general provision penalty and interest provision 30862 30862
12762614 9079013 Total Offbalance 1919565 Market Risk 28802 Operational Risk 517462 Total Amount 15228443 10753189 For years ended 31 December 2016 and 31 December 2015 under the NBG Basel IIIII requirements the Bank calculated its capital requirements and risk weighted assets separately for Pillar 1.
The NBG provided detailed instructions of Pillar 1 calculations.
The reporting started at the end of 2013.
The composition of the Banks capital calculated in accordance with Basel II Pillar I is as follows In thousands of GEL 2016 2015 Tier 1 Capital 1041270 953403 Tier 2 Capital 380751 245705 Regulatory capital 1422021 1199108 Riskweighted exposures Credit riskweighted exposures 9399140 7005711 Riskweighted exposures for market risk 45689 18651 Riskweighted exposures for operational risk 576628 452089 Total riskweighted exposures 10021457 7476451 Minimum Tier 1 ratio 8.5% 8.5% Tier 1 Capital adequacy ratio 10.4% 12.8% Minimum total capital adequacy ratio 10.5% 10.5% Total Capital adequacy ratio 14.2% 16.0% The breakdown of the Banks assets into the carrying amounts based on NBG accounting rules and relevant riskweighted exposures as of 31 December 2016 and 2015 are given in the tables below In thousands of GEL Carrying Value RW amount Cash cash equivalents Interbank Exposures and Securities 2397259 1086262 Gross loans and accrued interests excluding loans to JSC Bank Constanta 5771369 7149145 Repossessed assets 46441 46441 Fixed assets and intangible assets 328184 273176 Other assets 647261 536747 Minus general provision penalty and interest provision 45534 45534 Total 9144980 9046237 Total Offbalance 978221 352903 Market Risk 45689 45689 Operational Risk 403640 576628 Total Amount 10572530 10021457 240 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 31 DECEMBER 2017 37 Management of Capital continued In thousands of GEL Carrying Value RW amount Cash cash equivalents Interbank Exposures and Securities 1857283 570748 Gross loans and accrued interests excluding loans to JSC Bank Constanta 4442340 5555538 Repossessed assets 44253 44253 Fixed assets and intangible assets 306368 334472 Other assets 179535 219572 Minus general provision penalty and interest provision 36630 36630 Total 6793149 6687953 Total Offbalance 789224 317758 Market Risk 18651 18651 Operational Risk 316462 452089 Total Amount 7917486 7476451 Capital adequacy ratio under Basel Capital Accord 1988 The Group and the Bank are also subject to minimum capital requirements established by covenants stated in loan agreements.
These requirements include capital adequacy levels calculated in accordance with the requirements of the Basel Accord as defined in the International Convergence of Capital Measurement and Capital Standards updated April 1998 and Amendment to the Capital Accord to incorporate market risks updated November 2005 commonly known as Basel I.
The composition of the Groups capital calculated in accordance with Basel Accord is as follows In thousands of GELtel Tier 1 capital Share capital 524807 524778 427061 Retained earnings and disclosed reserves 1254331 983387 725498 Less Goodwill 26892 26892 2726 Noncontrolling interest 4735 4383 7189 Total tier 1 capital 1756981 1485656 1157022 Tier 2 capital Revaluation reserves 64489 59240 58701 General Reserve 109372 88300 59770 Subordinated debt included in tier 2 capital 355944 323087 173652 Total tier 2 capital 529805 470627 292123 Total capital 2286786 1956283 1449145 Credit riskweighted assets including offbalance obligations 8749752 7064035 4781605 Less General Reserve 118492 136721 134373 Market Risk 40803 46484 32605 Total Riskweighted assets 8672063 6973798 4679837 Minimum Tier 1 ratio 4.0% 4.0% 4.0% Tier 1 Capital adequacy ratio 20.3% 21.3% 24.7% Minimum total capital adequacy ratio 8.0% 8.0% 8.0% Total Capital adequacy ratio 26.4% 28.1% 31.0% Following the Basel I guidelines the General Reserve is defined by the management as the minimum among the following a IFRS provisions created on loans without impairment trigger event b 2% of loans without impairment trigger event c 1.25% of total RWA Riskweighted Assets.
241 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Governance Financial Statements Additional Information 37 Management of Capital continued The breakdown of the Groups assets into the carrying amounts and relevant riskweighted exposures as of the end of 2017 2016 2015 are provided in the tables below In thousands of GEL Riskweighted Exposures Carrying Value RW amount Cash and other cash equivalents mandatory cash balances with the NBG due from other banks investment securities available for sale 3609132 Gross loans and accrued interests 8553217 Repossessed assets 116809 116809 Fixed assets and intangible assets 476027 449136 Other assets 409876 409876 Total 13165061 8076134 Total Offbalance 1907457 673618 Less Loan loss provision minus General Reserve 118492 118492 Market Risk 40803 40803 Total Amount 14994829 8672063 In thousands of GEL Risk weighted Exposures Carrying Value RW amount Cash and other cash equivalents mandatory cash balances with the NBG due from other banks investment securities available for sale 2762892 133527 Gross loans and accrued interests 7358725 5609312 Repossessed assets 90873 90873 Fixed assets and intangible assets 401174 374282 Other assets 373118 373118 Total 10986782 6581112 Total Offbalance 1290813 482923 Less Loan loss provision minus General Reserve 136721 136721 Market Risk 46484 46484 Total Amount 12187358 6973798 In thousands of GEL Risk weighted Exposures Carrying Value RW amount Cash and other cash equivalents mandatory cash balances with the NBG due from other banks investment securities available for sale 1882281 103406 Gross loans and accrued interests 4639029 3757464 Repossessed assets 85216 85216 Fixed assets and intangible assets 294837 292111 Other assets 227775 227775 Total 7129138 4465972 Total Offbalance 849295 315633 Less Loan loss provision minus General Reserve 134373 134373 Market Risk 32605 32605 Total Amount 7876665 4679837 38 Contingencies and Commitments Legal proceedings.
When determining the level of provision to be set up with regards to such claims or the amount not subject to provisioning to be disclosed in the financial statements the management seeks both internal and external professional advice.
The management believes that the provision recorded in these financial statements is adequate and the amount not subject to provisioning need not be disclosed as it will not have a material adverse effect on the financial condition or the results of future operations of the Group.
Tax legislation.
Georgian and Azerbaijani tax and customs legislation is subject to varying interpretations and changes which can occur frequently.
The managements interpretation of the legislation as applied to the Groups transactions and activity may be challenged by the relevant authorities.
Fiscal periods remain open to review by the authorities in respect of taxes for five calendar years preceding the review period.
To respond to the risks the Group has engaged external tax specialists to carry out periodic reviews of Groups taxation policies and tax filings.
The Groups management believes that its interpretation of the relevant legislation is appropriate and the Groups tax and customs positions will be sustained.
Accordingly as of 31 December 2017 2016 and 2015 no provision for potential tax liabilities has been recorded.
242 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 31 DECEMBER 2017 38 Contingencies and Commitments continued Operating lease commitments Where the Group is the lessee as of 31 December 2017 the future minimum lease payments under non cancellable operating leases over the next year amounted to GEL 6479 thousand 31 December 2016 5016 thousand 31 December 2015 4891 thousand.
Compliance with covenants The Group is subject to certain covenants primarily related to its borrowings.
Noncompliance with such covenants may result in negative consequences for the Group including growth in the cost of borrowings and declaration of default.
In April 2017 the group had breached one of the covenants with a foreign financial institution lender .
The group has obtained the waiver from the financial institution in June 2017 whereby the breach was retrospectively waived.
As of 31 December 2016 TBC Kredit had breached certain borrowing covenants agreed with foreign financial institution lenders.
The major reason for the breach was the drastic devaluation of Azerbaijani Manat in February and December 2015.
The Group was in compliance with all other covenants as of 31 December 2017 and 31 December 2016.
The Group was in compliance with all covenants as of 31 December 2015.
Credit related commitments and financial guarantees The primary purpose of these instruments is to ensure that funds are available to a customer as required.
Financial guarantees and standby letters of credit which represent the irrevocable assurances that the Group will make payments in the event that a customer cannot meet its obligations to third parties carry the same credit risk as loans.
Documentary and commercial letters of credit that are written undertakings by the Group on behalf of a customer authorising a third party to draw drafts on the Group up to a stipulated amount under specific terms and conditions are collateralised by the underlying shipments of goods to which they relate or cash deposits and therefore carry less risk than a direct borrowing.
Commitments to extend credit represent unused portions of authorisations to prolong credit in the form of loans guarantees or letters of credit.
With respect to credit risk on commitments to extend credit the Group is potentially exposed to a loss in an amount equal to the total unused commitments.
However the likely amount of loss is lower than the total unused commitments since most commitments to extend credit are contingent upon customers maintaining specific credit standards.
The Group monitors the term to maturity of credit related commitments because longerterm commitments generally have a greater degree of credit risk than shorterterm ones.
Performance guarantees Performance guarantees are contracts that provide compensation in case of another party failing to perform a contractual obligation.
Such contracts do not transfer credit risk.
The risk under the performance guarantee contracts is the possibility that the insured event occurs ie the failure to perform the contractual obligation by another party.
The key risks the Group faces are significant fluctuations in the frequency and severity of payments incurred on such contracts relative to expectations.
Outstanding credit related commitments and performance guarantees are as follows In thousands of GELtel Performance guarantees issued 612297 426608 243183 Financial guarantees issued 141963 116260 71999 Undrawn credit lines 728178 449110 247159 Letters of credit issued 106919 154842 96634 Total credit related commitments and performance guarantees before provision 1589357 1146820 658975 Provision for performance guarantees 2067 2635 1472 Provision for credit related commitments and financial guarantees 8239 8049 5589 Total credit related commitments and performance guarantees 1579051 1136136 651914 The total outstanding contractual amount of undrawn credit lines letters of credit and guarantees does not necessarily represent future cash requirements as these financial instruments may expire or terminate without being funded.
Noncancellable commitments as of 31 December 2017 were GEL 389148 thousand 2016 GEL 169831 thousand 2015 GEL 136867 thousand.
Fair value of credit related commitments and financial guarantees were GEL 8239 thousand as of 31 December 2017 2016 GEL 8049 thousand 2015 GEL 5589 thousand.
Total credit related commitments and performance guarantees are denominated in currencies as follows In thousands of GELtel Georgian Laris 618544 409498 259749 US Dollars 734970 545621 319941 Euros 166304 101892 44874 Other 69539 89809 34411 Total 1589357 1146820 658975 Capital expenditure commitments.
As of 31 December 2017 the Group has contractual capital expenditure commitments amounting to GEL 7816 thousand 2016 GEL 5665 thousand 2015 GEL 6771 thousand.
243 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Governance Financial Statements Additional Information 39 NonControlling Interest The following table provides information about each subsidiary with a noncontrolling interest as of 31 December 2017 In thousands of GEL Proportion of non controlling interests voting rights held
Accumulated non controlling interest in the subsidiary Dividends paid to non controlling interest during the year TBC Bank JSC including 1.33% 5518 29255 TBC Leasing JSC 0.39% 14 70 TBC Kredit LLC 25% 275 4165 United Financial Corporation JSC 1.33% 63 500 The summarised financial information of these subsidiaries was as follows as of 31 December 2017 In thousands of GEL
Noncurrent assets
Noncurrent liabilities Revenue Profit Total compre hensive income
TBC Bank JSC 6490075 6447122 8830604 2258231 850450 362429 367678 466249 TBC Leasing JSC 111169 87928 95988 85262 15236 3436 3436 2450 TBC Kredit LLC 19771 20319 11858 20636 5172 1098 1098 3631 United Financial Corporation JSC 6353 5136 1255 45 12708 4733 4733 40 The following table provides information about each subsidiary with a noncontrolling interest as of 31 December 2016 In thousands of GEL Proportion of non controlling interests voting rights held Profit loss attributable to non controlling interest
Dividends paid to non controlling interest during the year TBC Bank JSC including 1.52% 887 28264 TBC Leasing JSC 0.39% 9 56 TBC Kredit LLC 25% 2865 3890 United Financial Corporation JSC 1.34% 50 436 The summarised financial information of these subsidiaries was as follows as of 31 December 2016 In thousands of GEL
Noncurrent assets
Noncurrent liabilities Revenue Profitloss
Cash flows TBC Bank JSC 5492825 5268934 7105314 2084656 679912 302491 303031 224421 TBC Leasing JSC 71484 49140 54930 51283 11566 2316 2316 5425 TBC Kredit LLC 20649 19458 16034 17867 8367 11461 11461 4291 United Financial Corporation JSC 9271 5800 9114 45 11979 3737 3737 1243 244 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 31 DECEMBER 2017 39 NonControlling Interest continued The following table provides information about each subsidiary with noncontrolling interest as of 31 December 2015 In thousands of GEL Proportion of non controlling interests voting rights held
Accumulated non controlling interest in the subsidiary
TBC Leasing JSC 0.43% 8 47 TBC Kredit LLC 25% 250 6756 United Financial Corporation JSC 1.33% 60 386 The summarised financial information of these subsidiaries was as follows as of 31 December 2015 In thousands of GEL
Noncurrent assets
Noncurrent liabilities Revenue Profitloss
Cash flows TBC Leasing JSC 69642 36323 29607 65378 9511 1960 1960 8769 TBC Kredit LLC 41703 36053 57773 1509 15319 1002 1002 7290 United Financial Corporation JSC 5453 6470 675 73 12512 4476 4476 1908 40 Offsetting Financial Assets and Financial Liabilities As of 31 December 2017 financial instruments subject to offsetting enforceable master netting and similar arrangements were as follows In thousands of GEL
Gross amounts set off in the statement of financial position Net amount after offsetting in the statement of financial position Amounts subject to master netting and similar arrangements not set off in the statement of financial position Net amount of exposure
Cash collateral received
Other financial assets Receivables on credit card services and money transfers 29308 2605 26703   26703 TOTAL ASSETS SUBJECT TO OFFSETTING MASTER NETTING AND SIMILAR ARRANGEMENT 29308 2605 26703   26703
Other financial liabilities Payables on credit card services and money transfers 12964 2605 10359   10359 TOTAL LIABILITIES SUBJECT TO OFFSETTING MASTER NETTING AND SIMILAR ARRANGEMENT 12964 2605 10359   10359 245 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Governance Financial Statements Additional Information 40 Offsetting Financial Assets and Financial Liabilities continued As of 31 December 2016 financial instruments subject to offsetting enforceable master netting and similar arrangements were as follows In thousands of GEL
Gross amounts set off in the statement of financial position Net amount after offsetting in the statement of financial position Amounts subject to master netting and similar arrangements not set off in the statement of financial position Net amount of exposure
Cash collateral received
Other financial assets Receivables on credit card services and money transfers 26959 2158 24801   24801 TOTAL ASSETS SUBJECT TO OFFSETTING MASTER NETTING AND SIMILAR ARRANGEMENT 26959 2158 24801   24801
Other financial liabilities Payables on credit card services and money transfers 14563 2158 12405   12405 TOTAL LIABILITIES SUBJECT TO OFFSETTING MASTER NETTING AND SIMILAR ARRANGEMENT 14563 2158 12405   12405 As of 31 December 2015 financial instruments subject to offsetting enforceable master netting and similar arrangements were as follows In thousands of GEL
Gross amounts set off in the statement of financial position Net amount after offsetting in the statement of financial position Amounts subject to master netting and similar arrangements not set off in the statement of financial position Net amount of exposure
Cash collateral received
Cash and cash equivalents Reverse repo 47768  47768 47768 Other financial assets Receivables on credit card services and money transfers 17821 2749 15072   15072 TOTAL ASSETS SUBJECT TO OFFSETTING MASTER NETTING AND SIMILAR ARRANGEMENT 65589 2749 62840 47768  15072
Other financial liabilities Payables on credit card services and money transfers 15300 2749 12551   12551 TOTAL LIABILITIES SUBJECT TO OFFSETTING MASTER NETTING AND SIMILAR ARRANGEMENT 15300 2749 12551   12551 The amount set off in the statement of financial position reported in column b is the lower of i the gross amount before offsetting reported in column a and ii the amount of the related instrument that is eligible for offsetting.
Similarly the amounts in columns d and e are limited to the exposure reported in column c for each individual instrument in order not to understate the ultimate net exposure.
Deposits placed with other banks and deposits received from other banks as part of gross settled currency swap arrangements have been nettedoff in these financial statements and the instrument has been presented as either asset or liability at a fair value.
The disclosure does not apply to loans and advances to customers and related customer deposits unless they are nettedoff in the statement of financial position.
246 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 31 DECEMBER 2017 41 Derivative Financial Instruments In the normal course of business the Group enters into various derivative financial instruments to manage currency liquidity and interest rate risks and for trading purposes.
In thousands of GELtel Fair value of gross settled currency swaps included in other financial assets or due from banks 1767 508 605 Fair value of foreign exchange forwards and gross settled currency swaps included in other financial liabilities 909 320 108 Fair value of Interest rate swaps included in other financial liabilities 267 1055 2303 Total 591 867 1806 Foreign Exchange Forwards and gross settled currency swaps.
Foreign exchange derivative financial instruments the Group entered are generally traded in an overthecounter market with professional counterparties on standardised contractual terms and conditions.
Derivatives have potentially favourable assets or unfavourable liabilities conditions as a result of fluctuations in market interest rates foreign exchange rates or other variables relative to their terms.
The aggregate fair values of derivative financial assets and liabilities can fluctuate significantly from time to time.
The table below sets out fair values at the balance sheet date of currencies receivable or payable under foreign exchange forwards contracts and gross settled currency swaps the Group entered.
The table reflects gross positions before the netting of any counterparty positions and payments and covers the contracts with settlement dates after the respective balance sheet date.
The contracts are short term by their nature.
In thousands of GELtel
Contracts with negative fair value
Contracts with negative fair value
Contracts with negative fair value Foreign exchange forwards and gross settled currency swaps fair values at the balance sheet date of USD payable on settlement   166326  13125  85754 USD receivable on settlement  12877 4220  13821 GEL payable on settlement   1360  1604  10427 GEL receivable on settlement  165881 10998  13857 EUR payable on settlement   9315  3214  1309 EUR receivable on settlement 3201  34024 Other payable on settlement   2247  2150  1963 Other receivable on settlement  1348 1862  38248 Fair value of foreign exchange forwards and gross settled currency swaps 180106 179248 20281 20093 99950 99453 Net fair value of foreign exchange forwards and gross settled currency Interest rate swaps.
In March 2010 TBC Bank entered into an interest rate swap agreement to hedge floating interest rate on its subordinated debt.
The hedge covers the payment of floating rate interest payments with the notional principal of USD 44000 thousand.
The swap expires in November 2018.
At the reporting date the fair value of interest rate swaps was estimated to be negative GEL 267 thousand 2016 negative GEL 1055 thousand 2015 negative GEL 2303 thousand.
Information on related party balances is disclosed in Note 44.
247 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Governance Financial Statements Additional Information 42 Fair Value Disclosures a Recurring fair value measurements Recurring fair value measurements are those that the accounting standards require or permit in the statement of financial position at the end of each reporting period.
The level in the fair value hierarchy into which the recurring fair value measurements are categorised as follows 31 December 2017 31 December 2016 31 December 2015 In thousands of GEL Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total ASSETS AT FAIR VALUE FINANCIAL ASSETS Investment securities available for sale Government notes      1016  1016  998  998 Certificates of Deposits of National Bank of Georgia  7728  7728  36002  36002  84849  84849 Corporate bonds  328761  328761  150073  150073  174916  174916 Ministry of Finance Treasury Bills  319745  319745  241810  241810  33445  33445 Corporate shares Visa Inc         9335   9335 Foreign exchange forwards and gross settled currency swaps included in other financial assets or due from banks  1767  1767  508  508  604  604 NONFINANCIAL ASSETS Premises and leasehold improvements   283905 283905   229549 229549   175184 175184 TOTAL ASSETS RECURRING FAIR VALUE
658001 283905 941906  429409 229549 658958 9335 294812 175184 479331 LIABILITIES CARRIED AT FAIR VALUE FINANCIAL LIABILITIES Interest rate swaps included in other financial liabilities  267  267  1055  1055  2303  2303 Foreign exchange forwards and gross settled currency swaps included in other financial liabilities  909  909  320  320  108  108 TOTAL LIABILITIES RECURRING FAIR VALUE
1176  1176  1375  1375  2411  2411 There were no transfers between levels 1 and 2 during the year ended 31 December 2017 2016 none 2015 none.
248 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 31 DECEMBER 2017 42 Fair Value Disclosures continued The description of the valuation technique and the description of inputs used in the fair value measurement for level 2 measurements Fair value at 31 December Valuation technique Inputs used In thousands of GELtel ASSETS AT FAIR VALUE FINANCIAL ASSETS Certificates of Deposits of NBG Ministry of Finance Treasury Bills Government notes Corporate bonds 656234 428901 294208 Discounted cash flows
Government bonds yield curve Foreign exchange forwards and gross settled currency swaps included in due from banks 1767 508 604 Forward pricing using present value calculations Official exchange rate riskfree rate TOTAL ASSETS RECURRING FAIR VALUE MEASUREMENTS 658001 429409 294812 LIABILITIES CARRIED AT FAIR VALUE FINANCIAL LIABILITIES Other financial liabilities Interest rate swaps included in other financial liabilities 267 1055 2303 Swap model using present value calculations Observable yield curves Foreign exchange forwards included in other financial liabilities 909 320 108 Forward pricing using present value calculations Official exchange rate riskfree rate TOTAL RECURRING FAIR VALUE MEASUREMENTS AT LEVEL 2 1176 1375 2411 There were no changes in the valuation technique for the level 2 and level 3 recurring fair value measurements during the year ended 31 December 2017 2016 none 2015 none.
For details of the techniques and inputs used for Level 3 recurring fair value measurement of as well as reconciliation of movements in premises refer to Note 15.
The unobservable input to which the fair value estimate for premises is most sensitive is price per square metre the higher the price per square metre the higher the fair value.
249 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Governance Financial Statements Additional Information 42 Fair Value Disclosures continued b Assets and liabilities not measured at fair value but for which fair value is disclosed Fair values analysed by level in the fair value hierarchy and carrying value of assets not measured at fair value are as follows 31 December 2017 31 December 2016 31 December 2015 In thousands of GEL Level 1 Level 2 Level 3
Value Level 1 Level 2 Level 3
Value Level 1 Level 2 Level 3
Value
FINANCIAL ASSETS Cash and cash equivalents 1431477   1431477 945180   945180 720347   720347 Due from other banks  39643  39643  24725  24725 11042   11042 Mandatory cash balances with the NBG  1033818  1033818  990642  990642  471490  471490 Loans and advances to customers Corporate loans   3292352 2425766   2085249 1972129   1504360 1392054 Consumer loans   2125733 2041887   1877490 1798412   1167551 1117574 Mortgage loans   2058468 2052151   1840981 1784832   906240 Loans to micro small and medium enterprises   1891528 1805549   1606448 1578329   1054395 1043119 Bonds carried at amortised cost  458950  449538  377749  372956  350167  372092 Investments in leases   145877 143836   95907 95031   80018 75760 Other financial assets 144377 144377   94119 94119   63713 63713
ASSETS
Investment properties at cost   85012 79232   123852 95615   105972 57600 TOTAL ASSETS 1431477 1532411 9743347 11647274 945180 1393116 7724046 9751970 731389 821657 4882249 6216930
LIABILITIES
Due to credit institutions  2626155  2620714  2197016  2197577  1113666  1113574 Customer accounts  4992099 2937349 7816817  4002659 2463392 6454949  2372794 1812575 4177931 Debt securities in issue  20695  20695  23508  23508  21714  21714 Other financial liabilities 49623  49623  37024  37024 Subordinated debt  425809  426788  369320  368381  284985  283648 TOTAL LIABILITIES  8155335 2937349 10975591 6642126 2463392 9094038  3830183 1812575 5633891 The fair values in the level 2 and level 3 of fair value hierarchy were estimated using the discounted cash flows valuation technique.
The fair value of unquoted fixed interest rate instruments was calculated based on estimated future cash flows expected to be received discounted at current interest rates for new instruments with similar credit risk and remaining maturity.
The fair value of investment properties was estimated using market comparatives refer to Note 3.
Amounts due to credit institutions were discounted at the Groups own incremental borrowing rate.
Liabilities due on demand were discounted from the first date that the Group could be required to pay the amount.
There were no changes in the valuation technique for the level 2 and level 3 measurements of assets and liabilities not measured at fair values in the year ended 31 December 2017 2016 none 2015 none.
250 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 31 DECEMBER 2017 43 Presentation of Financial Instruments by Measurement Category For the measurement purposes IAS 39 Financial Instruments Recognition of Measurement classifies financial assets into the following categories a loans and receivables b available for sale financial assets c financial assets held to maturity and d financial assets at fair value through profit or loss FVTPL .
Financial assets at fair value through profit or loss have two subcategories i assets designated as such upon initial recognition and ii those classified as held for trading.
In addition finance lease receivables form a separate category.
The following table provides a reconciliation of classes of financial assets with these measurement categories as of 31 December 2017 In thousands of GEL Loans and receivables Available for sale assets Finance lease receivables Assets held for trading Total
Cash and cash equivalents 1431477    1431477 Due from other banks 39643    39643 Mandatory cash balances with the National Bank of Georgia 1033818    1033818 Loans and advances to customers 8325353    8325353 Investment securities available for sale  657938   657938 Bonds carried at amortised cost 449538    449538 Investments in leases   143836  143836 Other financial assets Other financial receivables 144377   1767 146144 TOTAL FINANCIAL ASSETS 11424206 657938 143836 1767 12227747 NONFINANCIAL ASSETS     738163 TOTAL ASSETS     12965910 The following table provides a reconciliation of classes of financial assets with these measurement categories as of 31 December 2016 In thousands of GEL Loans and receivables Available for sale assets Finance lease receivables Assets held for trading Total
Cash and cash equivalents 945180    945180 Due from other banks 24725    24725 Mandatory cash balances with the National Bank of Georgia 990642    990642 Loans and advances to customers 7133702    7133702 Investment securities available for sale  430703   430703 Bonds carried at amortised cost 372956    372956 Investments in leases   95031  95031 Other financial assets Other financial receivables 94119   508 94627 TOTAL FINANCIAL ASSETS 9561324 430703 95031 508 10087566 NONFINANCIAL ASSETS     681466 TOTAL ASSETS     10769032 251 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Governance Financial Statements Additional Information 43 Presentation of Financial Instruments by Measurement Category continued The following table provides a reconciliation of classes of financial assets with these measurement categories as of 31 December 2015 In thousands of GEL Loans and receivables Available for sale assets Finance lease receivables Assets held for trading Total
Cash and cash equivalents 720347    720347 Due from other banks 11042    11042 Mandatory cash balances with the National Bank of Georgia 471490    471490 Loans and advances to customers 4444886    4444886 Investment securities available for sale  307310   307310 Bonds carried at amortised cost 372092    372092 Investments in leases   75760  75760 Other financial assets Other financial receivables 63712   605 64317 TOTAL FINANCIAL ASSETS 6083569 307310 75760 605 6467244 NONFINANCIAL ASSETS     467751 TOTAL ASSETS     6934995 As of 31 December 2017 2016 and 2015 all of the Groups financial liabilities except for derivatives are carried at amortised cost.
Derivatives belong to the assets held for trading measurement category.
44 Related Party Transactions Pursuant to IAS 24 Related Party Disclosures parties are generally considered to be related if the parties are under common control or one party has the ability to control the other or it can exercise significant influence over the other party in taking financial or operational decisions.
In considering each possible related party relationship attention is directed to the substance of the relationship not merely the legal form.
Parties with more than 10% of ownership stake in the TBCG or with representatives in the Board of Directors are considered as Significant Shareholders.
The key management personnel include members of TBCGs Board of Directors the Management Board of the Bank and their close family members.
Transactions between TBC Bank Group PLC and its subsidiaries also meet the definition of related party transactions.
Where these are eliminated on consolidation they are not disclosed in the Group Financial Statements.
As of 31 December 2017 the Groups outstanding balances with related parties were as follows In thousands of GEL
Key management personnel Gross amount of loans and advances to customers contractual interest rate 0.436% 154 Impairment provisions for loans and advances to customers  11 Customer accounts contractual interest rate 011.8 % 40100 11190 Guarantees 9901 Provision on guarantees The Groups income and expense items with related parties except from key management compensation for the year 2017 were as follows In thousands of GEL
Key management personnel Interest income  loans and advances to customers 20 Interest income  available securities for sale 747 Interest expense 928 449 Gains less losses from trading in foreign currencies 108 56 Foreign exchange translation gains less losses 46 36 Fee and commission income 122 Fee and commission expense 104 Administrative and other operating expenses excluding staff costs 58 239 Net loss on derivative financial instruments 46  252 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 31 DECEMBER 2017 44 Related Party Transactions continued The aggregate loan amounts advanced to and repaid by related parties during 2017 were as follows In thousands of GEL
Key management personnel Amounts advanced to related parties during the year Amounts repaid by related parties during the year 1293 3920 During the year 2017 13 related parties were removed from the insider list.
If they had remained in the list guarantees with related parties as of 31 December 2017 would have been GEL 1139 thousand higher net assets with related parties as of 31 December 2017 would have been GEL 214767 thousand lower.
As of 31 December 2017 transactions and balances of TBC Bank Group PLC with JSC TBC Bank were as follows In thousands of GEL Balance as of 31 December Gross amount of loans and advances granted to subsidiary 24000 Customer accounts placed in subsidiary 11564 Placement of cash in subsidiary 57 Investment in subsidiary 1422462 Included in Investments in subsidiary in Separate Statement of Financial Position GEL 7023 thousand relates to investment in JSC TBC Insurance.
The income and expense items for TBC Bank Group PLC with JSC TBC Bank except from key management compensation for the year 2017 were as follows In thousands of GEL 2017 Interest income 1807 Fee and commission expense 9 Dividend income 90552 As of 31 December 2016 the Groups outstanding balances with related parties were as follows In thousands of GEL Note
Key management personnel Gross amount of loans and advances to customers contractual interest rate 6.320% 900 7612 Impairment provisions for loans and advances to customers 2 26 Derivative financial liability 41 1055 Due to credit institutions contractual interest rate 5.79.7% 257403 Customer accounts contractual interest rate 013.5% 38982 14548 Guarantees 28509 Provision on guarantees 192 The Groups income and expense items with related parties except from key management compensation for the year 2016 were as follows In thousands of GEL Note
Key management personnel Interest income 161 399 Interest expense 17435 503 Gains less losses from trading in foreign currencies 115 18 Foreign exchange translation gains less losses 170 465 Fee and commission income 69 13 Fee and commission expense 580 Administrative and other operating expenses excluding staff costs 1 155 Net loss on derivative financial instruments 41 206  253 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Governance Financial Statements Additional Information 44 Related Party Transactions continued The aggregate loan amounts advanced to and repaid by related parties during 2016 were as follows In thousands of GEL
Key management personnel Amounts advanced to related parties during the year 3713 10568 Amounts repaid by related parties during the year 5994 5722 As of 31 December 2016 transactions and balances of TBC Bank Group PLC with JSC TBC Bank were as follows In thousands of GEL Balance as of 31 December Gross amount of loans and advances granted to subsidiary 2000 Customer accounts placed in subsidiary 2320 Placement of cash in subsidiary 399 Investment in subsidiary 1417043 Included in Investments in subsidiary in Separate Statement of Financial Position GEL 7023 thousand relates to investment in JSC TBC Insurance.
The income and expense items for TBC Bank Group PLC with JSC TBC Bank except from key management compensation for the year 2016 were as follows In thousands of GEL 2016 Interest income 1149 Interest expense 32 Fee and commission expense 1 As of 31 December 2015 the Groups outstanding balances with related parties were as follows In thousands of GEL Note
Key management personnel Gross amount of loans and advances to customers contractual interest rate 7.320% 3179 1963 Impairment provisions for loans and advances to customers 45 7 Derivative financial liability 41 2303 Due to credit institutions contractual interest rate 5.211.3% 63810 Customer accounts contractual interest rate 07.5% 8924 10253 Subordinated debt contractual interest rate 12.6% 132530 The Groups income and expense items with related parties except from key management compensation for the year 2015 were as follows In thousands of GEL Note
Key management personnel Interest income 438 139 Interest expense 20747 537 Gains less losses from trading in foreign currencies 139 40 Foreign exchange translation gains less losses 1160 28 Fee and commission income 12 16 Fee and commission expense 726 Administrative and other operating expenses excluding staff costs 48 288 Net loss on derivative financial instruments 41 575  254 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 31 DECEMBER 2017 44 Related Party Transactions continued As of 31 December 2015 other rights and obligations with related parties were as follows In thousands of GEL
Key management personnel Amounts advanced to related parties during the year 1684 2972 Amounts repaid by related parties during the year 5486 2492 The compensation of the TBCG Board of Directors and the Banks Management Board is presented below In thousands of GELtel
Accrued liability Expense
Accrued liability Salaries and bonuses 13339  12323  9939 867 Cash settled bonuses related to sharebased compensation 3905 9772 7336 10715 4748 5254 Equitysettled sharebased compensation 8469  9923  6864 Total 25713 9772 29582 10715 21551 6121 Included in salaries and bonuses for 2017 GEL 2326 thousand 2016 GEL 619 thousand relates to compensation for directors of TBCG paid by TBC Bank Group PLC.
Endnotes
A full list of related undertakings and the country of incorporation is set out below.
Company Name Country of incorporation JSC TBC Bank 7 Marjanishvili Street 0102 Tbilisi Georgia United Financial Corporation JSC 154 Agmashenebeli Avenue 0112 Tbilisi Georgia TBC Capital LLC 11 Chavchavadze Avenue 0179 Tbilisi Georgia TBC Leasing JSC 8 Bulachauri Street 0160 Tbilisi Georgia TBC Kredit LLC 7177 28 May Street AZ1010 Baku Azerbaijan Banking System Service Company LLC 7 Marjanishvili Street 0102 Tbilisi Georgia TBC Pay LLC 7 Marjanishvili Street 0102 Tbilisi Georgia Real Estate Management Fund JSC 7 Marjanishvili Street 0102 Tbilisi Georgia TBC Invest LLC 7 Jabonitsky street  52520 Tel Aviv Israel Mali LLC 23 Chkheidze Street 0102 Tbilisi Georgia JSC TBC Insurance 24B Al.
Kazbegi Avenue 0160 Tbilisi Georgia UFC International Ltd HARNEYS FIDUCIARY Craigmuir ChambersPO Box 71 Road TownTortola VG1110 British Virgin Islands TBC Capital B.
202 Oudegracht 1811 CR Alkmaar Netherlands TBC Invest International Ltd 7 Marjanishvili Street 0102 Tbilisi Georgia University Development Fund 1 Chavchavadze Avenue 0128  Tbilisi Georgia Ltd Georgian Mill Company 2 Abashidze street 0179 Tbilisi Georgia JSC CreditInfo Georgia 2 Tarkhnishvili street 0179 Tbilisi Georgia LLC Online Tickets 3 Irakli Abashidze street 0179 Tbilisi Georgia 255 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report
Strategic Report Strategy and Performance Governance Additional Information Financial Statements SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION Annual general meeting The Companys next Annual General Meeting is scheduled for 21 May 2018 in London.
The Notice of Annual General Meeting will be circulated to all the shareholders at least 21 working days before the Annual General Meeting and it will also be made available on our website site The voting on the resolutions will be announced via the Regulatory News Service and made available on our IR website site Reports and communications We issue regulatory announcements through the Regulatory News Service RNS.
Our regulatory announcements are also available at our website site in the regulatory news section.
Dividends
The Board intends to recommend 25% of the Companys profit for the financial year to be distributed to the Companys shareholders as a dividend which represents GEL 1.64 per share payable in British Pounds Sterling at an official exchange rate of the National Bank of Georgia for 24 May 2018.
If approved the final dividend will be paid on 22 June 2018 to shareholders on the Register of Members at the close of business in the UK ie 6pm London time on 18 May 2018.
Exdividend date 17 May 2018 Record date 18 May 2018 Currency conversion date 24 May 2018 Payment date 22 June 2018 Share price information Our latest and historical share prices are available through our website site Shareholder inquires TBC Bank Groups share register is maintained by Equiniti.
If you have any questions about your TBC Bank Groups shares please contact Equiniti.
Shareholder helpline UK callerstel International callers 44tel Aspect House Spencer Road
West Sussex BN99 6DA United Kingdom Our registered address TBC Bank Group PLC 6 St.
Andrews Street London EC4A 3AE United Kingdom
Our annual report financial results and investor presentations as well as other significant information are available through our website site 256 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Bank Joint Stock Company TBC Bank Bankassurance An arrangement in which a bank and an insurance company form a partnership so that the insurance company can sell its products to the banks client base Bank Constanta Joint Stock Company Bank Constanta Bank Republic Joint Stock Company Bank Republic Board Board of Directors of TBC Bank Group PLC Chairman Chairman of Board of Directors of the
Chief Executive Officer or CEO Chief Executive Officer of TBC Bank Group
Chief Financial Officer or CFO Chief Financial Officer of TBC Bank Group PLC Code The UK Corporate Governance Code Company TBC Bank Group PLC Corporate segment Legal entities with an annual revenue of GEL 8.0 million or more or who have been granted a loan in an amount equivalent to US 1.5 million or more.
Some other business customers may also be assigned to this segment or transferred to the MSME segment on a discretionary basis.
Business customers are legal entities who have been granted a loan for a business purpose Corporate Centre Comprise the treasury other support and back office functions and nonbanking subsidiaries of the Group Deputy Chairman Deputy chairman of Board of Directors of the
Directors Members of the Board of TBC Bank Group
Group The UKincorporated parent company of Joint Stock Company TBC Bank the Bank and its subsidiaries Internet banking penetration ratio Number of active internet banking users divided by total number of active retail customers Management Board Management Board of Joint Stock Company TBC Bank Mobile banking penetration ratio Number of active mobile banking users divided by total number of active retail clients Offloading ratio Number of transactions conducted in remote channels divided by total number of transactions based on JSC TBC Bank standalone data MSME Micro Small and Medium segment All business customers who are not included in either Corporate and Retail segments or legal entities who have been granted a pawn shop loan.
Business customers are legal entities who have been granted a loan for a business purpose Product per customer ratio Number of active products divided by number of active customers Retail segment All nonbusiness individual customers or individual business customers who have been granted a loan in an amount equivalent below US 8.0 thousand.
All individual customers are included in retail deposits.
Business customers are individuals who have been granted a loan for a business purpose Supervisory Board Supervisory Board of Joint Stock Company TBC Bank TBC Bank The UKincorporated parent company of Joint Stock Company TBC Bank the Bank and its subsidiaries TBC Status clients Clients with minimum monthly income of GEL 3000 or a loan of GEL 30000 or more or deposit of GEL 30000 or more TBC Bank Group PLC The UKincorporated parent company of Joint Stock Company TBC Bank the Bank TBCG TBC Bank Group PLC except for Remuneration Report where it means TBC Bank Group PLC and JSC TBC Bank together TBC Insurance Joint Stock Company TBC Insurance formerly Joint Stock Company Insurance Company
TBC JSC Joint Stock Company TBC Bank TBC PLC TBC Bank Group PLC VIP Clients with a minimum deposit of US 100000 as well as on a discretionary basis Wealth management for nonresident clients Nonresident clients with a minimum deposit of US 100000 as well as on a discretionary basis 257 TBC Bank Annual Report and Accounts 2017
ACCA Association of Chartered Certified
FDI Foreign direct investment NIM Net interest margin AFS Available for sale FTSE Financial Times Stock Exchange NPL Nonperforming loans ALCO Assetliability management committee FVOCI Fair value through other comprehensive income NPS Net promoter score ATM Automated teller machine FVPL Fair value through profit or loss OCI Other comprehensive income BNY Bank of New York GBP Great British pound national currency of the UK OECD Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development CAGR Compounded annual growth rate GDP Gross domestic product PLC Public limited company CAR Capital adequacy ratio GDR Global depositary receipt POS Point of sale EE Central and Eastern Europe GEL Georgian lari national currency of Georgia PPP Purchasing power parity CEO Chief executive officer GHG Greenhouse gas PWC PricewaterhouseCoopers CIS The Commonwealth of Independent
HR Human resources ROA Return on average assets CFA Chartered Financial Analyst HNWI Highnetworth individuals ROE Return on average equity CFO Chief financial officer IAS International Accounting Standards SME Small and mediumsized enterprises CGU Cash generating unit IASB International Accounting Standards Board SPPI Solely payments of principal and interest SAT Customer satisfaction IDR Issuer default rating STEM Science technology engineering and mathematics CIB Corporate investment banking IFI International financial institution UK United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland CoR Cost of risk IFRIC International Financial Reporting Interpretations Committee USD The US dollar national currency of the United States CRM Customer relationship management IFRS International Financial Reporting
VIP Very important person CRO Chief risk officer IMF International Monetary Fund VAR Valueatrisk CSR Corporate social responsibility IPCC Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
WB World Bank CVP Cost volume profit IPO Initial public offering WRI World Resources Institute DCF Discounted cash flows IT Information technology ECL Expected credit losses JSC Joint stock company EECG Energy Efficiency Centre Georgia KPI Key performance indicators EMEA Europe Middle East and Africa LED Lightemitting diode ENPS Employee Net Promoter Score LSE London Stock Exchange EPS Earnings per share MBA Master of Business Administration ERM Enterprise risk management MBO Managementbyobjectives ESRM Environmental and social risk management MSME Micro small and mediumsized enterprises EU European Union NBG National Bank of Georgia EUR Euro NCI Noncontrolling interest TBC Bank Group PLC 6 St.
