Annual Report 2017 Who we are 01 Our business at a glance 02 Our key products and services 04 Group financial highlights 06 Operational and strategic highlights 08 Chairmans letter 10 Chief Executives review 13 Group strategic framework 18 Our markets 19 How our business works 22 Our people 24 Our technology 26 Group financial review 28 Segmental review 35 Electronic Systems 36 Cyber and Intelligence 40 Platforms and Services US 44 Platforms and Services UK 48 Platforms and Services International 52 Representation of 2017 results 56 Guidance for 2018 57 Segmental looking forward 58 Corporate responsibility 60 How we manage risk 66 Our principal risks 68 Directors report Chairmans governance letter 72 Governance highlights 73 Directors duties 74 Board governance 76 Board of directors 78 Board information 80 Governance disclosures 81 Audit Committee report 82 Corporate Responsibility Committee report 87 Nominations Committee report 90 Remuneration Committee report 91 Annual remuneration report at a glance 96 Annual remuneration report 97 Preface to the Directors remuneration policy 116 Directors remuneration policy 117 Statutory and other information 130 Independent Auditors report 136 Group accounts Preparation 142 Consolidated income statement 144 Consolidated statement of comprehensive income 145 Consolidated statement of changes in equity 145 Consolidated balance sheet 146 Consolidated cash flow statement 147 Notes to the Group accounts 148 Company accounts Company statement of comprehensive income 202 Company statement of changes in equity 202 Company balance sheet 203 Notes to the Company accounts 204 Cautionary statement All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this document including without limitation those regarding the financial condition results operations and businesses of BAE Systems and its strategy plans and objectives and the markets and economies in which it operates are forwardlooking statements.
Such forwardlooking statements which reflect managements assumptions made on the basis of information available to it at this time involve known and unknown risks uncertainties and other important factors which could cause the actual results performance or achievements of BAE Systems or the markets and economies in which BAE Systems operates to be materially different from future results performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forwardlooking statements.
BAE Systems plc and its directors accept no liability to third parties in respect of this report save as would arise under English law.
Accordingly any liability to a person who has demonstrated reliance on any untrue or misleading statement or omission shall be determined in accordance with Schedule 10A of the Financial Services and Markets Act 2000.
It should be noted that Schedule 10A and Section 463 of the Companies Act 2006 contain limits on the liability of the directors of BAE Systems plc so that their liability is solely to BAE Systems plc.
Welcome to the BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 We search for new ways to provide our customers with a competitive edge across the air maritime land and cyber domains.
We employ a skilled workforce of 83200 people in over 40 countries and work closely with local partners to support economic development by transferring knowledge skills and technology.
2017 sales by domain
5 5%
2 5%
15 %
5% Including share of equity accounted investments.
Revenue plus the Groups share of revenue of equity accounted investments.
At BAE Systems our advanced defence technology protects people and national security and keeps critical information and infrastructure secure.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Who we are Air Manufacture development upgrade and inservice support of Typhoon combat aircraft Workshare partner for the design and manufacture of major subassemblies and systems and provision of support for F35 Lightning II combat aircraft Design manufacture and support of electronics equipment for military aircraft Inservice support of Tornado combat aircraft Design manufacture and support of avionics equipment for commercial aircraft Design and manufacture of missiles and missile systems through a 37.5% interest in MBDA Manufacture development upgrade and inservice support of Hawk trainer aircraft Development of nextgeneration unmanned air systems and defence information systems A Typhoon 26% B F35 Lightning II 10% C Defence electronics 20% D Tornado 12% E Commercial avionics 11% F Weapon systems 9% G Hawk 6% H Other 6% 55%
Design and manufacture of submarines Design and manufacture of complex warships Provision of ship repair and modernisation services in the US Provision of inservice support to surface ships and facilities management in the UK Design and manufacture of naval gun systems torpedoes radars and naval command and combat systems A Submarines 30% B Complex warships 18% C US ship repair 17% D UK naval support 11% E Weapon systems 9% F Other 15% 25%
A D  Design manufacture upgrade and support of tracked and amphibious combat vehicles Manufacture of ammunition and precision munitions for US UK and other armed forces Design and manufacture of electric and hybrid electric drive systems Design and manufacture of artillery systems and missile launchers for US UK and other armed forces A Combat vehicles 40% B Munitions 24% C Commercial 9% D Weapon systems other 27% 15%
C A  Supply of cyber intelligence and security capabilities to US government agencies Supply of cyber intelligence and security capabilities to UK and other government agencies Supply of defencegrade cyber solutions for the commercial market A US government 50% B UK and other governments 21% C Commercial 29% 5%
BAE Systems has strong established positions in the air maritime and land domains as well as a growing position in cyber security.
Our key products and services BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Our business at a glance A US 39% B UK 21% C Saudi Arabia 16% D Australia 3% E Other international markets 21% A Military and technical services and support 45% B Platforms 32% C Electronic systems 18% D Cyber 5% A Electronic Systems 18% B Cyber and Intelligence 9% C Platforms and Services US 15% D Platforms and Services UK 38% E Platforms and Services International 20%
BAE Systems has a diverse portfolio broadly balanced between an enduring services and support business longterm platform and product programmes electronic systems and activities in cyber and intelligence.
Sales by destination BAE Systems has leading positions in its principal markets  the US UK the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and Australia as well as established positions in a number of other international markets.
Employees by location
BAE Systems reports its performance through five principal reporting segments A A
Our
Segmental review
2017 sales
2 9 revenue
Employees
Other
Australia
Saudi Arabia Revenue plus the Groups share of revenue of equity accounted investments.
Effective 1 January 2018 BAE Systems revised its reporting segments to reflect the organisational changes described on page 17.
See page 56 for more information.
Includes 0.9bn 4% of sales generated under the Typhoon workshare agreement with Eurofighter Jagdflugzeug GmbH.
Including share of equity accounted investments.
Group financial review BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Provision of support to operational capability.
We provide maintenance support and training for Typhoon aircraft in service with the UK and Saudi Arabian air forces.
Under the Saudi British Defence Cooperation Programme we have contracts to provide manpower logistics and training training aircraft including Hawk and upgrades to Tornado aircraft in Saudi Arabia.
We provide support for Hawk aircraft in service in 14 countries and will provide sustainment services for the F35 Lightning II aircraft in the Europe and Pacific regions.
Design manufacture and support of avionics equipment across multiple commercial aircraft platforms including engine and flight controls and cabin and cockpit systems together with aftermarket support services.
BAE Systems is a leading supplier of engine controls for GE and is a major supplier of flight control electronics for Boeing and other aircraft platforms.
Design manufacture and support of avionics equipment across a range of US and other western military aircraft programmes including a leadership position in the electronic warfare market.
Air support and training
Commercial avionics equipment Manufacture of major Typhoon assemblies for European partner nations and other export customers.
Aircraft assembly for the Royal Air Force Royal Saudi Air Force and Royal Air Force of Oman.
Expansion of the capabilities of the aircraft.
Design and manufacture of subassemblies in the UK including the aft fuselage and empennage.
Provision of equipment in the US including the electronic warfare suite.
BAE Systems has a significant workshare on the worlds largest defence programme.
Development of future air system capabilities including a joint unmanned combat air system programme with France.
T yphoon manufacture and capability development F35 Lightning II design and manufacture Unmanned and future air system capabilities BAE Systems has strong established positions supplying defence equipment electronics and services as well as cyber intelligence and security solutions for governments.
We also have a growing position in adjacent commercial markets including avionics and cyber security.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Our key products and services Products and services include upgrade of US Army tracked vehicles including Bradley Fighting Vehicles design and manufacture of the US Armys M109 selfpropelled howitzer and Armored MultiPurpose Vehicle as well as amphibious vehicles for the US Marine Corps and international customers design manufacture and support of the CV90 and BvS10 combat vehicles for international customers and vehicle upgrade and support to the British Army.
Design and manufacture of naval gun systems munitions torpedoes radars naval command and combat systems artillery systems missile launchers and through a 37.5% interest in MBDA missiles and missile systems.
BAE Systems also manages complex ammunition plant operations for the US Army to produce insensitive munitions and propellant grains.
Delivery of a broad range of services to enable the US military and government to recognise manage and defeat threats.
Support to UK and other government agencies in their intelligence missions.
Provision of defencegrade solutions for commercial cyber applications.
Weapon systems and munitions
Cyber security Design and manufacture of two 65000tonne aircraft carriers five Offshore Patrol Vessels and Type 26 frigates for the Royal Navy.
Design and manufacture of seven Astute Class nuclearpowered attack submarines for the Royal Navy.
The first three Astute Class submarines are in operational service with the Royal Navy with the remaining four boats in build.
The final boat is expected to enter service in the middle of the next decade.
Design and manufacture of four Dreadnought Class nuclearpowered submarines to carry the UKs Trident ballistic missiles.
Manufacture of the first Dreadnought Class boat Dreadnought commenced in 2016.
Provision of naval and commercial ship repair and modernisation services in the US and UK together with support to the navies of the US UK and Australia.
In the US BAE Systems has facilities located on the east west and Gulf coasts as well as Hawaii and has invested in new dry dock facilities at its San Diego shipyard to support the US Navys increased focus on AsiaPacific operations.
Complex warships Submarines Ship repair and naval support BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Financial performance measures as defined by the Group Sales increased by 0.6bn to 19.6bn largely reflecting currency translation.
Underlying EBITA increased to 2034m a 4% increase on a constant currency basis Underlying earnings per share increased by 8% to 43.5p.
Operating business cash flow increased by 748m to 1752m.
Net debt reduced by 790m compared with 31 December 2016.
Order intake of 20.3bn.
Order backlog of 41.2bn was unchanged on a constant currency basis
KPI
2016 19020m Definition Revenue plus the Groups share of revenue of equity accounted investments.
Purpose Allows management to monitor the sales performance of subsidiaries and equity accounted investments.
Net debt
KPI
2016 1542m Definition Cash and cash equivalents less loans and overdrafts including debtrelated derivative financial instruments.
Purpose Allows management to monitor the indebtedness of the Group.
Order backlog 4 1 .2b n 2016 42.0bn Definition Funded and unfunded unexecuted customer orders including the Groups share of order backlog of equity accounted investments.
Unfunded orders include the elements of US multiyear contracts for which funding has not been authorised by the customer.
Purpose Supports future years sales performance of subsidiaries and equity accounted investments.
Order intake
KPI
2 0257 m 2016 22443m Definition Funded orders received from customers including the Groups share of order intake of equity accounted investments.
Purpose Allows management to monitor the order intake of subsidiaries and equity accounted investments.
Underlying EBITA
2016 1905m Definition Operating profit excluding amortisation and impairment of intangible assets finance costs and taxation expense of equity accounted investments EBITA and nonrecurring items Purpose Provides a measure of operating profitability that is comparable over time.
Underlying earnings per share
KPI
5 p 2016 40.3p Definition Basic earnings per share excluding amortisation and impairment of intangible assets noncash finance movements on pensions and financial derivatives nonrecurring items and in 2017 a credit in respect of US tax reform enacted in December 2017.
Purpose Provides a measure of underlying performance that is comparable over time.
Operating business cash flow
2016 1004m Definition Net cash flow from operating activities excluding taxation and including net capital expenditure financial investment and dividends from equity accounted investments.
Purpose Allows management to monitor the operational cash generation of the Group.
KPI
References to Key Performance Indicators KPIs throughout the Annual Report.
BONUS
80% of the UK executive directors bonuses are based on the achievement of financial KPIs see page 101.
We monitor the underlying financial performance of the Group using alternative performance measures.
These measures are not defined in IFRS and therefore are considered to be nonGAAP measures.
Accordingly the relevant IFRS measures are also presented where appropriate.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Group financial highlights Other financial highlights Financial performance measures defined in IFRS International Financial Reporting Standards.
Generally Accepted Accounting Principles.
Current year compared with prior year translated at current year exchange rates.
Including share of equity accounted investments.
Items that are not relevant to an understanding of the Groups underlying performance see page 28.
Revenue increased by 0.5bn to 18.3bn largely reflecting currency translation.
Operating profit decreased to 1480m including a 384m noncash goodwill impairment in Applied Intelligence reflecting lower growth assumptions.
Basic earnings per share decreased by 7% to 26.8p.
Net cash flow from operating activities increased by 668m to 1897m.
Groups share of the pretax accounting net pension deficit reduced by 2.2bn compared with 31 December 2016 to 3.9bn.
Final dividend of 13p per share making a total of 21.8p per share for the year an increase of 2% over 2016.
Revenue
2016 17790m Definition Income derived from the provision of goods and services by the Company and its subsidiary undertakings.
Groups share of the net pension deficit bn 2016 6.1bn Definition Net International Accounting Standard 19 Employee Benefits deficit excluding amounts allocated to equity accounted investments.
Operating profit 2016 1742m Definition Profit for the year before finance costs and taxation expense.
This measure includes finance costs and taxation expense of equity accounted investments.
Dividend per share 8 p 2016 21.3p Definition Interim dividend paid and final dividend proposed per share.
Basic earnings per share 8p 2016 28.8p Definition Basic earnings per share in accordance with International Accounting Standard 33 Earnings per Share.
Net cash flow from operating activities 2016 1229m Definition Net cash flow from operating activities in accordance with International Accounting Standard 7 Statement of Cash Flows.
Reconciliations from the financial performance measures as defined by the Group to the financial performance measures defined in IFRS are provided in the Group financial review on pages 28 to 34.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements The full 3.7bn production contract for the first batch of three Type 26 frigates was signed in June with 2.8bn of order intake in the year.
Production of the first ship Glasgow commenced in July.
We agreed contracts under the Saudi British Defence Cooperation Programme to provide ongoing support services to the Royal Saudi Air Force and Royal Saudi Naval Forces for a further five years to 31 December 2021.
We received a 414m 306m contract for the third and final option for LowRate Initial Production of 48 M109A7 selfpropelled howitzers and ammunition carriers under the Paladin Integrated Management programme.
The award contains options for a further 180 vehicle sets over three years of FullRate Production.
Growing demand for our Advanced Precision Kill Weapon System APKWS laserguided rockets with awards totalling nearly 300m 222m during the year and over 13000 units delivered at 31 December.
In November the 2017 UK triennial pension funding valuations and where necessary deficit recovery plans were agreed with the trustees and certified by the scheme actuaries after consultation with the Pensions Regulator.
In 2017 we made progress across the Group in achieving our strategic objectives.
Chief Executives review BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Operational and strategic highlights During the year our USbased Intelligence and Security business secured six task order contracts valued at more than 180m 133m increasing the FullMotion Video Intelligence Surveillance and Reconnaissance analysis support we provide to the US intelligence community.
Our USbased Electronic Systems business received orders on the F35 Lightning II programme worth over 450m 333m for additional hardware production and five years of support.
In December BAE Systems and the Government of Qatar entered into a contract valued at approximately 5bn for the supply of 24 Typhoon aircraft.
Alongside supplying the aircraft the agreement provides for the supply of ground support to the Qatar Armed Forces and delivery of technical and pilot training in Qatar.
The contract is subject to financing conditions and receipt by the Group of first payment which are expected to be fulfilled no later than mid2018.
Under a contract signed in 2012 the first eight Typhoon and all eight Hawk aircraft for Oman were delivered to the Sultanate of Oman in the year.
The remaining four Typhoon aircraft are scheduled to be delivered in 2018.
Under the sevenboat Astute Class submarine programme we received the full 1.4bn contract for the sixth submarine from the Royal Navy and the fourth boat Audacious was launched.
Segmental review Group strategic framework BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements The year in review There is no doubt that 2017 was a successful year and most importantly a year in which the leadership baton was smoothly and efficiently passed over to Charles Woodburn as Chief Executive of the Group.
The Companys longterm health and growth were further underpinned by contracts successfully secured during the year on major programmes in our principal and international markets.
Notably these included contracts to supply frigates and submarines for the Royal Navy new and upgraded land vehicles for the US M777 howitzers for India and strong global demand for our worldclass defence and commercial electronic systems capabilities.
In December we entered into a contract to supply Typhoon aircraft to Qatar subject to financing conditions and we remain cautiously optimistic of securing further aircraft sales to international customers.
Our cyber and intelligence capability remains in high demand from government and commercial customers around the world in a challenging market environment.
It is equally critical in ensuring bestinclass cyber protection for our own defence platforms products and services.
In recent years we have leveraged our capabilities into the commercial sector where on occasions increased volume has been achieved at the expense of value.
This has now been addressed through a change of management and by refocusing the business into markets where specialised skills provide competitive edge and attractive returns.
During the second half of the year our organisation structure was simplified and aligned with the demands of the business today.
There is no doubt that 2017 was a successful year.
Sir Roger Carr Chairman Dividend pence 8 p 2%tel BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 execution of a strong order book.
For my part as Chairman I have been pleased to witness the Companys ability to manage structural and leadership change in a turbulent year.
It has been made clear to me by customers shareholders employees and partners that all have valued the preservation of seasoned executive experience with the introduction of fresh thinking and renewed energy in the management team at a time of geopolitical turbulence.
Relationships and reputation are of course key to the success of any business.
In this context it is pleasing that close liaison with governments in the UK US the Gulf Australia India and many other key international markets continues to ensure the strength of our relationships at the highest levels and underline our commitment to contributing to national priorities across the globe.
This will be particularly important in 2018 in the pursuit of major business opportunities in air maritime land and cyber currently under negotiation.
The year ahead therefore remains demanding both in delivering the order book we have and building an even stronger backlog for the longterm future of the business but we approach it with confidence and enthusiasm.
Our strategy Whilst market conditions may fluctuate our strategy remains clear.
We are an international defence company operating in the domains of air maritime land and cyber with major business interests in the UK US the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and Australia.
We manage a balanced business of products and services employing worldclass skills in technology and engineering to meet our customers current and future needs.
We use these capabilities primarily in the defence sector but where appropriate extend our reach into related and adjacent commercial market areas.
We develop the skills necessary to supply our customers by a commitment to apprenticeships graduate training and lifelong learning.
The cash we generate from the business is used to pay our people pay our taxes meet our pension obligations invest in the business through research and technology and capital expenditure reward shareholders and make acquisitions when appropriate.
To deliver this strategy we have a welldefined operational framework underpinned by a strong culture which seeks to be trusted innovative and bold.
Our culture As a company we focus not simply on how much money we make but more importantly how we make money.
The tone is set at the top and cascades throughout the organisation.
We are proud of what we do and committed to serve and equip those that serve and protect us.
We aim to inspire and excel in the work we do and the technology we develop.
The management ethos is to work with customers in the spirit of partnership striving to go the extra mile in the products we make and the service we offer recognising that we must earn everything and are entitled to nothing.
As Chairman I believe we should place safety above profit people above process and ethics above outcomes in an environment that promotes merit and values diversity.
Our Corporate Responsibility Committee monitors performance in these areas.
Our Remuneration Committee focuses on the importance of rewarding management commensurate with performance and creating a structure that is fair transparent and inclusive in recruiting securing and retaining the best talent.
We believe it is only by adopting these principles that we can win the backing of our stakeholders and the support of society at large.
The Audit Committee continues to be the check and balance that we have to ensure we account conservatively manage prudently and manage risk effectively.
In discharging these responsibilities the Committee works closely with management internal audit and the external audit team to gather their perspectives and ensure the integrity accuracy and veracity of our financial reporting to a high standard.
Alternative performance measure definitions BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements At the heart of the business are the people we employ and the talent we build from apprentice to boardroom.
As an international leader in engineering and technology we believe we have a responsibility to develop a deep pool of expertise through highquality training and apprenticeships with some 2000 apprentices and 500 graduates currently in training in the UK.
Board and Executive Committee With effect from 1 July Charles Woodburn succeeded Ian King as Chief Executive.
Ian retired after a career spanning more than 40 years at the Company including leading BAE Systems as Chief Executive since 2008.
Building a pipeline of talent and managing succession at all levels in the business is of course an essential part of strategic planning.
Our Nominations Committee consistently reviews membership of the Board and Executive Committee.
In this respect in 2017 we were fortunate to recruit Revathi Advaithi as a nonexecutive director bringing wide international operational experience with strong engineering and digital credentials and Karin Hoeing as Group Human Resources Director and member of the Executive
As we look forward beyond the current year we will continue to refresh the Board and Executive Committee to ensure our experience and skillset is fit for purpose in a changing world.
To avoid complacency and in the pursuit of excellence we conduct rigorous annual reviews of the Board with the employment of an external advisor every other year.
The key findings of the 2018 Independent Board Evaluation are outlined in the Chairmans Governance letter on page 72 of this report.
As a Board we debate and review our culture each year to ensure we continue to treat everyone respectfully trade responsibly act with integrity and govern scrupulously.
Summary
In summary we have been pleased to deliver another year of good performance with sales of 19.6bn and underlying earnings per share of 43.5p underpinned by an order backlog of 41.2bn.
Against the background of a strong Board and a refreshed and committed management team we are both content with the years performance and positive about our future prospects.
The Board therefore has recommended a final dividend of 13p for a total of 21.8p per share for the full year.
Subject to shareholder approval at the May 2018 Annual General Meeting the dividend will be paid on 1 June 2018 to holders of ordinary shares registered on 20 April 2018.
Sir Roger Carr Chairman BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Chairmans letter continued BAE Systems delivered a good performance in 2017 consistent with our expectations for the year.
Charles Woodburn Chief Executive
BAE Systems delivered a good performance in 2017 consistent with our expectations for the year.
We are taking the actions necessary to address costs and to meet our customers affordability challenges.
Despite economic and political uncertainties governments in our major markets continue to prioritise defence and security with strong demand for our capabilities.
We are investing in our business our people and in the technology and skills we need to drive the business forward.
With an improving outlook for defence budgets in a number of our markets and a solid foundation for mediumterm growth we are well placed to generate good returns for shareholders.
Since taking on the role of Chief Executive I have reiterated that we are a strong company with a number of key advantages pursuing the right strategy.
We have a broad geographic footprint and diversified market positions.
Importantly
We have worldclass technologies in the fields of electronic warfare autonomous systems advanced manufacturing robotics and data analytics and we continue to invest in research and development often alongside our customers to identify and develop emerging technologies.
The speed of change in technology means that we must continually build on our technological advantage and attract and retain the right talent in order to stay competitive.
It is important to recognise that in a tough competitive market we need to become a stronger smarter and sharper organisation to win new business and grow which means increasing our focus and efforts in three priority areas Operational excellence We have a number of major programmes under way on which we are ramping up production so it is vital that we maintain our focus on operational excellence by delivering for our customers.
There is simply no better way to highlight our skills and capabilities and therefore win new business.
Group strategic framework
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Chief Executives review Our US electronics business delivered good operational performance across our core franchise positions in the hightechnology areas of electronic warfare precisionguided munitions Intelligence Surveillance and Reconnaissance and electrooptics.
BAE Systems has sustained its leadership position in the US electronic warfare market and production is ramping up to execute orders across a number of programmes some of which are classified.
As the electronic warfare system supplier on the F35 Lightning II combat aircraft programme we are increasing production and are well positioned to meet further increases in output rates over the coming years to meet the requirements of both US and international customers.
On F15 upgrade programmes are contracted and progressing for the US Air Force and international customers.
The Groups USbased combat vehicles business is underpinned by programmes for the manufacture of Armored MultiPurpose Vehicles and M109A7 selfpropelled howitzers and Bradley upgrades which all progressed in the year.
In the amphibious vehicle market 16 prototypes have been delivered to the US Marine Corps under the Amphibious Combat Vehicle 1.1 programme.
We are one of two competitors for this programme with final downselection expected in 2018.
BAE Systems is a leading supplier of ship repair services to the US Navy and continues to adjust its workforce and facilities to meet evolving demand.
Additional dry dock capacity at our San Diego shipyard became operational in February 2017 and accepted its first ship during the year.
Whilst market conditions remain highly competitive and continue to evolve our USbased Intelligence and Security business is focused on delivering on its contracts and maintaining a high level of bid activity.
UK
Defence and security remains a priority for the UK government.
We expect this to be reaffirmed in the National Security Capability Review and in the Modernising Defence Programme which was announced in January 2018 by the Defence Secretary.
Transition arrangements after March 2019 will be important to enable companies to prepare for potential changes in the regulatory environment.
As there is relatively limited UKEU trading and movement of EU nationals into and out of BAE Systems UK businesses the resulting Brexit impact on the business is likely to be limited depending on the terms of any transition and final agreements for the UKs future relationship with the European Union.
We will support the government in achieving its aim to ensure that the UK maintains its key role in European security and defence postBrexit and to strengthen bilateral relationships with key partners in Europe.
This will be important for ongoing collaboration in the development of defence capabilities.
In December BAE Systems and the Government of Qatar entered into a contract valued at approximately 5bn for the supply of 24 Typhoon aircraft.
Alongside supplying the aircraft the agreement provides for the supply of ground support to the Qatar Armed Forces and delivery of technical and pilot training in Qatar.
The contract is subject to financing conditions and receipt by the Group of first payment which are expected to be fulfilled no later than mid2018.
Discussions with current and prospective operators of the Typhoon aircraft continue to support the Groups expectations for additional Typhoon contract awards.
However there can be no certainty as to the timing of these orders.
As a result of reducing production activity on Typhoon and Hawk and also taking into account the changes to support requirements as the Royal Air Force transitions from Tornado to F35 Lightning II the business announced in October a total proposed headcount reduction of up to 1400 roles over the next three years.
Competitiveness
Good progress has been made in making the organisation more efficient over the last few years and there are further opportunities with procurement and enhanced collaboration at the forefront.
Technological innovation We have a long heritage of developing and integrating cuttingedge technologies to create complex systems that give our customers a capability advantage.
The accelerating pace of technological change is a disruptive force and a key driver of competitive advantage and increasingly a determinant for our customers in awarding new business.
Driving performance in these three areas will be key for the development of the business as we execute on our strategy in 2018 and beyond.
2017 performance
After seven months under a Continuing Resolution that maintained funding at the prior years level the fiscal year 2017 defence budget ultimately rose by approximately 4%.
Similarly fiscal year 2018 has begun under multiple Continuing Resolutions.
On 9 February 2018 Congress passed and the President signed a budget agreement that supports the mediumterm planning assumptions for our US businesses.
This budget agreement increases the budget caps for two years and extends the current Continuing Resolution to 23 March 2018 to allow lawmakers to pass a fiscal year 2018 omnibus appropriations bill.
We see continued support for increased defence spending in the Presidents recentlyreleased fiscal year 2019 budget request.
This request maintains positive momentum in funding for military readiness and modernisation and provides greater nearterm certainty.
Our USbased portfolio remains well aligned with customer priorities and growth areas such as the rampup of production on a number of our longterm programmes.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017
Chief Executives review
In August our Intelligence and Security business launched a new product iMOTR This innovative mobile multipleobject tracking radar uses commercial offtheshelf solutions to provide military test and evaluation ranges with a higher degree of accuracy in tracking the time space and position information for several objects in flight compared with current radars.
The iMOTR solution developed over two years with Groupfunded research and development expenditure features enhanced capabilities that offer more precise flight path tracking for objects travelling close to the ground and allow tracking information to be shared in real time with other radars or data collection sensors.
These added capabilities will allow our customers to assess larger more complex scenarios that are critical to developing the next generation of solutions to address national security threats.
The Typhoon aircrafts progression towards the Royal Air Force Centurion standard will enable transition of capability from Tornado to Typhoon as the UK Tornado fleet is scheduled to come out of service at the end of the decade.
UKbased production of rear fuselage assemblies for the F35 Lightning II aircraft increased to 82 in the year with most of the advanced manufacturing investment in place to achieve the planned increase in production volumes.
In readiness for the arrival of the UKs first F35 Lightning II aircraft in 2018 good progress has been made on the support facilities for the standup of the operational service at RAF Marham in Norfolk.
In the maritime domain there remains pressure on the Navys nearterm budgets.
On the aircraft carrier programme HMS Queen Elizabeth successfully concluded initial sea trials and entered HM Naval Base Portsmouth for the first time in August with operational handover to the Royal Navy in December.
Following contract award for the first batch of three Type 26 frigates worth 3.7bn production for the first ship Glasgow commenced in July.
The National Shipbuilding Strategy announced in September committed to all eight Type 26 frigates to be built in our Scottish manufacturing facilities.
In October we announced a teaming agreement with Cammell Laird for their bid for the UK Ministry of Defences proposed Type 31e general purpose frigate programme.
Submarine activity is increasing with the Astute and Dreadnought class submarines now both in production and major redevelopment of the Barrow site to deliver the Dreadnought programme under way.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements International The Saudi Arabian InKingdom Industrial Participation programme continues to make good progress and we have commenced discussions with the new Saudi Arabian Military Industries SAMI organisation to explore how we can collaborate to deliver further InKingdom Industrial Participation.
All of these activities are aligned with our longterm industrialisation strategy as well as the Saudi Arabian governments National Transformation Plan and Vision 2030.
On the Salam Typhoon programme all contracted 72 aircraft have now been delivered and the Typhoon support contracts are operating well exceeding the baseline flying programme contracted with the customer.
Discussions with the Saudi Arabian customer through 2017 resulted in contractual agreements under the Saudi British Defence Cooperation Programme being formalised.
These provide support services to the Royal Saudi Air Force and Royal Saudi Naval Forces for a further five years to 31 December 2021.
In Australia the business is underpinned by longterm support contracts whilst activity progresses on two major bid opportunities.
Firstly as one of two tenderers for the Land 400 Phase 2 Combat Reconnaissance Vehicle programme we have completed the Risk Mitigation Activity contract and submitted our final proposal with final preferred tender selection anticipated in the first half of 2018.
Secondly our initial tender response for the Commonwealths nineship SEA 5000 Future Frigate programme was submitted in August and we anticipate a preferred tender selection in 2018.
The MBDA joint venture has continued to win orders in both domestic and export markets.
The increase in business volumes has resulted in the requirement to expand production capacities in the UK and France.
Our strategy in action
F35 Lightning II In 2017 we demonstrated our military aircraft manufacturing expertise as we achieved a significant milestone on the F35 Lightning II programme.
With the delivery of the 318th rear section of the aircraft during the year 10% of the projected global customer aircraft requirement has now been produced.
The achievement of this milestone has only been possible through investments made in our advanced manufacturing facilities and our close working relationship with the supply chain.
Our focus in these areas will enable us to meet the rampup in production on the programme in the coming years.
As a key partner on F35 Lightning II a premier defence programme we are responsible for approximately 15% of the work on each aircraft excluding propulsion and we play a major role in the programme across multiple markets including the US UK and Australia.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017
Chief Executives review
Applied Intelligence achieved sales growth from the continued delivery of national security solutions for the UK and international governments.
In addition we have deployed antifraud regulatory compliance and cyber security products and services across a large range of commercial customers.
In 2017 Applied Intelligence reported an underlying loss of 61m including a 24m restructuring charge.
The first half loss of 27m was followed by a reduced second half loss before the restructuring charge of 10m as cost reduction actions started to deliver bottomline benefit.
A goodwill impairment of 384m was taken in 2017 reflecting the future level and timing of expected returns from the business.
Effective 1 January 2018 the business changed its operating model to deliver a more targeted portfolio of products and services focused on customers within three core business units Government Financial Services and Technology and Commercial.
The restructuring will enable a greater focus on customer needs and higher levels of operational efficiency in the commercial business that will accelerate improvements in competitiveness and profitability.
Balance sheet and capital allocation The Groups balance sheet is managed conservatively in line with its policy to retain its investment grade credit rating and to ensure operating flexibility.
Consistent with this approach the Group expects to continue to meet its pension obligations invest in research and technology and other organic investment opportunities and plans to pay dividends in line with its policy of longterm sustainable cover of around two times underlying earnings and to make accelerated returns of capital to shareholders when the balance sheet allows.
Investment
Groups strategy.
Pension schemes The 2017 UK triennial pension funding valuations concluded in November with the aggregate funding deficit as at 31 March 2017 across the UK schemes at 2.1bn.
The deficit recovery plan on the Groups largest pension scheme the BAE Systems Pension Scheme continues to March 2026 with the other schemes now with reduced repayment periods or fully funded.
The UK funding deficit at 31 March 2017 is some 3bn lower than the accounting deficit using likeforlike mortality assumptions and asset values at 31 December 2017 largely due to lower liabilities as a result of the discount rate assumption based on the expected returns on the investments held by the schemes.
Research and technology BAE Systems has developed some of the worlds most innovative technologies and invests in research and development to generate future products and capabilities.
We embrace disruptive technology drive innovation and invest appropriately both on a selffunded basis and in conjunction with our customers universities and small and mediumsized enterprises.
Company funded research and development contributes along with customer funding in driving focused investment in areas such as defence and commercial electronics military aircraft precision weapons and cyber security.
Responsible business We continue to build a culture where our people are empowered to make the right decisions and know where to go to seek help or guidance.
During 2017 we rolled out further ethics training across the Group to support employees and in January 2018 launched our revised Code of Conduct.
The safety of our employees and anybody who works on or visits our sites remains a key priority.
Our safety culture and our employees demand high standards for all aspects of health and safety.
In 2017 there was a 3% reduction in the Recordable Accident Rate and a 28% reduction in the total number of major injuries recorded as we continued to focus on reducing risk and embedding safety culture to drive improvement.
Recruiting and retaining talented people is a key priority.
We want every employee to reach their full potential within a diverse and inclusive work environment.
We have programmes in place across the business to support strategic workforce planning career development and retention as well as to improve diversity and inclusion.
Organisational changes In October we announced a restructure of our operations outside of the USmanaged business in support of our three priorities of delivering operational excellence honing our competitive edge and accelerating our technology innovation.
The new operating model effective 1 January 2018 will simplify our management structure to create strengthened Air and Maritime reporting segments whilst changes to our UKbased Applied Intelligence cyber security business are focused on meeting customer needs and accelerating improvements in competitiveness and profitability.
Our 2017 results are represented on page 56 to reflect the organisational changes and our segmental guidance for 2018 is presented on page 57 on a consistent basis.
On pages 58 and 59 we summarise the short to mediumterm prospects for our five principal reporting segments from 1 January 2018.
Summary
Our business benefits from a large order backlog strong franchises and established positions on longterm programmes in the US UK Saudi Arabia and Australia.
Our
Through execution of a consistent strategy we are well placed to maximise opportunities deal with the challenges and continue to generate good shareholder returns.
Charles Woodburn Chief Executive BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements S u p p o r ti n g th e operational capabilities of the Royal Saudi Air Force U p g r a di ng Australias radar defence network The mission statement has evolved and aims to set out more clearly our purpose  why we exist  and the importance of our work.
It emphasises that we put our customers first giving them the critical capabilities and technological edge they rely on to protect security and prosperity around the world.
We have also redefined our strategic objectives to become three strategic priorities from 2018 providing greater alignment between our strategy and the nearterm business objectives all our employees work to.
Our vision To be the premier international defence a e r o s p a c e a n d se c u r i t y c o mp a n y Our strategy Maintain and grow our defence businesses Continue to grow our business in adjacent markets Develop and expand our international business Inspire and develop a diverse workforce to drive success Enhance financial performance and deliver sustainable growth in shareholder value Our mission To provide a vital advantage to help our customers protect what really matters U p g r a di ng and securing communications capabilities on US Army vehicles P r o v i di ng an t i  m o n ey laundering protection to one of the UKs largest banks Our strategy in action N e a r in g Fu ll  R a t e Production on the Paladin Integrated
P ro d u c t i o n of Type 26 frigates for the Royal Navy commences U nm a nn e d a ir systems adaptability and mission efficiency First flights of our new HeadUp
A d v a n ce d manufacturing facilities for F35 Lightning II A new concept for fullspectrum air defence i M OT R a new product designed to improve radar accuracy Our values are T rusted Innovative and Bold Our strategic priorities Drive operational excellence Continuously improve competitiveness and efficiency Advance and further leverage our technology F i r s t T y p ho on and Hawk aircraft delivered to the Royal Air Force of Oman Our strategy is comprised of five key longterm areas of focus that will help us to achieve our vision and mission.
This strategy remains relevant and consistent.
We have updated our Group strategic framework to reflect our renewed focus on becoming a stronger company able to win and grow in a tougher competitive market.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Group strategic framework Supporting our customers Our strategy is focused on providing a vital advantage to our customers across US UK and international markets.
In particular we have built strong positions aligned with our core defence platforms to support our customers in our four principal markets.
These principal markets  the US UK the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and Australia have been identified as having a significant and sustained commitment to defence and security.
BAE Systems has established strong and enduring relationships in these markets and is recognised as playing a key role in the industrial capability of each of these countries.
Our unique position and capabilities Our strong position in the US through the Special Security Agreement together with our standing as the leading defence contractor in the UK provides us with unique capabilities that can be leveraged across the Group to support our customers.
In addition our diverse portfolio including leading cyber capabilities provides us with a comprehensive offering for our customers with cyber now recognised as a defence domain in its own right.
Responding to a changing character of conflict Our business continues to respond to geopolitical and technology trends that will influence the future character of conflict and shape our customers requirements.
Our
International growth aspirations Following a number of years of defence spend contraction global defence markets are stabilising with a number of nations returning to growth in response to an increasingly uncertain security environment.
We continue to recognise the importance and requirements of our international customers.
We have a significant international presence one of the broadest amongst the defence primes supported by longstanding customer relationships and diverse capabilities leveraged across the Group.
Accessible global defence markets Source 2016 US budget as shown in the Department of Defense Fiscal Year 2018 Budget Request and outside the US IHS Janes Defence Budgets based on 2016 total defence budgets and constant 2017 US dollars.
US
India
UK
Saudi Arabia
France
Germany
South Korea
Principal markets 10.
Brazil
Top ten global defence markets accessible for business by the Group bn BAE Systems global defence market position Source Defense News Top 100 for 2017 based on 2016 numbers.
Exchange rate applied to BAE Systems is 1.351.
Lockheed Martin
BAE Systems
Northrop Grumman General Dynamics
L3 Technologies
Thales
Top ten global defence contractors revenue bn Markets inaccessible for business by BAE Systems are excluded.
BAE Systems has leading positions in its principal markets  in the US UK the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and Australia  as well as established positions in a number of other international markets.
We are one of the largest global defence companies.
Group strategic framework BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements
A US 39% B UK 21% C Saudi Arabia 16% D Australia 3% E Other international markets 21% Revenue plus the Groups share of revenue of equity accounted investments.
Includes 0.9bn 4% of sales generated under the Typhoon workshare agreement with Eurofighter Jagdflugzeug GmbH.
The US continues to represent the single largest defence market in the world and BAE Systems remains a top ten defence supplier in the US.
After seven months under a Continuing Resolution that maintained funding at the prior years level the fiscal year 2017 defence budget ultimately rose by approximately 4%.
Whilst the fiscal year 2018 budget remains under a Continuing Resolution the bipartisan budget agreement passed on 9 February 2018 would increase the US defence budget by approximately 10% over current levels reflecting continued growth in defence spending to 700bn 518bn for the fiscal year ending 30 September 2018.
This budget agreement increases the budget caps for two years and extends the Continuing Resolution to 23 March 2018 to allow lawmakers to pass a 2018 spending bill.
The US defence budget is expected to experience continued growth.
The portfolio of the USbased business is well aligned with customer priorities and growth areas which include combat vehicles precisionguided munitions naval ship repair and modernisation services electronic warfare and space security.
BAE Systems has strong positions on a number of premier defence programmes including F35 Lightning II Paladin selfpropelled howitzer and Armored MultiPurpose Vehicle and we are a leader in advanced electronic systems realtime intelligence and analysis naval gun systems and artillery systems.
In addition to our position on US defence programmes the USbased portfolio is also focused on Foreign Military Sales and direct international sales to allied nations.
We continue to deliver on existing commercial programmes including engine and flight controls and electric drive propulsion systems.
BAE Systems remains the largest defence company in the UK with strong and longstanding relationships with the Ministry of Defence.
The UK is Europes largest defence market and after a period of budgetary decline defence spending has stabilised.
The 2017 Spring Budget reinforced previous commitments to increase defence spending as well as the continued pledge to maintain spending at 2% of GDP.
This provides the context for the Modernising Defence Programme announced in January 2018 by the Defence Secretary the outcome of which is aimed to be announced by the summer of 2018.
In light of the UKs referendum decision to leave the EU the government has signalled its intent to continue to play a major role in defence and security cooperation in Europe.
The UK government provides vital support in the pursuit of international export opportunities recognising the value that BAE Systems and the defence industry contributes to the UK economy.
BAE Systems plays an important role in providing capabilities to support the UK government and armed forces across the air maritime land and cyber domains.
Our involvement across the major UK defence programmes including Typhoon aircraft Queen Elizabeth Class aircraft carriers Type 26 frigates and Astute and Dreadnought Class submarines maintains our diverse skillsets allowing us to provide a vital advantage to our customers.
Our cyber business has a focused investment strategy to ensure that we support our commercial and government customers as cyber security becomes an increasingly important part of a sophisticated and persistent threat environment.
US UK BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Our markets continued The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia continues to be a leading military power and one of the largest defence markets globally.
Saudi Arabia has a strong commitment to defence and security spending driven by regional security instability.
Saudi Arabias Vision 2030 strategy to promote InKingdom industrialisation and diversification away from reliance on oil continues to shape our activities in support of Saudi Arabias national objectives of technology development local skills and the development of indigenous defence industry and capability.
Through the restructuring of the Groups portfolio of interests in a number of industrial companies building on our strong history in Saudi Arabia we are working in partnership to deliver these priorities and we have commenced discussions with the new Saudi Arabian Military Industries SAMI organisation to explore how we can collaborate to deliver further InKingdom Industrial Participation.
We remain well placed as a leading incountry contractor in support of air defence platforms and training systems for the Royal Saudi Air Force as well as support for mine countermeasure vessels for the Royal Saudi Naval Forces.
BAE Systems is one of the largest defence companies in Australia with strong activities across all domains.
Regional instability and the pace of military modernisation in the AsiaPacific region continue to drive the governments commitment to defence spending with major recapitalisation programmes expected in the air maritime and land domains.
In addition to a number of key priorities highlighted in the Australian Defence White Paper the government indicated its intent to grow defence spending by committing to spend 2% of GDP by 202021.
As part of this commitment the government has made clear its objective to build a stronger and more sustainable domestic defence industry ensuring that over time the nation has in place a sovereign industrial base that has the skills knowledge and capability to manage and support the platforms and systems it has invested in.
We are well positioned to support Australias initiative for growing domestic capabilities through an established business and a workforce based at more than 25 sites across the country in addition to our ability to leverage our international positions within the Group.
We provide support to the Australian Defence Force through engineering programme management and sustainment solutions including Jindalee Operational Radar Network upgrade Hawk LeadIn Fighter support F35 Lightning II sustainment and Anzac frigate support and upgrade.
BAE Systems has many strong and enduring relationships in other international markets.
Regional security tensions the growing emphasis on indigenous capabilities and varying economic conditions continue to influence defence spending internationally.
With high growth in AsiaPacific and the Middle East BAE Systems has developed relationships with partners and customers in a number of countries working directly with local industry.
In Malaysia we are a supplier to the armed forces both directly and through joint ventures.
We have set up a Global Engineering Centre in Kuala Lumpur focusing on local delivery and global support of our cyber and financial crime detection services.
We have signed a contract to provide Typhoon aircraft to Qatar subject to financing conditions and receipt by the Group of first payment.
We provide support to Typhoon and Hawk aircraft and naval vessels supplied to Oman.
In 2017 we signed a contract to collaborate on the first development phase of an indigenous fifthgeneration fighter jet TFX for the Turkish Air Force.
Our footprint in Turkey is growing through our armoured combat vehicles joint venture FNSS.
We have a strong presence in Sweden through our BAE Systems Hgglunds business supplying and supporting tracked vehicles for international customers.
Our US businesses export combat vehicles to international customers including Brazil and Japan.
In India we have longestablished relationships with local industry partners.
We have a strong partnership with Hindustan Aeronautics Limited on Hawk aircraft and more recently with Mahindra Defence Services on M777 howitzers.
Through our shareholding in MBDA our position in the missiles and missile systems market continues to grow in European and other international markets.
International
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements We create value through We aim to deliver Our business model is underpinned by id e n t i f yi n g customer needs se r v ic e s  s u s t a in m e n t and upgrade Established positions on longterm programmes Strong and collaborative relationships with governments and large commercial customers Our position as a trusted supplier allows us to identify emerging trends and opportunities for growth Understanding our customers to provide competitive services that add value Technical expertise acquired through product design and development Flexibility and responsiveness to maximise availability of our customers products our values Our values of Trusted Innovative and Bold are at the heart of everything we do and provide the right focus and framework for the Company to aspire to and live by now and into the future.
Our largest customers are governments but we also sell to large prime contractors and commercial businesses.
We take on and solve some of our customers most complex and challenging engineering and technology projects to give them a competitive edge helping them protect what matters most.
Our key products and services our people We have a diverse range of talented people.
We invest in education and training for our existing workforce including apprenticeship and graduate programmes and work with education sectors to help shape the workforce of the future.
We provide advanced technology defence aerospace and security solutions that aim to give our customers a competitive edge.
Group strategic framework
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 How our business works  r es e ar c h an d development a d v an c e d m an uf a c t ur i n g commissioning and integration b i d di n g an d contracting d es i gn i n g an d developing Strategic focus on technological capabilities which drive innovation Partnerships with small and mediumsized enterprises and academia to develop new solutions Earlystage research which is selffunded and then further developed with customer funding Investment in advanced manufacturing facilities and techniques Focus on operational excellence with safety as a key priority Management of complex projects and collaboration across global supply chains Critical skills in identifying risk whilst focusing on value for customers Record of delivery on complex projects Partnerships with local companies supporting economic development Engineering expertise in developing cuttingedge products and services Product safety embedded in our designs to maximise safety in the construction and use of our products Products designed to be easily maintained and upgraded as technology evolves our technology We focus on technology innovation and engineering excellence prioritising and investing in nextgeneration research and development programmes to deliver competitive solutions to meet our current and future customers needs.
We take pride in managing our operations responsibly and we require our employees to conduct business in an ethical way under our Code of Conduct to enable us to earn and maintain the trust of our stakeholders.
Our robust governance framework sets out the way we do business.
It details our policies and processes which together with our culture enable us to deliver operational excellence in a clear accountable and consistent way.
Our
Corporate responsibility
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Supporting STEM workshops in Oman In 2017 our UK and Omani engineering graduates ran STEM workshops at schools in Adam and Nizwa close to the Adam air base home to Typhoon aircraft in Oman.
The students participated in handson exercises introducing them to engineering and listened to our graduates experiences of their time abroad and with BAE Systems in Oman.
Engineering and technological disciplines are core to the future plans for Omans national economy.
The workshops undertaken by BAE Systems in Oman continue to have the full backing of the Omani Ministry of Education.
Recruiting and retaining the best people from the widest possible talent pool is a key priority for BAE Systems.
We value our employees and the contribution they make and we are committed to creating an inclusive culture where everyone can fulfil their potential.
This is essential if we are to attract and retain talented people and drive creativity innovation and our ability to solve our customers complex challenges.
Our approach Our human resources strategy prioritises employee welfare and development empowerment and knowledge transfer.
Our Group Human Resources Director reports directly to our Chief Executive and chairs the HR Council to ensure that our strategy supports the Integrated Business Plan and People Policy.
The Groups strategy is dependent on its ability to recruit and retain people with appropriate talent and skills and we have identified this as a principal risk see page 71.
Our People Policy sets out our people management expectations including with regard to diversity and inclusion training and development reward and employee engagement.
Diversity and inclusion We are committed to creating an inclusive environment with a diverse workforce which reflects the communities in which we work.
Our Chief Executive leads the Enterprise Diversity and Inclusion Council which has three key priorities build a culture of inclusion and inclusive leadership globally drive a heightened awareness and education of diversity and inclusion across the organisation and foster diversity and inclusion throughout the organisation.
Our businesses are tasked with developing strategies and programmes that support these priorities and we are implementing measures to track progress.
We are determined to bridge the historical gender gap in our industry by encouraging more women to join the Company and promoting development so that we ultimately increase the number of women in senior executive positions.
We have employeeled networks supporting Lesbian Gay Bisexual Transgender and Allies called OutLink in the UK and US.
In the UK this has resulted in a jointly developed Transgender Policy being established in 2017.
Identifying and recruiting talent We need to recruit a diverse range of professionals to help solve our customers challenges including engineers designers software developers and project managers.
We look to draw people from a wide range of backgrounds and cultures.
We have been focusing our recruitment on the next generation to replace the skills and experience we are losing as our workforce retires to mitigate Science Technology Engineering and Mathematics STEM skills shortages and to accelerate diversity within our leadership.
For example we have partnered with Cranfield University to provide the UKs firstever Masterslevel postgraduate engineering apprenticeship scheme with 76 BAE Systems engineers starting the programme in January 2018.
Training and development We want every employee to reach their full potential and feel rewarded for what they do.
We support this through our comprehensive career frameworks development programmes and the breadth of our operations.
Continual improvement of competence and skills transfer helps us to continue to develop worldleading technologies that give our customers a critical advantage.
Our focus on professional development throughout our employees careers supports their personal and professional growth and ensures that we have the skills to meet our customers current and future requirements.
At 1 January 2018.
At 31 December 2017 the Board comprised seven male 70% and three female 30% directors.
Senior managers are defined as employees excluding executive directors who have responsibility for planning directing or controlling the activities of the Group or a strategically significant part of the Group andor who are directors of subsidiary companies.
Excludes executive directors.
Excluding share of equity accounted investments and rounded to the nearest thousand employees.
See summary of Deloitte LLP assurance on page 65.
Board
Senior managers Total employees 14% 86% 21% 79% 36% 64% Female Male 16000 60000 Gender diversity Age diversity 24 years and younger years years years 60 years and older How our business works BAE Systems Annual Report 2017
We provide our employees with competitive reward packages which include a range of benefits and we recognise individual and team successes.
The UK government has introduced gender pay gap reporting regulations for companies with more than 250 employees.
For 2017 the average gender pay gap for our UK workforce was 11.2% which is lower than the current UK national average of 18.1%.
We have a gender pay gap because we employ around four times more men than women and a greater proportion of our senior leadership team is male.
This trend is not unusual for companies like ours which employ large numbers of people with qualifications in STEMrelated fields.
With the number of women who study and work in these fields significantly less than the number of men we recruit from a much smaller pool of female talent.
We continue to work hard to increase the number of females we employ to improve our gender balance and become a more diverse organisation.
Engagement
Effective engagement enables our employees to contribute to improving business performance and helps us to gauge our success in creating an environment in which everyone can fulfil their potential.
We encourage employees to become shareholders in BAE Systems and in some markets offer share schemes to support this.
We keep employees informed about what is happening across the business including Company results major business decisions and other matters which affect them using a variety of media including our intranet and email through podcasts newsletters and leadership blogs and also through team briefs and team meetings where we seek to listen to employees views and opinions.
Employees have the opportunity to share their views through our employee surveys.
We seek to maintain constructive relationships with our trade unions in the UK and Australia and our labour unions in the US.
We have structures in place to work with trade union representatives in our local markets where it is appropriate and legally acceptable.
Social and community matters It is important to us and our employees that we give back to the communities where we have a presence and can make a positive difference.
Globally during 2017 we contributed more than 11m to local national and international charities and notforprofit organisations through our Community Investment programme.
Community investment management Our Community Investment Policy requires us to develop and maintain a Global Community Investment Strategy which outlines how we support our primary focus areas where a measurable impact to the community can be demonstrated.
Our primary focus areas are Customer  supporting active service personnel veterans and their families Education  inspiring young people to consider STEM subjects and careers and Local community  working to support the communities in which we operate.
An outcome of our Community Investment Policy is that each market develops its own programme in support of the Global Community Investment Strategy and which is relevant to their lines of business charitable needs and culture.
Community investment funding is not paid to thirdparty fundraisers or directly to individuals.
As part of our due diligence procedures prior to a charitable sponsorship or charitable donation being committed the charity is vetted through a recognised external organisation to ensure that the funding will be used for charitable purposes.
To avoid the risk of conflicts of interest any community investment activity is tested against the principle that it does not place or does not appear to place actual or potential customers suppliers or government officials under any obligations.
The Global Community Investment Committee reports to the Executive Committee on all community investment activities including employee fundraising activities.
The impact of the work we do We have strong ties with armed forces charities and organisations that assist serving personnel veterans and their families.
In the UK we are proud to be a founder donor 5m over five years to the Defence and National Rehabilitation Centre due to open in 2018.
Volunteering is important to us and our employees so we enable and encourage it to be identified as a personal development goal.
In the US during the 2017 Military Appreciation Month integrated campaign Remember.
Honor.
Support. employee donations to selected organisations were doublematched by the Company up to 5000 per employee for a total of nearly 180000 133000.
Recruiting the next generation Our apprenticeship programme is one of the biggest and most progressive in the UK and is rated outstanding by the Office for Standards in Education Ofsted.
In 2017 we recruited 576 apprentices and trainees 190 graduates and 79 interns.
By the end of 2017 we had approximately 2000 apprentices and 500 graduates in training across our UK business approximately 6% of the workforce.
Our 2017 apprentice intake figures provided our best ever diversity and inclusion statistics with 27% female and 5% black Asian and minority ethnic.
From a social mobility perspective in 2016 18% of our apprentices were recruited from the top 20 most deprived wards in England.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Laser Directed Energy Weapons  changing the nature of warfare Recognising the potential for Laser Directed Energy Weapons LDEWs to change the nature of warfare we are leveraging our engineering expertise across our UK and US businesses to accelerate the development and introduction of laser capabilities.
Using focused light energy LDEWs could be used in a range of operations across the air maritime and land domains and our aim is to show our customers the potential capabilities of these weapons whilst prioritising safety and affordability.
We are collaborating with the university community to consider how to protect our platforms from LDEWs and how we can shape our future platform designs to ensure protection is built in to their development.
Including share of equity accounted investments.
We leverage our technology and engineering capabilities and invest in research and development to deliver competitive solutions for our customers now and in the future.
How our business works Our approach Technology and innovation are central to our business they underpin our strategy and the development of our products and services.
We scan emerging technologies from around the world to assess their potential for application in defence and security.
We develop embryonic technology before selecting technologies to mature for use in our products and services.
To do this we work across our business and we work with our customers academia and other industry partners.
In some cases we will acquire other organisations to secure exclusive access to technologies that are critical for our future.
We also work with potential overseas partners as part of our international campaigns and this can be a major discriminator in some markets.
An example of this is our participation for the first time in a technology symposium with Singapores Defence Science and Technology Agency DSTA in 2017.
Our hope is that this will be the first step in working with DSTA to identify and prioritise areas of technology that we can jointly explore for future collaboration.
Our people are encouraged to innovate and embrace disruptive technologies focused on those which will ensure our customers are equipped to face present and future threats.
We look for ways that technology can give our customers a competitive edge.
We assess the utility of our existing technology to determine if we can create value through licences and sales of rights to other organisations.
Our investment Our strategic thinking informs where we invest our research and development RandD funding and resource.
This in turn helps us to secure customer funding from organisations such as the UK Ministry of Defence the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency DARPA and the US military service laboratories to take the development of the technology to the next level.
We target investment in customer priority areas and in programmes that will give us a competitive advantage.
Our RandD programmes are designed to improve the capability and performance of our products and services reduce the cost of production and provide customers with efficiency savings and lower throughlife costs.
In 2017 we spent 1.6bn 2016 1.4bn on RandD of which 238m 2016 206m was funded by the Group.
In addition the Groups share of the RandD expenditure of its equity accounted investments in 2017 was 0.1bn 2016 0.1bn.
Protecting our investment in new technologies is important and we have a portfolio of patents and patent applications covering approximately 2000 inventions internationally.
We look to make valueadding acquisitions in emergent new technologies or in technologies that will accelerate our RandD programmes and in 2017 we completed the acquisition of IAP Research Inc. power electronics and advanced materials.
Research and development expenditure 1 .7b n 2016 1.5bn BAE Systems Annual Report 2017
Traditional manufacturing processes separate the complex tasks performed by humans from the simple repeatable tasks performed by robots.
In contrast cobotic systems are designed for humans to work collaboratively with robots allowing us to merge the efficiency and repeatability from the robot with the skill and dexterity from the human operator.
Our ongoing development of cobotic technology is focused on how we can provide more agility in the manufacturing environment increase productivity reduce costs and deliver improvements in safety.
Advances in sensor technology robotics design and machine learning will increasingly enable humans to work safely alongside machines without stopping the production line.
Our aim is to produce a system with the ability to adapt to the user interfacing with it thereby becoming the ultimate manufacturing assistant.
Our areas of focus Today there are BAE Systems technologies operating from the depths of the ocean to the far reaches of space.
However the technologies that have brought us to where we are today will not see us through the next decades.
This is why we are investing in key technologies that will be important for our customers in the future and which will bring value to our business over the coming years.
Areas of focus include Big data  developing technologies and capabilities that allow us to analyse and deduce relevant information from vast amounts of data.
This is of growing importance for both the defence and commercial sectors.
Stealth  continuing to invest in the development of materials design approaches manufacturing techniques and support processes that minimise the observability of our military products.
Electronic warfare  developing this advanced technology to help pilots identify monitor analyse and respond to potential threats.
We are also investing to improve our efficiency and capacity in defence electronics production.
Autonomy  investing in the development and integration of autonomous systems technologies.
They will play an increasingly important role in future conflict by removing armed forces personnel from dull dirty and dangerous tasks while ensuring humans remain in control continuing to make critical military decisions.
Laser Directed Energy Weapons commencement of a programme to develop a laser weapon integration capability and accelerate its introduction into operational service.
Advanced manufacturing  positioning our manufacturing capability to meet future product and platform demands through the development and exploitation of novel materials and advanced manufacturing technologies.
Chief Technology Officer Technology is a key priority for our business and a new Chief Technology Officer CTO was appointed at the start of 2018 to focus on our investment in and development and exploitation of technologies across our products services and operations.
Nigel Whitehead a member of the Executive Committee assumed the role of CTO and working with the BAE Systems Inc. support and project management.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Income statement Sales increased by 0.6bn to 19.6bn 2016 19.0bn largely reflecting currency translation.
Underlying EBITA increased by 129m to 2034m 2016 1905m giving a return on sales of 10.4% 2016 10.0%.
There was an exchange translation benefit of 50m.
Growth on a constant currency basis was at 4%.
Revenue increased by 0.5bn to 18.3bn 2016 17.8bn largely reflecting currency translation.
Operating profit decreased by 262m to 1480m 2016 1742m.
2017 includes a 384m impairment in respect of the Applied Intelligence business which is excluded from underlying EBITA.
There was an exchange translation benefit of 39m.
Nonrecurring items in 2017 of 13m represents a loss on the disposal of the BAE Systems San Francisco Ship Repair business.
Nonrecurring items in 2016 of 12m represented an impairment taken in respect of that business.
Amortisation of intangible assets is in line with the prior year at 86m 2016 87m.
Impairment of goodwill in 2017 represents the impairment of goodwill in Applied Intelligence reflecting the future level and timing of expected returns from the business.
Financial performance Measures as defined by the Group
KPI
19 626m 2016 19020m Underlying EBITA
20 34m 2016 1905m Underlying earnings per share
BONUS
5 p 2016 40.3p Operating business cash flow
1752m 2016 1004m Net debt
BONUS m 2016 1542m Order intake
BONUS
20 257m 2016 22443m Order backlog 41.2bn 2016 42.0bn Measures defined in IFRS
1 8 322m 2016 17790m Operating profit 1 4 80m 2016 1742m Basic earnings per share 8p 2016 28.8p Net cash flow from operating activities 1897m 2016 1229m Peter Lynas Group Finance Director
80% of the UK executive directors bonuses are based on the achievement of financial KPIs see page 101.
We monitor the underlying financial performance of the Group using the alternative performance measures defined on page 6.
These measures are not defined in IFRS and therefore are considered to be nonGAAP measures.
Accordingly the relevant IFRS measures are also presented where appropriate.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Group financial review Net finance costs including equity accounted investments were 380m 2016 619m.
The underlying interest charge excluding pension accounting and fair value and foreign exchange adjustments on financial instruments and investments decreased marginally to 245m 2016 257m.
Net interest expense on the Groups pension deficit was 173m 2016 177m.
There was a credit in respect of fair value and foreign exchange adjustments of 38m 2016 185m charge on exchange translation of US dollardenominated bonds.
Taxation expense including equity accounted investments of 287m 2016 249m reflects the Groups underlying effective tax rate for the year of 21% partially offset by a 40m credit in respect of US tax reform enacted in December 2017.
The US federal tax rate has been reduced from 35% to 21% with effect from 1 January 2018 while the estimated state tax rate has increased from 5% to 6%.
In line with this change the rate applying to US deferred tax assets and liabilities at 31 December 2017 has been reduced from 40% to 27% creating a rate adjustment in 2017 which is partly reflected in the income statement.
The calculation of the underlying effective tax rate is shown in note 6 to the Group accounts on page 155.
The underlying effective tax rate for 2018 is expected to reduce from 21% to around 18% benefiting from US tax reform with the final rate dependent on the geographical mix of profits.
Looking beyond 2018 the effective tax rate will depend principally on whether there are any changes in tax legislation in the Groups most significant countries of operation the geographical mix of profits and the resolution of open issues.
Income statement Financial performance measures as defined by the Group Sales KPI 19626 19020 Underlying EBITA KPI 2034 1905 Return on sales 10.4% 10.0% Financial performance measures defined in IFRS m m Revenue 18322 17790 Operating profit 1480 1742 Return on revenue 8.1% 9.8% Reconciliation of sales to revenue m m Sales KPI 19626 19020 Deduct Share of sales by equity accounted investments 2575 2427 Add Sales to equity accounted investments 1271 1197 Revenue 18322 17790 Reconciliation of underlying EBITA to operating profit m m Underlying EBITA KPI 2034 1905 Nonrecurring items 13 12 Amortisation of intangible assets 86 87 Impairment of goodwill 384 Financial expense of equity accounted investments 34 28 Taxation expense of equity accounted investments 37 36 Operating profit 1480 1742 Net finance costs 346 591 Taxation expense 250 213 Profit for the year 884 938 Underlying interest expense 245 257 Net interest expense on retirement benefit obligations 173 177 Fair value and foreign exchange adjustments on financial instruments and investments 38 185 Net finance costs including equity accounted investments 380 619 Exchange rates Average 2017 2016 Sensitivity analysis Estimated impact on sales of a ten cent movement in the average exchange rate m International Financial Reporting Standards.
Generally Accepted Accounting Principles.
Including share of equity accounted investments.
Current year compared with prior year translated at current year exchange rates.
Alternative performance measure definitions BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Earnings per share Financial performance measures as defined by the Group 2017 2016 Underlying earnings 1383m 1277m Underlying earnings per share KPI 43.5p 40.3p Financial performance measures defined in IFRS Profit for the year attributable to equity shareholders 854m 913m Basic earnings per share 26.8p 28.8p Reconciliation of underlying EBITA to underlying earnings m m Underlying EBITA 2034 1905 Underlying interest expense including equity accounted investments 245 257 1789 1648 Taxation expense at the underlying effective tax rate 376 346 Noncontrolling interests 30 25 Underlying earnings 1383 1277 Reconciliation of underlying earnings to profit for the year attributable to equity shareholders m m Underlying earnings 1383 1277 Impact of US tax reform enacted in December 2017 40 Nonrecurring items post tax 10 9 Amortisation and impairment of intangible assets post tax 68 69 Impairment of goodwill 384 Net interest expense on retirement benefit obligations post tax 137 140 Fair value and foreign exchange adjustments on financial instruments and investments post tax 30 146 Profit for the year attributable to equity shareholders 854 913 Noncontrolling interests 30 25 Profit for the year 884 938 Earnings per share Underlying earnings per share for the year increased by 8% to 43.5p 2016 40.3p.
The inyear loss at Applied Intelligence was offset by good performance across the rest of the Group.
Basic earnings per share was 26.8p 2016 28.8p.
Basic earnings per share is lower than underlying earnings per share mainly reflecting the 384m goodwill impairment charge taken in 2017 which is excluded from underlying earnings per share.
Orders
Order intake decreased by 2.2bn to 20257m 2016 22443m.
The most significant award was the production contract for the first batch of three Type 26 frigates with 2.8bn of order intake in the year.
Order backlog decreased by 0.8bn to 41.2bn 2016 42.0bn reflecting currency translation.
Orders
Financial performance measures as defined by the Group 2017 2016 Order intake KPI 20257m 22443m Order backlog 41.2bn 42.0bn International Financial Reporting Standards.
Including share of equity accounted investments.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Group financial review continued Cash flow Operating business cash flow was 1752m 2016 1004m which includes cash contributions in respect of pension deficit funding over and above service costs for the UK and US schemes totalling 271m on a funding basis.
The remainder of the advances received in 2012 on the Omani Typhoon and Hawk order as well as European Typhoon production are almost all now consumed.
On the Saudi support contracts renewal some 300m of cash was received in 2017 representing advance funding to be utilised in 2018 and 2019.
Costs have been incurred against provisions created in previous years as the US commercial shipbuilding programmes are closed out.
Approximately 100m of VAT payments rolled from December 2017 into January 2018.
Taxation payments increased to 227m 2016 187m in line with the increase in adjusted profit before taxation as calculated in note 6 to the Group accounts on page 155.
Net capital expenditure and financial investment was 444m 2016 450m.
As planned capital investment was made in support of the production rampup in our US Electronic Systems and Combat Vehicles businesses.
Dividends received from equity accounted investments of 72m 2016 38m is primarily receipts from MBDA FNSS and Advanced Electronics Company.
There was a higher dividend from MBDA in 2017.
Interest received was 23m 2016 10m.
The cash outflow in respect of acquisitions and disposals in 2017 of 11m reflects costs incurred in respect of the disposal of BAE Systems San Francisco Ship Repair and the acquisition of IAP Research Inc.
The cash inflow in 2016 of 6m reflected the sale of a 4.1% shareholding in a subsidiary company in Saudi Arabia.
Interest paid was 204m 2016 210m.
Equity dividends paid in 2017 represents the 2016 final 404m and 2017 interim 280m dividends.
Dividends paid to noncontrolling interests decreased to 8m 2016 24m reflecting a lower payment by Saudi Maintenance and Supply Chain Management Company in which the Group has a 51% shareholding.
There was a cash outflow from matured derivative financial instruments of 83m 2016 480m inflow from rolling hedges relating to balances with the Groups subsidiaries and equity accounted investments.
The cash flow partially offsets the foreign exchange translation on the Groups external US dollardenominated borrowing see below.
Net cash flow from loans in 2016 represented repayment of a 350m 286m 3.5% bond at maturity.
Foreign exchange translation primarily arises in respect of the Groups US dollar denominated borrowing.
In 2016 this was materially offset by the cash flow from matured derivative financial instruments see above.
Cash flow Financial performance measures as defined by the Group Operating business cash flow KPI 1752 1004 Financial performance measures defined in IFRS m m Net cash flow from operating activities 1897 1229 Reconciliation from operating business cash flow to net cash flow from operating activities m m Operating business cash flow KPI 1752 1004 Add back Net capital expenditure and financial investment 444 450 Deduct Dividends received from equity accounted investments 72 38 Deduct Taxation 227 187 Net cash flow from operating activities 1897 1229 Net capital expenditure and financial investment 444 450 Dividends received from equity accounted investments 72 38 Interest received 23 10 Acquisitions and disposals 11 6 Net cash flow from investing activities 360 396 Interest paid 204 210 Net purchasesale of own shares 1 3 Equity dividends paid 684 670 Dividends paid to noncontrolling interests 8 24 Cash flow from matured derivative financial instruments 83 480 Movement in cash collateral 15 32 Net cash flow from loans  286 Net cash flow from financing activities 995 675 Net increase in cash and cash equivalents 542 158 Add back Net cash flow from loans  286 Add backdeduct Cash classified as held for sale 2 2 Foreign exchange translation 301 621 Other noncash movements 55 59 Decreaseincrease in net debt 790 120 Opening net debt 1542 1422 Net debt KPI 752 1542 187 and 188 Notes 24 and 26 to the Group accounts International Financial Reporting Standards.
Represented to reclassify interest paid from investing to financing activities.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Balance sheet Summarised balance sheet Intangible assets 10378 11264 Property plant and equipment and investment property 1977 1999 Equity accounted investments and other investments 390 305 Working capital 3752 3564 Groups share of the net IAS 19 pension deficit see below 3920 6054 Net tax assets and liabilities 435 935 Net other financial assets and liabilities 18 121 Net debt KPI 752 1542 Net assets held for sale 10 Net assets 4784 3464 Funding received from the UK government for property plant and equipment at BarrowinFurness UK relating to the Dreadnought submarine programme included in working capital in the Consolidated balance sheet is presented here in property plant and equipment and investment property.
Components of net debt m m Cash and cash equivalents 3271 2769 Debtrelated derivative financial instrument assets 60 114 Loans  noncurrent 4069 4425 Loans and overdrafts  current 14 Net debt KPI 752 1542 Exchange rates Year end 2017 2016 Balance sheet The 0.9bn decrease in intangible assets to 10.4bn 2016 11.3bn mainly reflects exchange translation 0.5bn and the Applied Intelligence goodwill impairment 0.4bn.
Property plant and equipment and investment property is 2.0bn 2016 2.0bn.
Equity accounted investments and other investments increased to 390m 2016 305m reflecting the Groups share of profit for the year 116m and reduced pension allocation from the lower deficit 66m less dividends received 72m.
The Groups share of the net IAS 19 pension deficit reduced to 3.9bn 2016 6.1bn mainly reflecting asset returns updated mortality tables and allowances for future mortality improvements.
The major movements in the net pension deficit are shown in the bridge chart below.
In November the 2017 UK triennial funding valuations and where necessary deficit recovery plans were agreed with the trustees and certified by the scheme actuaries after consultation with the Pensions Regulator.
The funding deficit across the UK schemes at 31 March 2017 was 2.1bn.
The UK accounting deficit using likeforlike mortality assumptions and asset values at 31 December 2017 is approximately 3bn higher than the funding deficit.
The discount rate applied to liabilities for accounting purposes reflects the yield on highquality corporate bonds.
The discount Accounting net pension deficit  bridge bn Add back 2016 allocation Change in mortality assumptions Actual return on assets Interest on liabilities Real discount rate
Deduct 2017 allocation 174 Note 21 to the Group accounts Maturity of the Groups borrowings bnteltelteltel 172 Note 19 to the Group accounts Amounts allocated to equity accounted investments.
Repayable in 2041 292m and 2044 395m.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Group financial review continued rate for funding purposes reflects a prudent assessment of expected returns on the investments held by the schemes.
Based on the new funding valuations the Group will increase current annual deficit recovery payments to the UK schemes to 220m a year from 1 April 2018.
Details of the Groups pension schemes are provided in note 21 to the Group accounts on page 174.
A net deferred tax asset of 0.7bn 2016 1.2bn relating to the Groups pension deficit is included within net tax assets and liabilities.
In aggregate there was a 0.2bn decrease in working capital largely reflecting advance funding on support contracts in Saudi Arabia and timing of VAT payments partly offset by previous advances now largely utilised.
The Groups net debt at 31 December 2017 is 752m a net decrease of 790m from the net debt position of 1542m at the start of the year.
There are no material debt maturities before 2019.
The maturity of the Groups borrowings is shown in the chart opposite.
Cash and cash equivalents of 3271m 2016 2769m are held primarily for the repayment of debt securities pension deficit funding payment of the 2017 final dividend and management of working capital.
Net assets held for sale represents the Aircraft Accessories and Components Company expected to be sold in 2018.
Accounting policies Critical accounting policies Certain of the Groups significant accounting policies are considered by the directors to be critical because of the level of complexity judgement or estimation involved in their application and their impact on the consolidated financial statements Revenue and profit recognition Revenue 18.3bn year ended 31 December 2017 See note 1 to the Group accounts Carrying value of goodwill Goodwill 10.0bn at 31 December 2017 See note 8 to the Group accounts Deferred tax asset on retirement benefit obligations Deferred tax asset on pensionretirement scheme deficits 0.7bn at 31 December 2017 See note 14 to the Group accounts Tax provisions Tax provisions 351m at 31 December 2017 See note 16 to the Group accounts Retirement benefit obligations Groups share of the net IAS 19 pension deficit 3.9bn at 31 December 2017 See note 21 to the Group accounts 142 For more information Changes in accounting policies Effective 1 January 2018 BAE Systems adopted IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with
The Groups results announcement for the half year ending 30 June 2018 will be the first to be prepared under IFRS 15.
The new Standard does not change the way in which we manage our contracts under Lifecycle Management our mandated project management process or the lifetime profitability and cash flow.
Revenue on the majority of contracts currently being recognised based on the completion of milestones or deliveries will cumulatively be recognised earlier.
The provisional impact of restating our results for the adoption of IFRS 15 is a reduction in underlying earnings per share of 1.4p to 42.1p for the year ended 31 December 2017 and an increase in net assets of 57m at 31 December 2017.
The restated results will be used as the comparatives for the Groups financial statements for the year ending 31 December 2018.
The earnings impact on 2018 and beyond is not expected to be material.
Details of the impact of IFRS 15 are provided in note 34 to the Group accounts on page 199.
Capital
Objectives
Maintain the Groups investment grade credit rating and ensure operating flexibility whilst meeting its pension obligations pursuing organic investment opportunities paying dividends in line with the Groups policy of longterm sustainable cover of around two times underlying earnings making accelerated returns of capital to shareholders when the balance sheet allows and when the return from doing so is in excess of the Groups Weighted Average Cost of Capital and investing in valueenhancing acquisitions where market conditions are right and where they deliver on the Groups strategy.
Policies
The Group funds its operations through a mixture of equity funding and debt financing including bank and capital market borrowings.
The capital structure of the Group reflects the judgement of the directors of an appropriate balance of funding required.
Three credit rating agencies publish credit ratings for the Group Rating Outlook Category Moodys Investors Service Baa2 Stable Investment grade Standard and Poors Ratings Services BBB Stable Investment grade Fitch Ratings BBB Stable Investment grade 185 Note 23 to the Group accounts
As part of the Groups capital allocation policy the Group plans to pay dividends in line with its policy of longterm sustainable cover of around two times underlying earnings.
The Board has recommended a final dividend of 13p per share making a total of 21.8p per share for the year an increase of 2% over 2016.
At this level the annual dividend is covered two times.
Subject to shareholder approval at the 2018 Annual General Meeting the dividend will be paid on 1 June 2018 to holders of ordinary shares registered on 20 April 2018.
The exdividend date is 19 April 2018.
At 31 December 2017 the Company had retained earnings of 2.6bn 2016 2.1bn the nondistributable portion of which is 649m 2016 604m see page 202.
Total external dividends relating to 2017 are 694m 2016 677m including the interim dividend paid during the year of 280m 2016 273m and the final dividend proposed of approximately 414m 2016 404m.
On an annual basis the Company receives dividends from its subsidiaries to increase further its distributable reserves and accordingly the Company expects to have sufficient distributable reserves to support its dividend policy.
The Groups dividend policy is underpinned by its viability and going concern statements see page 81.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Treasury The Groups treasury activities are overseen by the Treasury Review Management Committee
Two executive directors are members of the TRMC including the Group Finance Director who chairs the Committee.
The TRMC also has representatives with legal and tax expertise.
The Group operates a centralised treasury department that is accountable to the TRMC for managing treasury activities in accordance with the treasury policies approved by the Board.
Objectivespolicies
Net debt Maintain a balance between the continuity flexibility and cost of debt funding through the use of borrowings from a range of markets with a range of maturities currencies and interest rates reflecting the Groups risk profile.
Material borrowings are arranged by the central treasury department and funds raised are lent onward to operating subsidiaries as required.
Interest rates Manage the exposure to interest rate fluctuations on borrowings through varying the proportion of fixed rate debt relative to floating rate debt with derivative instruments including interest rate and crosscurrency swaps.
A minimum of 50% and a maximum of 90% of gross debt is maintained at fixed interest rates.
Liquidity
Maintain adequate undrawn committed borrowing facilities.
An undrawn committed Revolving Credit Facility of 2bn contracted to December 2018 and 1.9bn contracted from December 2018 to December 2020 is available to meet expected general corporate funding requirements.
Monitor and control counterparty credit risk and credit limit utilisation.
The Group adopts a conservative approach to the investment of its surplus cash.
It is deposited with financial institutions with strong credit ratings for short periods.
Currency
Reduce the Groups exposure to transactional volatility in earnings and cash flows from movements in foreign currency exchange rates.
All material firm transactional exposures are hedged.
The Group does not hedge the translation effect of exchange rate movements on the income statements or balance sheets of foreign subsidiaries and equity accounted investments it regards as longterm investments.
190 Note 28 to the Group accounts Tax strategy The Groups tax strategy is to ensure compliance with all applicable tax laws and regulations and manage the Groups tax expense in a way that is consistent with its values and its legal obligations in all relevant jurisdictions.
The Group does not tolerate activities designed to facilitate tax evasion offences.
The Group promotes collaborative professional working with tax authorities in order to build open transparent and trusted relationships.
As part of this the Group engages in open and early dialogue to discuss tax planning strategy risks and significant transactions and discloses any significant uncertainties in relation to tax matters.
Queries and information requests by tax authorities are responded to in a timely fashion and the Group ensures that tax authorities are kept informed about how issues are progressing.
The Group seeks to resolve issues in real time and before returns are filed where possible.
Fair accurate and timely disclosures are made in tax returns reports and documents that the Group files with or submits to tax authorities.
Where disagreements over tax arise the Group works proactively to seek to resolve all issues by agreement where possible and reach reasonable solutions.
In the UK the Group is subject to an annual risk assessment by HM Revenue and Customs and strives to achieve as low a risk rating as can be achieved by a group of BAE Systems size and complexity.
Whilst the Group aims to maximise the tax efficiency of its business transactions it does not use structures in its tax planning that are contrary to the intentions of the relevant legislature.
The Group interprets relevant tax laws in a reasonable way and ensures that transactions are structured in a way that is consistent with a relationship of cooperative compliance with tax authorities.
It also actively considers the implications of any planning for the Groups wider corporate reputation.
The Group is open and transparent with regard to decisionmaking governance and tax planning in its business keeping tax authorities informed of who has responsibility how decisions are reached how the business is structured and where different parts of the business are located.
BAE Systems operates internationally and is subject to tax in many different jurisdictions.
The Group employs professional tax managers and takes appropriate advice from reputable professional firms.
The Group is routinely subject to tax audits and reviews which can take a considerable period of time to conclude.
Provision is made for known issues based on managements interpretation of countryspecific legislation and the likely outcome of negotiations or litigation.
The assessment and management of tax risks are regularly reviewed by the Audit Committee as is the Groups tax strategy.
Armslength principles are applied in the pricing of all intragroup transactions of goods and services in accordance with Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development guidelines.
Where appropriate the Group engages with governments in relation to proposed legislation and tax policy.
The Group endorses the statement of tax principles issued by the Confederation of British Industry in May 2013 www. bi. principles. df.
154 Note 6 to the Group accounts BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Group financial review continued Electronic
Cyber and
Platforms and
US
Platforms and
UK
Platforms and
International
Employees
Employees
Employees
Employees
Employees
Financial performance measures As defined by the Group Defined in IFRS Year ended 31 December 2017
Sales
KPI
Underlying
EBITA
Return on sales %
Operating
KPI
Order
Order
Revenue
Operating
Return on revenue % Net cash flow from operating activities Electronic Systems 3635 562 15.5 450 4175 5.4 3635 542 14.9 569 Cyber and Intelligence 1820 52 2.9 116 1859 2.1 1820 367 20.2 127 Platforms and Services US 2928 242 8.3 222 3542 4.6 2825 218 7.7 286 Platforms and Services UK 7682 794 10.3 427 6817 16.8 7624 774 10.2 607 Platforms and Services International 4138 472 11.4 671 4365 13.3 3136 427 13.6 669
Deduct Intragroup 864 789 1.0 718 Deduct Taxation Total 19626 2034 10.4 1752 20257 41.2 18322 1480 8.1 1897 We use financial performance measures as defined by the Group to monitor the underlying financial performance of the Groups reporting segments.
Reconciliations from these measures to the financial performance measures defined in IFRS are provided in the Group financial review on pages 28 to 34.
Reconciliations by reporting segment for revenue and operating profit are included in note 1 to the Group accounts see page 148 and for net cash flow from operating activities in note 24 to the Group accounts see page 187.
Effective 1 January 2018 BAE Systems revised its reporting segments to reflect the organisational changes described on page 17.
See page 56 for more information.
Including share of equity accounted investments.
International Financial Reporting Standards.
HQ comprises the Groups head office activities together with a 49% interest in Air Astana.
Taxation is managed on a Groupwide basis.
We report our performance through five principal reporting segments Alternative performance measure definitions BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements
First flights of our new HeadUp Display Our LiteHUD HeadUp Display HUD took to the skies for its first flights in 2017 marking a significant milestone for both the technology and the programme.
A HUD is a seethrough display that seamlessly presents flightcritical information directly in a pilots line of sight without obstructing views of the outside world.
We began funding the development of LiteHUD more than two years ago and we are confident that customers will benefit from its nextgeneration display capability at an offtheshelf price.
Designed using our patented optical waveguide technology LiteHUD is 60% smaller and up to 50% lighter than conventional headup displays.
The system enhances situational awareness in day and night conditions significantly improving flight safety and reducing pilot fatigue.
Electronic Combat includes the Integrated Electronic Warfare Low Observable Tactical Aircraft Electronic Warfare and Tactical Aircraft Electronic Warfare product lines.
The business provides a depth of capability in integrated electronic warfare systems for airborne applications including electronic support electronic attack and electronic protection technologies.
Survivability Targeting and Sensing exploits the electrooptical and infrared spectrum to provide leading threat warning and infrared countermeasures systems precision guidance and seeker solutions advanced targeting solutions headup displays and stateoftheart tactical imaging systems.
C4ISR Systems addresses the market for actionable intelligence through innovative technical solutions for airborne persistent surveillance identification systems signals intelligence underwater and surface warfare solutions and space products.
Controls and Avionics addresses the commercial and military aircraft electronics markets including flybywire flight controls full authority digital engine controls flight deck systems cabin management systems and mission computers.
Power and Propulsion Solutions delivers electric propulsion and power management performance with innovative products and solutions that advance vehicle mobility efficiency and capability in the transit military marine and rail markets.
Electronic Systems comprises the US and UKbased electronics activities including electronic warfare systems electrooptical sensors military and commercial digital engine and flight controls precision guidance and seeker solutions nextgeneration military communications systems and data links persistent surveillance capabilities and hybrid electric drive systems.
Segmental review BAE Systems Annual Report 2017
Systems Operational and strategic highlights Orders worth over 450m 333m received for F35 Lightning II hardware production and support Invested more than 100m 74m in our Ramp to Rate initiative to prepare the business for future Electronic Warfare growth Received a 311m 230m contract to provide the Digital Electronic Warfare System DEWS to support the sale of new aircraft to an international customer Growing demand for APKWS laserguided rockets with awards totalling approximately 300m 222m during the year
HeadUp Display selected by critical launch customers with first flights in 2017 The FADEC Alliance joint venture transitioned to FullRate Production of the full authority digital engine control for the LEAP commercial aircraft engine Major milestone achieved with the delivery of our 8000th hybridelectric system Financial performance measures as defined by the Group 2017 2016 Sales KPI 3635m 3282m Underlying EBITA KPI 562m 494m Return on sales 15.5% 15.1% Operating business cash flow
Order intake KPI 4175m 3322m Order backlog 5.4bn 5.2bn Sales compared with 2016 were up 5% at 4.7bn 3.6bn.
The growth came in the electronic warfare business from the F35 Lightning II and DEWS programmes as well as increasing classified activity.
Volumes of the the top five sales lines.
The return on sales achieved of 15.5% 2016 15.1% reflects continued strong programme execution and risk retirement.
Financial performance Financial performance measures defined in IFRS 2017 2016 Revenue 3635m 3282m Operating profit 542m 474m Return on revenue 14.9% 14.4% Cash flow from operating activities 569m 568m Cash conversion of underlying EBITA for the full year was at 85% 2016 97% excluding pension deficit funding.
Order backlog was at a record high of 7.3bn 5.4bn following further awards for F35 Lightning II systems classified Electronic Warfare activity and APKWS product.
Sales by domain %
3%
16%
81% Sales by line of business % Controls and Avionics Power and Propulsion
25%
Combat
30%
Targeting and Sensing 18%
Systems
27% Sales analysis Defence and commercial %
22%
78% Including share of equity accounted investments.
International Financial Reporting Standards.
Alternative performance measure definitions BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Operational performance Electronic Combat BAE Systems has sustained its leadership position in the US electronic warfare market and production is ramping up across a number of programmes some of which are classified.
LowRate Initial Production LRIP hardware deliveries for the F35 Lightning II programme continue with Lot 10 and 11 deliveries.
We have received initial Lot 12 funding with an anticipated final award value in excess of 300m 222m and a Request for Proposal for a potential block buy encompassing multiple lots.
BAE Systems reached a price agreement with Lockheed Martin on a 155m 115m Electronic Warfare Performance Based Logistics contract.
The award provides Electronic Warfare material availability and support for the F35 Lightning II aircraft over a fiveyear period.
The business is under contracts from Boeing and Warner Robins Air Logistics Complex totalling more than 1.0bn 0.7bn to install the Digital Electronic Warfare System on select new F15 aircraft upgrade existing F15 aircraft and to provide spare units and modules for an international customer.
The programme remains on schedule.
BAE Systems has also received a 311m 230m contract to provide the Digital Electronic Warfare System to support the sale of new F15 aircraft to another international customer.
Following our selection by Boeing in 2015 to develop and manufacture the nextgeneration digital electronic warfare system for the US Air Forces Eagle Passive Active Warning Survivability System programme to upgrade up to 400 F15 aircraft we are currently executing the 161m 119m engineering and manufacturing development contract.
The programme could be worth more than 1.0bn 0.7bn over its life.
We have been awarded 87m 64m worth of modifications to a competitively awarded contract for an electronic warfare system for the US Air Force Special Operations Commands fleet of C 130J aircraft.
The total value of the contract including all options could exceed This award extends our position to include our electronic warfare capabilities on large fixedwing aircraft.
Production of our sensor technology for the Long Range AntiShip Missile has commenced following a 40m 30m order from prime contractor Lockheed Martin.
We provided the sensor technology that supported a successful launch of the missile demonstrating its ability to address the US Navys requirement for versatile multiplatform precision munitions that enable distributed operations.
For over a decade we have provided full lifecycle support as the prime mission system integrator for the US Air Forces EC 130H Compass Call standoff electronic attack platform.
We are under contract to crossdeck the mission electronics onto a new Gulfstream G550 business jet for the US Air Force.
BAE Systems will continue to sustain the existing EC 130H electronics as we develop manufacture procure integrate and sustain the electronics.
The programme could be worth more than 2.0bn 1.5bn over the next decade.
Due to the sensitive nature of electronic combat systems and technology many of our programmes are classified.
As a world leader in electronic warfare we continue to experience growth in these increasingly important areas.
Survivability Targeting and Sensing Our Advanced Precision Kill Weapon System delivered as at 31 December 2017.
In addition to expanding its use in the US military the system is generating strong international attention with 19 nations expressing interest.
The programme received awards totalling approximately 300m 222m during the year.
We continue to execute on the Terminal HighAltitude Area Defence programme.
We have received a 30m 22m production contract for longlead material on Lots 9 and 10 and anticipate that additional units will be added in response to increasing demand.
On the 236m 174m Common Missile Warning System programme we continue to deliver to schedule.
Under the fiveyear 434m 321m Enhanced Night Vision Goggle III and Family of Weapon Sights  Individual Indefinite Delivery Indefinite Quantity contract we continued to progress the production qualification testing.
The US Armys Family of Weapon Sights Crew Served programme completed its System Critical Design Review during the year.
This sevenyear contract awarded in 2016 has a potential value of up to The LiteHUD HeadUp Display has been selected by critical launch customers for integration on multiple platforms.
In 2017 it had its first flights on a C 130J aircraft a Textron Scorpion jet and our advanced Hawk demonstrator aircraft.
In December the US Department of Defense announced that we were awarded a contract by the US Army for the Limited Interim Missile Warning System programme.
C4ISR Systems In September the Communications and Navigation Solutions product line joined the Intelligence Surveillance and Reconnaissance business to form a new C4ISR Systems business that spans the entire mission lifecycle sensing processing exploitation and dissemination.
As a leading provider of spacequalified subsystems and components we continue to experience growth in the areas of integrated onboard processors reconfigurable processing payloads and secure communications.
We have been awarded an 81m 60m contract for the Network Tactical Common Data Link programme to provide the US Navy with the ability to simultaneously transmit and receive realtime intelligence surveillance and reconnaissance data over multiple data links with a system to be fielded on various surface ship types.
Since winning the Geospatial Data Services Foundational GEOINT Content Management programme in 2014 we have been awarded orders valued at 214m 158m.
The business is meeting all delivery requirements in assisting US intelligence community customers with the development of advanced geospatial intelligence data collection and processing solutions.
As a provider of signals intelligence capabilities we are executing the 132m 98m Tactical Signals Intelligence Payloads programme for the US Armys Gray Eagle unmanned aircraft.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Segmental review Electronic Systems Our strategy in action Unmanned air systems adaptability and mission efficiency We are developing technology for the US Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency DARPA that will enable unmanned air systems to conduct multiple missions.
The CONverged Collaborative Elements for RF Task Operations  or CONCERTO programme is creating single multifunction payloads that adapt to changing battlefield situations and mission needs in real time.
These compact units will allow operators to converge multiple radio frequency systems on one payload that will efficiently switch between intelligence surveillance and reconnaissance command and control networking and combat operations support missions without having to make physical changes.
Looking forward Forwardlooking information for the Electronic Systems reporting segment is provided later in this report.
Work continues on the US Navys P8A Poseidon maritime surveillance aircraft programme to provide stateoftheart processing capabilities.
The programme is expected to be worth 1.2bn 0.9bn over its life.
Controls and Avionics BAE Systems is a major supplier of engine controls flight controls and cabin and flight deck systems.
The development of the integrated flight control electronics and remote electronic units for Boeings nextgeneration 777X aircraft remains on schedule with all hardware in qualification and systems integration testing progressing to plan.
On the Boeing 737 MAX aircraft a successful first flight was completed on the MAX 9 with our spoiler controls flight deck systems and utilities electronics.
The development of our civil active inceptors is progressing with Gulfstream G500 and Embraer KC390 aircraft continuing flight tests with positive pilot feedback.
A derivative of the civil inceptors for the Boeing CH47 Chinook helicopter LinkEdge Active Parallel Actuation Subsystem has successfully completed its Preliminary Design Review.
FADEC Alliance a joint venture between FADEC International our joint venture with Safran Electronics and Defense and GE Aviation has transitioned the full authority digital engine control FADEC for the LEAP engine to FullRate Production.
The LEAP engine powers the Airbus A320neo the Boeing 737 MAX and the Comac C919.
The development of the FADEC for the GE9x engine for the Boeing 777X is on schedule with certification planned for 2018.
On the F35 Lightning II programme LRIP Lot 11 is ongoing for the current vehicle management computer and active inceptor system equipment.
Orders for Lot 12 are expected in 2018.
BAE Systems has been awarded a multi million dollar contract to provide flight control computers active inceptors accelerometers and integrated colour display systems for new Taiwanese Air Force training aircraft.
The award establishes our footprint on a new platform.
Power and Propulsion Solutions With the transit bus market continuing its shift towards more electric bus systems to meet emission targets and to satisfy an environmentallyconscious public BAE Systems achieved a major milestone with the delivery of its 8000th hybridelectric system.
Transit operators around the world are looking for reliable lowemission technologies and major cities such as Seattle Boston Quebec London and Paris are adopting our advanced hybrid solutions which are capable of emissionfree driving up to half of the time.
Representation of 2017 results
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Our strategy in action Providing antimoney laundering protection to one of the UKs largest banks BAE Systems Applied Intelligence has been selected by one of the UKs largest banks as its preferred strategic vendor for antimoney laundering protection.
With laundered money now estimated to represent between 2% and 5% of global Gross Domestic Product  equivalent to the fifth largest economy in the world money laundering schemes are becoming ever more complex with commercial retail and investment banks all becoming targets for fraudsters.
The contract means this bank can use our latest cuttingedge technology to ensure criminals and money launderers are accurately detected.
Intelligence and Security delivers a broad range of services to the US military and government.
Global Analysis and Operations provides innovative missionenabling analytic solutions and support to the US government.
Integrated Electronics and Warfare Systems provides systems engineering integration and throughlife support services for US defence and coalition partner customers.
IT Solutions delivers secure solutions and services that enable US national security customers to perform missionsensitive operations and protect their data and networks.
Applied Intelligence provides data intelligence solutions which enable governments and commercial organisations to defend against nationalscale threats protect their networks and data against sophisticated attacks and operate successfully in cyberspace.
Its solutions are delivered as licensed technologies softwareasaservice subscriptions through outsourced managed services and via consulting and systems integration projects.
UK Services delivers cyber security data analytics and digital transformation consulting and systems integration services to national security government and large enterprises in the UK.
International Services and Solutions provides cyber intelligence and defence solutions to international government agencies and communications service providers.
Commercial Solutions provides cyber defence counterfraud and financial compliance products to commercial organisations globally.
Cyber and Intelligence comprises the USbased Intelligence and Security business and UKheadquartered Applied Intelligence business and covers the Groups cyber security secure government and commercial and financial security activities.
Segmental review BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Cyber and Intelligence Operational and strategic highlights Intelligence and Security Six task orders secured valued at more than 180m 133m for FullMotion Video Intelligence Surveillance and Reconnaissance analysis support Won a position on a US Department of Treasury programme to support the Office of Terrorism and Financial Intelligence with a maximum lifecycle value of 135m 100m Awarded three US Navy contracts with an estimated lifecycle value of approximately 180m 133m to provide engineering and integration support for critical mission systems Selected by the US Navy to pursue orders to provide equipment and support services for Space and Naval Warfare Systems Center Atlantic Applied Intelligence Contracts won with UK government and commercial customers for secure IT transformation and cyber defence Restructuring activities under way including headcount and facility reductions and a move to a revised operating model effective 1 January 2018 to drive profitable growth Financial performance measures as defined by the Group 2017 2016 Sales KPI 1820m 1778m Underlying EBITA KPI 52m 90m Return on sales 2.9% 5.1% Operating business cash flow
Order intake KPI 1859m 1885m Order backlog 2.1bn 2.4bn In aggregate sales were marginally lower at 2.3bn 1.8bn.
The Intelligence and Security business saw a 4% decrease largely in the highly competitive area of IT support services to the intelligence community.
Growth in Applied Intelligence was at 6% benefiting from increases in the UK Services and International Services and Solutions divisions.
Return on sales was 2.9% 2016 5.1% after a restructuring charge taken in the Applied Intelligence business.
Return on sales in the Intelligence and Security business was similar to last year at 8.8%.
In Applied Intelligence the underlying loss for the year was 61m including 24m for the restructuring charge.
The first half loss Financial performance Financial performance measures defined in IFRS 2017 2016 Revenue 1820m 1778m Operating lossprofit 367m 59m Return on revenue 20.2% 3.3% Cash flow from operating activities 127m 106m of 27m was followed by a reduced second half loss before the restructuring charge of 10m as the costreduction actions under the ongoing restructuring started to deliver bottomline benefit.
There was an operating loss of 367m 2016 profit 59m which includes a 384m goodwill impairment in Applied Intelligence reflecting the future level and timing of expected returns from the business.
Cash conversion of underlying EBITA for the year was in excess of 100%.
Order backlog reduced marginally to 2.9bn 2.1bn.
Sales by business %
Intelligence
30%
70% Sales analysis Intelligence and Security % IT Solutions 20% Global Analysis and Operations 18% Integrated Electronics and Warfare Systems 62%
99%
1% Sales analysis Applied Intelligence %
46%
54% International Services and Solutions 21% Commercial Solutions 30% UK Services 49% Including share of equity accounted investments.
International Financial Reporting Standards.
Alternative performance measure definitions BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Operational performance Intelligence and Security Global Analysis and Operations We are pursuing task orders under a new Indefinite Delivery Indefinite Quantity contract with an estimated value of more than 400m 296m to expand our work in motionimagery analysis analytic training multimedia support and research for the US intelligence community.
During the year the business secured six task order contracts valued at more than 180m 133m.
We won a position on a US Department of Treasury programme to support the Office of Terrorism and Financial Intelligence.
The maximum lifecycle value of all task orders to be awarded under the programme is estimated at 135m 100m.
Integrated Electronics and Warfare Systems The business is executing on the second year of a fiveyear solesource contract worth up to 368m 272m to provide systems engineering services to the US Navys Strategic Systems Programs office.
The programme provides support for weapons systems on board US Ohio and UK Vanguard Class submarines as well as future Ohio Class replacement and UK Dreadnought Class submarines.
US Navy contract awards in the year include a new fiveyear 42m 31m multipleaward contract with the Naval Undersea Warfare Center Division to install submarine multi mission trainer systems at bases in the US Guam and Australia a 22month 76m 56m contract to support the rapid design development fabrication customisation and lifecycle maintenance of new and existing communication and electronic platforms for the Naval Warfare Center Aircraft Division and a fiveyear 64m 47m contract to provide lifecycle systems engineering and technical support for a variety of deployed systems that ensure operational readiness of the fleet.
In addition the US Navy awarded BAE Systems a position on a fiveyear Indefinite Delivery Indefinite Quantity contract to provide research development test and evaluation services support for the Naval Warfare Center Aircraft Divisions Aircraft Prototype Systems
The potential lifecycle value of all task orders under this contract across the eight awardees could reach 487m 360m.
Our strategy in action
US Army vehicles In October our engineers achieved a significant milestone successfully upgrading the C4I capabilities of the 5000th mineresistant tactical vehicle for US and allied forces.
The upgrades which are performed at our stateoftheart facility in Summerville South Carolina US enhance vehicle communications systems intercom systems mobile network systems and soldier protective systems on a variety of MineResistant Ambush Protected MRAP vehicles including the MRAP AllTerrain Vehicle MATV MaxxPro Dash and RG31 platforms.
This important milestone comes as the US Army seeks to improve the mission capabilities of its tactical vehicle fleet and enhance situational awareness for soldiers.
Command Control Communications Computers and Intelligence.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Segmental review Cyber and Intelligence The US Navy has also selected BAE Systems to provide equipment and support services for Space and Naval Warfare Systems Center
As one of several companies involved we will pursue future orders as part of this fiveyear Indefinite Delivery Indefinite Quantity contract.
The total value of all orders to be awarded over the life of the contract is estimated at 180m 133m.
On the US Air Force Intercontinental Ballistic Missile Integration Support Contractor programme we were awarded over 29m 21m of additional engineering change proposals in 2017 raising the total lifecycle value of the contract to 922m 682m.
Our work includes programme management systems sustainment and cyber security assessment and defence.
We continue to pursue task orders on a nineyear Indefinite Delivery Indefinite Quantity contract to support the US Army in developing nextgeneration technologies for space highaltitude and missile defence.
IT Solutions Our contract to connect a number of US agencies under one shared IT environment passed significant security testing and was authorised for adoption into the government IT infrastructure.
Although we executed on our task orders and provided IT services to foster greater systems integration and information sharing for the intelligence community we have been advised that future contract options will not be exercised as the government reassesses its acquisition strategy in favour of a more federated desktop approach.
We therefore do not anticipate any future awards beyond the 164m 121m of funding to date.
Our business was awarded a contract increase of 160m 118m to extend the period of performance of a major software development and IT support contract for a US intelligence community customer.
We received a fiveyear 41m 30m contract with the US Department of Homeland Security National Protection and Programs Directorate to provide data analytics risk scoring and systems engineering support as well as cyber security assessment governance and training to ensure all federal civilian agencies are in compliance with government cyber security regulations.
Organisational changes Effective 12 February 2018 the business moved to a revised operating model to position for growth through three customerfocused business areas Integrated Defence Solutions Intelligence Solutions and Air Force Solutions.
Applied Intelligence The business has delivered revenue growth from the continued delivery of national security solutions for the UK and international governments as well as deployment of antifraud regulatory compliance and cyber security products and services to commercial customers.
UK Services The business continues to invest in engineering disciplines and specialist expertise in the cyber digital and data domains to support our customers in national security intelligence nationalscale cyber defence commercial cyber security and regulatory compliance.
We have won a number of contracts with both UK government and commercial enterprises helping our customers to maximise the benefits of secure IT transformation and cyber defence.
International Services and Solutions The business was underpinned by significant demand for our nationalscale cyber defence capabilities.
We continue to work with key national security customers in AsiaPacific and the Middle East.
Our technical capability in multisource intelligence analytics has advanced significantly.
In order to improve the cost competitiveness of our engineering we are continuing to expand our offshore service operations and delivery centres.
Commercial Solutions We have a focused set of cyber security antifraud and regulatory compliance solutions.
We continue to see demand for our in the financial services sector.
Customers are increasingly consuming these solutions as multiyear managed services.
We are continuing to renew existing longterm customer contracts where we deploy a comprehensive portfolio of products.
Provision of our antifraud and antimoney laundering capabilities continues to see demand with financial services customers.
Organisational changes In the second half of the year the business commenced a restructuring that resulted in a headcount reduction and effective 1 January 2018 the business moved to a revised operating model to deliver a more targeted portfolio of products and services focused on customers within three core business units Government Financial Services and Technology and Commercial.
The restructuring will enable a greater focus on customer needs and higher levels of operational efficiency in the commercial business that will accelerate improvements in competitiveness and profitability.
Looking forward Forwardlooking information for the Cyber and Intelligence reporting segment is provided later in this report.
Representation of 2017 results
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Our strategy in action Nearing FullRate Production on the Paladin Integrated Management programme In December the US Army awarded us a 414m 306m contract for the third and final LowRate Initial Production option for the M109A7 selfpropelled howitzer.
The award includes options to initiate FullRate Production which if exercised would bring the full value to 1.7bn 1.3bn.
The M109A7 consists of a new chassis design for improved performance and upgraded survivability as well as state oftheart digital backbone and power generation capability.
These enhancements reduce overall programme cost and logistical footprint and provide improved mobility and system survivability.
We will produce 48 vehicle sets including M992A3 ammunition carriers with options for 60 vehicle sets per year for approximately three years thereafter during FullRate Production.
Platforms and Services US with operations in the US UK and Sweden manufactures combat vehicles weapons and munitions and delivers services and sustainment activities including ship repair and the management of governmentowned munitions facilities.
Segmental review US Combat Vehicles focuses on a portfolio of tracked combat vehicles amphibious vehicles accessories protection systems and tactical support services for the US military and international customers.
Weapon Systems focuses on naval weapons artillery advanced weapons precision munitions high explosives and propellants for US UK and international customers.
Services include complex munition site management for the US Armys Holston and Radford facilities.
US Ship Repair is a major provider of nonnuclear ship repair modernisation overhaul and conversions to the US Navy government and commercial maritime customers.
It has five operational sites in the US on the Atlantic Gulf of Mexico and Pacific coasts as well as in Hawaii.
BAE Systems Hgglunds focuses on the tracked vehicle market for Swedish and international customers.
FNSS the Turkish land systems business in which BAE Systems holds a 49% interest produces and upgrades tracked and wheeled military vehicles for domestic and international customers.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Platforms and
US
Including share of equity accounted investments.
International Financial Reporting Standards.
Sales by domain %
39%
60%
1% Sales by line of business % US Combat
30%
Systems
33% BAE Systems
7%
3% US Ship
27% Sales analysis Platforms and services %
22%
78% Operational and strategic highlights Vehicle deliveries nearing completion under the engineering and manufacturing development phase of the Armored MultiPurpose Vehicle programme Awarded a 414m 306m contract for the third and final option for LowRate Initial Production under the Paladin Integrated Management programme Completed deliveries of the 16 Amphibious Combat Vehicle prototypes to the US Marine Corps First two M777 lightweight howitzers shipped to India for testing under the 542m 401m contract awarded in January 2017 140m 104m contract awarded for the modernisation of USS Tortuga Construction of the final commercial ship is nearing completion and the ship is expected to be delivered in the first half of 2018 FNSS received a 155m 138m contract to provide 27 amphibious assault vehicles to the Turkish Ministry of National Defence Financial performance measures as defined by the Group 2017 2016 Sales KPI 2928m 2874m Underlying EBITA KPI 242m 211m Return on sales 8.3% 7.3% Operating business cash flow
Order intake KPI 3542m 3308m Order backlog 4.6bn 4.6bn Sales reduced by 3% to 3.8bn 2.9bn as deliveries of land vehicles to Brazil and Japan slipped into the first half of 2018.
The business delivered an improved return on sales of 8.3% 2016 7.3%.
Charges taken in the year on the commercial shipbuilding programmes amounted to 16m 12m with just one contract now remaining for completion.
Cash conversion of underlying EBITA was significantly improved despite the impact from the use of provisions on the commercial shipbuilding programmes.
Financial performance Financial performance measures defined in IFRS 2017 2016 Revenue 2825m 2783m Operating profit 218m 182m Return on revenue 7.7% 6.5% Cash flow from operating activities 286m 129m Order backlog was increased to 6.3bn 4.6bn supportive of future growth expectations.
Key awards in the year included the 0.5bn 0.4bn Indian order for M777 howitzers 0.4bn 0.3bn for Paladin production and a total of 1.3bn 1.0bn in the Ship Repair business.
Alternative performance measure definitions BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Operational performance US Combat Vehicles The business continues to perform on a number of key franchise combat vehicle programmes across both domestic and international markets.
On the US Armys Armored MultiPurpose Vehicle programme we have nearly concluded deliveries of the first 29 vehicles under the engineering and manufacturing development phase.
The contract which has a potential value of 1.2bn 0.9bn including options for 289 vehicles in LowRate Initial Production brings the US Army closer to achieving its objective to replace its legacy M113 armoured personnel carriers.
In December we received a 414m 306m contract for the third and final option for LowRate Initial Production of 48 M109A7 selfpropelled howitzers and M992A3 ammunition carriers under the Paladin Integrated Management programme.
With options for FullRate Production of a further 180 vehicle sets over three years the award is worth approximately 1.7bn 1.3bn.
The business is executing a 286m 211m engineering and manufacturing development contract to address the space weight power and cooling limitations of the Bradley family of vehicles and to prepare the vehicle for communication network upgrades.
The
US customers production decision regarding the upgrade of approximately 500 vehicles over a threeyear period is expected in 2018.
In September we received a contract from the US Army worth up to 69m 51m for the conversion of the next 20 M88A1 recovery vehicles to the more capable Heavy Equipment Recovery Combat Utility Lift Evacuation Systems HERCULES configuration.
In March we received a contract from the US Army worth up to 112m 83m for technical support and sustainment of M88 recovery vehicles.
Teamed with Iveco Defence we completed deliveries of the 16 Amphibious Combat Vehicle ACV 1.1 prototypes to the US Marine Corps for testing under the 158m 117m engineering and manufacturing development phase of the programme.
We are one of two competitors for this programme with final downselection expected in 2018.
Whilst we have encountered some production challenges work continues on multiple contracts totalling 165m 122m for Assault Amphibious Vehicles AAVs for the Japanese Ministry of Defence including a contract for 30 new AAVs and an 82m 61m contract with Brazil to provide 23 upgraded AAVs.
Weapon Systems BAE Systems remains a leading provider of gun systems and precision strike capabilities.
In February 2017 we completed the acquisition of IAP Research Inc. power electronics and advanced materials.
We continue to execute on a 183m contract to provide the gun system known as the Maritime Indirect Fire System for the Royal Navys Type 26 frigate.
Following the contract modification received in 2016 from the Swedish government formalising its purchase of an additional 24 Archer systems production work continues with deliveries expected to begin in 2018.
In October we received a contract to deliver additional Bofors 155mm BONUS smart antiarmour munitions to the Swedish Army in 2019.
In January 2017 we received a 542m 401m Foreign Military Sale contract from the US government to provide 145 M777 lightweight howitzers to the Indian Army.
We will build the first 25 guns in our facilities with the remaining systems assembled in India by Mahindra Defence Services our selected supplier to establish an assembly integration and test facility in India.
The first two guns were shipped during the year and are progressing through incountry testing.
In July we received a 47m 35m contract for the continued development of the precisionguided Hypervelocity Projectile a nextgeneration lowdrag projectile capable of executing multiple missions from a number of gun systems.
In the complex ordnance manufacturing business we continue to manage the US Armys Radford and Holston munitions facilities operating near capacity.
In 2017 we received additional funding of 177m 131m to continue construction of a new nitrocellulose facility in Radford.
At Holston we are performing on modernisation contracts totalling 135m 100m for waste water management and a 146m 108m contract for the construction of a nitric acid recovery facility to produce larger quantities of insensitive munitions.
US Ship Repair As a leading provider of US Navy ship repair and modernisation services we secured firm orders across our US shipyards totalling approximately 1.3bn 1.0bn in 2017 including a 140m 104m contract for the modernisation of the USS Tortuga at our Norfolk shipyard.
We continue to adjust our workforce and facilities to meet evolving customer demand including the new dry dock in our San Diego shipyard which completed operational certification in February and welcomed the USS New Orleans as its first vessel for servicing.
One of the final two commercial ships is complete and awaiting acceptance sea trials pending identification of a buyer following the original customers decision not to take delivery of the vessel.
Construction of the final ship is nearing completion and the ship is expected to be delivered in the first half of 2018.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Segmental review Platforms and Services
BAE Systems Hgglunds Series production of CV90 Infantry Fighting Vehicles for Norway was completed during the year under the 865m 640m contract.
We have received contracts from the Estonian government for a sustainment programme for 44 CV90s.
We are performing to schedule on the refurbishment of Swedish CV90 vehicles and the sustainment and upgrade of Danish CV90s.
We are integrating Mjlner mortar systems on 40 Swedish CV90s and testing and verification of Active Protection Systems on Dutch CV90s is under way together with significant vehicle upgrades.
We continue to perform on a contract to produce 32 BvS10 military vehicles for Austria.
FNSS
FNSS our land systems joint venture based in Turkey continues to perform under its 524m 387m programme to produce 259 8x8 wheeled armoured vehicles for the Royal Malaysian Army.
Production has completed on a contract to upgrade M113 tracked armoured personnel carriers for the Royal Saudi Land Forces.
The next phase of the contract is expected in 2018.
In support of an export contract to Oman awarded in 2015 for the PARS Wheeled Armoured Vehicle work continues to deliver 8x8 and 6x6 vehicles in a number of configurations.
Deliveries of the first 8x8 and 6x6 vehicles have been accepted with the first production batch of 8x8 vehicles delivered in December.
Work has begun under two Turkish Land Forces contracts a 278m 247m contract signed in June 2016 to supply 260 AntiTank Vehicles and an 84m 75m contract signed in December 2016 for air defence vehicles.
In March FNSS received a 155m 138m contract to provide 27 amphibious assault vehicles to the Turkish Ministry of National
Our strategy in action A new concept for fullspectrum air defence We take pride in working closely with our customers to understand and develop the capabilities they require to complete their missions.
During the 2017 AUSA Association of the United States Army exhibition in October BAE Systems unveiled its ManoeuvreShort Range Air Defence MSHORAD concept vehicle based on a Bradley Infantry Fighting Vehicle designed to address the US Armys shortrange air defence requirements.
The integration of MSHORAD on an existing Bradley vehicle demonstrates our ability to bring innovative solutions to existing adaptable platforms.
MSHORAD a multispectral solution consisting of detection identification tracking and engagement capabilities to defeat air threats such as unmanned air vehicles integrated on the Bradley would provide a fullspectrum air defence solution to the US Army.
Looking forward Forwardlooking information for the Platforms and Services US reporting segment is provided later in this report.
Representation of 2017 results
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Our strategy in action First T yphoon and Hawk aircraft delivered to the Royal Air Force of Oman The arrival of the first Typhoon and Hawk aircraft part of a batch of 12 combat and eight trainer jets scheduled to be delivered to the Sultanate of Oman was marked with a ceremony in June in the presence of the Commander of the Royal Air Force of Oman at Adam Air Base Oman.
The Sultanate of Oman announced its decision to purchase Typhoon and Hawk aircraft in December 2012 and this first delivery signifies important progress in helping the Sultanate to upgrade the capability of its air force.
Military Air and Information includes programmes for the production of Typhoon combat and Hawk trainer aircraft F35 Lightning II manufacture and support support and upgrades for Typhoon Tornado and Hawk aircraft and development of nextgeneration Unmanned Air Systems and defence information systems.
Maritime programmes include the construction of two Queen Elizabeth Class aircraft carriers five River Class Offshore Patrol Vessels and seven Astute Class submarines for the Royal Navy the design and production of the Dreadnought Class submarine and Type 26 frigate and inservice support including the delivery of services at HM Naval Base Portsmouth.
Land UK provides combat vehicle upgrades and support to the British Army and international customers and designs develops and manufactures a comprehensive range of munitions products servicing its main customer the UK Ministry of Defence as well as international customers.
The business also develops and manufactures casedtelescoped weapons through its CTA International joint venture.
Organisational changes Effective 1 January 2018 BAE Systems revised its reporting segments to reflect the organisational changes described on page 17.
The Platforms and Services UK and Platforms and Services International management structures have been removed with the organisation streamlined and strengthened Air and Maritime reporting segments created.
Platforms and Services UK comprises the Groups UKbased air maritime land and shared services activities.
Segmental review BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Platforms and
UK
Operational and strategic highlights Contract valued at approximately 5bn signed in December to supply 24 Typhoon aircraft and support to Qatar subject to financing conditions and receipt by the Group of first payment First eight Typhoon and all eight Hawk aircraft for Oman delivered to the Sultanate of Oman Signed the full 3.7bn production contract for the initial batch of three Type 26 frigates Received the full 1.4bn contract for the sixth Astute Class submarine from the Royal Navy in March and the fourth Astute boat Audacious was launched in April Rationalisation activities announced including potential headcount reductions in the Military Air and Information and Maritime Services businesses Financial performance measures as defined by the Group 2017 2016 Sales KPI 7682m 7806m Underlying EBITA KPI 794m 810m Return on sales 10.3% 10.4% Operating business cash flow
Order intake KPI 6817m 8024m Order backlog 16.8bn 17.8bn Sales of 7.7bn 2016 7.8bn were marginally lower than 2016.
Activity levels on the submarine programmes were ahead of plan.
Return on sales was at 10.3% 2016 10.4%.
There was a cash inflow of 427m 2016 199m which includes a 106m temporary benefit relating to VAT.
Consumption of customer advances on the Omani Saudi Arabian and European Typhoon contracts has now largely completed.
Financial performance Financial performance measures defined in IFRS 2017 2016 Revenue 7624m 7699m Operating profit 774m 780m Return on revenue 10.2% 10.1% Cash flow from operating activities 607m 385m Order backlog reduced to 16.8bn 2016 17.8bn.
The 5bn order received from Qatar in December for 24 Typhoon aircraft and support has not yet been taken into order backlog pending completion of the financing package which we expect in the coming months.
Sales by domain %
5%
39%
56% Sales by line of business % Military Air and Information 59% Land UK 4%
37% Sales analysis Platforms and services %
63%
37% Including share of equity accounted investments.
International Financial Reporting Standards.
Alternative performance measure definitions BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Operational performance Military Air and Information In December BAE Systems and the Government of Qatar entered into a contract valued at approximately 5bn for the supply of 24 Typhoon aircraft.
Alongside supplying the aircraft the agreement provides for the supply of ground support to the Qatar Armed Forces and delivery of technical and pilot training in Qatar.
The contract is subject to financing conditions and receipt by the Group of first payment which are expected to be fulfilled no later than mid2018.
In the year 20 Typhoon aircraft were delivered from the UK final assembly facility of which four were delivered to Saudi Arabia completing the contract for 72 aircraft.
All 236 Tranche 2 aircraft have been delivered to the UK Germany Italy and Spain together with 51 of the 88 contracted Tranche 3 aircraft.
There were eight Typhoon and eight Hawk aircraft deliveries to the Oman customer in the year with the remaining four Typhoon aircraft scheduled to be delivered in 2018.
Good progress continues to be made on airframe manufacture for the contract to supply 28 Typhoon aircraft to Kuwait secured by Italian Eurofighter partner Leonardo in 2016 with fuselage deliveries due to commence in 2018.
Development towards the Royal Air Force Centurion standard continues which will enable transition of air capabilities from Tornado to Typhoon.
Flight testing for Storm Shadow and Meteor weapons capability enhancements was completed during the year.
Integration of the Captor EScan radar continues.
We have continued to support our UK and European customers Typhoon and Tornado aircraft and their operational commitments.
The tenyear partnership arrangement with the Ministry of Defence to support the UK Typhoon fleet continues as planned with availability of aircraft being sustained at contractual levels.
The initial support package has been substantially delivered as part of the contract to commence operations at a new operating air base at Adam in Oman.
On the F35 Lightning II programme full contract award was secured on Lot 10 and 82 rear fuselage assemblies were manufactured for the LowRate Initial Production Lot 10 and 11 contracts.
Negotiations continued on Lot 11 with additional order intake received in the year of 248m.
Lot 11 negotiations are expected to conclude during the first quarter of 2018 with the balance of the order intake also expected in this timeframe.
At RAF Marham in Norfolk good progress has been made on construction of the engineering and training facilities and the standup of the operational service in readiness for the arrival of the UKs first F35 Lightning II aircraft in 2018.
Following the announcement that the UK had been chosen as a major European repair hub for the maintenance repair overhaul and upgrade of F35 Lightning II avionics and components we have established a joint venture with the UK Ministry of Defence and Northrop Grumman and progress on establishing the repair facility and capability continues to plan.
Support continues to be provided to users of Hawk trainer aircraft around the world.
The longterm support contract for the Royal Air Forces UK fleet of Hawk fast jet trainer aircraft continues to deliver against all contractual milestones.
Discussions continue with the Government of India and Hindustan Aeronautics Limited HAL for the supply of additional kit sets which will result in aircraft built under licence by HAL for the Indian Air Force and Indian Navy.
Following an extensive review with our partner Northrop Grumman of the requirements and conditions of the US Air Force future trainer programme both companies decided not to proceed with the competitive bid.
An initial contract for the AngloFrench unmanned combat air system feasibility and definition phase of 16m was received during the year.
It is anticipated that an AngloFrench followon programme will be agreed in 2018.
A 1 19m contract was secured for collaboration on the first design and development phase of an indigenous fifthgeneration fighter jet for the Turkish Air Force.
As a result of reducing production activity on Typhoon and Hawk and also taking into account the changes to support requirements as the Royal Air Force transitions from Tornado to F35 Lightning II the business announced in October a total proposed headcount reduction of up to 1400 roles over the next three years.
Maritime
On the aircraft carrier programme HMS Queen Elizabeth successfully concluded initial sea trials and entered HM Naval Base Portsmouth for the first time in August.
Operational handover and acceptance by the Royal Navy took place in December.
HMS Prince of Wales floated out of the dock at Rosyth in December.
Large volume installation activities continue to progress with commissioning of systems planned to commence in 2018 and sea trials beginning in 2019.
The full 3.7bn production contract was signed in June for the first batch of three Type 26 frigates with 2.8bn of order intake in the year following funding in previous years for longlead items.
Production of the first ship Glasgow commenced in July.
The programme currently employs over 1000 people and production activities will progressively build up during 2018 as more of the ship transitions from completion of the detailed design through to production readiness.
The first Offshore Patrol Vessel OPV HMS Forth completed sea trials in December and was accepted by the Ministry of Defence in January 2018.
Construction of the remaining four OPVs on the Clyde continues.
Under the Maritime Support Delivery Framework contract which the Ministry of Defence has agreed in principle to extend until 31 March 2020 we provide services at HM Naval Base Portsmouth and support to half of the Royal Navys surface fleet.
We remain on track to achieve target cost.
The business was unsuccessful on a competitive bid to provide equipment procurement and equipment management services for the Queen Elizabeth Class aircraft carriers and Type 45 destroyers.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Segmental review Platforms and Services
Our strategy in action Production of T ype 26 frigates for the Royal Navy commences The UK programme to manufacture the Type 26 frigate for the Royal Navy is under way following the receipt of the full 3.7bn production contract for the initial batch of three frigates.
Progress on the programme was highlighted by the cutting of steel on Glasgow the first of the new ships in July.
Highlyadvanced and adaptable the Type 26 frigate will be able to fulfil multiple missions around the world from submarine hunting to humanitarian assistance.
Designed for a service life of at least 25 years the Type 26 frigates will be a critical part of the future Royal Navy surface fleet.
Looking forward Forwardlooking information reflecting the organisational changes described on page 48 is provided later in this report.
BAE Systems provides significant support and maintenance to the Royal Navys fleet of Type 45 destroyers and has responded to a Ministry of Defence competitive proposal on its power improvement project with the award decision expected in 2018.
Progress continues on the 270m Spearfish torpedo upgrade demonstration and manufacture phases with the demonstration phase forecast to complete in 2020.
Evolving customer requirements and a focus on improved efficiency and removing cost in the Maritime Services business have led to the announcement in October of a proposed headcount reduction of around 375 roles.
The proposed rationalisation will more closely align capacity with workload and improve competitiveness to retain and grow our position on key programmes while retaining critical skills.
The first three Astute Class submarines are in operational service with the Royal Navy.
Progress continues on the manufacture of the remaining four boats with launch of the fourth boat Audacious achieved in
A full contract award for the sixth boat Agamemnon was secured in March for 1.4bn with 0.6bn of order intake in the year after order intake in previous years for longlead items.
Further funding of 80m was received for the seventh boat.
Functional and spatial design and the production of the first of class continues to advance on the Dreadnought Class submarine the replacement for the Royal Navys Vanguard Class submarine.
The next phase of the contract is scheduled to commence in April 2018.
The major programme of building works at the Barrow site continues with contracts in place totalling more than 500m with two further major buildings being completed during the year.
The detailed arrangements for the Dreadnought Alliance including the organisational governance and commercial arrangements between the three parties the Ministry of Defence BAE Systems and RollsRoyce continue to be developed.
Land UK The business continues to provide UK and international customers with a full range of light and heavy munitions with orders totalling 133m received in the year.
During the year 131 40mm casedtelescopic cannons were delivered to the Ministry of Defence by CTA International a joint venture between BAE Systems and Nexter bringing cumulative deliveries to 160 of 515.
This is the first entirely new medium calibre cannon and ammunition system qualified by the British Army since the late 1960s.
The business has continued to provide support to previously supplied armoured vehicles and bridging systems with orders of 48m received in the year.
The business is one of two contenders delivering the design stages of the Challenger 2 Life Extension Programme and the British Armys bridging system.
Representation of 2017 results
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Our strategy in action Supporting the operational capabilities of the Royal Saudi Air Force Throughout 2017 we have continued to provide support to the Royal Saudi Air Force Typhoon and Tornado fleets.
We have delivered against our contractual requirements ensuring that as part of our commitment to support the defence needs of the Kingdom an efficient and affordable support service is always available.
Building on our success in reducing throughlife costs for the UK Royal Air Force we have met our commitments in supporting Saudi Arabian aircraft across maintenance training logistics and servicing as well as identifying cost savings and process efficiencies.
We have done this without compromising the effectiveness of the aircraft enabling the Royal Saudi Air Force to continue to conduct its vital role in the defence of the Kingdom.
In Saudi Arabia the business provides operational capability support to the countrys air and naval forces through UKSaudi governmenttogovernment programmes.
The Saudi British Defence Cooperation Programme and Salam Typhoon project provide for multiyear contracts between the governments.
In Australia the business delivers production upgrade and support programmes for customers in the defence and commercial sectors across the air maritime and land domains.
Services contracts include the provision of sustainment training solutions and upgrades.
In Oman the business is developing its position building on a long history of relationships with the Omani armed forces through the provision support and upgrade of defence platforms and cyber security services.
Business generated in Oman is executed through our relevant reporting segments.
MBDA is a leading global prime contractor of missiles and missile systems across the air maritime and land domains.
Organisational changes Effective 1 January 2018 BAE Systems revised its reporting segments to reflect the organisational changes described on page 17.
The Platforms and Services UK and Platforms and Services International management structures have been removed with the organisation streamlined and strengthened Air and Maritime reporting segments created.
Platforms and Services International comprises the Groups businesses in Saudi Arabia Australia and Oman together with its 37.5% interest in the panEuropean MBDA joint venture.
Segmental review BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Platforms and
International
Operational and strategic highlights Final four of 72 Typhoon aircraft delivered to Saudi Arabia on the Salam Typhoon programme The Typhoon support contracts are operating well and a contract for support to additional flying hours was agreed in April Contracts agreed to provide ongoing support services to the Royal Saudi Air Force and Royal Saudi Naval Forces for a further five years The first major units of the second batch of Hawk aircraft delivered on schedule to Saudi Arabia allowing final assembly to commence Assigned the role of F35 Regional Warehouse provider for the AsiaPacific region Selected as the preferred tenderer for the Jindalee Operational Radar Network upgrade programme MBDA signed a contract in December to supply Brimstone and Meteor missiles to Qatar subject to financing conditions and receipt of first payment MBDA contracts for naval fleet air defence and coastal defence in Qatar became effective in July Financial performance measures as defined by the Group 2017 2016 Sales KPI 4138m 3943m Underlying EBITA KPI 472m 400m Return on sales 11.4% 10.1% Operating business cash flow
Order intake KPI 4365m 6175m Order backlog 13.3bn 13.1bn Sales of 4.1bn 2016 3.9bn were 5% up over 2016.
With all 72 Salam Typhoon aircraft now in service we have seen higher levels of support.
In addition we have seen the expected rampup from MBDAs strong order backlog.
Underlying EBITA of 472m 2016 400m and the return on sales of 11.4% 2016 10.1% benefited from improving performance from our Saudi partner companies and stronger performance at MBDA.
Operating cash inflow was 671m 2016 435m although approximately 300m of this was for an advance payment on the Saudi support programme.
Financial performance Financial performance measures defined in IFRS 2017 2016 Revenue 3136m 3037m Operating profit 427m 365m Return on revenue 13.6% 12.0% Cash flow from operating activities 669m 473m Order backlog was marginally higher at 13.3bn 2016 13.1bn as further order intake was booked under the renewal of the fiveyear support contract in Saudi Arabia and Qatari naval orders became effective within MBDA.
Sales by domain %
7%
9%
84% Sales by line of business %
21%
14% Saudi Arabia 65% Sales analysis Platforms and services %
29%
71% Including share of equity accounted investments.
International Financial Reporting Standards.
Alternative performance measure definitions BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Our strategy in action
Australias radar defence network In June we were advised that we have been selected as the preferred tenderer to help sustain Australias radar defence network beyond 2042.
The Jindalee Operational Radar Network JORN a network of three remote overthehorizon radars provides widearea surveillance and the upgrade programme will see us carry out important work to insert new technologies and extend the operational life of the network.
The JORN programme offers further opportunities for Australian suppliers as our 100% Australian approach will see us developing Australian small and medium sized enterprises in the supply chain.
This also ensures that Australia retains control of its strategically important sovereign asset which plays a vital role in supporting the Australian Defence Forces air and maritime operations border protection disaster relief and search and rescue operations.
Operational performance Saudi Arabia On the Salam Typhoon programme with four deliveries in the year all 72 contracted aircraft have been delivered to the customer.
Typhoon capability development programmes continue to progress.
The Typhoon support contracts are operating well and a contract for support to additional flying hours was agreed in April.
Discussions have continued with the Saudi Arabian customer though 2017 resulting in contractual agreements under the Saudi British Defence Cooperation Programme to provide ongoing support services to the Royal Saudi Air Force and Royal Saudi Naval Forces for a further five years to 31 December 2021.
Final aircraft deliveries for the first batch of 22 Hawk aircraft were completed in the second half of the year.
The first major units of the second batch of 22 aircraft contracted in 2015 have been delivered on schedule to Saudi Arabia allowing final assembly to commence.
Under the Royal Saudi Naval Forces Minehunter midlife update programme acceptance of the third and final ship is expected in the first half of 2018.
Under the planned reorganisation of our portfolio of interests in a number of industrial companies in Saudi Arabia Riyadh Wings Aviation Academy LLC acquired a 4.1% shareholding in a Group subsidiary Overhaul and Maintenance Company during 2016 and is expected to acquire a further interest up to a maximum of 49%.
The reorganisation supports our strategy to expand the customer base of our InKingdom Industrial Participation programme promoting training development and employment opportunities in line with the Kingdoms National Transformation Plan and Vision 2030.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Segmental review Platforms and Services
The Saudi Arabian InKingdom Industrial Participation programme continues to make good progress.
During 2017 there has been further capability and knowledge transfer on the Typhoon and Hawk platforms.
The first Hawk aircraft assembled in Saudi Arabia will come off the production line in 2018 for delivery to the Royal Saudi Air Force.
We have commenced discussions with the new Saudi Arabian Military Industries SAMI organisation to explore how we can collaborate to deliver further InKingdom Industrial Participation.
All of these activities are aligned with our longterm industrialisation strategy as well as the Saudi Arabian governments National Transformation Plan and Vision 2030.
Australia
We have continued to provide inservice support to the Navys two Landing Helicopter Docks under a fouryear support contract awarded in 2014.
Final acceptance of these vessels is expected in 2018.
HMAS Stuart the final Anzac Class frigate to be modernised under the AntiShip Missile Defence programme has been accepted into service by the Commonwealth.
The scope of activities for the next five years of sustainment and upgrade of the Anzac fleet under the Warship Asset Management Alliance has been agreed and contracts totalling A561m 324m have been awarded to BAE Systems.
The next upgrade cycle for the Anzac frigate fleet the MidLife Capability Assurance Programme has commenced with the first ship HMAS Arunta being docked at our Henderson shipyard during the second half of the year.
The upgrade programme is planned to run through to 2023.
The delayed JP 2008 Phase 3F programme to provide enhanced defence satellite communications services was formally accepted by the Commonwealth in November.
We will continue to provide inservice support to the system under a fiveyear support contract.
Mobilisation activities for sustainment of the Regional F35 Lightning II fleet continues to progress at our Williamtown facility with an increased scope following the announcement in August that BAE Systems was assigned the role of F35 Regional Warehouse provider for the AsiaPacific region.
Our existing Hawk Mk127 Leadin Fighter sustainment contracts continue to perform strongly.
The Capability Assurance Programme to upgrade the Hawk fleet to meet the training requirements of the fifthgeneration F35 Lightning II is progressing ahead of schedule with 20 of the 33 aircraft modified at the end of 2017.
During 2017 the Australian Air Force customer declared achievement of initial operating capability and has commenced training with the aircraft.
In June the Commonwealth announced that we have been selected as the preferred tenderer for the Jindalee Operational Radar Network upgrade programme.
If successful the expected value of the contract over the initial award term of ten years is approximately A1.0bn 0.6bn.
Following downselect in 2016 as one of two tenderers for the Land 400 Phase 2 Combat Reconnaissance Vehicle programme we have completed the Risk Mitigation Activity contract and submitted our final proposal to the Commonwealth in August.
Customer evaluation is ongoing with final preferred tender selection anticipated in the first half of 2018.
Our tender response for the Commonwealths nineship SEA 5000 Future Frigate programme was submitted in August.
The Commonwealth continues to fund Schedule Protection Activity to support its evaluation timetable and we anticipate a preferred tender selection in the first half of 2018.
Oman
The Oman Typhoon and Hawk aircraft programme being undertaken by Platforms and Services UK completed delivery of the first eight Typhoon aircraft and all eight Hawk trainer aircraft in 2017.
The remaining four Typhoon aircraft are scheduled to be delivered in 2018.
Separately we continue to fulfil our legacy industrial participation obligations in Oman through delivery of an agreed training and knowledge transfer programme.
MBDA
In March MBDA secured a contract from the UK and French governments for a threeyear concept phase of the Future CruiseAntiShip Weapon which will prepare for the replacement of the existing missiles deployed by the UK and French armed forces.
This contract follows on from the joint UKFrance 2016 programme for the midlife refurbishment of their current inventory of missiles.
In July MBDA finalised the financing package to secure effectivity of the Qatari contracts signed in 2016 which will supply air defence systems and antiship missiles for the naval surface fleet along with coastal defence systems.
The German Ministry of Defence and MBDA have entered into a formal negotiation process for the German groundbased air defence system TLVS a key element of the German defence strategy.
Lockheed Martin will be the joint venture partner with MBDA on this programme.
Significant progress has been made in securing positions on a number of fast jet platforms.
The Meteor Beyond Visual Range AirtoAir Missile is already in operational service on Gripen with the Swedish Air Force and has now achieved qualification for both Typhoon and Rafale aircraft.
A contract has been received to procure further Brimstone missiles to equip Typhoon.
Integration of MBDA missiles on F35 Lightning II has progressed well with successful Advanced Short Range AirtoAir Missile qualification firings achieved and contracts received from the UK to integrate Meteor.
In December MBDA entered into a contract with Qatar for the supply of Brimstone and Meteor missiles.
The contract is subject to financing conditions and receipt by MBDA of first payment which are expected to be fulfilled no later than mid2018.
Success in both domestic and export markets has significantly increased MBDAs production volumes resulting in the requirement to expand production capacities.
A new manufacturing facility is fully operational in Bolton UK and a capacity enhancement is under way in Bourges France.
Looking forward Forwardlooking information reflecting the organisational changes described on page 52 is provided later in this report.
Representation of 2017 results
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Financial performance measures for the year ended 31 December 2017 as represented to reflect the organisational changes are as follows As defined by the Group Defined in IFRS Year ended 31 December 2017
Sales
KPI
Underlying
EBITA
Return on sales %
Operating
KPI
Order
Order
Revenue
Operating
Return on revenue % Net cash flow from operating activities Electronic Systems 3635 562 15.5 450 4175 5.4 3635 542 14.9 569 Cyber and Intelligence 1820 52 2.9 116 1859 2.1 1820 367 20.2 127 Platforms and Services US 2928 242 8.3 222 3542 4.6 2825 218 7.7 286 Air 8059 1000 12.4 832 6128 20.4 7120 952 13.4 888 Maritime 3151 258 8.2 278 4671 9.1 3119 247 7.9 396
Deduct Intragroup 303 455 0.4 244 Deduct Taxation Total 19626 2034 10.4 1752 20257 41.2 18322 1480 8.1 1897 Financial performance measures for the year ended 31 December 2017 as represented to reflect both the organisational changes and the impact of the adoption of IFRS 15 are as follows As defined by the Group Defined in IFRS Year ended 31 December 2017
Sales
KPI
Underlying
EBITA
Return on sales %
Operating
KPI
Order
Order
Revenue
Operating
Return on revenue % Net cash flow from operating activities Electronic Systems 3598 541 15.0 450 4175 4.8 3598 521 14.5 569 Cyber and Intelligence 1818 58 3.2 116 1859 2.1 1818 361 19.9 127 Platforms and Services US 2951 237 8.0 222 3542 4.2 2848 213 7.5 286 Air 7210 967 13.4 832 6128 19.5 6312 921 14.6 888 Maritime 2877 251 8.7 278 4671 8.5 2845 240 8.4 396
Deduct Intragroup 303 455 0.4 244 Deduct Taxation Total 18487 1974 10.7 1752 20257 38.7 17224 1422 8.3 1897 The Group and segmental guidance for 2018 shown opposite is based on the Groups actual financial performance for 2017 as represented to reflect both the organisational changes and the impact of the adoption of IFRS 15.
International Financial Reporting Standards.
Including share of equity accounted investments.
HQ comprises the Groups UKbased head office and shared services activities together with a 49% interest in Air Astana.
Taxation is managed on a Groupwide basis.
Effective 1 January 2018 BAE Systems revised its reporting segments to reflect the organisational changes described on page 17 and adopted International Financial Reporting Standard IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers.
Alternative performance measure definitions BAE Systems Annual Report 2017
High singledigit sales growth is expected in 2018 driven by a number of electronic warfare contracts with some 70% of projected sales in the 2017 closing order backlog.
Margins are expected to be in a range of 14% to 16%.
Cyber and Intelligence Comprising the US Intelligence and Security sector 70% of Cyber and Intelligence sales in 2017 and Applied Intelligence In aggregate sales in 2018 are expected to be marginally higher than 2017.
Sales in Intelligence and Security are expected to be largely unchanged with some growth coming from the UK Services and International Services and Solutions divisions of Applied Intelligence.
Margins are expected to improve to around 5%.
The Intelligence and Security business is expected to contribute around 8% margin with Applied Intelligence moving to an overall breakeven position.
Platforms and Services US Sales growth of 10% to 15% is expected with increasing volumes from the US Combat Vehicles and Weapon Systems businesses as well as higher ship repair activity.
Almost 75% of guidance is in the closing order backlog.
Another year of margin improvement to a range of 9% to 10% is expected in 2018 absent further charges on the commercial shipbuilding contracts.
Air
Sales are expected to be some 5% lower as activity on Typhoon for the European Saudi and Oman contracts is largely complete.
Around 85% of guidance is in the closing order backlog.
Margins are expected to be in the 11% to 13% range.
Maritime
Sales are expected to be stable as activity levels on Carrier reduce and are largely offset by increases on submarine programmes.
Around 90% of guidance is in the closing order backlog.
Margin levels are expected to be within the 8% to 9% range.
HQ
HQ costs are expected to be similar to 2017.
Underlying finance costs are expected to be around 15% lower benefiting from the weaker US dollar reduced charges arising from our share of equity accounted investments and lower net present value adjustments.
The underlying effective tax rate for 2018 is expected to reduce from 21% to around 18% benefiting from US tax reform with the final rate dependent on the geographical mix of profits.
Underlying EBITA as a percentage of sales.
Compared with the Groups actual financial performance for 2017 as represented to reflect the impact of the adoption of IFRS 15 from 43.5p to 42.1p and assuming a US1.40 to sterling exchange rate.
For the year ending 31 December 2018 we expect the Groups underlying earnings per share to be in line with the fullyear underlying earnings per share in 2017 of 42.
1p.
The guidance is based on the measures used to monitor the underlying financial performance of the Group.
Reconciliations from these measures to the financial performance measures defined in International Financial Reporting Standards for 2017 are provided in the Group financial review on pages 28 to 34.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements
USbased Intelligence and Security business and UKheadquartered Applied Intelligence business and covers the Groups cyber security secure government and commercial and financial security activities.
Intelligence and Security The outlook for the US government services sector is stable although market conditions remain highly competitive and continue to evolve.
Whilst the governments decision not to exercise future options on our contract to develop a shared IT environment for US agencies could impact revenue in 2018 the shift in the governments IT strategy could present new opportunities for the business.
With effect from 12 February 2018 the business has restructured to better align with its customer base and position the business to more effectively compete and grow in critical missionfocused areas with three business areas Integrated Defence Solutions Intelligence Solutions and Air Force Solutions.
Applied Intelligence With effect from 1 January 2018 the Applied Intelligence business has restructured to focus on a more targeted portfolio of products and services delivering for customers within three core business units Government Financial Services and Technology and Commercial.
The restructuring will enable a greater focus on customer needs and higher levels of operational efficiency in the commercial business that will accelerate improvements in competitiveness and profitability.
Sales growth is expected to continue as cyber security is an increasingly important part of government security and a core element of stewardship for commercial enterprises in a sophisticated and persistent threat environment.
Electronic Systems comprises the US and UKbased electronics activities including electronic warfare systems electrooptical sensors military and commercial digital engine and flight controls precision guidance and seeker solutions nextgeneration military communications systems and data links persistent surveillance capabilities and hybrid electric drive systems.
Electronic Systems is well positioned to address current and evolving priority programmes from its strong franchise positions in electronic warfare precision guidance and seeker solutions.
Electronic Systems has a longstanding programme of research and development and its focus remains on maintaining a diverse portfolio of defence and commercial products and capabilities for US and international customers.
The business expects to benefit from its ability to apply innovative technology solutions that meet defence customers changing requirements.
That along with strong programme positions particularly on F35 Lightning II and F15 upgrades and specific products such as APKWS position the business well for the medium term.
In the commercial aviation market Electronic Systems technology innovations are enabling the business to maintain its longstanding customer positions and to compete for and win new business.
Revenue plus the Groups share of revenue of equity accounted investments.
Operating profit excluding amortisation and impairment of intangible assets finance costs and taxation expense of equity accounted investments EBITA and nonrecurring items.
2017 sales Sales by reporting segment for the year ended 31 December 2017 as represented to reflect the organisational structure effective from 1 January 2018 and the impact of the transition to IFRS 15 are as follows A Electronic Systems 19% B Cyber and Intelligence 10% C Platforms and Services US 16% D Air 39% E Maritime 16% 2017 underlying EBITA Underlying EBITA by reporting segment for the year ended 31 December 2017 as represented to reflect the organisational structure effective from 1 January 2018 and the impact of the transition to IFRS 15 is as follows A Electronic Systems 26% B Cyber and Intelligence 3% C Platforms and Services US 12% D Air 47% E Maritime 12% Electronic Systems Cyber and Intelligence Effective 1 January 2018 BAE Systems has five principal reporting segments Electronic Systems Cyber and Intelligence Platforms and Services US Air and Maritime which align with the strategic direction of the Group.
Alternative performance measure definitions
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017
Sweden manufactures combat vehicles weapons and munitions and delivers services and sustainment activities including ship repair and the management of governmentowned munitions facilities.
The land vehicles business is underpinned by strong positions on key franchise programmes.
These include the US Armys Armored MultiPurpose Vehicle M109A7 selfpropelled howitzer and Bradley upgrade programmes and the CV90 and BvS10 export programmes from our BAE Systems Hgglunds business.
The business continues to pursue a range of domestic and international opportunities in combat and amphibious vehicles as well as weapon systems.
FNSS has grown its order book with both domestic and international orders.
These longterm contracts and our franchise position in tracked vehicles which offer opportunities in international markets make the land business well placed for growth in the medium term.
In the maritime domain the Group has a strong position on naval gun programmes and US Navy ship repair.
Additional dry dock ship repair capacity has been established in San Diego to support the US Navys increased requirements in the AsiaPacific region.
The Group remains a leading provider of gun systems and precision strike capabilities and in the complex ordnance manufacturing business we continue to manage the US Armys Radford and Holston munitions facilities under longterm contracts.
Air comprises the Groups UKbased air activities for European and International markets and US Programmes and its businesses in Saudi Arabia and Australia together with its 37 .5% interest in the panEuropean MBDA joint venture.
In the UK as current export contracts for Typhoon and Hawk complete and UK Tornado support ends sales are underpinned by our workshare on Typhoon for Kuwait Typhoon and Hawk support and F35 Lightning II production and support.
UKbased production of rear fuselage assemblies for F35 Lightning II will increase over the next three years to reach its expected peak rate for the next decade.
We play a significant role in the F35 Lightning II sustainment programme in support of Lockheed Martin.
Discussions continue with current and prospective operators on contract awards for Typhoon and Hawk and we continue to develop longstanding international partnerships in the air domain maintaining our skills and capabilities.
The UK and Saudi support operations are underpinned by longterm contracts.
In Saudi Arabia the InKingdom Industrial Participation programme continues to make good progress consistent with our longterm strategy as well as the Saudi Arabian governments National Transformation Plan and Vision 2030.
In Australia the business is structured around longterm sustainment and upgrade activities and we are progressing significant opportunities with the Australian government in the maritime and land domains.
MBDA has a strong order book which is driving increasing production and sales.
Development programmes continue to improve the longterm capabilities of the business.
Maritime comprises the Groups UKbased maritime and land activities.
Maritime
In Maritime there remains pressure on the Navys nearterm budgets and a highlycompetitive environment in ship support and upgrade.
Within submarines the business is executing on the Astute Class programme with four boats still in build.
On the Dreadnought programme production on the first boat of four commenced in 2016.
Investment
In shipbuilding sales are underpinned by the contracts to manufacture the Queen Elizabeth Class aircraft carriers Type 26 frigates and River Class Offshore Patrol Vessels.
The throughlife support of surface ship platforms provides a sustainable business in technical services and midlife upgrades.
Land UK The Land UK business continues to deliver support to armoured vehicle and bridging systems in UK and international markets munitions under the 15year Munitions Acquisition Supply Solution partnering agreement secured in 2008 and 40mm casedtelescopic cannons for the UK and French armies.
Platforms and Services US Air Maritime US defence budget Whilst we continue to operate under a Continuing Resolution the bipartisan budget agreement passed on 9 February 2018 would increase the US defence budget by approximately 10% over current levels reflecting continued growth in defence spending to 700bn 518bn for the fiscal year ending 30 September 2018.
This budget agreement increases the budget caps for two years and extends the Continuing Resolution to 23 March 2018 to allow lawmakers to pass a 2018 spending bill.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Corporate responsibility in action Launch of the revised Code of Conduct We regularly review and update our Code of Conduct to ensure that it reflects best practice emerging issues and new regulations.
This was done in 2017 and the revised Code of Conduct was launched in January 2018.
As part of the revision process the Code of Conduct was externally benchmarked with two organisations the Institute of Business Ethics and the Corporate Executive Board.
Further review was conducted by internal consultation and collaboration across the Group including trade union representatives.
The final version was approved by the Board in December.
The Board delegates the detailed oversight of corporate responsibility matters to the Corporate Responsibility Committee which is chaired by a nonexecutive director see page 87.
The Corporate Responsibility Committee meets as part of the Boards annual schedule of meetings see page 80 and agrees the Groups responsible business priorities relating to our employees trust and integrity health and safety and resource efficiency.
The Chief Executive is responsible for ensuring we meet our own standards and the expectations of our stakeholders.
He is supported by the Managing Director Operational Governance with guidance and oversight from the Board via the Corporate Responsibility Committee.
The performance review process is used to flow down corporate responsibility objectives through the Company.
For information on how our business model is underpinned by our commitment to corporate responsibility see page 23.
Our Operational Framework see page 76 sets out the way we do business.
We set Groupwide policies which are enacted at a local level by our businesses and help business leadership to make informed decisions about the business opportunities we pursue.
The Operational Framework is reviewed and approved by the Board each year.
The twiceyearly Operational Assurance Statement OAS process is used to monitor compliance with the Operational
The Internal Audit Director owns the OAS Policy and is responsible for the consolidation and reporting of the OAS submissions from the businesses to the Group Audit Review Board the Audit Committee and the Corporate Responsibility
The Internal Audit Director reports functionally to the Audit Committee and for daytoday operations to the Chief
The Corporate Responsibility and Audit Committees hold a joint meeting each year to review the OAS and assurance matters as both committees are concerned with both financial and nonfinancial risk.
Corporate responsibility is a key enabler for our business supporting sustainable longterm performance by managing nonfinancial risks that can impact reputation and shareholder value.
How we manage risk BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 our facilities and products see page 64.
Trust and integrity We aim to be a recognised leader in business conduct.
This helps us to earn and maintain stakeholder trust and sustain business success.
We consider it fundamental to maintain a culture focused on embedding responsible business behaviours.
All employees are expected to act in accordance with the requirements of the Companys policies including the Code of Conduct at all times.
As well as being the right thing to do this reduces the risk of compliance failure and supports us in attracting and retaining highcalibre employees.
Our principal risks include risks relating to laws and regulations and our people see pages 70 and 71 respectively.
We work to build a culture where our people are empowered to make the right decisions and know where to go to seek help or guidance.
Our Code of Conduct sets out clear expectations on ethical conduct and we offer training and support to help people understand the right thing to do.
During 2017 we rolled out facetoface ethics training that covered realistic issue based scenarios.
This training delivered by line managers to their teams across the Group was designed to stimulate conversations around difficult issues faced by employees in their workplace.
Certain employees received additional training according to their role such as anticorruption training.
Employees can speak up via our network of over 160 Ethics Officers or by contacting our 24hour Ethics Helpline by phone email or an external website to ask for support or report concerns anonymously if preferred.
We collect data on ethics enquiries and dismissals for reasons relating to unethical behaviour see opposite.
In 2017 there were 1280 ethics enquiries an increase of 14% on 2016.
This positive trend reflects our efforts to encourage people to speak up and we will continue to communicate to our employees the methods of making contact.
Our 2017 anonymity rate of 24% compares favourably with international benchmarks.
In 2017 53% of the ethics enquiries received were requests for guidance and advice which we believe reflects our employees coming to us before a situation has worsened and requires investigation.
We encourage employees to contact us as early as possible when a potential incident can still be prevented by timely advice.
All ethics enquiries reported which required investigation were reviewed and reported either to the Ethics Review Committee or in BAE Systems Inc.
Oversight Committee.
For further informationsitecrsummary Total ethics enquiries 1tel Anonymity rate 24 % 2016 21% 2017 ethics enquiries by type tel122 1 Guidance and advice 2 Employee relations and conduct 3 Management practices 4 Accounting charges practices 5 Other Dismissals for reasons relating to unethical behaviour 1tel tel265 See summary of Deloitte LLP assurance on page 65.
Our principal risks BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Antibribery and anticorruption We have wellestablished antibribery and anticorruption policies aimed at ensuring adherence to the associated legal and regulatory requirements.
Our commitment to comply with all applicable laws and regulations including those addressing antibribery and anticorruption and our commitment never to offer give or receive bribes or inducements is also clearly set out in the Code of Conduct.
The policies referred to above include the following Advisers Policy  which governs the appointment management and payment of third parties who are engaged to assist with our sales and marketing activities Gifts and Hospitality Policy  which governs the reasonableness and proportionality of offering or receipt of gifts or hospitality Conflict of Interest Policy  designed to ensure that personal conflicts of interest do not impair employees judgement and damage the Companys integrity and interests and Facilitation Payments Policy  designed to ensure that the Company and its employees seek to eliminate the practice of facilitation payments.
Other policies including our Export Control Policy Lobbying Policy and Offset Policy include measures to address bribery and corruption risks.
An outcome of these policies is our extensive due diligence procedures implemented to address the issues mentioned above.
In particular the Advisers Policy requires that intermediaries who are engaged to assist with our sales and marketing activities are approved via procedures which include appropriate internal and external due diligence and authorisation.
Sales and marketing advisers with whom the Company has an ongoing relationship go through this process every two years.
For the principal risks relating to compliance with antibribery and anticorruption regulations and how the risk is mitigated see the laws and regulations risk description on page 70.
Suppliers
We work with suppliers and their supply chains to provide fully compliant cost effective equipment goods services and solutions.
Our supplier relationships are often long term due to the length of our product lifecycles so we aim to work with suppliers who share our values and who embrace standards of ethical behaviour consistent with our own.
Our policy is to identify and select suppliers who meet our standards and support them by managing risks throughout the lifecycle of any commercial arrangement.
We manage risk with our suppliers in accordance with our Procurement Policy our Lifecycle Management Framework and our Supplier Principles.
Our
Council oversee compliance with the policies and principles.
Our procurement teams assess suppliers against antibribery and anticorruption criteria.
After selection we continue to engage with our suppliers for ongoing assurance at all stages of a project.
Our key supplier and procurement policies are compliant with national and international laws.
In 2017 we reconfirmed our commitment to the enhanced UK Government Prompt Payment Code and were one of the inaugural signatories to the Australian Small Business Supplier Payment Code.
Human rights We are committed to respecting human rights.
This applies equally to our employees our suppliers and business partners all of whom are expected to adopt the same or similarly high standards of ethical behaviour.
We are committed to conducting business responsibly and to maintaining and improving systems and processes to reduce the risk of slavery or human trafficking in our business or supply chain.
Our Code of Conduct and other global policies and processes mandated under the Operational Framework together with our supporting principles and guidance on responsible trading and suppliers support our commitment to human rights.
This results for example in due diligence being carried out during the supplier evaluation stage against nonfinancial risks including human rights working hours harassment and unlawful discrimination antiwhistleblowing slavery human trafficking and child labour.
Suppliers are regularly reviewed throughout their contractual relationships against such nonfinancial risks.
In 2017 we published our response to the UK Modern Slavery Act and a statement in response to the California Transparency in Supply Chain Act on our websitesite Working with others We continue to work with peers across the defence industry to improve ethical standards.
During 2017 we continued to participate in the International Forum on Business Ethical Conducts Council and worked with the Institute of Business Ethics to set up a UK Defence Practitioners Group.
This group met several times in 2017 to share experiences and best practice on ethical issues of particular concern to the industry and to receive expert briefings.
2018 priorities We will roll out the revised Code of Conduct to all employees.
Managers will distribute the Code of Conduct to their direct reports alongside facetoface scenariobased training.
This forms part of our continuing efforts to build a culture of responsible behaviour and ethical decisionmaking.
Operational
Our principal risks BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Corporate responsibility continued Health and safety Our collective focus on employee wellbeing and the health and safety of employees and those who work on or visit our sites is a contributory factor to the success of our organisation.
Our safety culture and our employees demand high standards for all aspects of health and safety.
This is supported both by our mandated Health and Safety Policy and the principles contained within our Code of Conduct for employees.
Employee wellbeing We promote wellbeing through a wide variety of programmes ranging from exercise and fitness promotion to occupational health checks.
We know that good mental and physical health contributes to better decision making greater productivity and higher levels of employee satisfaction.
We run campaigns to encourage employees to take responsibility for their health problems such as heart disease diabetes and cancer.
Our Employee Assistance Programme is a confidential service available to employees and includes support and advice on personal matters.
Safety
Our business is highly complex and our employees are exposed to many risks.
These range from slips trips and falls in an office environment confined space working and machinery hazards within manufacturing to fire and explosion risks associated with the manufacture and storage of munitions.
Many of our employees operate heavy equipment work at height or do physically demanding work in highrisk environments.
In order to ensure consistency all businesses are required to comply with our Health and Safety Policy which outlines and prescribes the responsibilities and arrangements in place for ensuring safety.
It is the responsibility of individual business leaders to ensure that their organisations comply with the policy.
We aim to mitigate or manage safety risks by finding new ways to enhance safety standards increase awareness and continually drive a strong safety culture.
Due to the varied risk profiles and work environments within the Group we operate safety management systems within each business many of which are externally accredited to the OHSAS 18001 standard.
These systems identify and control risk and are used to assure that processes and procedures are protecting our people and others who may be affected by our operations.
Teams of safety specialists assist management in ensuring safety management systems are effective and that operational control of risk is maintained.
Health and safety specialists provide expert advice and tools to put our safety policies into practice.
Some employees may be exposed to longterm health risks from hazardous substances and other physical hazards.
We aim to reduce exposure levels to hazardous substances and to seek alternatives where possible.
We provide our employees with health surveillance to understand and reduce the impact of workplace health risks.
We use the Recordable Accident Rate as a key performance indicator to measure workplace injuries.
This metric along with the number of major injuries is used to determine an element of executive bonus see page 101.
In 2017 there was a 3% reduction in the Recordable Accident Rate a 28% reduction in the total number of major injuries recorded and no fatalities as we continued to focus on reducing risk and embedding safety culture to drive improvement.
2018 priorities We will continue to drive towards a worldclass level of safety performance focus on the management and reduction of safety risk and drive a strong safety culture through communication awareness and visible leadership.
We will target a 10% reduction in the Recordable Accident Rate.
BONUS
5% of the UK executive directors bonuses are based on the achievement of safety KPIs see page 101.
Recordable Accident Rate per 100000 employees
BONUS telMajor injuries recorded
Occupational Health and Safety Assessment Series.
See summary of Deloitte LLP assurance on page 65.
The definition of a major injury was updated in 2017 to more closely align with the Reporting of Injuries Diseases and Dangerous Occurrences Regulations 2014.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Resource efficiency Resource efficiency is an important measure of business effectiveness for us and is embedded within our Environmental Policy.
As a major manufacturer our operations have an impact on the environment  from the energy and resources we use to the products we manufacture and the waste we generate.
We are committed to minimising the risk of environmental impact of our operations and products reducing our environmental footprint and in turn decreasing our operational costs.
In line with the Environmental Policy our businesses and operational sites devise their own ways of addressing their environmental priorities given the diverse geographic and sectoral spread of our business.
Alongside the policy the revised Code of Conduct supports our commitment to environmental management  every employee is to contribute to the efficient use of resources and compliance with environmental practices and policies.
An outcome of our Environmental Policy is that ongoing environmental performance is reported to our senior management team through Quarterly Business Reviews and adherence to our Environmental Policy is monitored by the environmental teams in our businesses via the Operational Assurance Statement process.
Our businesses set annual environmental and resource efficiency targets.
Whilst the priorities and targets differ locally our businesses are tackling resource efficiency challenges that are global in nature chiefly materials resilience energy and climate change and waste emissions and discharges.
Materials resilience Where applicable we adapt our materials management and use according to regulations as they are implemented.
We have an overall aim to reduce the hazardous materials used at our sites during the manufacture of our products.
Corporate responsibility in action Growth of our hybridelectric transport systems To date we have over 8000 hybrid electric systems in service on buses from London to California.
Each year these buses transport over one billion passengers whilst saving 17 million gallons of fuel and eliminating 170000 tonnes of CO 2 from entering the atmosphere.
Using BAE Systems hybrid and electric systems transit bus agencies around the world are taking initiatives to clean up their cities and provide sustainable quieter options for public transportation.
In alignment with these initiatives we have introduced a nextgeneration hybrid our SeriesER which extends the electric driving range and have brought to market a new energy storage system and direct drive motor to compete in our European markets.
We are prepared to respond to market demand for zeroemissions with our SeriesEV technology including a fullbattery electric solution and our hydrogen fuel cell technology solution.
We have taken our proven green bus technology to the water with the introduction of three hybrid and electric solutions HybriGen provides hybrid power for boat accessories and cleaner quieter vessel propulsion HybriGen Zero addresses the inland towboat market with hybrid power saving fuel space and maintenance costs and Hybrid Assist uses a parallel hybrid configuration to drive a vessel on electric power at low speeds with a boost of power for high speeds when required.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Corporate responsibility continued Greenhouse gas emissions data from 1 November 2016 to 31 October 2017 tonnes CO Combustion of fuel within BAE Systems facilities and vehicles Scope 1 Electricity and steam purchased for BAE Systems use Scope 2 locationbased Business travel in nonBAE Systems vehicles Scope 3 Total greenhouse gas emissions Total greenhouse gas emissions per employee
The greenhouse gas emissions data is reported in line with the Greenhouse Gas Protocol Corporate Accounting and Reporting Standard Operational Control approach and emission factors for fuels and electricity are published at sitegovernment collectionsconversionfactorsforcompanyreporting.
The CO 2 e associated with carbon dioxide methane and nitrous oxide is reported.
Greenhouse gas emissions associated with hydrofluorocarbons perfluorocarbons and sulphur hexafluoride are estimated to be immaterial to total emissions and are therefore not reported.
The principal record of the Groups worldwide facilities is its legal departments Global Property Database.
Greenhouse gas emissions are primarily calculated from energy consumption records reported via the Groups global environmental database.
Where actual usage data is not available for facilities and residences within the Global Property Database an estimated consumption is used based on the type of building.
Greenhouse gas emissions related to business travel include air travel data for the majority of the global business and rail data for business units operating in the UK and US.
These data are taken from travel suppliers procurement records.
Emissions from joint ventures and pension scheme properties not occupied by the Group are not included.
Where a business or facility is acquired during a reporting year it will be included in our reporting in the next full reporting year after the change.
The Scope 2 greenhouse gas emissions associated with the Greenhouse Gas Protocol marketbased method have been calculated as 592745 tonnes CO 2 e.
Supplierspecific emission factors have been sought for our most significant operating regions but were either deemed of insufficient quality to use at present or were unavailable.
Therefore in line with the Greenhouse Gas Protocol guidance this figure has been calculated using residualmix emission factors where available for our UK and US operations.
In our other significant operating regions residualmix emission factors are either unavailable or the resulting absolute emissions at Group level are within the margin of error and therefore the latter has been used.
See summary of Deloitte LLP assurance opposite.
Excluding share of equity accounted investments.
Energy and climate change We are improving energy efficiency and decarbonising our energy supply to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
The nature of our business with largescale projects and fluctuations in orders makes it challenging to set a Groupwide emissions reduction target.
Energy targets are set at business level and contribute to an overall energy reduction target for the Group.
We collect data on greenhouse gas emissions.
The Groups total greenhouse gas emissions have decreased by 8% in the 12 months to 31 October 2017.
Our largest 20 sites accounted for 83% of our greenhouse gas emissions on average over 2014 to 2016.
Of these sites 18 are certified to ISO 14001 and the other two have an environmental management system in place.
In line with these environmental management systems the top 20 sites are actively aiming to reduce the emissions they produce.
Waste emissions and discharges Targets to reduce waste emissions and discharges are set by each business reflecting the scale and maturity of their facilities and the nature of their activities.
The efficient use of resources and a decrease in waste produced reduces our environmental footprint and provides costsaving benefits for the organisation.
We use our engineering expertise to improve resource efficiency and make our products more sustainable.
We work to reduce environmental impacts at every stage of their lifecycle  from concept design and manufacture through to use and disposal.
2018 priorities We will continue to drive improvements in the management of materials and resources across all businesses.
Deloitte LLP assurance Deloitte LLP has provided limited assurance on the following performance indicators at Group level Diversity  total employees split by gender and age Ethics  employee and thirdparty enquiries to Ethics Officers and the Ethics Helpline and dismissals for reasons relating to unethical behaviour Safety  Recordable Accident Rate the number of major injuries recorded and the number of fatalities Environment  greenhouse gas emissions total and Scope 1 2 and 3 and Community  total value of Community Investment programme donations.
More online To see Deloitte LLPsitesite2017crdata BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Effective management of risks and opportunities is essential to the delivery of the Groups strategic objectives and the creation of sustainable shareholder value.
Board
The Board has overall responsibility for determining the nature and extent of the risk it is willing to take and ensuring that risks are managed effectively across the Group.
Risk is a regular agenda item at Board meetings and the Board reviews risk as part of its annual strategy review process.
This provides the Board with an appreciation of the key risks within the business and oversight of how they are being managed.
The Board delegates oversight of certain risk management activities to the Audit and Corporate Responsibility committees as follows Audit Committee The Audit Committee monitors the Groups key risks identified by the risk assessment processes and reports its findings to the Board twice a year.
It is also responsible for reviewing in detail the effectiveness of the Groups system of internal control policies and procedures for the identification assessment and reporting of risk.
Corporate Responsibility Committee The Corporate Responsibility Committee monitors the Groups performance in managing the Groups significant nonfinancial risks including those arising in respect of business conduct health and safety and the environment.
The Committee reports its findings to the Board on a regular basis.
Approach
The Groups Risk Management Policy is set out in the Operational Framework the Groups detailed governance framework.
The Groups approach to risk management is aimed at the early identification of key risks mitigating the effect of those risks before they occur and dealing with them effectively if they crystallise.
The Group is committed to the protection of its assets which include human resources intellectual and physical property and financial resources through an effective risk management process underpinned where appropriate by insurance.
Reporting within the Group is structured so that key issues are escalated through the management team and ultimately to the Board where appropriate.
The underlying principles of the Groups risk management processes are that risks are monitored continuously associated action plans reviewed appropriate contingencies provisioned and this information reported through established management control procedures.
The Board has conducted a review of the effectiveness of the Groups systems of risk management and internal control processes including financial operational and compliance controls and risk management systems in accordance with the UK Corporate Governance
The Company has developed a system of internal controls that was in place throughout 2017 and to the date of this report.
As with any system of internal control the policies and processes that are mandated in the Operational Framework are designed to manage rather than eliminate the risk of failure to achieve business objectives and can only provide reasonable and not absolute assurance against material misstatement or loss.
Financial and nonfinancial risks Financial risks expose the Group to potential costs which are quantifiable on the basis that their probability and impact can be understood adequately and related to the financial statements.
Nonfinancial risks cannot be assessed readily in financial terms and therefore cannot be reflected reliably in the financial statements.
Process
Businesses
The responsibility for risk identification analysis evaluation and mitigation rests with the line management of the businesses.
They are also responsible for reporting and monitoring key risks in accordance with established processes under the Groups Operational Framework.
The Groups risk management process is set out in the Risk Management Policy a mandated policy under the Operational Framework and in respect of projects in the Lifecycle Management Framework a core business process under the Operational Framework.
Further guidance is provided by a Risk Management Maturity selfassessment tool.
Identified risks are documented in risk registers showing the risks that have been identified characteristics of the risk the basis for determining mitigation strategy and what reviews and monitoring are necessary.
Each risk is allocated an owner who has authority and responsibility for assessing and managing it.
Project risks are reported and monitored in Groupmandated format Contract Review Packs which are reviewed by management at monthly Contract Reviews.
The financial performance of projects is reported and monitored using Contract Status Reports which form part of the Contract Review Pack.
These include programme margin metrics which are reviewed regularly by the Executive Committee and Board.
Project margin is recognised after making suitable allowances for technical and other risks related to performance milestones yet to be achieved.
In addition every six months the businesses complete an Operational Assurance Statement OAS which is a mandated policy under the Operational Framework.
The OAS is in two parts a selfassessment of compliance with the Operational Framework and a report showing the key financial and nonfinancial risks for the relevant business.
Together with reviews undertaken by Internal Audit and the work of the external auditors the OAS forms the Groups process for reviewing the effectiveness of the system of internal controls.
Executive Committee The key financial and nonfinancial risks identified by the businesses from the risk assessment processes are collated and reviewed by the Executive Committee to identify those issues where the cumulative risk or possible reputational impacts could be significant.
Management responsibility for the management of the Groups most significant nonfinancial risks is determined by the Executive Committee.
The OAS and nonfinancial risk registers are reviewed regularly by the Executive Committee to monitor the status and progression of mitigation plans and these key risks are reported to the Board on a regular basis.
Principal risks The Board has carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Company including those that would threaten its business model future performance solvency and liquidity.
Such risks have been identified as principal based on the likelihood of occurrence and the potential impact on the Group and have been identified through the application of the policies and processes outlined above.
These risks together with details of how they are being mitigated and managed are detailed on pages 68 to 71.
Our principal risks BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 How we manage risk Corporate Responsibility Committee Nonfinancial Risk Register Audit Committee Operational Assurance Statement Risk Register Nonfinancial Risk Register Executive Committee Operational Assurance Statement Risk Register Nonfinancial Risk Register
Overall responsibility for risk management Integrated Business Plan  Core Business Process Annual longterm strategy and fiveyear plan for each business Operational Assurance Statement  Mandated Policy Sixmonthly management selfassessment of compliance with the Operational Framework and summary of key risks Chief Executives Business Review  Core Business Process Quarterly toplevel review of the key operational financial and nonfinancial performance issues within the business and significant forthcoming bids and events Quarterly Business Review  Core Business Process Quarterly management review of the performance of each of the Groups businesses against their objectives measures and milestones Lifecycle Management Contract Review  Core Business Process Monthly management review of project performance and issues to ensure that appropriate decisions and actions are taken
Monitoring and reporting Monitoring and reporting Monitoring and reporting Monitoring and reporting Monitoring and reporting
Business Risk
Risk Management Policy  Mandated Policy
Identification
Financial and nonfinancial risks recorded in risk registers
Risk owners identified and action plans implemented Robust mitigation strategy subject to regular and rigorous review
Risks analysed for impact and probability to determine gross exposure
Risk exposure reviewed and risks prioritised Risk management framework As defined in the Groups Operational Framework.
Operational
Framework
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Description Impact Mitigation Defence spending The Group is dependent on defence spending.
In 2017 92% of the Groups sales were defencerelated.
Defence spending by governments can fluctuate depending on change of government policy other political considerations budgetary constraints specific threats and movements in the international oil price.
There have been constraints on government expenditure in a number of the Groups principal markets in particular in the US and UK.
A National Security Capability Review is being undertaken by the Cabinet Office and a Modernising Defence Programme was announced in January 2018 by the Defence Secretary.
The outcome of both is aimed to be announced by the summer of 2018.
The result of the EU referendum in the UK has led to a period of uncertainty and in the longer term there is a risk relating to the Groups ability to participate in further collaborative defence programmes in Europe.
Lower defence spending by the Groups major customers could have a material adverse effect on the Groups future results and financial condition.
The business is geographically spread across US UK and international defence markets In the US after seven months under a Continuing Resolution that maintained funding at the prior years level the fiscal year 2017 defence budget ultimately rose by approximately 4%.
Whilst the fiscal year 2018 budget remains under a Continuing Resolution the bipartisan budget agreement passed on 9 February 2018 would increase the US defence budget by approximately 10% over current levels reflecting continued growth in defence spending to 700bn 518bn for the fiscal year ending 30 September 2018.
This budget agreement increases the budget caps for two years and extends the Continuing Resolution to 23 March 2018 to allow lawmakers to pass a 2018 spending bill.
The US business has become adept at managing through Continuing Resolutions and brief government shutdowns mitigating any shortterm interruptions across our portfolio.
The UK is Europes largest defence market and after a period of budgetary decline defence spending has stabilised.
The 2017 Spring Budget reinforced previous commitments to increase defence spending as well as the continued pledge to maintain spending at 2% of GDP.
In Saudi Arabia regional tensions continue to dictate that defence remains a high priority.
The diverse product and services portfolio is marketed across a range of defence markets.
BAE Systems benefits from a large order backlog with established positions on longterm programmes in the US UK Saudi Arabia and Australia.
BAE Systems has a growing portfolio of commercial businesses including commercial avionics and the commercial areas of the Applied Intelligence business.
We will support the government in achieving its aim to ensure that the UK maintains its key role in European security and defence postBrexit and to strengthen bilateral relationships with key partners in Europe.
This will be important for ongoing collaboration in the development of defence capabilities.
Government customers The Groups largest customers are governments.
The Group has longstanding relationships and security arrangements with a number of its government customers including its three largest customers the governments of the US UK and Saudi Arabia and their agencies.
It is important that these relationships and arrangements are maintained.
In the defence and security industries governments can typically modify contracts for their convenience or terminate them at short notice.
Longterm US government contracts for example are funded annually and are subject to cancellation if funding appropriations for subsequent periods are not made.
Governments also from time to time review their terms of trade and underlying policies and seek to impose such new terms and policies when entering into new contracts.
The Groups performance on its contracts with some government customers is subject to financial audits and other reviews which can result in adjustments to prices and costs.
Deterioration in the Groups principal government relationships resulting in the failure to obtain contracts or expected funding appropriations adverse changes in the terms of its arrangements with those customers or their agencies or the termination of contracts could have a material adverse effect on the Groups future results and financial condition.
Government customers have sophisticated procurement and security organisations with which the Group can have longstanding relationships with wellestablished and understood terms of business.
In the event of a customer terminating a contract for convenience the Group would typically be paid for work done and commitments made at the time of termination.
Risks are identified based on the likelihood of occurrence and the potential impact on the Group.
The Groups principal risks are identified below together with a description of how we mitigate those risks.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Our principal risks Description Impact Mitigation International markets The Group operates in international markets.
BAE Systems is an international company conducting business in a number of regions including the US and the Middle East.
The risks of operating in some countries include social and political changes impacting the business environment economic downturns political instability and civil disturbances the imposition of restraints on the movement of capital the introduction of burdensome taxes or tariffs change of government policy and regulations in the UK US and all other relevant jurisdictions and the inability to obtain or maintain the necessary export licences.
The Group is exposed to volatility arising from movements in currency exchange rates particularly in respect of the US dollar euro Saudi riyal and Australian dollar.
There has been volatility in currency exchange rates in the period since the EU referendum in the UK.
In July 2017 the High Court of England and Wales ruled that the UK government has been acting lawfully in granting defence export licences to the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
The Court of Appeal is currently considering whether to permit an appeal of the High Courts decision.
The occurrence of any such events could have a material adverse effect on the Groups future results and financial condition.
The Group has a balanced portfolio of businesses across a number of markets internationally.
The Group benefits from a large order backlog with established positions on longterm programmes in the US UK Saudi Arabia and Australia.
The Groups policy is to hedge all material firm transactional currency exchange rate exposures.
The Groups contracts are often longterm in nature and consequently it may be able to mitigate these risks over the terms of those contracts.
Political risk insurance is held in respect of export contracts not structured on a governmenttogovernment basis.
BAE Systems has a wellestablished legal and regulatory compliance structure aimed at ensuring adherence to regulatory requirements and identifying restrictions that could adversely impact the Groups activities including export control requirements.
Competition in international markets The Groups business is subject to significant competition in international markets.
The Groups business plan depends upon its ability to win and contract for highquality new programmes an increasing number of which are expected to be in markets outside the US and UK.
The Group is dependent upon US and UK government support in relation to a number of its business opportunities in export markets.
The Groups business and future results may be adversely impacted if it is unable to compete adequately and obtain new business in the markets in which it operates.
The Group has an international multimarket presence a balanced portfolio of businesses leading capabilities and a track record of delivery on its commitments to its customers.
The Group continues to invest in research and development and to reduce its cost base and improve efficiencies to remain competitive.
In the UK export contracts can be structured on a governmenttogovernment basis and government support can also involve military training ministerial support for promotional activities and financial support through UK Export Finance.
In the US most of the Groups defence export sales are delivered through the Foreign Military Sales process under which the importing government contracts with the US government.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Description Impact Mitigation Laws and regulations The Group is subject to risk from a failure to comply with laws and regulations.
The Group operates in a highlyregulated environment across many jurisdictions and is subject without limitation to regulations relating to importexport controls money laundering false accounting antibribery and antiboycott provisions.
It is important that the Group maintains a culture in which it focuses on embedding responsible business behaviours and that all employees act in accordance with the requirements of the Groups policies including the Code of Conduct at all times.
Export restrictions could become more stringent and political factors or changing international circumstances could result in the Group being unable to obtain or maintain necessary export licences.
Failure by the Group or its sales representatives marketing advisers or others acting on its behalf to comply with these regulations could result in fines and penalties andor the suspension or debarment of the Group from government contracts or the suspension of the Groups export privileges which could have a material adverse effect on the Group.
Reduced access to export markets could have a material adverse effect on the Groups future results and financial condition.
BAE Systems has a wellestablished legal and regulatory compliance structure aimed at ensuring adherence to regulatory requirements and identifying restrictions that could adversely impact the Groups activities.
Internal and external market risk assessments form an important element of ongoing corporate development and training processes.
A uniform global policy and process for the appointment of advisers engaged in business development is in effect.
BAE Systems continues to reinforce its ethics programme globally driving the right behaviours by supporting employees in making ethical decisions and embedding responsible business practices.
The special compliance officer appointed pursuant to commitments concerning ongoing regulatory compliance made in the course of the 2011 settlement with the US Department of State concluded his monitorship in May 2014 and at the invitation of BAE Systems agreed to remain in a limited capacity for a limited further period of time.
Contract risk and execution The Group has many contracts including a small number of large contracts and fixedprice contracts.
In 2017 47% of the Groups sales were generated by its 15 largest programmes.
At 31 December 2017 the Group had five programmes with order backlog in excess of 1bn.
A significant portion of the Groups revenue is derived from fixedprice contracts.
Actual costs may exceed the projected costs on which the fixed prices are agreed and since these contracts can extend over many years it can be difficult to predict the ultimate outturn costs.
It is important that the Group maintains a culture in which it delivers on its projects within tight tolerances of quality time and cost performance in a reliable predictable and repeatable manner.
The inability of the Group to deliver on its contractual commitments the loss expiration suspension cancellation or termination of any one of its large contracts or its failure to anticipate technical problems or estimate accurately and control costs on fixedprice contracts could have a material adverse effect on the Groups future results and financial condition.
Contractrelated risks and uncertainties are managed under the Groups mandated Lifecycle Management process.
A leadership development programme for project directors has been deployed across the Group covering the leadership competencies required to manage complex projects containing significant levels of risk and uncertainty.
A significant proportion of the Groups largest contracts are with the UK Ministry of Defence.
In the UK development programmes are normally contracted with appropriate levels of risk being initially held by the customer and contract structures are used to mitigate risk on production programmes including where the customer and contractor share cost savings and overruns against target prices.
The Group has a wellbalanced spread of programmes and significant order backlog which provides forward visibility.
The Group has limited exposure to fixedprice design and development activity which is in general more risk intensive than fixedprice production activity.
Robust bid preparation and approvals processes are well established throughout the Group with decisions required to be taken at the appropriate level in line with clear delegations of authority.
Contract awards and cash profiles The Group is dependent on the award timing and cash profile of its contracts.
The Groups profits and cash flows are dependent to a significant extent on the timing of or failure to receive award of defence contracts and the profile of cash receipts on its contracts.
Amounts receivable under the Groups defence contracts can be substantial and therefore the timing of or failure to receive awards and associated cash advances and milestone payments could materially affect the Groups profits and cash flows for the periods affected thereby reducing cash available to meet the Groups cash allocation priorities potentially resulting in the need to arrange external funding and impacting its investment grade credit rating.
The Groups balance sheet continues to be managed conservatively in line with its policy to retain an investment grade credit rating and to ensure operating flexibility.
The Group monitors a rolling forecast of its liquidity requirements to ensure that there is sufficient cash to meet its operational needs and maintain adequate headroom.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Our principal risks continued Description Impact Mitigation Pension funding The Group has an aggregate funding deficit in its defined benefit pension schemes.
In aggregate there is an actuarial deficit between the value of the projected liabilities of the Groups defined benefit pension schemes and the assets they hold.
The funding deficits may be adversely affected by changes in a number of factors including investment returns and anticipated members longevity.
Increases in pension scheme deficits may require the Group to increase the amount of cash contributions payable to these schemes thereby reducing cash available to meet the Groups other cash allocation priorities.
In the UK new employees have been offered membership of defined contribution rather than defined benefit schemes since April 2012 and in the US employees have not accrued salaryrelated benefits in defined benefit schemes since January 2013.
In November the 2017 UK triennial funding valuations and where necessary deficit recovery plans were agreed with the trustees and certified by the scheme actuaries after consultation with the Pensions Regulator.
The funding deficit across the UK schemes at 31 March 2017 was 2.1bn.
Based on the new funding valuations the Group will increase current annual deficit recovery payments to the UK schemes to 220m a year from 1 April 2018.
The deficits in each of the schemes are expected to be cleared between 2021 and 2026.
Under the last agreement made in 2014 all scheme deficits were only projected to be cleared in 2026.
Information technology security The Group could be negatively impacted by information technology security threats.
The security threats faced by the Group include threats to its information technology infrastructure unlawful attempts to gain access to its proprietary or classified information and the potential for business disruptions associated with information technology failures.
Failure to combat these risks effectively could negatively impact the Groups reputation among its customers and the public cause disruption to its business operations and could result in a negative impact on the Groups future results and financial condition.
The Group has a broad range of measures in place including appropriate tools and techniques to monitor and mitigate this risk.
People
The Groups strategy is dependent on its ability to recruit and retain people with appropriate talent and skills.
Delivery of the Groups strategy and business plan is dependent on its ability to compete to recruit and retain people with appropriate talent and skills including those with innovative technological capabilities.
The Groups business plan is targeting an increasing level of business in international export markets outside the US and UK.
It is important that the Group recruits and retains management with the necessary international skills and experience in the relevant jurisdictions.
The loss of key employees or inability to attract the appropriate people on a timely basis could adversely impact its ability to deliver its strategy meet the business plan and accordingly have a negative impact on the Groups future results and financial condition.
The Group recognises that its employees are key to delivering its strategy and business plan and focuses on developing the existing workforce and hiring talented people to meet current and future requirements.
The Group has wellestablished graduate recruitment and apprenticeship programmes and in order to maximise the contribution that its workforce can make to the performance of the business has an effective throughcareer capability development programme.
In order to seek to maximise its talent pool the Group is committed to creating a diverse and inclusive environment for its employees.
Additional risks and uncertainties currently unknown to the Group or which the Group currently deems immaterial may also have an adverse effect on the business or financial condition of the Group.
Strategic report The Strategic report was approved by the board of directors on 21 February 2018.
David Parkes Company Secretary BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Dear Shareholders The importance of having a clearly defined strategy for management to pursue and the right culture to guide behaviour and drive performance to implement the strategy remains a priority focus for the Board as I highlight in the Chairmans letter in this report see pages 10 to 12.
Effective engagement with our stakeholders is equally an essential part of good governance with particular emphasis on shareholders and customers.
Our shareholder contact is typically through our investor relations team on a daytoday basis which is supplemented by facetoface meetings with our major shareholders by our Chief Executive and Group Finance Director at the time of our annual and halfyear results.
To ensure that our performance is viewed in the context of our broader Board policy as Chairman I try to meet with our major shareholders at least once a year to discuss governance strategy culture and succession.
Our Senior Independent Director is of course available to speak to shareholders at all times if an alternative or additional channel of communication is required.
This year we decided to widen the circle of contact with Board members by inviting a small group of shareholders to engage directly with the Board in an informal gathering to discuss the requirements of shareholders in general and to review BAE Systems in particular.
The meeting proved to be valuable to both parties and we will continue this practice in the years ahead.
Our second additional measure was to invite shareholders to a more formal morning meeting with our nonexecutive directors and Chief Executive for a brief presentation by each of the nonexecutive committee chairs on our remuneration audit and corporate responsibility policies and procedures.
The presentations were followed by an open question and answer session which enabled shareholders to probe more deeply into the methods and mindsets of the nonexecutive team.
Feedback on this session was particularly positive and we will continue to conduct this type of meeting on a twoyearly basis or when there is material change in Board membership.
Contents
Chairmans governance letter 72 Governance highlights 73 Directors duties 74 Board governance 76 Board of directors 78 Board information 80 Governance disclosures 81 Audit Committee report 82 Corporate Responsibility Committee report 87 Nominations Committee report 90 Remuneration Committee report 91 BAE Systems Annual Report 2017
Executive succession planning  the planned succession process whereby Charles Woodburn succeeded Ian King as Chief Executive was completed in an orderly manner.
Nonexecutive directors  Revathi Advaithi was appointed to the Board as an independent nonexecutive further strengthening it particularly with regards to multinational business leadership and engineering and manufacturing experience and expertise.
Audit retender  after a comprehensive and robust selection process led by the Audit Committee Deloitte was selected for appointment to succeed KPMG as the Companys auditors with effect from the Annual General Meeting in 2018.
Shareholder engagement  the Board as a whole engaged directly with major shareholders including the hosting of an event at which governance arrangements for the Board and its committees and employee engagement activities were presented and discussed.
Customer engagement  in order to help directors to develop their understanding of the Companys performance and relationship with key UK customers at firsthand during the year the Board visited a customer site and also met with senior Royal Navy and Ministry of Defence officials.
Reporting  the Boards reporting on governance matters in these reports has been enhanced further including greater focus on how the directors discharge their duties and promote the success of the Company.
Our customer contact is undertaken at all levels on a daily basis to ensure that the relationships we have continue to be open transparent and productive.
From a Board perspective however we felt it was important to provide the nonexecutive directors with firsthand knowledge of the challenges and opportunities with each of our major UK customers.
To achieve this objective we invited senior members of the Royal Navy and Ministry of Defence to join the Board for an open exchange on our strengths weaknesses and opportunities.
The forum provided a robust discussion which was both instructive and encouraging.
We intend to extend invitations to other customers in the coming year in order to deepen our understanding of their needs and reinforce the relationships we enjoy.
As a discipline a number of Board meetings are held on operational sites throughout the year which provide an opportunity for interaction with employees and a chance for nonexecutive directors to develop deeper insights into the quality of our current senior management and the potential for succession in the next generation.
During such visits we meet individuals for breakfast and dinner tour the sites and conduct town hall sessions with the workforce.
During 2018 the Board will also accompany the executive management team to meet colleagues and customers in the US and the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
Additionally the Corporate Responsibility Committee makes independent visits to operational sites across the world to evaluate and encourage the adoption of the highest standards of corporate behaviour.
To further our practice of Board involvement in 2018 we intend to nominate a nonexecutive director to accompany Charles Woodburn to participate in one of his regular meetings with trade unions representatives in the UK.
As we look forward to the year ahead we are determined to continue this policy of deeper engagement with all stakeholders to ensure we understand and respect the needs of our shareholders our suppliers our colleagues and our customers.
Sir Roger Carr Chairman Board evaluation Period of evaluation JanuaryFebruary with feedback and review taking place at a Board meeting held on 21 February 2018.
Evaluation process Externallyfacilitated selfassessment of the Board conducted in accordance with best practice described in the UK Corporate Governance Code and other guidance.
Facilitator
Ffion Hague at Independent Board Evaluation IBE which provides no other services to BAE Systems.
Description of process All directors interviewed by the facilitator for 1.5 hours based on a set agenda that had been tailored for BAE Systems.
Ten senior executives were also interviewed.
Feedback
A comprehensive report was produced by IBE which was provided to directors ahead of the Board meeting at which the principal findings were presented by Ms Hague.
Among other things the report covered shareholder and stakeholder relations strategy governance and compliance Board focus risk management succession planning Board composition Board culture relationship with senior management decisionmaking induction papers and Board resources.
Feedback from the evaluation will be provided to individual directors by the
Feedback on the Chairmans own performance will be provided by the Senior Independent Director after he has met with all the nonexecutive directors to consider the material provided by IBE.
Resulting actions The Board discussed the report and agreed actions concerning executive and nonexecutive succession planning employee engagement and diversity and inclusion and the provision of additional Board time for wider and more openended discussion of certain matters.
The Board will work on implementing these in 2018.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Governance The directors of BAE Systems  and those of all UK companies  must act in accordance with a set of general duties.
These duties are detailed in the UKs Companies Act and include a duty to promote the success of the Company which is summarised here.
As part of their induction the directors are briefed on their duties and they can access professional advice on these  either through the Company or if they judge it necessary from an independent provider.
It is important to recognise that in large and complex companies such as BAE Systems the directors fulfil their duties partly through a governance framework that delegates daytoday decisionmaking to employees of the Company.
The Board recognises that such delegation needs to be much more than simple financial authorities and in this section of the report we have summarised our governance structure which covers the values and behaviours expected of our employees the standards they must adhere to how we engage with stakeholders and how the Board looks to ensure that we have a robust system of control and assurance processes.
For more detail on our governance structure see pages 76 and 77.
Section 172 of the UKs Companies Act In summary as required by Section 172 of the UKs Companies Act a director of a company must act in the way he considers in good faith would most likely promote the success of the company for the benefit of its shareholders.
In doing this the director must have regard amongst other matters to the likely consequences of any decisions in the long term interests of the companys employees need to foster the companys business relationships with suppliers customers and others impact of the companys operations on the community and environment companys reputation for high standards of business conduct and need to act fairly as between members of the company.
Shareholders
A board needs to communicate effectively with its shareholders and understand their views.
The Annual Report is the principal means by which the Board reports to shareholders on its stewardship of the Company.
This report and other matters are put to shareholders for their consideration and approval at the Companys Annual General Meeting where the Board engages directly with shareholders.
In addition the Chairman meets regularly with our largest shareholders and provides feedback to the Board following these meetings.
Board governance
Risk management
Risk management is the identification of key risks that could threaten the success of a company and taking steps to reduce or eliminate them.
A board needs to ensure that a company has effective risk management processes.
The Company has welldeveloped risk management processes for which the Board has overall responsibility.
The Audit and Corporate Responsibility committees jointly review the Operational Assurance Statement Risk Register and Nonfinancial Risk Register regularly.
The Board considers risk as part of its annual strategy review process and also when considering major new business bids.
How we manage risk Culture and values The right corporate culture underpins how a company creates and sustains value over the longer term and is a key element of maintaining a reputation for high standards of business conduct.
Culture and values are important in setting the behavioural standards expected of employees.
During the year the Board which sets the Companys values considered the Companys culture and the behaviours this is seen to be driving.
The Board uses employee engagement surveys to help understand corporate culture across the Group.
The Corporate Responsibility Committee monitors the types of issues reported through the Companys Ethics Helpline and Ethics Officers to assist in monitoring corporate culture.
Corporate Responsibility Committee report Here we outline how the directors discharge their duties to promote the success of the Company.
Directors
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017
Promoting the longterm success of the company by setting the strategy and strategic objectives that will ensure its business model remains relevant and effective.
The Board approves the Companys strategy and business plan.
Each year in November it spends a whole day reviewing and agreeing strategy which is detailed in the Companys Integrated Business Plan IBP.
Through the year and in preparation for the IBP the Board undertakes a series of strategic updates with each of the Groups business sectors.
Group strategic framework Robust governance In order to carry out their legal duties effectively the directors of large companies should ensure they have a robust governance structure underpinned by the right culture and values which will ensure decisions are made at the appropriate level and where necessary by reference to required policies and procedures.
The Operational Framework documents the roles of the directors and executive management detailing how and by whom key decisions are to be made.
The Board and Audit Committee regularly review the effectiveness of the internal controls detailed in the Operational Framework supported by our assurance processes.
The Board uses its annual evaluation process to help ensure that it is effective in discharging its responsibilities.
Operational
Employees
A companys employees are central to the longterm success of a company as such a board needs to consider their interests and have means of engaging with and understanding their views.
The Company has a welldeveloped structure through which senior management including the Chief Executive engages regularly with senior trade union officials to discuss and understand in an open and wellinformed basis matters concerning UK employees.
The Chief Executive briefs the Board on matters raised at these meetings.
Board members engage with employees when visiting Company sites around the world and it has held town hall meetings as part of such visits.
Our
Major decisions Many of the decisions and actions of large companies are made on the basis of authority delegated by the board.
However to ensure that major decisions  particularly those not in the normal course of business involving large values or with a possible impact on the reputation of the company  are considered and taken by the directors.
A board should reserve certain matters for its own decision.
The Operational Framework clearly details the matters that the Board has reserved for its own decision.
Where matters are delegated financial and other limits are set to ensure that major decisions are referred to the Board.
This includes major business opportunities capital expenditures and the nature of the business that the Company should undertake.
Operational
Business relationships Fostering business relationships with key stakeholders such as customers and suppliers is key to a companys success.
As such a board should have oversight of these relationships.
The Boards annual programme provides opportunities for it to engage with our principal customers and gain at firsthand an understanding of their requirements and the Companys performance in meeting these.
The Chairman is engaged actively in developing customer relationships at the most senior level and reports regularly on this to the
During the year the Corporate Responsibility Committee undertook a deep dive into how we engage with suppliers.
Group strategic framework
A board needs assurance that a companys financial reporting risk management governance and internal control processes are operating effectively.
This is essential to the success of the company and its longterm reputation.
The Board principally through the Audit and Corporate Responsibility committees engages throughout the year with the Companys auditors and internal audit function and receives feedback on their audit and review activities.
In addition it has put in place certain key assurance processes such as the Operational Assurance Statement.
Operational Assurance
Performance oversight The board of a large company will normally delegate daytoday management to executive management.
However it must maintain oversight of the companys performance and ensure that management is acting in accordance with its delegated authority and the values and standards that underpin this.
At each Board meeting the directors receive a comprehensive report from the Chief Executive on the performance of the Company.
The effectiveness of such reporting is supported by a system of risk management and internal control processes  all of which is underpinned by the values and standards mandated in our Operational Framework.
Board information Remuneration and incentives A board needs to ensure that executive management and other employees are remunerated and incentivised in a manner that is consistent with the directors duty to promote the success of the company and the consequences of their decisions in the long term.
In addition to setting the remuneration of the executive directors the Boards Remuneration Committee reviews and approves the remuneration structure for all senior executives including incentive targets and their outcomes.
It also oversees the operation of the allemployee share plans that reward and incentivise employees across the Group.
Remuneration Committee report
To promote the success of a company and maintain a reputation for high standards of business conduct a board should set the expectations and requirements with regards to the behaviours and standards required by its employees and others associated with it.
Through the Operational Framework which includes our Code of Conduct the Board has agreed policies that set the standards of behaviour and business practice.
Also through these policies the Board sets standards and requirements with regards to key governance matters including our people our commitment to the community and the environment standards of business conduct and our relationship with suppliers.
Operational
Directors
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Governance This is the structure through which we manage the Company.
It has evolved over time and continues to evolve to meet the needs of the business and our stakeholder responsibilities.
Shareholders
The Company has approximately 100000 individual corporate and employee shareholders.
Corporate Responsibility
Audit
Committee
Nominations
Committee
Remuneration
Committee
Board committees The membership of the principal board committees see below solely comprises nonexecutive directors.
They provide leadership scrutiny and oversight over key governance areas.
Operational governance The Operational Framework sets out how we do business across BAE Systems and encapsulates our values policies and processes together with clear levels of delegated responsibility aimed at ensuring that all of our employees and businesses act in a clear accountable and consistent manner.
It is reviewed and approved annually by the Board.
Annual General Meeting Shareholders vote on key governance matters including the reelection of directors their remuneration the payment of dividends and the appointment of the auditors.
Shareholder relations The Chief Executive and Group Finance Director meet the Companys principal shareholders on a regular basis.
Separately the Chairman maintains regular contact with the Companys principal shareholders on governance matters and ensures that all directors are aware of their views.
Board
The Board consists of executive and independent nonexecutive directors plus a nonexecutive chairman who was independent in accordance with the UK Corporate Governance Code on his appointment.
The nonexecutive directors constructively challenge and help develop proposals on strategy.
They also scrutinise the performance of management in meeting agreed goals and objectives and satisfy themselves as to the integrity of financial information and that systems of risk management are robust and defensible.
In addition they set the remuneration of the executive directors and oversee Board succession planning.
Chairman
Responsible for leading the Board and ensuring that it discharges its duties efficiently.
Chief Executive Responsible for the implementation and delivery of the strategy agreed by the Board.
Senior Independent Director Acts as a sounding board for the Chairman and acts as an intermediary for the other directors as necessary.
Company Secretary Responsible to the Board for ensuring that Board procedures are complied with.
Through the Chairman he is responsible for ensuring that directors are supplied with information in a timely manner.
Oversight of performance and compliance with Operational
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017
These core business processes are mandated by the Operational Framework and designed to ensure consistent planning reporting and review of business performance across all businesses How we work The Operational Framework sets out the principles of good governance which together with our culture guide our work and behaviour in support of the strategy set in our Group strategic framework see page 18.
Here we set out the values that we ask all our employees to demonstrate in their daytoday work wherever they are in the world.
Organisation
From the Board downwards we set out how we are organised and the responsibilities of the Board the Chairman the Chief Executive the Executive Committee our Functional Councils such as Engineering Human Resources and Procurement and the senior executives charged with running our businesses.
Governance
The UK Corporate Governance Codes the Code principles are embedded in the Operational Framework and its policies and processes underpin all the disclosures made by the Board pursuant to the Codes provisions.
How we conduct our business is fundamental to the success of BAE Systems.
The Operational Framework sets out our approach and the standards to which we adhere.
It includes the following Code of Conduct Lays out the standards that are expected of each of us to support us in doing the right thing.
All employees receive annual training designed to stimulate conversations about ethical decisionmaking.
Responsible
Trading Principles We do not compromise on the way we do business and here we mandate a principlesbased approach to our business activity.
Internal controls Provide assurance regarding the reliability and integrity of information compliance with policies processes laws regulations and contracts the safeguarding of assets and protection against fraud and the economical and efficient use of resources.
Risk framework This is how we identify analyse evaluate and mitigate risk see page 66.
Workplace and operational environment This covers how we expect our people to be managed and the obligations placed on us all concerning avoiding conflicts of interest antibribery and managing the security of our people information and other assets.
Delegated authorities As part of a robust system of internal controls the Board has delegated certain authorities to executive management.
Delegation is subject to financial limits and other restrictions above which matters must be referred to the Board.
IBP
Integrated Business Planning Approved by the Board annually creates a consistent approach to strategic planning aligning resources with the delivery of forecast financial performance and strategic objectives.
LCM
Lifecycle Management Policy How we plan and manage the execution of all projects above a certain minimum level providing decision gate reviews at key stages from initial opportunity to final closure.
MandA
Mergers and Acquisitions Policy A structured approach to mergers acquisitions and disposals.
TPL
T otal Performance Leadership A set of peoplerelated activities that help to identify select manage and reward leaders and facilitates succession planning.
Operational Assurance Statement OAS This key governance process requires that a return is completed every six months by each operational and functional business head reporting their formal view against such matters as compliance with law and regulation ethical business conduct financial controls risk management compliance with business planning processes health and safety conflicts of interest delegated authorities appointment of advisers and product safety.
There is a separate OAS process for our joint ventures.
Our Internal Audit function owns the OAS process.
It is managed independently from management functions.
The Internal Audit Director reports functionally to the Audit Committee and for daytoday operations to the Chief Executive.
Group strategic framework BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Governance Sir Roger Carr
Appointed to the Board 2013 Nationality UK Skills competence and experience Having joined the Board in 2013 Sir Roger was appointed Chairman in 2014.
He is an experienced company chairman with a wealth of knowledge gained across a number of business sectors.
With over two decades of boardroom experience Sir Roger has a deep understanding of corporate governance and what is required to lead an effective board.
Prior to joining BAE Systems Sir Roger was Chairman of Centrica plc and Deputy Chairman of the Court of the Bank of England.
In the past he has also served as CEO of Williams plc and chairman of Thames Water plc Cadbury plc Chubb and Mitchells and Butlers plc.
He was Vice Chairman of the BBC Trust until it was dissolved in April last year.
He has been active in representing UK business having previously served as President of the CBI and as a member of the Prime Ministers Business Advisory
He was a member of the Higgs Committee on Corporate Governance which assisted in further developing the UK Corporate Governance Code.
Sir Roger is also a senior adviser to Kohlberg Kravis Roberts a fellow of the Royal Society for the encouragement of Arts Manufactures and Commerce an honorary fellow of the Institute of Chartered Secretaries and Administrators and a visiting fellow to the Sad Business School Oxford.
Other nonexecutive appointments
Committee membership Chairman of the Nominations Committee and the NonExecutive Directors Fees Committee.
Charles Woodburn Chief Executive Appointed to the Board 2016 Nationality UK Skills competence and experience Charles joined BAE Systems in May 2016 as Chief Operating Officer and succeeded Ian King as Chief Executive on 1 July 2017.
Prior to joining the Company he spent over 20 years in the oil and gas industry holding a number of senior management positions in the Far East Australia Europe and the
He joined the Company from the oilfield services business Expro Group where he served as Chief Executive Officer.
Prior to that he spent 15 years with Schlumberger Limited.
Nonexecutive appointments
Committee membership NonExecutive Directors Fees Committee.
Revathi Advaithi Nonexecutive director Appointed to the Board 2018 Nationality US Skills competence and experience Revathi brings extensive operational experience to the Board gained from her leadership of multinational engineering and manufacturing businesses where she has gained a good understanding of digital technology and international markets.
Revathi is Chief Operating Officer Electrical Sector for Eaton a power management company.
She joined Eaton in 1995 and led the Electrical Sector in the Americas and AsiaPacific with a threeyear assignment in Shanghai.
Between 2002 and 2008 Revathi worked at Honeywell where she held several senior roles within the sourcing and supply chain functions of the aerospace sector before being named vice president and general manager of Honeywells Field Solutions business in 2006.
Revathi returned to Eaton in 2008 as vice president and general manager of the Electrical Components Division.
She serves on the board of governors of the National Electrical Manufacturers Association in the US and on the Advisory Council for the University of Pittsburghs Center for Energy.
Other nonexecutive appointments
Committee membership Corporate Responsibility Committee and Nominations
Jerry DeMuro
President and Chief Executive Officer
Appointed to the Board 2014 Nationality US Skills competence and experience Appointed to the Board on 1 February 2014 as President and Chief Executive Officer of BAE Systems Inc.
Jerry is an experienced US executive who has worked in the national security technology and aerospace industry for over 30 years.
Prior to joining the Company he served as executive vice president and corporate vice president of General Dynamics Information Systems and Technology Group.
Earlier in his career he spent almost a decade as an acquisition official at the US Department of Defense.
Nonexecutive appointments Nonexecutive director of Aero Communications Inc.
Committee membership NonExecutive Directors Fees Committee.
Chairman
Executive directors Nonexecutive directors Peter Lynas Group Finance Director Appointed to the Board 2011 Nationality UK Skills competence and experience Peter a qualified accountant was appointed to the Board as Group Finance Director in 2011.
This year Peters role was expanded to include responsibility for UK Shared Services Procurement and Group Mergers and Acquisitions.
Peter previously served for a number of years as Director Financial Control Reporting and Treasury.
He joined GECMarconi in 1985 having previously worked for other companies in the UK and Europe.
After progressing through a number of positions he was appointed Finance Director of GECs Marconi Electronic Systems business which was subsequently acquired by British Aerospace in 1999 to become BAE Systems.
Nonexecutive appointments Nonexecutive director of SSE plc and chairman of its audit committee.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Board of directors Harriet Green OBE Nonexecutive director Appointed to the Board 2010 Nationality UK Skills competence and experience Harriet is a transformative business leader with international operational and boardroom experience.
She is currently Chief Executive Officer and Chairman of AsiaPacific at IBM.
Harriet has extensive global business leadership experience.
She previously served as Chief Executive Officer and executive director of Thomas Cook plc.
Prior to that she was Chief Executive Officer and executive director of Premier Farnell plc.
Previously she was also a nonexecutive director of Emerson Electric Co.
In 2017 Harriet was named as one of the Fast Companys 100 Most Creative People in Business and The Financial Times ranked Harriet sixth in their HERoes ranking Champions of Women in Business list.
In 2016 she won the Women in Technology Institute WITI Award and in 2014 she received the Veuve Clicquot Business Woman Award.
Other nonexecutive appointments
Committee membership Corporate Responsibility Committee and Nominations
Paula Rosput Reynolds Nonexecutive director Appointed to the Board 2011 Nationality US Skills competence and experience An experienced company director in both the UK and North America Paula is currently Chief Executive Officer and President of the business advisory group PreferWest LLC.
Starting her career as an economist she spent over 20 years in the energy sector culminating in her appointment as President and Chief Executive Officer of AGL Resources in 2002.
She served as President and Chief Executive Officer of Safeco Corporation before becoming Vice Chairman and Chief Restructuring Officer of American International Group overseeing its divestiture of assets and serving as chief liaison with the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
She received the National Association of Corporate Directors National Lifetime Achievement Award in 2014.
Past roles include nonexecutive directorships at CocaCola Enterprises Inc.
Anadarko Petroleum Corporation Delta Air Lines Inc.
Air Products and Chemicals Inc. and Siluria Technologies Inc.
Other nonexecutive appointments Nonexecutive director of BP p.
CBRE Group Inc. and TransCanada Corporation.
Committee membership Chairman of the Remuneration Committee and member of the Audit Committee and Nominations Committee.
Chris Grigg Nonexecutive director Appointed to the Board 2013 Nationality UK Skills competence and experience As chief executive of a FTSE 100 company Chris brings management and boardroom experience to the Board.
He is currently Chief Executive of The British Land Company PLC a position he has held since 2009.
Chris has more than 30 years experience in the banking and real estate industries.
Prior to joining British Land he was Chief Executive of Barclays Commercial Bank.
Before that he was a partner at Goldman Sachs.
Chris is currently a member of the executive board of the European Public Real Estate Association and the board of the British Property Federation.
Other nonexecutive appointments
Committee membership Corporate Responsibility Committee and Nominations
Nick Rose Nonexecutive director and Senior Independent Director Appointed to the Board 2010 Nationality UK Skills competence and experience Nick brings to the Board considerable financial expertise and boardroom experience.
Nick was Chief Financial Officer of Diageo plc for over ten years until 2010.
In this role he was responsible for supply procurement strategy and IT on a global basis.
His financial experience was developed during his time as group treasurer and group controller at Diageo and also in his earlier career at Ford Finance.
He is a former Chairman of the engineering technology company Edwards Group Limited and former nonexecutive director of Mot Hennessy SNC and Scottish Power plc.
Nick is currently an adviser to CCMP Capital Advisors LLC.
Other nonexecutive appointments Chairman of Williams Grand Prix Holdings PLC nonexecutive director and senior independent director of BT Group plc and nonexecutive chairman of Loch Lomond Group.
Committee membership Chairman of the Audit Committee and member of the Nominations Committee and Remuneration Committee.
Ian Tyler Nonexecutive director Appointed to the Board 2013 Nationality UK Skills competence and experience Ian brings considerable financial and longterm international contracting experience to the Board.
Having qualified as a chartered accountant Ian subsequently held a number of senior finance and operational positions within industrial companies before being appointed Finance Director of Balfour Beatty plc in 1996.
He was subsequently appointed as Chief Executive in 2005.
He is currently Chairman of Bovis Homes Group PLC and Cairn Energy plc.
Ian is a former nonexecutive director of Mediclinic International plc Cable and Wireless Communications Plc and VT Group plc.
Other nonexecutive appointments Chairman of Amey plc and AWE Management Limited.
Committee membership Chairman of the Corporate Responsibility Committee and member of the Audit Committee and Nominations
Elizabeth Corley CBE Nonexecutive director Appointed to the Board 2016 Nationality UK Skills competence and experience Elizabeth brings investor governance and boardroom experience to the Board.
She is currently nonexecutive vicechair of Allianz Global Investors.
She has served as Chief Executive Officer of Allianz Global Investors initially for Europe then globally from 2005 to 2016.
Prior to that she worked for Merrill Lynch Investment
Elizabeth is active in representing the investment industry and developing standards within it.
She is a member of the FICC Market Standards Board the European Securities and Markets Authoritys stakeholder group and of the advisory council of TheCityUK.
Elizabeth is currently chair of the advisory group to the UK government on social impact investing.
In 2017 she stepped down from the board of the UK Financial Reporting Council after completing her second threeyear term of appointment.
Elizabeth is also an acclaimed writer a member of the Royal Society of Arts and a trustee of the British Museum.
Other nonexecutive appointments Nonexecutive director of Pearson plc and Morgan Stanley.
Committee membership Nominations Committee and Remuneration Committee.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017
Financial statements Governance Attendance
Individual directors attendance at meetings of the Board and its committees in 2017
Audit
Committee
Corporate
Responsibility
Committee
Nominations
Committee
Remuneration
Committee
Sir Roger Carr 88   44 Elizabeth Corley 88   44 66 Jerry DeMuro 88 Harriet Green 78  44 34 Chris Grigg 88  44 44 Ian King 44 Peter Lynas 88 Paula Rosput Reynolds 88 66  44 66 Nick Rose 88 66  44 66 Ian Tyler 88 66 44 44 Charles Woodburn 88
Nonexecutive director Executive director Committee chair Audit Committee Corporate Responsibility Committee Nominations Committee Remuneration Committee
Committee membership Nationality Date of appointment to the Board Date current term ends Current term as director Sir Roger Carr
N 2013 2020 Second Revathi Advaithi Nonexecutive director N 2018 2021 First Elizabeth Corley Nonexecutive director R 2016 2019 First Harriet Green Nonexecutive director N 2010 2019 Third Chris Grigg Nonexecutive director N 2013 2019 Second Paula Rosput Reynolds Nonexecutive director R 2011 2020 Third Nick Rose Nonexecutive director and Senior Independent Director R 2010 2019 Third Ian Tyler Nonexecutive director N 2013 2019 Second The average length of appointment of nonexecutive members of the Board as at 31 December 2017 was 5.3 years.
Charles Woodburn Chief Executive Peter Lynas Group Finance Director Jerry DeMuro President and Chief Executive Officer of BAE Systems Inc.
The average length of appointment of executive members of the Board as at 31 December 2017 was 4.1 years.
Sir Roger Carr joined the Board in October 2013 and was appointed as Chairman in February 2014.
Tenure  independent nonexecutive directors Up to three years Over three and up to six years
Diversity  Board 7 male 4 female BAE Systems Annual Report 2017
The Board is responsible for the Companys risk management and internal control systems.
It has delegated responsibility for reviewing in detail the effectiveness of these systems to the Audit Committee which reports to the Board on its findings so that all directors can take a view on the matter.
An overview of the processes used to identify evaluate and manage the principal risks can be found on pages 66 and 67.
These processes are an integral part of our governance framework the Operational Framework details of which can be found on page 76.
The Operational Framework mandates the Operational Assurance Statement process which is owned by the Companys Internal Audit function and is one of the principal processes used by the Board in monitoring the effectiveness of control systems.
The risk management and internal control systems detailed in the Operational Framework were in place throughout the year and the Board having reviewed their effectiveness believes they accord with the Financial Reporting Councils Guidance on Risk Management Internal Control and Related Financial and Business Reporting.
Viability statement
As required by the provisions of the Code the Board has undertaken an assessment of the future prospects of the Company taking into account the Companys current position and principal risks.
This assessment was informed by the following business processes Risk management process  the Company has developed a structured approach to the management of risk see above and the principal risks identified are considered as part of the Boards annual review of the Integrated Business Plan.
Integrated Business Plan IBP  the IBP represents a common process with standard outputs and requirements that produces an integrated strategic and business plan for the Group and also for each of its businesses over the following five years.
The use of a fiveyear period provides a robust planning tool against which longterm decisions can be made concerning amongst other things strategic priorities funding requirements including commitments to Group pension schemes returns made to shareholders capital expenditure and resource planning.
Longer term strategic inputs also form part of the IBP process and where activity is required to meet such longterm priorities this is provided for in the plan.
The detailed plan is reviewed each year by the Board as part of its strategy review process.
Once approved by the Board the IBP provides the basis for setting all detailed financial budgets and strategic actions across the businesses and is subsequently used by the Board to monitor performance.
Liquidity analysis  the Board regularly reviews an analysis based on the financial output from the IBP looking at the forecast working capital requirements cash flow and committed borrowing and other funding facilities available to the Company over the fiveyear period covered by the IBP.
This analysis includes stress testing of the Companys liquidity under severe but plausible scenarios as developed from the IBP including the following the Company being unable to access debt markets to renew term debt facilities an unfavourable change to the terms of trade the Company enjoys with certain principal customers the Company failing to win certain major export contracts and potential change of UK government policy.
The scenarios tested included the impact of multiple adverse factors.
Conclusion
In undertaking its review of the IBP in 2017 the Board considered the prospects of the Company over the fiveyear period covered by the process.
On the basis of this and other matters considered and reviewed by the Board the Board has reasonable expectations that the Company will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the following five years.
It is recognised that such future assessments are subject to a level of uncertainty that increases with time and therefore future outcomes cannot be guaranteed or predicted with certainty.
Also this assessment was made recognising the principal risks that could have an impact on the future performance of the Company see pages 68 to 71.
Going concern statement Accounting standards require that directors satisfy themselves that it is reasonable for them to conclude whether it is appropriate to prepare financial statements on a going concern basis and the Code requires that if appropriate this report includes a statement to that effect.
Following review the directors have concluded that it is appropriate to adopt the going concern basis for these financial statements and have not identified any material uncertainties concerning the Companys ability to do so in the 12month period from the date of approving them.
For this reason they continue to adopt the going concern basis in preparing the accounts.
Directors
In compliance with the Code all directors are subject to annual election by shareholders.
The Chairman has confirmed that based on the formal performance evaluations undertaken in 2017 all remain committed to the role and the individual performance of all directors continues to be effective.
Also in compliance with the Code the Company ensures that nonexecutive directors have sufficient time to fulfil their obligations.
This is assessed when a director is appointed and also in the event of there being a material change to an individuals circumstances.
At the beginning of 2018 Elizabeth Corley a nonexecutive director of the Company was appointed as a nonexecutive director of Morgan Stanley a US listed company.
One of its UK subsidiary companies provides corporate broking services to the Company and consequently an assessment has been undertaken to determine whether this relationship has a bearing on her independence for the purposes of provision B.1.1 of the
After review it was determined that this was not a material business relationship given the relatively low value of the contractual arrangements and the nature of the relationship i. company and nonexecutive in nature.
Should there be any change to either Elizabeth Corleys role with Morgan Stanley or a material change in the services its UK subsidiary provides to the Company this decision will be reconsidered.
In addition to being a nonexecutive director of the Company Ian Tyler is chairman of two listed FTSE 250 companies Bovis Homes Group and Cairn Energy and also two nonlisted companies AWE Management a private company owned by three jointventure partners and Amey a subsidiary of a Spanish listed company.
The Chairman has reviewed Ian Tylers other commitments and is satisfied that they do not impinge on his ability to discharge his responsibilities to BAE Systems effectively.
He will keep this matter under review.
All directors undertake a structured induction programme when they first join the Board thereafter they regularly update and refresh their knowledge of the Company.
The Company considers that all of the nonexecutive directors identified on pages 78 and 79 of this report are independent in accordance with Code provisions.
UK Corporate Governance Code the Code compliance The Company was compliant with the provisions of the Code throughout 2017 and the Board has applied its principles in its governance structure and operations.
The following statements are made in compliance with the Code.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017
Financial statements Governance
Governance disclosures Dear Shareholders The section on the Audit Committees year on page 86 provides an overview of the work that we have undertaken in the last 12 months and I would like to focus here on specific aspects of that activity.
We reported last year on progress to date on our audit tender which has been conducted in accordance with the audit tender and transition timeframe set out in the graphic below.
I am pleased to report that the tender exercise was completed to timescale enabling the Audit Committee to make a recommendation to the Board in May 2017 which it subsequently endorsed.
Subject to shareholder approval at the 2018 Annual General Meeting AGM Deloitte LLP will succeed KPMG LLP as the Companys auditor at the end of that meeting.
More detail on the audit retender is set out on page 83.
My Audit Committee colleagues and I are highly appreciative of the time and effort that audit firms expend in preparing their responses to tenders and would like to thank the participating firms for their professionalism and diligence in this regard.
Audit rotation regulations going forward will require large companies to retender their external audit service no less frequently than every ten years.
Our focus since the recommendation was endorsed by the Board has been twofold ensuring that audit quality is maintained for the 2017 halfyear and fullyear audits from the outgoing auditor whilst at the same time ensuring that the proposed incoming auditor is readying itself for the engagement in terms of both audit engagement compliance issues and familiarisation with the business.
More detail on work undertaken by Deloitte on the transition arrangements is set out on page 83.
Audit retender and transition aside the Committee has continued its monitoring of the financial reporting process and its integrity risk management systems and assurance.
During the year we have reviewed the initial disclosures for IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers and related briefings on the impact on the financial statements.
Further information on IFRS 15 is provided in note 34 to the Group accounts on pages 199 to 201.
As reported on page 21 the Group has been restructuring its portfolio of interests in a number of industrial companies in Saudi Arabia in order to support the Kingdoms Vision 2030 industrialisation strategy.
During the year we have focused on controls in our Saudi business as well as governance in relation to this portfolio of collaborative partnerships.
We have continued in our efforts to leverage optimal use of the Internal Audit function within the risk environment.
An external assessment of the function originally scheduled to be undertaken in 2017 has been deferred until 2018 following organisational changes taking effect from 1 January 2018.
The assessment has been commissioned and will commence in the first quarter of 2018.
Members
Nick Rose Chairman Paula Rosput Reynolds Ian Tyler Prior to May 2016 Preaudit qualification and independence enquiries June 2016 Request for Proposal documents for selected firms agreed Summer 2016 Meetings with lead partners of tendering firms December 2016 Tender progress assessment September 2016 to March 2017 Factfinding process for tendering firms External audit tender and transition timeline BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Audit Committee report Nick Rose Chairman of the Audit Committee Audit retender Key elements of the audit retender were as follows overseen by the Audit Committee who agreed the scope of the Request for Proposal RFP assessment of tender participants informed by complexity of the Group and scale of its international business tender competed by highly capable and experienced international audit firms with strong track records and technical expertise no contractual obligations restricted the selection of firms participating in the audit current incumbent KPMG LLP and its predecessors had been in place as the Companys auditors since 1981 without retender and was thus not invited to tender evaluation criteria in the RFP included audit quality and independence understanding of the Groups business capability of audit team in terms of skills experience and geographic reach clear planning and audit approach and robust challenge insight and proactivity business meetings and site visits scheduled to enable the participating firms to gain an understanding of the Groups business presentations made to the Audit Committee by participating firms with question and answer sessions Audit Committee put forward formal recommendation to the Board that of two audit firms capable of undertaking the audit appointment Deloitte LLP was its preferred choice and Board endorsed the Committees recommendation and will recommend the appointment of Deloitte LLP at the 2018 AGM.
Audit transition Activity undertaken by Deloitte as the incoming auditor for the year ending 31 December 2018 has included the following reviewed nonaudit services provided to the Group and steps taken to achieve audit independence from 1 January 2018 agreed interaction with KPMG as outgoing auditor during the 2017 audit cycle including attendance at key audit meetings observing the 2017 halfyear process and shadowing the yearend audit finalised audit team and agreed key transition milestones with the Committee and finance teams across the Group held regular meetings with Group Finance Director Director Financial Control and Reporting and business unit finance directors worked closely with Internal Audit to understand their 2017 and 2018 work programmes and used the outputs to inform the 2018 Audit Plan and risk assessment process attended Audit Committee meetings since June 2017 and reported regularly on independence and audit transition plan status and undertaken familiarisation visits and other meetings and interactions with sector and business unit management and other senior executives to facilitate knowledge building audit scoping and execution planning.
June 2017 to July 2017 Halfyear results shadow period December 2017 to February 2018 Fullyear results shadow period May 2017 Selection of new auditors for recommendation to the Board August 2017 Announcement of halfyear results February 2018 Announcement of fullyear results May 2018 Board recommendation at Annual General Meeting to appoint new auditors Subject to shareholder approval at the 2018 AGM.
External audit tender and transition timeline BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Governance Audit Quality Review AQR The Financial Reporting Councils AQR team monitors the quality of audit work of certain UK audit firms through inspections of a sample of audits and related procedures at individual audit firms.
During the year the 2016 external audit of the Group by KPMG was reviewed by the AQR.
The review covered certain items of the Grouplevel audit including retirement benefit obligations taxation procedures in relation to the risks of bribery and corruption and the quality of communications with the Audit Committee and the audit of recognition of revenues and profits on longterm contracts by two of the business unit audit teams.
I met with the AQR to gain an understanding of its report and the Committee discussed the review findings with KPMG.
The AQR reported a number of recommendations for improvement and also areas of high standard.
The recommendations were incorporated into the 2017 audit work and the Committee is satisfied that they have been properly addressed.
The Committee does not consider any of the findings to have a significant impact on KPMGs audit approach.
We will make the lessons learned from this report available to our incoming auditor Deloitte.
Audit independence We have reviewed in detail the confirmation and information received from KPMG on the arrangements that they have in place to safeguard auditor independence and objectivity including specific safeguards in place where they are providing permissible nonaudit services to the Group.
As part of the auditor transition arrangements we have reviewed on a regular basis the steps being taken by Deloitte the proposed incoming auditor to achieve audit independence from 1 January 2018 onwards.
Nonaudit services policy The Committee has a formal policy governing the engagement of the auditors to provide nonaudit services which we review on an annual basis.
The policy prohibits certain activities from being undertaken by the auditors and also places restrictions on the employment of former employees of the auditors.
Recognising that the auditors are best placed to undertake certain work of a nonaudit nature the policy permits the provision of AuditRelated Services and Permitted NonAudit Services up to limits that are preapproved by the Committee with specific approvals required beyond such limits by the
A copy of the policy is available on the Companys websitesite As reported last year we made revisions to the policy in order to ensure compliance with the Financial Reporting Councils revised regulations on ethical standards for auditors and EU regulations adopted by the UK which apply prohibitions to a range of engagements that could result in an auditor facing a conflict of interest.
As a result certain services formerly provided by KPMG primarily tax services and investor information services were no longer provided by them with effect from 1 January 2017.
Details of fees payable to the auditors are set out on page 151.
In 2017 nonaudit fees represented 15% of the audit fee.
The principal nonaudit services provided by the auditors related to the interim review and accounting advice primarily in respect of IFRS 15.
Financial statements The Committee reviews all significant issues concerning the financial statements.
The principal matters we considered concerning the 2017 financial statements were Recognition of revenue profit and provisioning We reviewed key estimates and judgements prior to publication of the financial statements.
Our review included the key estimates and assumptions applied in determining the financial status of the more significant programmes including Typhoon UK aircraft carrier programme Astute Class submarine programme and Saudi British Defence Cooperation Programme.
Pensions
Recognising the scale of the Groups pension obligation we reviewed the key assumptions supporting the valuation of the retirement benefit obligation.
This included a comparison of the discount and inflation rates used against externallyderived data.
We reviewed the methodology used to allocate a proportion of the retirement benefit obligation to equity accounted investments and concluded that this was appropriate with reference to agreements between the Company and those companies.
We also considered the adequacy of disclosures in respect of the sensitivity of the deficit to changes in these key assumptions as well as the results of the UK triennial funding valuations see note 21 to the Group accounts on pages 174 to 183.
How we ensure that the Groups financial statements taken as a whole are fair balanced and understandable The process is comprehensive guidance issued to all the contributors at operational level a verification process dealing with the factual content of the reports comprehensive reviews undertaken at different levels in the Group that aim to ensure consistency and overall balance and comprehensive review by the directors and the Executive Committee.
How the effectiveness of the external audit process was assessed Who we surveyed Executive directors Operating groupsector and line of business management Internal Audit Director Other senior executives including key finance roles Areas we covered Understanding of the Groups risks Audit plan Robustness of audit processes
Quality of communications Ability to provide a seamless service across differing jurisdictions as well as interaction with the Committee members.
This review related to KPMGs final audit prior to rotating off our account.
The feedback has been shared with them and will also help inform our discussions on audit scope and process with Deloitte our incoming auditor.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Audit Committee report continued outputs of general financial and LCM controls testing and any required improvement actions with management and internal and external audit with a view to ensuring the ongoing robustness of programme execution and risk mitigation.
We have reviewed the ongoing effectiveness of the Companys risk management processes as part of our wider review of internal controls.
The Groups principal risks are set out on pages 68 to 71.
Internal audit Internal Audit plays an integral role in the Companys governance structure and provides regular reports to the Committee including the outputs of the twiceyearly OAS process and the tracking of remedial action in the case of any control failures.
The annual Internal Audit programme is agreed jointly by the Audit and Corporate Responsibility committees to ensure that the overarching programme covers not only financial risk but also the assessment of the effectiveness of key areas of ethical and reputational risk.
The assurance programme covers a broad range of audits covering areas such as mandated governance OAS outputs risk register findings change programmes structural and business changes and areas relating to responsible behaviour and nonfinancial risk.
Internal Audit may also from timetotime undertake other work within the context of the risk environment.
As part of this years process we reviewed the scope of annual audits and recalibrated them against the current risk environment.
During the year under review and separate from the normal regular sessions we hold with the Internal Audit Director without management present we held a separate session with him his heads of internal audit and the external auditor which has helped inform our view on how to optimise internal audit resource for valueadded assurance.
After discussion of the 2017 evaluation output with the Internal Audit Director the Committee concluded that the Internal Audit function remains effective.
As reported earlier an external assessment of the function will commence in the first quarter of 2018.
Nick Rose Chairman of the Audit Committee
We considered the level of goodwill held on the Groups balance sheet in respect of a number of past major transactions and whether given the future prospects of these businesses the value of goodwill held on the balance sheet remains appropriate.
The methodology for impairment testing used by the Group is set out in note 8 to the Group accounts on page 158.
As a result of this review there has been an impairment of goodwill held in respect of Applied Intelligence of 384m reflecting the future level and timing of expected returns from the business.
Taxation
Whilst tax policy is ultimately a matter for the Boards determination we reviewed the Groups tax strategy as set out on page 34.
Twice during the year we reviewed the Groups tax charge tax provisions and the basis of recoverability of the deferred tax asset relating to the Groups pension deficit.
Going concern and viability statements The Committee agreed the parameters of and reviewed the supporting report for the going concern statement see page 81 and the statement on the Boards assessment of the prospects of the Company the viability statement on page 81 over the fiveyear period used in the Integrated Business Plan.
Internal control and risk The Board has delegated to the Committee responsibility for reviewing in detail the effectiveness of the Companys risk management and internal control system.
The Committees review of the effectiveness of internal controls has encompassed a review of the reports relating to the sixmonthly Operational Assurance Statements OAS which are submitted by each business or function as a mandated policy under the Groupwide Operational Framework controls reports and reports from both internal and external auditors.
A key focus for the Committee is the controls environment surrounding the Companys Lifecycle Management LCM process the bedrock of our programme execution and management.
LCM is integral to the successful execution of the Groups projects and programmes and of particular importance in the early identification of programme risk and the determination of profit recognition or provisioning which you will see from above tend to be areas where we are required to exercise judgement.
We have discussed the Competition and Markets Authority Audit Order The Committee has complied with the provisions of the Competition and Markets Authority Audit Order in respect of committee responsibilities and audit retendering disclosures.
Committee composition and evaluation The breadth of experience of the Audit Committee members is set out on page 79.
The performance evaluation of the Committee is undertaken as part of the wider Board evaluation and the Board believes the Committee to have the appropriate composition skills and experience to discharge its responsibilities.
How the Committee assesses the effectiveness of Internal Audit Who we survey Groupwide heads of Audit Review
Other business leaders External auditors Areas for requested feedback include Role of Internal Audit and independence Audit planning processes and execution People resources and skilling Communications and reporting BAE Systems Annual Report 2017
Financial statements Governance June
Committee
Washington DC US Agreed audit engagement and audit fee.
Agreed audit strategy and scope.
Reviewed external auditor independence issues.
Reviewed Deloittes Audit Transition Plan.
Discussed with external auditors the Financial Reporting Councils latest Quality Review on KPMG which did not include the BAE Systems audit.
Considered output of the Internal Audit Directors report.
Received a presentation from VP Audit for the US businesses.
Regular quarterly items
Committee
London UK Considered the accounting financial control and audit issues reported by the auditors that flowed from the audit work.
Reviewed the financial statements and specific disclosures including going concern for recommendation to the Board.
Received a report from the Group Taxation
Considered output from the sixmonthly OAS review.
Reviewed the procedures and outputs for the identification assessment and reporting of risk.
Audit Transition Reviewed independence safeguards for incoming auditor.
Regular quarterly items
Meeting
London UK Informal meeting with the Internal Audit Director to discuss best practice developments in internal audit and its strategic development.
October
Committee
London UK Agreed the Trading Update.
November
Briefing
Reviewed briefing on IFRS 15.
December
Committee
London UK Considered the external auditors controls report.
Considered output of the Internal Audit Directors report.
Presentation on governance in the Companys Saudi Arabian Kingdom Portfolio Companies.
Received a report on export control compliance.
Received a report on the Groups insurance arrangements.
Reviewed the NonAudit Services Policy.
Discussed the first iteration of the annual Internal Audit programme.
Set the parameters for work supporting the viability and going concern statements.
Undertook a review of the effectiveness of the Internal Audit function.
Regular quarterly items
Committee
London UK Considered the accounting financial control and audit issues reported by the auditors that flowed from the audit work.
Reviewed the financial statements and specific disclosures including viability and going concern for recommendation to the Board.
Reviewed the effectiveness of the external audit process.
Received a report from the Group Taxation Director.
Considered output from the sixmonthly OAS review.
Reviewed the procedures and outputs for the identification assessment and reporting of risk.
Reviewed the effectiveness of the Companys helpline procedures in respect of the reporting of accounting or financial improprieties.
Regular quarterly items Joint session with the Corporate Responsibility Committee Agreed final iteration of the annual Internal Audit programme.
May
Committee
Farnborough Hampshire UK Conducted the audit tender selection and made recommendation to the Board.
Agreed the AGM Trading Statement.
June
Committee
May
Committee
February
Committee
July
Committee
August
Meeting
November
Briefing
December
Committee
October
Committee
Audit Committee timeline The Audit Committees year The Committee reviews the nature and level of nonaudit services including independence safeguards from the incumbent auditor where it provides such services and holds a separate session with the Internal Audit Director and external auditors without management present.
The Audit Committee Chairman also meets separately with internal and external audit on an ad hoc basis.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Audit Committee report continued Ian T yler Chairman of the Corporate Responsibility Committee Dear Shareholders It is my pleasure to once again be reporting to you on the business of the Corporate Responsibility Committee during 2017.
Through this report I aim to give you an insight into the programme of work that we have undertaken our areas of focus during 2017 and how we aim to develop these into 2018.
The corporate responsibility landscape continues to evolve and as such the Committee monitors developments to ensure that our agenda remains relevant whilst keeping a keen eye on the matters that have been our principal focus for some time.
During 2017 we increased the intensity of our review of diversity and inclusion across the different areas of the business.
We also looked at responsible trading the way in which the Company interacts with our suppliers and how the Company engages with employees.
I will provide detail on each of these areas through this report and begin with a discussion of our health and safety agenda which remains a key priority.
Safety
Safety continues to be a key priority for the Committee and we remain focused on making progress towards achieving worldclass performance wherever possible.
During the year we carried out a deepdive review of the safety performance of the US business to understand the factors driving these specific safety performance metrics.
In 2017 there was a 3% reduction in the Recordable Accident Rate and a 28% reduction in the total number of major injuries recorded.
To ensure that we do not lose focus on this important area the Board continues to prioritise safety in the business through the inclusion of a specific safety objective that is designed to be realistic but stretching and which forms part of our executive annual incentive scheme see page 101.
Diversity and inclusion In July we welcomed Charles Woodburn to the Board in the position of Chief Executive.
Charles has now taken on the role of Chairman of the Companys Diversity and Inclusion Council and he will be engaging with the Committee on the Councils priorities and the progress that is being made to drive business performance.
In my report last year I explained that during 2016 the Committee sought to gain an understanding from management on the Companys objectives and plans with regard to diversity and inclusion.
At the conclusion of our programme of work in 2016 it was clear to me that whilst taking a toplevel view had been helpful to set the scene it did not provide us with a rich enough view of what the challenges were at business unit level.
Each business has its distinct challenges and the Committee was keen to understand what these were and how the management boards were addressing them.
We therefore invited each line of business to meet with the Committee to discuss how they were building the diversity and inclusion strategy into their work.
From the discussions we held with the line leaders we gained a more informed view of the progress being made but we also gained an appreciation of why this is an evolving issue and one that we as a Committee need to continue to focus on in 2018.
The Committee held a very useful discussion on the particular challenges that the Saudi Arabian business faces in terms of local recruitment and retention and gender diversity in particular.
One of the issues that sits alongside our consideration of diversity and inclusion is the development of talent across all backgrounds and it is promising to see that developments in the educational opportunities for women are being translated into changes to the demographic of our employees.
At the end of 2017 the Committee had reviewed the diversity and inclusion approach for each line of business which has given the Committee a better understanding of the actions that are taking place at management board level to embed a culture of diversity and inclusion.
During 2018 the Committee will continue to keep this high on its agenda as we consider the accountability measures that are required to ensure that we have the necessary commitment and engagement to deliver further improvement.
Responsible trading The Committee has continued to review the issue of responsible trading.
During the year we reviewed the antibribery and anticorruption policies which included the Lobbying Adviser and Gifts and Hospitality policies.
These policies set out the expectations that we have of our employees.
Members
Ian T yler Chairman Revathi Advaithi Harriet Green Chris Grigg Focus on diversity and inclusion The Corporate Responsibility Committee continued to focus on diversity and inclusion throughout 2017 and this has remained a key agenda item at each of the quarterly meetings.
Our goal is to build a culture of inclusion and inclusive leadership globally and the Committee has played a key role in driving and supporting the development of market plans and strategies to foster diversity and inclusion throughout the organisation.
The Corporate Responsibility Committee has reinforced accountability for diversity and inclusion through the promotion of demographic data analysis to identify targeted diversity and inclusion actions numeric goals and milestones to increase the representation of minority groups and accelerate diversity recruitment processes that support increasing pipelines and mitigate unconscious bias inclusive leadership training programmes employee resource groups and local councils and a focus on early careers and nextgeneration recruitment to address retirement risk and Science Technology Engineering and Mathematics skills shortages.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017
Financial statements Governance
Corporate Responsibility Committee report The Committee also reviewed the different ways in which the Company assesses and makes judgements on the types of products and services that are developed and sold and the customers that we will do business with.
We considered some of the key export markets where we operate and held indepth discussions with the management team on our approach to existing and new business opportunities and how we engage with governments and customers.
In particular the Committee reviewed and carefully considered the manner in which the Company operates in these markets looking at government relationships and the controls we have in place aimed at ensuring that we operate legally and in accordance with our responsible business policies.
For all of these areas we aimed to understand how management assesses risk from both an operational and reputational perspective.
In support of this we also looked at the Product Trading Policy which looks to ensure that the required standards of integrity are met.
We are continuing to focus on responsible trading as part of our 2018 agenda.
Responsible procurement The Committee undertook a deep dive into the way in which the Company engages with suppliers.
In 2016 the Company embarked on a major programme of change within its procurement function.
The Committee therefore met with the Chief Procurement Officer to discuss the changes made to the global Procurement Policy the structure and role of the Procurement Council and the Supplier Principles launched in January 2017.
The Committee was interested in understanding two aspects of procurement in particular.
The first was how the Company can be confident that its suppliers and their supply chains in turn are meeting similar responsible business standards to those that we set for ourselves.
The Supplier Principles detail what the Company expects and these have been benchmarked against global best practice.
The second aspect was how we as a customer engage with our supply chain and the relationships we build with this crucial element of our business.
The Committee will revisit this topic in 2018 to review the progress that has been made.
Employee engagement The Committee has considered how the Company engages with employees to gain an understanding of their views and opinions.
There are challenges to engaging effectively with a large number of employees across a number of countries.
To meet this challenge new engagement surveys have been developed and we reviewed the way in which the Agile survey is being used to gain a quick response from employees on specific topics.
Each business has the ability to tailor the questions asked to suit their specific engagement needs which gives a new agility to the process.
The
Committee was also interested to understand how management responds to these surveys.
It was encouraging to see that both the quantitative results and the qualitative comments were considered in detail by the management teams as part of their engagement process.
The Committee will continue to review the employee engagement agenda during 2018.
Next year As in previous years the agenda for 2018 will be developed to ensure that we maintain a focus on our rolling agenda of safety ethics diversity and inclusion and responsible business conduct.
In addition to this we look to include deep dives on other areas to broaden our understanding of the challenges and opportunities across the business in relation to corporate responsibility.
Ian Tyler Chairman of the Corporate Responsibility Committee Focus on employee engagement It is important for the members of the Board to be able to understand the views and opinions of employees.
The Company engages with employees in a number of different ways to gain feedback on what is happening across the business and to build a dialogue on key issues.
This includes meeting with employees and the use of employee engagement surveys.
The opportunity to have facetoface engagement with employees is regularly included in the agenda for site visits undertaken by the Board.
These discussions are one of the ways in which the Board can gauge the success of the engagement and to listen directly to the views of employees.
During 2017 the Corporate Responsibility Committee reviewed the output of the employee engagement surveys and in 2018 we will look closely at the ways in which the Board will develop the frameworks for how it engages with employees across the business.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Corporate Responsibility Committee report continued October
London UK Received a presentation on diversity and inclusion in the International Operating
Discussion of the progress that has been made in BAE Systems Australia and Saudi Arabia and the different challenges for these areas of the business.
Presentation from Group Procurement on the policies and guidance relating to responsible procurement.
Consideration of the structure of the function and the way that it supports the global approach to responsible business.
December
Committee
London UK Undertook the annual review of the Gifts and Hospitality Facilitation Payments and Advisers Policies.
Received a presentation on diversity and inclusion in Platforms and Services UK.
Discussion of the approach taken by the business to attract and retain diverse talent and the way in which this supported the leadership pipeline.
Consideration of how targets could be used to drive improvements.
Consideration of the structure and focus of the corporate responsibility objectives for 2018.
Review of the corporate responsibility audit review programme for 2018.
February
Committee
London UK Carried out the annual review of the Product Trading Policy.
This policy governs BAE Systems business behaviour to ensure that the Companys product trading reflects the Companys standards of integrity.
Consideration of the Companys approach to diversity and inclusion and the way in which this is managed across the business.
Received a presentation from the Group Human Resources Director on employee engagement tools and discussed the results of a recent internal survey.
Review of performance against the 2016 safety performance objectives.
A recommendation on the performance rating was made to the Remuneration
June
Committee
Washington DC US Received a presentation on diversity and inclusion in BAE Systems Inc.
Discussion on the objectives of the business the strategy to achieve this and the way in which performance was assessed.
Review of the safety performance of BAE Systems Inc. the business.
Discussed the programme of work that was being undertaken to update the Code of Conduct.
The Corporate Responsibility Committees year
Committee
February
Committee
October
Committee
December
Committee
Corporate Responsibility Committee timeline Schedule for 2018
February
Review of performance metrics for 2017.
Product trading.
Diversity and inclusion deep dive.
June
Antibribery and corruption overseas governance.
Workplace safety deep dive.
Environment update.
Stakeholder and employee engagement.
September
Review of responsible procurement.
Workplace safety.
Diversity and inclusion deep dive.
December
Antibribery and anticorruption and related policies  review of Lobbying Adviser and Gifts and Hospitality policies.
Consideration of forwardlooking objectives.
Diversity and inclusion deep dive.
Stakeholder and employee engagement update.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Governance Dear Shareholders Im pleased to report that 2017 saw a successful conclusion to the Chief Executive succession planning process  as managed by the Nominations Committee  with Charles Woodburn succeeding Ian King on 1 July.
It was back in March 2015 that the Committee first identified Charles as a possible candidate for the role and I would like to thank him and Ian for the professional and helpful manner in which they conducted themselves during a rigorous and lengthy selection and handover process.
Charles is well supported in his new role by two very able and experienced fellow executive directors Jerry DeMuro who leads our US business and Peter Lynas Group Finance Director.
Im pleased that Peter has agreed to take a wider management role and since November last year he has been responsible for UK Shared Services Procurement and Group Mergers and
Last year I committed to further strengthen the nonexecutive representation on the
Im delighted that we were able to achieve this with the appointment of Revathi Advaithi on 1 January this year.
With an international industrial sector background and a good understanding of the digital economy Revathis knowledge and experience will be an asset to the Board.
Heidrick and Struggles  JCA Group worked with the Committee to assist in her recruitment and Spencer Stuart performed a similar role in the Chief Executive search.
Looking ahead next year Nick Rose who chairs our Audit Committee and is also our Senior Independent Director will have served on the Board for nine years and has indicated that he will retire in 2019.
Consequently the Committee has initiated a search process to identify a suitable candidate to succeed Nick in leading the Audit Committee.
BAE Systems recognises the value of being an inclusive employer with a diverse workforce.
This also applies at Board level and we continue to make good progress in increasing the diversity of the Board.
In terms of gender 36% of Board members are women which exceeds our previously stated policy target of 33% or greater by 2020  as targeted by the HamptonAlexander Review.
This remains our policy concerning gender.
In terms of other aspects of Board diversity our policy is to continue over time to create a Board that not only brings together individuals with the right skills knowledge and experience but also has a diversity that reflects the multinational nature of our Company and the increasingly global nature of the business world in general.
However individual merit will always be the prime consideration when making appointments to the Board.
We will continue to engage with search consultants to identify candidates in a manner that is consistent with achieving an appropriately diverse board.
One of the Committees objectives over the last couple of years has been to develop a better understanding of the depth of our management resource.
This has meant making time for the nonexecutive directors to meet with executives who either currently occupy senior management positions just below our Executive Committee or show the potential to reach that level.
Using informal events scheduled around our Board meetings we have been successful in significantly increasing the Boards engagement with executives.
This activity has helped the members of the Nominations Committee to perform the important role they undertake in overseeing succession planning and executive development across the Group.
This work will be a key priority for the Committee in 2018.
We know we employ some highly talented people and will engage with the Chief Executive and our new Group Human Resources Director in ensuring that they are developed and given the opportunities to lead this Company in the years to come.
Sir Roger Carr Chairman of the Nominations Committee
Sir Roger Carr Chairman Revathi Advaithi Elizabeth Corley Harriet Green Chris Grigg Paula Rosput Reynolds Nick Rose Ian Tyler
Committee
March
Committee
February
Committee
July
Committee
Nominations Committee timeline Heidrick and Struggles  JCA Group and Spencer Stuart provide other recruitment services to BAE Systems.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017
Committee report Sir Roger Carr Chairman of the Nominations Committee Dear Shareholders The Remuneration Committee the Committee is pleased to provide this update on our progress in implementing the remuneration policy approved at the May 2017 AGM the
We appreciated the high level of support we received 95.09% in favour and the continuing constructive dialogue we have had with a number of you.
The Committee remains sensitive to the broad range of themes regarding executive remuneration expressed by investors the UK government and the wider public particularly as regards to restraint when setting quantum.
We believe such restraint is appropriate as long as remuneration remains reflective of the business environment and contains appropriate incentives to achieve the Groups business objectives.
In keeping with this theme I believe you will find that our changes for 2018 are quite modest but are nevertheless responsive to the feedback that the Committee received during the last shareholder consultation cycle.
To confirm for 2018 no revisions are proposed to our executive remuneration framework which would constitute a change to the Policy.
Key changes proposed and approved at our 2017 AGM include adoption of common metrics 50% on Earnings per Share 50% on Total Shareholder Return for all performancerelated share awards introducing reasonable discretion for the Committee to modify the final outcome of awards vesting in light of important factors in the business amending the structure of our LongTerm Incentive Plan applicable to our UK executive directors to ensure a minimum period from grant to final release based on a threeyear performance period with a further twoyear holding period for all awards to be granted from 2018 onwards and a simplification of the LongTerm Incentive construct applicable to the US executive director.
2017 was a crossroads year for BAE Systems and the application of our Policy reflected these circumstances.
Ian King retired from the Company at the end of June having served for over 40 years including leading BAE Systems as Chief Executive since 2008.
His retirement was handled precisely according to our Policy.
This transition had been anticipated and the decisionmaking with respect to succession and remuneration was undertaken with an eye to ensuring a smooth transition of leadership through a period of significant change in the business environment.
Thus our then Chief Operating Officer Charles Woodburn was appointed Chief Executive with effect from 1 July 2017 and his remuneration was adjusted in accordance with the Policy.
Our Group Finance Director Peter Lynas was subsequently asked to undertake enhanced responsibility for Procurement Group Mergers and Acquisitions and UK Shared Services.
As previously announced the base salary of the Group Finance Director was increased to reflect these expanded responsibilities with effect from 1 November 2017 and this adjustment was also in accordance with the Policy.
Members
Paula Rosput Reynolds Chairman Elizabeth Corley Nick Rose performance incentive outcome Group EPS AIP 42.3p Group cash AIP 940m Group order intake AIP 19.3bn Average threeyear EPS growth LTI 4.7% Threeyear TSR LTI 49.1% Recordable Accident Rate per 100000 employees AIP 564 Major injuries recorded AIP 28 AIP Annual Incentive Plan LTI LongTerm Incentive Below threshold Between threshold and target Between target and stretch Business performance and incentive outcomes in 2017 This resulted in the following incentive outcomes 2017 annual bonus payouts for the executive directors ranged from 75.6% to 88.4% of maximum and Performance Shares EPS granted to executive directors in March 2015 will vest at 46.9%.
Performance Shares TSR and Share Option awards granted at the same time did not meet their performance condition and will lapse.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017
Financial statements Governance
Remuneration
Committee report Paula Rosput Reynolds Chairman of the Remuneration Committee The Company remains subject to rapidly changing political economic defence and security conditions around the world.
Such circumstances require that we be responsive to the environment and innovate for the longrun health of the business.
Thus in October we announced a restructure of various of our operations resulting in a number of senior leadership changes.
The
Committee adjusted remuneration for the affected senior executives to reflect new roles and enhanced responsibilities.
In doing so the Committee adhered to the Policy.
Throughout this period of transition the Committees overarching goal has remained constant  to ensure that we are providing compelling incentives for sustainable high performance by our executive team in a way that is transparent to our stakeholders and is supported by them.
Further our remuneration programmes are designed to assure that there is strong alignment between business results and rewards conferred.
In reading this report we hope you will agree that the results of our deliberations are consistent with these purposes.
Context to the Committees decisions The Committee is responsible for the full spectrum of executive employment matters recruiting promoting and retaining the best toplevel leaders setting the incentives under which these leaders operate and monitoring the results they produce and the manner in which they produce them.
Our overall remuneration framework has a number of specific goals.
It is designed to motivate our key talent to achieve the Companys strategic objectives to deliver on customer commitments to lead and inspire employees and to drive value for our shareholders.
It is also designed to be competitive in the various markets in which we operate and compete for talent.
There are multiple considerations in the design of the overall framework.
First is the balance of shortterm and longterm incentives.
Second is the interplay between Group and business segment results and individual accomplishments as well as the level of reward afforded to employees in the wider Group.
Third is to distinguish between the precise numerical results and the character of the results themselves including the manner in which they are achieved.
Fourth is the balance between absolute shareholder value creation and the Groups performance relative to peers.
Our shortterm programme metrics are tied to Group performance business segment performance and individual goals including the leadership behaviours that underpin BAE Systems Total Performance culture.
Our longterm incentive programme measures absolute performance of the Group and performance relative to peers.
Our framework is intended to foster accountability for sustaining and growing the Group in a responsible manner.
In addition to developing the overall remuneration framework the Committee assesses the level of challenge within our annual and longterm incentive plan targets.
Annually in November the full Board reviews and adopts the Integrated Business Plan.
Thereafter the Committee reviews the specific business targetsmetrics for the one and threeyear periods and examines the underlying assumptions including the degree of stretch contained within them.
After setting one and threeyear targets the Committee periodically reviews progress towards the attainment of the objectives.
After the close of each year the Committee undertakes a thorough review of annual and threeyear performance.
Separately the Committee regularly considers the overall construct of the remuneration package to ensure that potential pay outcomes are appropriate and reasonable against different performance scenarios.
Summary of key decisions for 2017 Approval of early retirement for outgoing Chief Executive Ian King in June 2017.
Approval of remuneration package applicable to newlyappointed Chief Executive Charles Woodburn in July 2017.
Salary of the Chief Executive is being increased by 2.5% from 1 January 2018.
As a result of his expanded role and increased responsibilities the salary of the Group Finance Director increased by 6.9% on 1 November 2017.
His salary is being increased by 2.5% from 1 January 2018.
Salary of the President and Chief Executive Officer of BAE Systems Inc.
1 January 2018.
Approval of remuneration packages for newly appointed Executive Committee members.
Awards granted in spring 2017 of Performance Shares Share Options and to US executive director only Restricted Shares.
Performance Shares subject to i 50% on Earnings per Share EPS growth 3% to 7% average annual growth requirement and ii 50% on the Total Shareholder Return TSR percentile ranking against sector peer comparator group and the companies in the FTSE 100 index with each group having equal weight.
Elimination of Share Options for UK executive directors and maintaining expected value in Performance Shares for 2018 awards.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017
Remuneration Committee report
As noted above the changes for 2018 are quite modest but are nevertheless responsive to the feedback that the Committee received during the last shareholder consultation cycle.
The following actions will apply to our framework for 2018 and all are entirely in accordance with the bounds of the approved
In line with our commitment to continued transparency and engagement with our shareholders we have engaged with our major shareholders on these changes for 2018.
In order to increase focus on the achievement of nonfinancial objectives designed to support the Groups strategy the weighting on nonfinancial performance measures will increase from 20% to 25% with 75% remaining on financial metrics relating to Group EPS Group cash and Group order intake.
LongTerm Incentive LTI design simplification As a further step towards simplification of our LTI framework having already taken the decision to eliminate the use of Share Options as part of the construct applicable to our US executive director the Committee will also cease the award of Share Options to the UK executive directors for 2018 onwards.
Consistent with the flexibility contained within the Policy LTI awards will be delivered using Performance Shares only.
This change will result in a lower total face value of the award without we believe diluting the incentive to achieve longterm sustainable value.
Long Term Incentive award levels
Current aggregate face value of awards Performance Shares and Share Options % of salary New face value associated with Performance Share award only % of salary Chief Executive 185 550 370 Group Finance Director 167.5 515 335 The conversion from Share Options to Performance Shares has been calculated in line with the methodology explained in our Policy on page 120 and is shown in the table below.
This approach significantly simplifies our LTI arrangements without changing the underlying marketcompetitive expected values of 185% for the Chief Executive and 167.5% for the Group Finance Director.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017
Financial statements Governance
Vests subject to threeyear TSR and EPS conditions vested shares released in onethirds in years 3 4 and 5
Twothirds paid in cash immediately Application of 2018 package for UK executive directors Application of 2018 package for US executive director Vests subject to threeyear service condition with an additional twoyear clawback period Charts are illustrative and are not to scale.
Details of executive director remuneration packages are on page 96.
The full Policy approved at the 2017 AGM is set out on pages
Shares
Restricted
Shares
Annual
Incentive
Year
Onethird
Twothirds paid in cash immediately Vests subject to threeyear TSR and EPS conditions and twoyear holding period in year Performance
Base
Salary
Annual
Incentive
Compulsory bonus deferral
Year
Base
Salary Wider employee agenda Recognising the public interest in pay differentials and the expected proposed legislation in this area we are continuing to voluntarily disclose the pay ratio of our Chief Executive to that of the average employee of the Group.
The level of salary adjustment for the executive directors is in line with the average increase for employees generally across the Group in 2018.
To support the Committee in taking a greater responsibility for demonstrating how pay and incentives are aligned across the Company the Committee undertook a reward framework deepdive session covering information on the structure of remuneration across the Group including pension benefits.
In February 2018 BAE Systems published its gender pay report in accordance with UK legislation.
Our average gender pay gap is 11.2%.
This is lower than the UK national average of 18.1%.
We have a gender pay gap because we employ around four times more men than women in the UK and a greater proportion of our senior leadership team is male.
We are determined to bridge the gender gap in our industry by encouraging more women to join BAE Systems and we have put in place a number of programmes and initiatives to support the development and progression of women into senior executive positions.
Concluding comments On behalf of my colleagues on the Committee and indeed the entire Board we appreciate the input we have received from shareholders and representatives of institutional investors.
The Committee remains committed to our policy of paying for performance.
The changes for 2018 simplify the LTI construct considerably whilst ensuring that the incentive arrangements for executives remain meaningful and are aligned to the Companys strategic goals and the interests of our shareholders.
The Remuneration Committee is actively engaged in monitoring performance and continuing to ensure that the level of challenge within our annual and longterm incentive plans remains appropriate.
On behalf of the Board Paula Rosput Reynolds Chairman of the Remuneration Committee BAE Systems Annual Report 2017
Remuneration Committee report
Committee
New Milton Hampshire UK Reviewed level of executive directors and Executive Committee members shareholdings relative to the Minimum Shareholding Requirement.
Reviewed dilution levels and share usage under Employee Share Plans.
Approved operation of Group AllEmployee Free Share Plans.
Considered high level remuneration market practice findings.
Approved remuneration package for new or existing Executive Committee members.
Reviewed outline of 2017 Annual remuneration report.
December
Committee
London UK Reviewed and set salaries and bonus opportunity levels for executive directors and Executive Committee members.
Proposed and set 2018 Annual Incentive targets.
May
Committee
Farnborough Hampshire UK Considered institutional investor shareholder updates.
Approved remuneration package for new or existing Executive Committee members.
September
Committee
Farnborough Hampshire UK Agreed basis for 2017 annual remuneration review including elimination of share options for UK executive directors.
Received update on progress against Annual Incentive Plan objectives for executive directors and Executive Committee members.
Received update on performance conditions for LongTerm Incentive awards.
Approved remuneration package for new or existing executive director or Executive Committee members.
Received details of recent pay review exercise for key senior executives.
January
Committee
London UK Agreed 2017 objectives for executive directors and Executive Committee members.
Reviewed feedback from shareholder consultation on 2017 Directors remuneration policy renewal.
Reviewed Remuneration Committee terms of reference.
February
Committee
London UK Determined 2016 bonuses against performance for executive directors and Executive Committee members for payment in March 2017.
Approved 2016 Group AllEmployee Free Share Plans payments.
Determined vesting outcome for 2014 LongTerm Incentive awards.
Approved 2017 LongTerm Incentive awards and associated performance targets for executive directors and Executive Committee members.
Approved modifying the mix of LongTerm Incentives for US executive director.
Reviewed feedback from shareholder consultation on 2017 remuneration review and policy renewal.
Approved 2016 Annual remuneration report.
The Remuneration Committees year
Committee
February
Committee
January
Committee
November
Committee
September
Committee
December
Committee
Remuneration Committee timeline BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Governance Summary of remuneration framework The overall remuneration framework applicable in 2018 to each of the three executive directors under the policy approved by shareholders at the 2017 Annual General Meeting is summarised in the following table.
Purpose and link to strategy
Woodburn
CEO
Peter
Lynas
GFD
Jerry
DeMuro
CEO Inc.
Base Salary with effect from 1 January 2018 Recognise market value of role and individuals skills experience and performance to ensure the business can attract and retain talent.
897000 641650 1053700 Pension and benefits Provide competitive benefits.
Defined contribution
Section 401k defined contribution Annual Incentive Drive and reward annual performance of individuals and teams on both financial and nonfinancial metrics including leadership behaviours in order to deliver sustainable growth in shareholder value.
Compulsory deferral into shares increases alignment with shareholder interests.
Ontargetmaximum
112.5%225% 80%160% 112.5%225% Performance condition 75% financial25% nonfinancial Deferral into Deferred Bonus Plan Onethird compulsory deferral Performance Shares Drive and reward delivery of sustained longterm Earnings per Share EPS and Total Shareholder Return TSR performance aligned to the interests of shareholders.
Grant % salary 370% 335% 298% Performance condition 50% on relative TSR50% on threeyear EPS growth Restricted Shares Provide longterm reward through time vesting awards principally in the Companys US market.
Grant % salary na 150%
Shareholding
Requirement
Provide longterm alignment with shareholder interests.
The full Directors remuneration policy approved by shareholders at the 2017 Annual General Meeting is set out on pages 117 to 129.
The appointment of Charles Woodburn as Chief Executive with effect from 1 July 2017 is detailed on page 100.
Ontarget
Charles Woodburn Chief Executive Actual Ontarget CEO for full year
Peter Lynas Group Finance Director Actual Ontarget Jerry DeMuro President and Chief Executive Ofcer of BAE Systems Inc.
Actual
Share Options Performance Shares Restricted Shares Annual Incentive Pension and benets Base Salary The figures for Jerry DeMuro have been converted from US dollars to sterling.
Charles Woodburn was appointed to the Board in 2016 and his first LTI is not due to vest until 2019 subject to performance conditions being met.
Longterm incentive figures in the charts above are based on the 2015 Performance Shares Share Options and Restricted Shares awards.
For Jerry DeMuro the single total figure of remuneration on page 99 includes his 2017 Restricted Shares award as required by regulation.
Executive directors remuneration The charts below show the 2017 actual remuneration achieved as disclosed in the single total figure of remuneration on page 99 compared with the 2017 ontarget opportunity.
Ontarget remuneration assumes target vesting of incentives payable in respect of the performance period with yearend 2017.
For Charles Woodburn the first two bars below reflect his remuneration for 2017 as Chief Operating Officer to 30 June and Chief Executive from 1 July.
The third bar provides ontarget remuneration assuming he was Chief Executive for the full year for comparison purposes only.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Annual remuneration report at a glance Contents Directors remuneration in the year ending 31 December 2018 97 Single total figure of remuneration for the Chairman and nonexecutive directors 98 for the executive directors 99 Annual bonus 101 Key strategic objectives 102 LongTerm Incentive Plan LTIP performance 104 Total Shareholder Return TSR performance and Chief Executive pay 105 Pay ratio of Chief Executive to average employee 106 Relative importance of spend on pay 106 Pension entitlements 107 Share interests Scheme interests awarded during the financial year 109 Description of share plans and summary of performance conditions 110 Statement of directors shareholdings and share interests 111 Statement of voting 114 NonExecutive Directors Fees Committee 114 Remuneration Committee composition and advisers 115 Directors remuneration in the year ending 31 December 2018 For the purposes of the Companies Act 2006 the Directors remuneration policy the Policy has been operating in practice since the date of its approval on 10 May 2017 at the 2017 AGM.
The remuneration for 2018 will be implemented as follows The salary of the Chief Executive is being increased by 2.5% to 897000 with effect from 1 January 2018.
The salary of the Group Finance Director is being increased by 2.5% to 641650 with effect from 1 January 2018.
The salary of the President and Chief Executive Officer of BAE Systems Inc. is being increased by 3% to 1053700 with effect from 1 January 2018.
Annual and LongTerm Incentive opportunity levels remain in line with 2017 approved Policy.
LongTerm Incentive awards of Performance Shares only for UK executive directors and Performance Shares and Restricted Shares for US executive director.
The performance measures and weightings for 2018 for the Annual Incentive and LongTerm Incentives are set out on page 116.
The Committee is of the view that bonus targets for the Annual Incentive are commercially sensitive and that it would be detrimental to the Company to disclose them in advance.
The targets will be disclosed retrospectively after the end of the relevant financial year.
The fee for the Chairman is set at 700000 per annum until February 2020.
As agreed by the NonExecutive Directors Fees Committee whose composition is detailed on page 114 the fee structure for nonexecutive directors which will not be reviewed until 1 April 2020 is as follows Basic fee is 80000 per annum.
Senior Independent Directors fee is 25000 per annum.
Remuneration Committee Chairmans fee is 25000 per annum.
Corporate Responsibility Committee Chairmans fee is 25000 per annum.
Audit Committee Chairmans fee is 25000 per annum.
Travel allowance of 4500 per meeting payable on each occasion that a scheduled Board meeting necessitates air travel of more than five hours one way subject to a maximum of six travel allowances per year.
Remuneration policy The Companys remuneration policy approved at the 2017 AGM which took effect on 10 May 2017 is detailed on pages 117 to 129.
The Companys remuneration policy approved at the 2014 AGM which was in effect until 10 May 2017 is available on the Companys websitesite This section details the remuneration of the executive and nonexecutive directors including the Chairman during the financial year ended 31 December 2017 and will be proposed for an advisory vote by shareholders at the 2018 Annual General Meeting
It has been prepared on the basis prescribed in the Large and Mediumsized Companies and Groups Accounts and Reports Amendment Regulations 2013.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017
Financial statements Governance
Annual remuneration report for the year ended 31 December 2017 Single total figure of remuneration for the Chairman and nonexecutive directors Fees Benefits Other Total
Sir Roger Carr 696 650     696 650 Nonexecutive directors E P L Corley H Green C M Grigg 79 75 2  P Rosput Reynolds N C Rose I P Tyler .
Appointed to the Board on 1 February 2016.
Chairman
Sir Roger Carr was appointed as Chairman on 1 February 2014 on a fixed annual fee of 650000 throughout his initial threeyear term as Chairman.
As reported last year his fee was reviewed in 2016 and was increased to 700000 per annum with effect from 1 February 2017.
This fee will not be reviewed again for the remainder of his current threeyear term.
Nonexecutive directors As reported last year the fee structure for the nonexecutive directors was reviewed and was increased for the first time since 2012.
With effect from 1 April 2017 the fee structure on a per annum basis is as follows i Chairman Audit Committee 105000 2016 100000 ii Chairman Corporate Responsibility Committee 105000 2016 95000 iii Chairman Remuneration Committee 105000 2016 95000 iv other nonexecutive directors 80000 2016 75000 and v additional fee for Senior Independent Director 25000 2016 20000.
These amounts are shown in the Fees column above.
A travel allowance of 4500 2016 4500 per meeting is also paid on each occasion that a nonexecutive directors travel necessitates air travel of more than five hours one way to the meeting location subject to a maximum of six travel allowances per year.
These amounts are shown in the Other column.
The amounts in the Benefits column relate to travel expenses and subsistence.
The above table has been subject to audit.
Single total figure of remuneration BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Annual remuneration report continued Single total figure of remuneration for the executive directors Base salary Taxable benefits
LTIP
Pension
Other
Total
I G King C N Woodburn 1311 823  na 154 95 1 1621 2302 3042 P J Lynas 592 571 29 3tel 248 1763 J DeMuro 1578 1531 441  809 2997 Retired as Chief Executive and from the Board on 30 June 2017.
Appointed to the Board on 9 May 2016 as Chief Operating Officer and appointed as Chief Executive on 1 July 2017.
The above table has been subject to audit.
The benefits received by Ian King include the provision of a car allowance and the private use of a chauffeurdriven car 2017 28k 2016 47k.
In addition upon his retirement Ian King received a leaving gift totalling 5k with any tax due on this payment being settled by the Company.
The benefits received by Charles Woodburn include the provision of a car allowance and the private use of a chauffeurdriven car 2017 23k 2016 17k.
The benefits received by Peter Lynas include the provision of a car allowance and the private use of a chauffeurdriven car 2017 21k 2016 19k.
In addition Peter Lynas received a second residence allowance of 8k 2016 15k on the basis disclosed in previous years.
Jerry
DeMuros benefits include private use of a chauffeurdriven car and parking 2017 3k 2016 4k medical and dental benefits 2017 14k 2016 12k insured life and disability benefits 2017 9k 2016 8k and the private use of a company aircraft 2017 9k 2016 1k.
Further detail on bonus payments is provided on page 101.
Onethird of the net bonus paid to Charles Woodburn Peter Lynas and Jerry DeMuro will be deferred compulsorily into BAE Systems shares for a threeyear period without additional performance conditions.
The same deferral treatment applies to the net bonus paid to Ian King in respect of the prorated bonus for his six months of service in 2017.
This column relates to the estimated or actual value of LongTerm Incentive Plans for which the performance period ended in the relevant financial year.
With respect to the 2015 LTIP PS will vest.
The 2015 LTIP PS did not meet their TSR performance condition and will lapse see page 104 for further detail.
The figures for Ian King and Peter Lynas in this column reflect defined benefit arrangements and have been calculated in line with the method set out in Section 229 of the Finance Act 2004 using a capitalisation factor of 20 to assess the increase in the value of the pension promise over the year under review net of inflation.
The figures for Ian King show the added pension value received in the defined benefit schemes from 1 January 2017 to the date of his retirement on 30 June 2017 see note 2 on page 107 for details on pension paid for the six months from retirement to 31 December 2017.
The figures for Peter Lynas allow for the impact of a pension sharing order effective in 2017.
These figures are also sensitive to salary increases and Consumer Prices Index CPI inflation as follows Salary increase Pensionable salary is averaged over three years.
The figures for Peter Lynas reflect salary increases since 31 December 2016.
CPI inflation In a year with high CPI inflation the increase in the value of the pension promise would be lower than in a year with lower CPI inflation.
For the 2017 figures the reference CPI inflation was 1%.
The figures for Charles Woodburn relate to a salary supplement in lieu of Company pension contributions.
The figures for Jerry DeMuro include company contributions paid into his Section 401k defined contribution arrangement.
This column includes i the value of Free Share awards under the UK allemployee Share Incentive Plan SIP of 505 for Charles Woodburn and Peter Lynas and Matching Shares under voluntary investment in the SIP for Ian King for the six months to 30 June 2017 and Charles Woodburn and ii for Jerry DeMuro the value of the 2017 grant of Restricted Shares 837k.
This award formed part of Jerry DeMuros 2017 LTIP allocation but is required to be reported under Other as it has no performance conditions attached his prior year figure relates to a similar Restricted Shares award in 2016.
The balance of the 2017 figure 113k relates to the value of notional reinvested dividends in respect of his 2014 Restricted Share Plan award which vested in March 2017 the third anniversary of grant.
The value of the related award was reported in the 2014 Remuneration report.
The prior year figure for Charles Woodburn includes the cash payment of 1620000 to recognise forfeited compensation from his previous employer as set out in note 7 below.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Governance 6.
As previously reported Ian King retired from the Company on 30 June 2017 having served for over 40 years including leading BAE Systems as Chief Executive since 2008.
His leaving arrangements were as follows His retirement constituted early retirement with Company consent for share plan and pension purposes and accordingly i he was entitled to an immediate pension.
Under the rules of the 2000 Pension Plan and Executive Pension Scheme a pension of 130th of threeyear final average salary for each year of service subject to the payment of members contributions currently 8% is payable at 62 years of age.
Benefits paid prior to age 62 are subject to actuarial reduction currently a reduction of 4% to annual benefits for each year that retirement takes place prior to age 62 with proportionate reductions applied in respect of part years.
He was 61 at the date of his retirement and his pension payments were reduced accordingly ii unvested share awards and options under the Companys LongTerm Incentive Plan will vest at the normal vesting date subject to testing of the relevant performance conditions at the end of the normal performance period.
Share awards were reduced prorata on the basis of complete months from the grant date to 30 June 2017.
Any share options that vest will remain exercisable for a period of six months from the vesting date and iii unvested deferred bonus awards were preserved and will vest at the normal vesting dates.
He will continue to be covered by the Companys Directors and Officers insurance policy and his directors indemnification arrangements will remain in force.
He will continue to be bound by those provisions of his service agreement which continue to apply following cessation of employment including posttermination restrictive covenants and confidentiality provisions.
He was eligible for an Annual Incentive payment for 2017 determined by the Committee based on an assessment of individual and Company performance.
Any bonus was to be prorated for his six months of service during 2017 and will be paid at the normal date following the end of the 2017 financial year.
Onethird of the net bonus will be compulsorily deferred into shares in the normal way see page 101 for further detail.
No award was granted under the LongTerm Incentive Plan in 2017.
No termination payment was paid.
Taxable benefits comprising the provision of a car allowance and the private use of a chauffeurdriven car ceased from 30 June 2017.
As previously reported Charles Woodburn was appointed as Chief Operating Officer on 9 May 2016 and joined the Board as an executive director on the same date.
His salary on appointment was 750000 with a maximum bonus opportunity of 200% of salary of which onethird will be deferred in shares for a period of three years.
He also received LTIP awards at the following levels Performance Share award of 230% of salary and Share Option award of 300% of salary.
In addition he received the following awards to take into account the fair value of the awards being forfeited which significantly extend the vestingholding period of the incentives being given up cash payment of 1620000 in respect of incentives earned and payable within six months of which 50% of this net amount was to be used to purchase BAE Systems shares within 120 days following payment.
Due to BAE Systems being in a closed period from 1 January 2017 until the announcement of the Companys results on 23 February 2017 the Remuneration Committee agreed to extend the period in which Charles was required to buy the shares to the end of February 2017.
These shares continue to be held in accordance with BAE Systems Minimum Shareholding Requirement and ii a oneoff grant of Performance Shares equal to 266% of salary subject to the same performance conditions applicable to awards made under the LTIP with vesting in equal tranches of onethird in 2019 onethird in 2020 and the final third in 2021.
His pension arrangements are set out on pages 107 and 108.
On his appointment as Chief Executive on 1 July 2017 his salary increased to 875000 per annum.
All other provisions of his remuneration package are as set out in the Companys remuneration policy in respect of the Chief Executive role.
Jerry DeMuro is paid in US dollars with the disclosed figures above being converted into sterling at the required exchange rate.
The 2017 salary reflects his 3.0% salary increase and the exchange rate fluctuations experienced in 2017.
Single total figure of remuneration continued BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Annual remuneration report continued Chief Operating Officer to 30 June 2017 and Chief Executive since 1 July 2017 Charles Woodburn
Weight as a percentage of target Actual performance against targets set
Target for 2017
Actual performance
Financial Group EPS 40.0 39.8p 40.6p 42.6p 42.3p 92.5% Group cash 25.0 1947m 1807m 1508m 940m 100.0% Group order intake 15.0 na 23.6bn 24.5bn 19.3bn 0% Personal Safety 5.0 See note 2 below 40.0% Key strategic objectives 15.0 See Key strategic objectives section on page 102 77.0% Total bonus as a percentage of maximum 75.6% Group Finance Director Peter Lynas
Weight as a percentage of target Actual performance against targets set
Target for 2017
Actual performance
Financial Group EPS 40.0 39.8p 40.6p 42.6p 42.3p 92.5% Group cash 25.0 1947m 1807m 1508m 940m 100.0% Group order intake 15.0 na 23.6bn 24.5bn 19.3bn 0% Personal Safety 5.0 See note 2 below 40.0% Key strategic objectives 15.0 See Key strategic objectives section on page 103 83.0% Total bonus as a percentage of maximum 76.5% President and Chief Executive Officer of BAE Systems Inc.
Jerry DeMuro
Weight as a percentage of target Actual performance against targets set
Target for 2017
Actual performance
Financial Group EPS 13.3 39.8p 40.6p 42.6p 42.3p 92.5% Group cash 8.3 1947m 1807m 1508m 940m 100.0% Group order intake 5.0 na 23.6bn 24.5bn 19.3bn 0% BAE Systems Inc.
BAE Systems Inc.
BAE Systems Inc.
Personal Safety 5.0 See note 2 below 40.0% Key strategic objectives 15.0 See Key strategic objectives section on page 103 82.5% Total bonus as a percentage of maximum 88.4% Chief Executive to 30 June 2017 Ian King
Weight as a percentage of target Actual performance against targets set
Target for 2017
Actual performance
Financial Group EPS 40.0 39.8p 40.6p 42.6p 42.3p 92.5% Group cash 25.0 1947m 1807m 1508m 940m 100.0% Group order intake 15.0 na 23.6bn 24.5bn 19.3bn 0% Personal Safety 5.0 See note 2 below 40.0% Key strategic objectives 15.0 See Key strategic objectives section on page 102 79.0% Total bonus as a percentage of maximum 75.9% The above table has been subject to audit.
Adjusted to be on a likeforlike basis with the targets.
Performance against the safety element of the bonus was determined by the Corporate Responsibility Committee whose composition is stated on page 87 taking account of the level of significant risk reduction and improvement in safety culture as well as targeted improvements against key safety indicators including a reduction in recordable accidents.
While the Group achieved a 3% reduction in recordable accidents it did not meet the 10% target level.
A 30% reduction in the most severe accidents was delivered resulting in an overall performance award factor of 40% of maximum.
Annual bonus Annual bonuses for the 2017 year are paid in March 2018.
Annual bonus is made up of financial metrics safety and personal objectives designed to support the achievement of certain strategic outcomes necessary for sustaining the Groups longterm vitality.
The breakdown of bonus measures achievement and payout for each executive director is shown below.
Onethird of the net bonus payment is subject to compulsory deferral into BAE Systems shares for a threeyear period for which there is no additional performance condition.
As previously reported onethird of the net bonus due to Ian King for the sixmonth period he served in 2017 will be compulsorily deferred into shares in the normal way.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Governance Ian King Chief Executive until 30 June 2017 Overview Key achievements in the sixmonth period For 2017 the focus of Ians personal objectives was on sustaining the building blocks to meet longterm growth as well as continuing to foster an inclusive environment and developing a strong pipeline of talent for future succession within the business.
Assuring continuity in executive leadership Successful handover to Charles Woodburn Securing production contracts on key maritime programmes Maintaining the Companys UK workshare across strategic manufacturing activity Driving positive customer relationships to secure additional orders in key international markets Payout % of maximum 79% Charles Woodburn Chief Operating Officer until 30 June 2017 and Chief Executive from 1 July 2017 Overview Key achievements in the year Prior to his transition to the role of Chief Executive Charless objectives as Chief Operating Officer focused on driving competitiveness and technology to position the business for longterm growth.
Establishing a global procurement strategy to drive savings across the enterprise Achieving major milestones in respect of Air sector capability upgrade programmes Establishing global cyber collaboration across all key markets Taking a lead role in ensuring RandD funding is pulled through into product plans Undertaking the transition from Ian King with a clear sense of purpose communicated clearly to internal and external audiences Implementation of new operating and organisational models to deliver improved efficiency and competitiveness Payout % of maximum 77% Key strategic objectives Achievement against key strategic objectives represents 15% of the annual bonus opportunity applicable to each of the executive directors.
These objectives relate to the delivery of the Groups strategic objectives and demonstration of leadership behaviours.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Annual remuneration report continued Peter Lynas Group Finance Director Overview Key achievements in the year Peters objectives were focused on maintaining the Groups investor proposition and ensuring the delivery of deficit recovery plans for the UK pension schemes.
Sustaining the Groups investmentgrade credit rating through budget discipline cash management and a strong wellmonitored framework of controls Reaching agreement on pension deficit recovery plans with Trustees and the Pensions Regulator Exceeding performance benchmarks on internally managed pension scheme asset portfolios Payout % of maximum 83% Jerry DeMuro President and Chief Executive Officer of BAE Systems Inc.
Overview Key achievements in the year Jerrys objectives included defending and capturing growth in our core franchises with specific focus on organic growth initiatives in Precision Munitions Space and Land Vehicles as well as driving collaboration and international market opportunities.
Successful execution of key programme milestones across Electronics Land and Services sectors Continued progress in securing additional international business Growing domestic portfolio positions in each of BAE Systems Inc.
Driving efficiencies in Enterprise Shared Services to reduce cost whilst maintaining agreed service standards Identifying and delivering key global collaboration opportunities Payout % of maximum 82.5% BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Governance LongTerm Incentive Plan LTIP performance Annual average EPS growth Outperformance of performance conditions ending on 31 December 2017 Threshold Maximum Actual Percentage of maximum achieved 2017 EPS requirement 41.3p 45.9p 43.3p Annual average EPS growth 3% 7% 4.75% 46.9% Relative TSR against comparator group Outperformance of performance conditions ending on 31 December 2017 Threshold Maximum Actual Percentage of maximum achieved TSR against comparator group 68.7% 128.0% 41.0% 0% The following awards had performance periods that ended on 31 December 2017 2015 Performance Shares LTIP PS Performance conditions half on relative TSR against comparator group half on EPS growth of 3% to 7% per annum.
The TSR threeyear performance period ended on 31 December 2017 and the related performance condition was not met thus this portion of the award will lapse.
With respect to the 2015 LTIP PS
4.75% and consequently 46.9% of the shares under this portion of the award will vest.
The Committee is satisfied that there has been a sustained improvement in the Companys underlying financial performance and that it is appropriate for vesting of 46.9% of the EPS portion.
2015 Share Options LTIP SO Performance condition relative TSR against comparator group.
The TSR threeyear performance period ended on 31 December 2017 and the related performance condition was not met thus the award will lapse.
A summary of TSR performance to 31 December 2017 on outstanding TSRrelated LTIP awards is illustrated in the chart below.
The grey boxes show the range of TSR required for 25% vesting to full vesting in respect of the sectoral international defence and FTSE 100 comparator groups as appropriate and the orange diamonds show BAE Systems TSR.
The proportion that would vest is shown in the boxes at the top of the chart.
TSR performance under the TSRrelated awards as at 31 December 2017 0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% 140% 120% 25 March 2015 award 23 March 2016 award 21 March 2017 award FTSE 100 group BAE Systems TSR 26.2% vesting 0% vesting 0% vesting Sectoral international defence group BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Annual remuneration report continued Total Shareholder Return TSR performance and Chief Executive pay The graph below shows the value by 31 December 2017 on a TSR basis of 100 invested in BAE Systems on 31 December 2008 compared with the value of 100 invested in the FTSE 100 index including the effect of dividends.
The FTSE 100 is considered to be an appropriate comparator for this purpose as it is a broad equity index of which BAE Systems is a constituent member and reflects the investment interests of our UK shareholder base.
In addition it forms 50% of the TSR performance measure for awards made from 2016 onwards.
The equivalent data is shown for the sectoral TSR comparator group of other international defence companies which is of relevance to our international shareholder base.
Value at 31 December 2017 of 100 investment at 31 December 2008 tel 2008 201 1teltel BAE Systems FTSE 100 Sectoral TSR comparator group Change in Chief Executives remuneration over nine yearstelteltel 2017 Chief Executives single total figure 000 Ian King 4030 4810 4613 2574 2499 3519 2929 3463 2086 Charles Woodburn         1279 4030 4810 4613 2574 2499 3519 2929 3463 3365 Bonus paid as a percentage of maximum Ian King 83.0% 71.0% 68.6% 55.6% 53.4% 74.3% 72.4% 82.3% 75.9% Charles Woodburn         75.8% LTI as a percentage of maximum vesting Ian King 65.5% 57.6% 44.3% nil nil 16.8% nil nil 11.3% Charles Woodburn         na Ian King retired and stepped down as Chief Executive on 30 June 2017 and Charles Woodburn took over the position on 1 July 2017.
Ian Kings remuneration is shown from the start of the financial year until 30 June 2017.
Charles Woodburns remuneration is shown from 1 July 2017 to the end of the financial year.
Total remuneration includes the value of share plans vesting that were granted prior to appointment as Chief Executive.
The percentage change from 2016 to 2017 in remuneration of the Chief Executive and average UK employee is shown in the table below.
As required by statute the table shows the details for the Chief Executive role and therefore includes a combination of the remuneration of Ian King and Charles Woodburn for the 2017 financial year.
The relevant remuneration figures applying for 2017 in respect of the Chief Executive role are included in the table for reference.
As Charles Woodburns overall remuneration is lower than Ian Kings the calculation for 2017 results in a downward movement in the yearonyear percentage change.
If the table below reflected Ian Kings remuneration for the full financial year the percentage movement on a likeforlike basis would be a 0% increase in salary and a decrease of 7.9% in bonus.
Chief Executive remuneration to 31 December 2017 Change in Chief Executives remuneration % Change in average UK employee remuneration % Base salary 929 5.5 2.9 Taxable benefits 44 4.9 2.9 Bonus 1585 12.9 2.7 The BAE Systems UK employee population has been chosen as this employee comparator group reflects the local employment conditions of the Chief Executive for the purpose of this comparison.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Governance Pay ratio of Chief Executive to average employee The ratio of remuneration of the Chief Executive to the average employee of the entire Group over the last four years was as followstel 2017 Chief Executives remuneration 000 3519 2929 3463 3365 Average employee remuneration 000 Ratio 601 471 521 471 The Chief Executives remuneration is calculated on the same basis as the single total figure of remuneration table.
The
Chief Executives remuneration in 2017 includes a combination of the remuneration of Ian King and Charles Woodburn.
As Charles Woodburns overall remuneration is lower than Ian Kings the calculation for 2017 results in a downward movement in the pay ratio.
Average employee remuneration is based on staff costs calculated on the same basis as note 3 to the Group accounts excluding social security costs and US healthcare costs.
The Committee is mindful of the relationship between Chief Executive remuneration and remuneration of the wider BAE Systems employee population.
Therefore in line with our commitment to transparency the table above provides the ratio of remuneration of the Chief Executive to the average employee of the Group for the past four years.
As can be seen the ratio has typically been around 501 with the ratio being higher in 2014 as a result of the partial vesting of LongTerm Incentive awards in that year.
The ratio could range from around 201 to 1001 depending on the level of performance against the measures which drive the Annual and LongTerm Incentive Plans.
Relative importance of spend on pay The following charts set out underlying EBITA amounts paid in returns to shareholders total employee costs and average headcount for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2017.
Underlying EBITA m Returns to shareholders m 7% 2% 1tel Total employee costs m Average headcount 7% 0% 5tel Operating profit excluding amortisation and impairment of intangible assets finance costs and taxation expense of equity accounted investments EBITA and nonrecurring items see page 28.
After excluding the impact of exchange translation total employee costs increased by 4% per employee on 2016.
Excluding share of equity accounted investments.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Annual remuneration report continued Pension entitlements Total pension entitlements Figures included in the remuneration table on page 99 Director Age
Accrued benefit at 1 January 2017 per annum
31 December 2017 per annum Added pension value received in the year from defined benefit scheme Added pension value received in the year from defined contribution scheme
Ian King 61 62 857652 875235 218946 na 218946 Charles Woodburn 46 65 7270 17486 na Peter Lynas 59 62 251954 285564 569871 na 569871 Jerry DeMuro 62 65 99884 136043 na 10816 10816 Retired on 30 June 2017.
The defined benefit figure includes both funded and unfunded arrangements for Ian King and Peter Lynas.
Accrued benefit for Ian King and Peter Lynas is annual pension payable on retirement prior to any reduction for early payment or exchanging pension for cash.
Ian Kings accrued benefit in this column is his accrued benefit at his retirement date of 30 June 2017 prior to any reduction for early retirement.
There was no further accrual of benefit between 30 June 2017 and 31 December 2017.
He retired at 30 June 2017 with a pension of 745229 per annum with his pension payments totalling 372615 for the six months from retirement to 31 December 2017 and a cash lump sum of 1132032 excluding Additional Voluntary Contributions.
These figures allow for a reduction in respect of Early Retirement Factors to allow for the benefit being drawn before his Normal Retirement Age.
The brought forward accrued benefit figure as at 1 January 2017 has been reduced by 3516 from that disclosed in 2016 to properly reflect the longevity adjustment factor that applies.
Peter Lynas has accrued defined benefit pension which is reduced if taken before normal retirement age.
In addition a longevity adjustment factor is applied to pension accrued after 5 April 2006 to mitigate against life expectancy changes.
The figures allow for the current factors in force whereas in practice the factors are updated annually and those in force at retirement will be applied.
Accrued benefit figures for Peter Lynas include the impact of a pension sharing order effective in 2017.
Accrued benefit for Charles Woodburn is the total value of his defined contribution account including employee contributions and investment returns.
Accrued benefit for Jerry DeMuro is the total value of his Section 401k account including both employee and company contributions as well as investment returns.
The above table has been subject to audit.
Peter Lynas is a member of the BAE Systems Executive Pension Scheme ExPS and the BAE Systems 2000 Pension Plan 2000 Plan which together provide a pension for executive directors payable at 62 of 130th of threeyear average final salary for each year of service subject to the payment of members contributions currently 8%.
Benefits paid prior to age 62 for ExPS and age 65 for 2000 Plan will be subject to actuarial reduction.
The ExPS tops up the underlying employee plan to provide a target benefit for executive directors payable from normal retirement age of 130th of Final Pensionable Pay FPP for each year of ExPS pensionable service subject to a maximum of twothirds of FPP.
FPP is defined as annual base salary averaged over the last 12 months prior to leaving service in respect of service accrued to 5 April 2006 and 36 months prior to leaving in respect of service from 6 April 2006.
The
ExPS also provides a lump sum deathinservice benefit equal to four times base salary at date of death and a spouses deathinservice pension equal to twothirds of the prospective pension at normal retirement age.
Spouses pensions are also payable upon death in retirement and death after leaving the Companys employment with a deferred pension.
Once in payment pensions are increased annually by the rise in the Retail Prices Index subject to a maximum increase of 5% per year in respect of pre6 April 2006 service and 2.5% per year in respect of service from 6 April 2006.
Peter Lynas joined the ExPS in 1999.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Governance The 2000 Plan provides a pension of 150th of Final Pensionable Earnings FPE for each year of pensionable service payable from a normal retirement age of 65 and members pay contributions of 8% of Pensionable Earnings.
FPE under the 2000 Plan is the best consecutive threeyear average of base salary and bonus in the ten Plan Years prior to leaving less an offset for State pensions.
The Company decided in 2006 to limit pensionable bonuses in the 2000 Plan in the 200607 Plan Year to 20% of base salary and to 10% of base salary for the 200708 Plan Year and thereafter.
However there is a guarantee that the FPE figure for benefits in respect of service prior to 6 April 2007 will not be less than the FPE figure at 5 April 2007 to ensure that employees do not lose the benefit of contributions paid on past bonuses.
Peter Lynas has 32 years and two months service in the 2000 Plan.
The review of pension policies carried out in 2010 by the Committee concluded that the pension benefits should continue to be based on the Companys registered pension schemes and that in appropriate circumstances the Company will continue to have the option to offer an unfunded pension promise so as to mitigate the impact of further reductions to the Lifetime Allowance and the impact of the reduced Annual Allowance.
Peter Lynas was given the choice to remain in the current arrangement and pay the increased tax or to take an unfunded promise he elected for the latter.
The Committee has decided that in cases where the Company is to pay an unfunded promise executives will be given the choice to commute some or all of the benefit for a taxable lump sum or take it as pension.
Where an unfunded pension is taken ten years after retirement the executive will be given a further opportunity to commute the residual value of the unfunded pension for a lump sum.
Therefore Peter Lynas total pension is the sum of his 2000 Plan benefits plus the topup from the ExPS most of which is provided through the unfunded promise referred to above.
Ian King is a member of the ExPS which he joined in 1999 and the 2000 Plan with benefits in line with those set out above and had opted to take an unfunded promise.
At his retirement on 30 June 2017 he had 34 years service in the 2000 Plan and became a pensioner member.
As reported last year when he retired as a director and ceased employment on 30 June 2017 his retirement constituted early retirement with Company consent for pension purposes and accordingly he was entitled to an immediate pension.
Under the rules of the 2000 Plan and the ExPS and as set out above a pension of 130th of threeyear final average salary for each year of service subject to the payment of members contributions currently 8% is payable at 62 years of age.
Benefits paid prior to age 62 for ExPS and age 65 for 2000 Plan will be subject to actuarial reduction currently a reduction of 4% to annual benefits for each year that retirement takes place prior to 62 for ExPS and 65 for 2000 Plan with proportionate reductions applied in respect of part years.
Ian King was 61 at the date of his retirement and his pension payments were reduced accordingly.
Charles Woodburn participates in the BAE Systems Executive Pension Scheme Defined Contribution Retirement Plan EPS DCRP which is a defined contribution arrangement for senior executives.
Charles Woodburn contributes the maximum 10000 per annum into the EPS DCRP arrangement as permitted by the Annual Allowance limit and a 19% salary supplement is paid in lieu of the Company contributions.
Jerry DeMuro participates in a Section 401k defined contribution arrangement set up for US employees in which the company will match his contributions up to a maximum contribution of 6% of salary up to US regulatory limits 2018 18500 2017 18000.
In 2017 the company paid contributions of 14628 into this arrangement.
External directorships Fees retained in 2017 by executive directors during the period in which they served in that capacity in respect of nonexecutive directorships were Peter Lynas 85000 in respect of his directorship of SSE plc Jerry DeMuro 50000 in respect of his directorship of Aero Communications Inc. nonexecutive directorship of Schroders plc for the six months to 30 June 2017.
These amounts are not included in the remuneration table on page 99.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Annual remuneration report continued Share interests Scheme interests awarded during the financial year Scheme Type of interest Date of grant
Face value of award
Date to which performance is measured
Percentage of interests receivable if minimum performance achieved Charles Woodburn LTIP PS
Performance
Sharesnil cost option 21.03.17 132897 115% of salary 862502 nil Three years
25% LTIP PS
Performance
Sharesnil cost option 21.03.17 132897 115% of salary 862502 nil Three years
25% LTIP SO Share option 21.03.17 346687 300% of salary 2249999 6.49 Three years
25% Peter Lynas LTIP PS
Performance
Sharesnil cost option 21.03.17 96944 107.5% of salary 629167 nil Three years
25% LTIP PS
Performance
Sharesnil cost option 21.03.17 96945 107.5% of salary 629173 nil Three years
25% LTIP SO Share option 21.03.17 270543 300% of salary 1755824 6.49 Three years
25% Jerry DeMuro LTIP PS
Performance
Shares
21.03.17 156092 121% of salary 1013037 na Three years
25% LTIP PS
Performance
Shares
21.03.17 156092 121% of salary 1013037 na Three years
25% LTIP SO Share option 21.03.17 503106 390% of salary 3265158 6.49 Three years
25% LTIP RS Retention 21.03.17 129002 100% of salary 837223 na na na na The value of the award is calculated on the date of grant by reference to the middle market quotation at the close of the preceding day.
Key LTIP  LongTerm Incentive Plan.
PS  Performance Shares.
SO  Share Options.
RS  Restricted Shares.
Note Performance Shares and Restricted Shares  Shares under award attract dividends prior to vesting.
Performance Shares are intended to be free share awards and are structured as a nil cost option to give the participant more flexibility as to the timing of the benefit.
For the US executive director awards of Performance Shares are classified as conditional share awards rather than share options and are deliverable on the third fourth and fifth anniversary of grant subject to attainment of the performance condition.
No grant of awards was made to Ian King in March 2017 in view of his previously announced retirement on 30 June 2017.
The table above has been subject to audit.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Governance Description of share plans and summary of performance conditions Performance Share Plan PSPLTIP Performance Shares Shares under award vest after satisfaction of the threeyear performance condition.
Awards that vest are capable of exercise in three equal tranches on a phased basis from the third fourth and fifth anniversary of grant.
Any unexercised awards will lapse on the seventh anniversary of grant.
For US participants the awards are automatically delivered at the end of years three four and five subject to the performance condition being achieved.
Since 2015 shares have been awarded under the LTIP a single umbrella plan that was approved at the 2014 AGM as detailed on page 119 and are termed Performance Shares.
Shares under award attract dividends prior to tranche vesting.
From 2018 awards to nonUS executive directors remain subject to the threeyear performance period but will not vest until the fifth anniversary of grant see the UK executive director graphic on page 93.
They will be exercisable until the seventh anniversary of grant.
Awards made to the UK executive directors since 2008 and to date to the US executive director have been weighted 50% on the EPS performance condition and 50% on the TSR performance condition.
The TSR comparator groups are shown below.
Plan Performance condition LTIP PS
For awards made from 2015 rate of average annual EPS growth over the threeyear performance period with 25% vesting at 3% average growth per annum 50% vesting at 5% average growth per annum and 100% vesting at 7% average growth per annum with vesting on a straightline basis between these parameters.
Awards will not vest unless the Board is satisfied that there has been a sustained improvement in the Companys underlying financial performance.
In taking such a view the Committee may consider but not exclusively the following financial metrics net cashdebt order book risk and project performance.
PSP
TSR
LTIP PS
The proportion of the award capable of exercise is determined by for awards made up to and including 2015 the Companys TSR share price growth plus dividends ranking relative to a comparator group of 12 other international defence companies over a threeyear performance period.
For awards made from 2016 50% of the TSR measure is on the current peer comparator group of 13 other international defence companies and 50% is on a TSR percentile ranking against the companies in the FTSE 100 index.
Under both the sectoral and FTSE 100 comparator groups no shares vest if the Companys TSR is below the top 50% of TSRs achieved by the comparator group with 25% vesting at median 100% vesting if it is in the top quintile and vesting on a straightline basis between these two parameters and ii whether there has been a sustained improvement in the Companys underlying financial performance.
In taking such a view the Committee may consider but not exclusively the following financial metrics net cashdebt EBITA order book turnover risk and project performance.
Operating profit excluding amortisation and impairment of intangible assets finance costs and taxation expense of equity accounted investments.
The TSR peer comparator group for awards from 2016 comprises
General Dynamics Harris Corporation L3 Technologies
Leonardo
Lockheed Martin
Northrop Grumman
SAIC
Thales
United Technologies The TSR comparator group for awards from 2012 to 2015 comprises
General Dynamics ITT Exelis L3 Technologies
Lockheed Martin
Northrop Grumman
SAIC
Thales
United Technologies Formerly named L3 Communications.
Formerly named Finmeccanica.
ITT Exelis is now part of Harris Corporation.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Annual remuneration report continued Executive Share Option Plan 2012 ExSOP LTIP Share Options Options are normally exercisable between the third and tenth anniversary of their grant subject to the performance condition set out below being achieved.
Since 2015 shares have been awarded under the single umbrella plan the LongTerm Incentive Plan that was approved at the 2014 AGM as detailed on page 119 and are termed Share Options.
Awards made from 2015 are subject to a further twoyear clawback period after the initial threeyear vesting period.
As set out elsewhere in this report executive directors will no longer receive share option awards from 2018.
Plan Performance condition
LTIP SO For awards made up to and including 2015 the proportion of the award capable of exercise is determined by the Companys TSR share price growth plus dividends ranking relative to a comparator group of 12 other international defence companies over a threeyear performance period.
For awards made from 2016 50% of the TSR measure is on the current peer comparator group of 13 other international defence companies and 50% is on a TSR percentile ranking against the companies in the FTSE 100 index.
Under both the sectoral and FTSE 100 comparator groups no shares vest if the Companys TSR is below the top 50% of TSRs achieved by the comparator group with 25% vesting at median 100% vesting if it is in the top quintile and vesting on a straightline basis between these two parameters.
Restricted Share Plan RSPLTIP Restricted Shares The RSP is not subject to a performance condition as it is designed to address retention issues principally in the US.
The shares are subject only to the condition that the participant remains employed by the Group at the end of the vesting date three years after the award date.
Shares under award attract dividends prior to vesting.
Since 2015 shares have been awarded under the single umbrella plan that was approved at the 2014 AGM as detailed on page 119 and are termed Restricted Shares.
Awards made from 2015 are subject to a further twoyear clawback period after the initial threeyear vesting period.
Statement of directors shareholdings and share interests Minimum Shareholding Requirement MSR Executive directors are compulsorily required to establish and maintain a minimum personal shareholding equal to a set percentage of base salary.
An Initial Value must be achieved as quickly as possible using shares vesting or options exercised through the executive share option schemes and LongTerm Incentive schemes by retaining 50% of the net value i. the value after deduction of exercise costs and tax of shares acquired under these schemes.
Once the Initial Value is achieved a Subsequent Value must be achieved in the same way except that a minimum of 25% of the net value must be retained on each exercise or acquisition.
Shares owned beneficially by the director including the portion of net annual bonus deferred compulsorily into BAE Systems shares and hisher spouse count towards the MSR.
The
MSR does not apply after the individual has ceased to be a director.
Any case of noncompliance would be dealt with by the Committee.
The following table sets out MSR Initial Value and Subsequent Value Initial Value Subsequent Value Ian King 150% 300% Charles Woodburn 150% 300% Peter Lynas 100% 200% Jerry DeMuro 175% 212.5% from 2018 350% 425% from 2018 Retired on 30 June 2017.
Peter Lynas was in excess of his Subsequent Value MSR at 31 December 2017 as was Ian King on 30 June 2017 the date of his retirement.
Jerry DeMuro joined the Board in 2014 and his personal holding of shares in the Company at 31 December 2017 stood at 153%.
The higher MSR values applicable to Jerry DeMuro recognise the higher LTI opportunity and broader US market practice.
Charles Woodburn joined the Board in May 2016 and his personal shareholding in the Company at 31 December 2017 stood at 63%.
There are MSR requirements in place for all of the employee population who receive LTIPs.
There are no shareholding requirements for the Chairman or the nonexecutive directors.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Governance Share interests as at 31 December 2017 or on ceasing to be a director of the Company The interests of the directors who served during the year ended 31 December 2017 in the shares of BAE Systems plc or scheme interests in relation to those shares were as follows Shares Scheme interests Options and awards over shares Share awards with performance conditions Share awards without performance conditions Share options with performance conditions Share options with performance conditions vested but unexercised
Sir Roger Carr 126093 E P L Corley 10000 J DeMuro 202335 941831 389187 1517828  2848846 H Green C M Grigg 24555 I G King 1923894   1198463  1198463 P J Lynas 232944   1582740  1582740 P Rosput Reynolds 25200 N C Rose 55000 I P Tyler C N Woodburn 96966   1687187  1687187 Retired from the Board on 30 June 2017.
Ian Kings scheme interests stated as at 30 June 2017 are after prorating in accordance with his leaving arrangements referred to on page 100.
The above table has been subject to audit.
The interests of directors include those of their connected persons.
The shares held by Paula Rosput Reynolds are represented by 6300 American Depositary Shares.
Details of the share interests in options and awards held by the executive directors as at 31 December 2017 are given on page 113 and details of share options exercised in 2017 are given on page 114.
Performance Shares granted under the LTIP are classified as share awards with performance conditions for the US executive director and as share options with performance conditions for the UK executive directors.
Since 31 December 2017 Charles Woodburn has acquired an additional 77 shares under the Partnership and Matching shares elements of the Share Incentive Plan so that his beneficial shareholding at the date of this report stood at 97043.
Revathi Advaithi who was appointed to the Board on 1 January 2018 had a nil shareholding in BAE Systems plc at the date of her appointment and at the date of this report.
There have been no changes in the interests of the remaining directors in the shares of BAE Systems plc between 31 December 2017 and the date of this report.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Annual remuneration report continued Breakdown of scheme interests Options and awards held as at 31 December 2017 or on ceasing to be a director of the Company Ian King 31 December Date of grant
Date from which exercisable or part exercisable LTIP PS
LTIP PS
LTIP PS
LTIP PS
LTIP SO 402822 LTIP SO 250885 The figures for Ian King are stated as at 30 June 2017 the date of his ceasing to be a director.
His share options and awards stated as at 30 June 2017 are after prorating in accordance with his leaving arrangements referred to on page 100.
There were no subsequent changes to his scheme interests between 30 June 2017 and 31 December 2017 which remain subject to the relevant performance conditions.
Jerry DeMuro 31 December Date of grant
Date from which exercisable or part exercisable LTIP PS
LTIP PS
LTIP PS
LTIP PS
LTIP PS
LTIP PS
LTIP SO 472579 LTIP SO 542143 LTIP SO 503106 LTIP RS 121174 25.03.15 na 25.03.18 LTIP RS 139011 23.03.16 na 23.03.19 LTIP RS 129002 21.03.17 na 21.03.20 Peter Lynas 31 December Date of grant
Date from which exercisable or part exercisable LTIP PS
LTIP PS
LTIP PS
LTIP PS
LTIP PS
LTIP PS
LTIP SO 308018 LTIP SO 343424 LTIP SO 270543 Charles Woodburn 31 December Date of grant
Date from which exercisable or part exercisable LTIP PS
LTIP PS
LTIP PS
LTIP PS
LTIP SO 405040 LTIP SO 346687 The outstanding option or award will lapse after the end of the financial year having not met the full performance condition.
The outstanding option or award will partially lapse after the end of the financial year having not met the full performance condition.
Subject to a performance condition that is yet to be tested.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Governance Options exercised during 2017 Ian King
Exercise price Date of grant Date of exercise Market price on exercise
PSP
TSR
The PSP option exercised by Ian King attracted reinvested dividends which equated to an additional 2825 shares.
Peter Lynas
Exercise price Date of grant Date of exercise Market price on exercise
TSR
The PSP option exercised by Peter Lynas attracted reinvested dividends which equated to an additional 1601 shares.
The tables on page 113 and above have been subject to audit.
Performance conditions Performance conditions for the LTIP PSP and ExSOP are detailed on pages 110 and 111.
Statement of voting Shareholder voting on the resolutions to approve the Directors remuneration policy and the Annual remuneration report put to the 2017 AGM was as follows Directors remuneration policy Votes for % Votes against % Total votes cast Votes withheld abstentions 2286232998 95.09 118030799 4.91 2404263797 6035623 Annual remuneration report Votes for % Votes against % Total votes cast Votes withheld abstentions 2322287980 97.25 65571040 2.75 2387859020 22440400 NonExecutive Directors Fees Committee The nonexecutive directors fees are set by the NonExecutive Directors Fees Committee which comprises Sir Roger Carr Chairman Philip Bramwell Group General Counsel Jerry DeMuro and since 1 July 2017 Charles Woodburn.
Ian King also served as a member of the committee until his retirement on 30 June 2017.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Annual remuneration report continued Remuneration Committee composition and advisers The Committee members comprise Paula Rosput Reynolds Chairman Elizabeth Corley and Nick Rose.
Advisers to the Remuneration Committee are shown below.
Adviser Services provided Appointment Governance Fees in respect of services provided to the Committee
PwC
During 2017 provided information on market practice in relation to different aspects of remuneration market trends and benchmarking of the remuneration packages for the executive population.
Subsequently appointed in 2018 as independent adviser to the Committee.
By the Company at the request of the Committee.
Committee appointment.
In 2017 PwC did not directly engage with the Committee but will do so in 2018 following the appointment as independent adviser to the Company.
The Committee is aware that PwC provides a variety of other services to the Company including tax and pensions advice.
PwC also provides a range of consultancy services.
PwC is a member of the Remuneration Consultants Group RCG and is a signatory to the RCGs code of conduct.
Fee basis Hourly Willis Towers Watson
During 2017 advised the Committee members on remuneration matters including independent advice on the information and proposals presented to the Committee by Company executives.
Committee appointment.
WTW engaged directly with the members of the Committee.
The Committee is aware that WTW provides a variety of other services to the Company including corporate risk management advice and insurance brokerage services.
WTW also provides a range of HR consultancy services related to human capital management and employee benefits.
WTW is a member of the Remuneration Consultants Group RCG and is a signatory to the RCGs code of conduct.
Fee basis Hourly Linklaters Provided legal services principally regarding remuneration policy regulations and revision of the rules of the BAE Systems LongTerm Incentive Plan 2014 to reflect changes to reward structures.
By the Company with the approval of the Committee.
Only provides legal compliance legal drafting and review services and does not advise the Committee.
The Committee is aware that Linklaters is one of a number of legal firms that provides legal advice and services to the Company on a range of matters.
Linklaters is regulated by the Law Society.
Fee basis Hourly New Bridge Street part of Aon Hewitt Advises on the TSR outcomes as required for assessing the performance condition under the BAE Systems LongTerm Incentive Plan 2014.
By the Company.
The Committee is aware that New Bridge Street provides a variety of other HRrelated services to the Company.
The nature of the advice provided to the Committee is limited to factual information concerning the performance of the Companys shares.
New Bridge Street is a member of the Remuneration Consultants Group RCG and is a signatory to the RCGs code of conduct.
Fee basis Fixed fee During the year the Committee received material assistance and advice on remuneration policy from the then Group Human Resources Director Lynn Minella and the Human Resources Director Reward Paul Farley.
Ian King in his then role as Chief Executive and Charles Woodburn in his role as Chief Executive also provided advice that was of material assistance to the Committee.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Governance Directors remuneration for 2018 For 2018 it remains our intention to operate the Policy that was agreed by shareholders at the 2017 AGM.
This section sets out how the Policy will apply in 2018.
As set out in our Remuneration Committee Chairmans letter on pages 91 to 94 the Committee intends to make the following changes to our executive remuneration arrangements for 2018 which do not constitute a change to the Policy approved by shareholders in 2017.
LongTerm Incentive LTI construct for UK executive directors As a further step towards simplification of our LTI framework having already taken the decision to eliminate the use of Share Options as part of the LTI construct applicable to our US executive director the Committee also will cease the award of Share Options to the UK executive directors for 2018 onwards.
Consistent with the flexibility contained within the Policy LTI awards will be delivered using Performance Shares only.
This change will result in a lower total face value of the award without we believe diluting the incentive to the achievement of longterm sustainable value.
The conversion from Share Options to Performance Shares has been calculated in line with the methodology explained in the Policy on page 120 and is shown in the table below Current total expected value Current aggregate face value of awards Performance Shares and Share Options New face value associated with Performance Share award only Chief Executive 185% 550% 370% Group Finance Director 167.5% 515% 335% This approach significantly simplifies our LTI arrangements without changing the underlying marketcompetitive expected values of 185% for the Chief Executive and 167.5% for the Group Finance Director.
Metrics and weightings applicable in 2018 The performance metrics and weightings applicable to the 2018 annual incentive are 75% on financial metrics relating to Group EPS Group cash and Group order intake 5% on safety and 20% on personal objectives designed to support the Groups strategy.
Performance Shares will continue to have 50% of the award based on TSR performance as follows 50% of the TSR measure on the current peer comparator group of 13 other international defence companies and 50% on a TSR percentile ranking against the companies in the FTSE 100 index.
For 2018 the remaining 50% of the award is subject to the EPS condition with a performance range of 3% to 7% average annual EPS growth requirement.
For US participants other than members of the Executive Committee 50% of the awards made in 2018 are subject to the longterm operating cash performance of the US business in place of TSR growth.
There is no change in 2018 to the criteria and weightings applying to Restricted Shares.
As set out previously the US executive director will receive an equal weight in expected value in Performance Shares and Restricted Shares.
As set out above from 2018 UK executive directors will receive Performance Shares only.
Illustration of application of policy for 2018 The following charts show the value of the package each of the executive directors would receive based on 2018 base salaries remuneration and 2018 LTI awards assuming the following scenarios minimum fixed pay including salary benefits and pension as provided in the single total figure table on page 99 and the Restricted Shares award for the US executive director pay receivable assuming ontarget performance is met and maximum pay assuming variable elements pay out in full.
The scenarios below exclude any share price appreciation and dividends.
UK legislation requires that these charts are given in relation to the first year in which the remuneration policy takes legal effect see page 125.
The charts below are reporting the actual levels for 2018.
Chief Executive 000
0 2000 4000 Value of package 000 6000 8000 17% 33% 31% 30% 52% 37% 100%
Minimum
Group Finance Director 000
0 1000 2000 Value of package 000 3000 5000 28% 48% 23% 20% 49% 32% 100%
Minimum
President and Chief Executive Officer
Maximum
0 2000 4000 Value of package 000 6000 8000 33% 53% 29% 24% 38% 23% 100%
Minimum
Fixed elements of remuneration Annual bonus Performance Shares The Directors remuneration policy the Policy set out on pages 1 17 to 129 was agreed by shareholders at the Annual General Meeting AGM on 10 May 2017 and took legal effect on that date.
The approved policy has been reprinted verbatim from the 2016 Annual Report updated only so that the page numbers where appropriate refer to the 2017 Annual Report in order to aid readability and to report subsequent Board membership changes.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Preface to the Directors remuneration policy This Directors remuneration policy the Policy will take legal effect from the conclusion of the 2017 Annual General Meeting AGM subject to shareholder approval at the 2017 AGM The Remuneration Committee the Committee considers remuneration policy annually to ensure that it remains aligned with business needs and is appropriately positioned relative to the market.
However in the absence of exceptional or unexpected circumstances which may necessitate a change to the Policy there is currently no intention to revise the Policy more frequently than every three years.
We use target performance to estimate the total potential reward and benchmark it against reward packages paid by BAE Systems competitors.
The Policy is to set base salary with reference to the relevant marketcompetitive level.
Actual total direct reward reflects the performance of the individual and the Company as a whole.
The aim is to deliver an overall remuneration package for executive directors which provides an appropriate balance between shortterm and longterm reward and between fixed and variable reward as described in the table below.
Whilst our LongTerm Incentive Plan provides the Committee with discretion in respect of vesting outcomes that affect the actual level of reward payable to individuals as explained on page 120 such discretion would only be used in exceptional circumstances and if exercised disclosed at the latest in the report on implementation of the Policy i. remuneration report for the year in question.
Changes compared to the policy approved at the 2014 AGM The Policy contains no components which were not in the remuneration policy approved at the 2014 AGM.
However the material changes from the policy approved in 2014 are summarised below with the supporting rationale provided in the Remuneration Committee Chairmans letter on pages 79 to 82 of the 2016 Annual Report.
Salary
Clarity on cap on salary increases.
Annual incentive Introduction of separate maximum for Chief Operating Officer.
Introduction of limits for new executive director role.
Incorporation of malus and clawback mechanisms.
LongTerm Incentives LTI Introduction of reasonableness discretion.
Introduction of separate maximum for Chief Operating Officer.
Introduction of limits for new executive director role.
Clarity on flexibility to vary weightings of different award types and the associated impact on opportunity levels subject to the parameters set out.
Incorporation of malus and clawback mechanisms.
Introduction of twoyear holding period for shares acquired on vesting of awards to nonUS directors.
Introduction of Earnings per Share EPS alongside Total Shareholder Return TSR on share options with equal weighting.
Removal of Share Options for US executive director and redistribution into Performance Shares and Restricted Shares to maintain current Expected Value.
Increase in Minimum Shareholding Requirement for US executive director.
Pension
Participation in executive defined contribution retirement plan or cash equivalent introduced as default pension vehicle for new directors.
Inclusion of salary supplement as vehicle to offset impact of Lifetime Allowance andor Annual Allowance.
Nonexecutive directors fees Introduction of maximum for Chairmans fees and benefits.
Approved at the AGM on 10 May 2017.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017
Financial statements Governance
Directors remuneration policy Base salary Purpose and link to strategy Recognise market value of role and individuals skills experience and performance to ensure the business can attract and retain talent.
Operation
Salaries are reviewed annually.
Business and individual performance skills the scope of the role and the individuals time in the role are taken into account when setting and assessing salaries as is market data for similar roles in the relevant market comparator group.
The comparator group for UK executive directors is comprised of selected companies from the FTSE 100 and is constructed to position BAE Systems around the median in terms of market capitalisation.
For the President and Chief Executive Officer of BAE Systems Inc. general industry sector where BAE Systems Inc. is positioned at the median of the comparator group by reference to revenue size.
Maximum opportunity When considering salary increases for the executive directors in their current roles the Committee considers the general level of salary increase across the Group and in the relevant external market.
Actual increases for the executive directors in their current roles will generally not exceed the average percentage increase for employees as a whole taking account of the level of movement within the relevant UKUS comparator group.
As a maximum in exceptional circumstances such as a material increase in job size or complexity while performing the same role or a recently appointed executive director where the salary is positioned low against the market the increase will not exceed 10% in any single year for executive directors performing the same role.
If an individuals role changes then a salary increase above 10% may be awarded in any single year to position their salary appropriately in accordance with the base salary principles described under Operation above.
As a matter of policy no new executive director role will have a salary greater than the Chief Executive at that time.
Performance metrics used weighting and time period applicable
Annual incentive Purpose and link to strategy Drive and reward annual performance of individuals and teams on both financial and nonfinancial metrics including leadership behaviours in order to deliver sustainable growth in shareholder value.
Compulsory deferral into shares increases alignment with shareholder interests.
Operation
The annual incentive is driven off inyear financial performance corporate responsibility and other nonfinancial objectives measured at the Group and individual level.
Onethird of the total annual incentive amount is subject to compulsory deferral for three years in BAE Systems shares without any matching.
A malus mechanism may be applied to any bonus and a clawback mechanism may be applied to the deferred bonus shares until up to the end of the threeyear deferral period in respect of 2015 or subsequent years where the Company is entitled to terminate employment for cause or the participant has engaged in misconduct including breach of policy which gives rise to other disciplinary sanction the results of the Company andor relevant business or businesses for any period have been restated or subsequently appear materially inaccurate or misleading andor any Group company or business unit has made a material financial loss.
Cash dividends are payable to the participants on the shares during this threeyear deferral period.
Executive directors policy table BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Directors remuneration policy continued Annual incentive continued Maximum opportunity Chief Executive and the President and Chief Executive Officer of BAE Systems Inc.
225% of salary Chief Operating Officer 200% of salary Group Finance Director 160% of salary Where a new executive director role is established the maximum opportunity will not exceed that of the Chief Operating Officer role as set out above.
The payout for maximum performance is double the payout for ontarget performance.
The payout for target performance is half of the respective maximum percentages above.
The payout for achieving a threshold performance is 40% of the payout for ontarget performance i.
20% of maximum with no payout for achieving less than this.
Payout for performance between targets is calculated on a straightline basis.
Performance metrics used weighting and time period applicable Performance is assessed on an annual basis using a combination of the Groups main performance indicators for the year and other objectives designed to support the Groups strategy.
Metrics which will include financial and nonfinancial metrics as well as the achievement of personal objectives will be determined and weighted each year according to business priorities.
7580% will relate to financial metrics.
Metrics and weightings to be determined annually.
Proposed metrics and weightings applicable in 2017 Group EPS  40% Group cash  25% Order intake  15% Safety  5% Personal objectives designed to support the Groups strategy  15% See notes 4 and 5 on page 124 regarding the selection and weighting of performance metrics.
Notwithstanding performance against the applicable metrics all bonus payments are at the discretion of the Committee which will be based on an assessment of the individuals personal contribution to business performance over the relevant year and leadership behaviours demonstrated in making that contribution relative to others.
LongTerm Incentives LTI
Longterm incentives will operate under the BAE Systems LongTerm Incentive Plan approved by shareholders at the 2014 AGM.
The size of awards granted is based on a percentage of salary which is divided by the share price to determine the number of shares subject to the award.
Dividend equivalents in respect of vested shares may be paid at the time of vesting or exercise in the case of options and are not taken into account when determining individual limits.
A malus and clawback mechanism may be applied until two years after vesting or if sooner the fifth anniversary of grant or the occurrence of certain corporate events to all awards granted on or after 25 March 2015 where the Company is entitled to terminate employment for cause or the participant has engaged in misconduct including breach of policy which gives rise to other disciplinary sanction the results of the Company andor relevant business or businesses for any period have been restated or subsequently appear materially inaccurate or misleading any Group company or business unit has made a material financial loss andor the measurement of any performance condition does not reflect the actual performance of the Company over the performance period.
The Committee will establish the targets for each measure at the start of each performance period based on Group projections and market expectations for the business.
The performance conditions for previous awards are described in the Annual remuneration report.
Awards and performance conditions can be adjusted to take account of variations of share capital and other transactions or events.
On a change of control or similar transaction awards generally will vest to the extent performance conditions are then satisfied if applicable and then be prorated to reflect the acceleration of vesting unless the Committee decides otherwise.
Alternatively awards may be exchanged for equivalent awards over shares in the acquiring company.
The share plan rules may be amended from timetotime by the Committee in certain circumstances including minor changes for administrative tax or other regulatory purposes.
Subject to this Policy performance conditions of awards already granted may be amended in accordance with their terms or if anything happens which causes the Committee reasonably to consider it appropriate to do so.
Performance metrics used weighting and time period applicable See notes 4 and 5 on page 124 regarding the selection and weighting of performance metrics.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Governance LongTerm Incentives LTI continued Maximum opportunity Over the lifetime of this Policy the Committee will have discretion to vary the weighting of different types of awards within the framework set out below but the overall LTI Expected Value EV will remain the same assuming the LTI EV is calculated as 50% of face value for Performance Shares 20% of face value for Share Options and 100% of face value for Restricted Shares UK executive directors awards will consist of a mix of Performance Shares and Share Options with Share Options comprising no more than 50% of overall LTI EV.
US executive directors awards will consist of a mix of Performance Shares and Restricted Shares with Restricted Shares comprising no more than 50% of overall LTI EV.
Performance metrics used weighting and time period applicable See below in relation to Performance Shares and Share Options.
In addition to the primary performance tests set out below the Committee confirms and recognises its obligation to judge the overall reasonableness of the rewards received relative to the overall business actions and results achieved.
When determining the final performance condition outcome under Performance Share and Share Option awards the Committee will have discretion over the number of awards vesting in light of other important factors in the business reasonable discretion.
The discretion may result in vesting of awards going upwards subject to maximum 100% vesting of awards as well as downwards.
Any factors will be properly considered as they arise and any discretion to the calculated results will be applied in a highly disciplined manner and the rationale and impact will be reported transparently.
The use of reasonableness discretion would apply to LTI awards granted to executive directors after the commencement of this Policy.
See notes 4 and 5 on page 124.
LongTerm Incentives  Performance Shares Purpose and link to strategy Drive and reward delivery of sustained longterm EPS and TSR performance aligned to the interests of shareholders.
Operation
For nonUS executive directors awards typically in the form of nilcost options will vest subject to performance and service conditions on the fifth anniversary of grant.
These will be exercisable between the fifth and tenth anniversary of grant or such shorter period as may be specified by the Committee.
For US executive directors awards are delivered as conditional share awards RSUs.
To maintain the competitiveness of the LTI offering in the US awards will vest automatically on the third fourth and fifth anniversary of grant subject to performance conditions.
Policy maximum opportunity Award levels applicable to UK executive directors for normal annual grants assuming the current LTI EV weightings in Performance Shares and Share Options are as follows Chief Executive 250% of salary Chief Operating Officer 230% of salary Group Finance Director 215% of salary Award levels applicable to US executive directors for normal annual grants assuming the current LTI EV weightings in Performance Shares and Restricted Shares are as follows President and Chief Executive Officer of BAE Systems Inc.
298% of salary Note the percentages above could be exceeded if the LTI EV weightings were to be varied see above.
Where a new executive director role is established the maximum opportunity will not exceed that of the Chief Operating Officer role as set out above.
Executive directors policy table continued BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Directors remuneration policy continued LongTerm Incentives  Performance Shares continued Performance metrics used weighting and time period applicable Metrics and weightings will be as follows subject to the Committees ability to adjust as set out below 50% of award based on TSR relative to one or more appropriate comparator groups over the threeyear performance period as selected by the Committee at the time of grant Vesting of each comparator group is determined as nil vesting if TSR ranked below median in the peer group 25% vesting if TSR ranked at the median 100% vesting if TSR ranked in the upper quintile prorata vesting for performance between median and upper quintile.
If more than one comparator group is used vesting of the TSR portion of the award will be determined by the average of the vesting outcomes from each comparator group.
Award subject to a secondary financial measure as set out on page 110.
50% of award based on average annual EPS growth over the three financial years starting with that in which the award is granted with 25% vesting for threshold performance 50% vesting for target performance and 100% vesting for stretch performance.
Prorata vesting for intermediate performance.
The metrics and weightings applicable in 2017 are as follows 50% of award based on TSR relative to the following two comparator groups over the threeyear performance period At least ten other international defence companies selected by the Committee at the time of grant.
All companies in the FTSE 100 index.
50% of award based on average annual EPS growth over the three financial years starting with that in which the award is granted with threshold performance requirement as average annual EPS growth of 3% target performance requirement as average annual EPS growth of 5% and stretch performance requirement as average annual EPS growth of 7%.
Note that awards granted to executive directors from the date of the 2017 AGM would be subject to application of reasonableness discretion in light of other important factors in the business as described earlier.
The Committee can adjust the weighting of the EPS and TSR conditions and if considered appropriate the Committee may introduce an alternate performance condition aligned to the Companys strategy.
See notes 4 and 5 on page 124.
LongTerm Incentives  Share Options Purpose and link to strategy Drive and reward delivery of sustained longterm EPS and TSR performance and sustained improvement in the Companys share price.
Operation
Share Options have an exercise price set at market value at grant.
For nonUS executive directors awards vest subject to performance and service conditions on the fifth anniversary of grant and will be exercisable between the fifth and tenth anniversary of grant.
US executive directors are not eligible.
Policy maximum opportunity Award levels applicable to UK executive directors for normal annual grants assuming the current LTI EV weightings in Performance Shares and Share Options are as follows Chief Executive 300% of salary Chief Operating Officer 300% of salary Group Finance Director 300% of salary Note the percentages above could be exceeded if the LTI EV weightings were to be varied see page 120.
Where a new executive director role is established the maximum opportunity will not exceed that of the Chief Operating Officer role as set out above.
Performance metrics used weighting and time period applicable For Share Option awards made to the executive directors exercise is subject to the TSR and EPS performance conditions subject to any adjustment described above and application of reasonableness discretion as set out above.
Note that for Share Option awards granted to the executive directors prior to the 2017 AGM exercise is subject to the TSR performance conditions as set out in our policy approved at the 2014 AGM.
See notes 4 and 5 on page 124.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Governance LongTerm Incentives  Restricted Shares Purpose and link to strategy Provide longterm reward through timevesting awards principally in the Companys US market.
Operation
The shares are subject only to the condition that the participant remains employed by the Group on the vesting date three years after the award date.
These awards are not subject to a performance condition as it is designed to address competitive market practice and retention issues principally in the US.
NonUS executive directors are not eligible.
Policy maximum opportunity Award levels applicable to US executive directors for normal annual grants assuming the current LTI EV weightings in Performance Shares and Restricted Shares are as follows President and Chief Executive Officer of BAE Systems Inc.
150% of salary Performance metrics used weighting and time period applicable
See notes 4 and 5 on page 124.
Benefits
Purpose and link to strategy Provide employment benefits which ensure that the overall package is market competitive when these elements are taken into account.
Operation
Benefits include provision of a company car or cash equivalent life assurance and illhealth benefit cover which are provided directly or through membership of the Companys pension schemes.
The main benefits in the UK include a car allowance currently 16000 per annum private use of a chauffeurdriven car and annual medical screening plus life assurance and illhealth benefit cover provided through membership of the Companys pension schemes.
Opportunity for UK executive directors to participate in the Share Incentive Plan a tax approved allemployee plan.
In the US benefits include a cash allowance for car and parking currently 20900 per annum and private use of a chauffeurdriven car medical and dental benefits and insured life and disability benefits.
Additional benefits such as relocation assistance may also be provided in certain circumstances if considered reasonable and appropriate by the Committee.
Relocation assistance comprises reimbursement for direct items of expenditure such as legal estate agency removals and temporary accommodation.
Directors and Officers insurance cover is also provided for all executive directors.
Maximum opportunity Benefits are set at a level which the Committee considers to be appropriate against comparable roles in companies of similar size in the relevant market.
Benefits are as reported and itemised within the single total figure shown as part of the Annual remuneration report on page 99.
The maximum cost of such benefits will reflect the associated marketcompetitive cost of provision.
Relocation assistance is based on actual costs incurred which are linked to the size and value of the property plus a maximum relocation allowance of 2500.
Participation limits for the Share Incentive Plan are those set by the UK tax authorities from timetotime.
Performance metrics used weighting and time period applicable
Executive directors policy table continued BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Directors remuneration policy continued Pension Purpose and link to strategy Provide competitive postretirement benefits or cash allowance equivalent.
Operation
The current Chief Executive and Group Finance Director as at 22 February 2017 are members of the BAE Systems Executive Pension Scheme and members of an underlying employee pension plan which together provide a target benefit for executive directors payable at normal retirement age 62 of 130th of final pensionable earnings FPE for each year of service up to a maximum of twothirds of FPE.
Member contributions are currently 8% of salary.
Further detail is provided on page 107 as part of the Annual remuneration report.
The current Chief Operating Officer as at 22 February 2017 is a member of the defined contribution section of the BAE Systems Executive Pension Scheme EPS DCRP.
In line with our policy Company contributions are 19% of salary and member contributions are 6% of salary.
Where the Annual Allowance AA is breached as is the case with the Chief Operating Officer he will pay member contributions up to the AA limit and the Company contributions will be paid as a salary supplement.
For any new externallyappointed UK executive directors or internally appointed UK executive directors who are not members of a BAE Systems defined benefit scheme membership of the BAE Systems EPS DCRP is offered with contribution requirements set as a percentage of base salary dependent on grading.
Individuals may elect to receive some or all of their Company contributions as a cash allowance.
For any internallyappointed UK executive directors who are already members of a BAE Systems defined benefit scheme the Company may offer to maintain their membership in that pension arrangement with the contribution rates appropriate to that arrangement or the choice of membership of the BAE Systems EPS DCRP as set out above.
Where UK executive directors pension entitlement or accrual is restricted to the Lifetime Allowance LTA andor the AA the Company may offer an unfunded pension promise or salary supplement to offset the impact of these restrictions.
The current President and Chief Executive Officer of BAE Systems Inc. to US regulatory limits.
Any new externallyappointed US executive directors or internallyappointed US executive directors who are not members of a pension plan would be offered membership of the US Section 401k defined contribution plan.
For any internallyappointed US executive directors who are members of the 2006 Plan and NonQualified Plan these plans provide a cash sum at retirement equal to the sum of the annual accruals currently set at 1000 from the 2006 Plan and 500 from the NonQualified Plan.
The Company may offer to maintain membership of the 2006 Plan and NonQualified Plan in addition to membership of the US Section 401k defined contribution plan.
Maximum opportunity The BAE Systems EPS DCRP provides a maximum Company contribution of 19% in addition to employee contribution of 6% of base salary.
Under the existing executive defined benefit scheme a maximum of twothirds of FPE is accrued at 130th for each year of service.
Where UK executive directors pension entitlement or accrual is restricted to the LTA andor the AA the Company may offer an unfunded pension promise or salary supplement to offset the impact of these restrictions.
The US Section 401k defined contribution plan provides 100% company matching contributions up to a maximum of 6% of base salary subject to US statutory limits.
For US executive directors who are members of the 2006 Plan and NonQualified Plan these plans provide a cash sum at retirement equal to the sum of the annual accruals currently set at 1000 from the 2006 Plan and 500 from the NonQualified Plan.
Ian King Chief Executive as at 22 February 2017 retired on 30 June 2017.
Charles Woodburn Chief Operating Officer as at 22 February 2017 was appointed as Chief Executive with effect from 1 July 2017.
Date of approval of the Companys 2016 Annual Report in which this policy was originally published.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Governance Notes to the executive directors policy table Remuneration policy for other employees The Companys approach to annual salary reviews is consistent across the Group with consideration given to the scope of the role level of experience performance and market data for similar roles in other companies.
All leaders may participate in an annual bonus scheme with similar metrics to those used for the executive directors.
Other employees may participate in performancebased incentive plans which vary by organisational level and with relevant metrics for the particular area of the business.
LTI grants may be made to the most senior managers in the business approximately 400 individuals globally.
The nature of the awards depends on the individuals location roles and responsibilities in particular performance conditions and targets for performance share grants made to UK and Rest of World participants are made in line with those applying to executive directors for US participants below Executive Committee level performance share grants are normally subject to BAE Systems Inc.
Performance Shares applicable to participants below executive director level vest on the third anniversary subject to performance conditions and are exercisable or released in the case of US participants in equal tranches on the third fourth and fifth anniversary of grant Share Options are granted to participants below executive director level there are no performance conditions attached and they vest and are exercisable after three years and Restricted Share grants are currently made to the most senior managers in the US businesses reflecting competitive market practice and vest after three years.
Performance measures and targets The Committee selected the performance conditions because these are central to the Companys overall strategy and are the key metrics used by the executive directors to oversee the operation of the business.
Any nonfinancial performance targets are determined by the Committee in consultation with the Corporate Responsibility Committee.
The performance conditions and targets are determined annually by the Committee within the parameters set out above taking account of the Groups strategic objectives the internal business plan and budgets as well as external market expectations and general economic conditions.
The Committee is of the view that the performance targets for the annual bonus are commercially sensitive and that it would be detrimental to the interests of the Company to disclose them before the start of the financial year.
The targets will be disclosed retrospectively after the end of the relevant financial year.
Minimum Shareholding Requirement MSR The Committee has agreed a policy whereby the executive directors are required to establish and maintain a minimum personal shareholding equal to a set percentage of base salary.
An Initial Value must be achieved as quickly as possible using shares vesting or options exercised through the executive share option schemes and other LTI schemes by retaining 50% of the net value i. after deduction of exercise costs and tax of shares acquired under these schemes.
Once the Initial Value is achieved a Subsequent Value must be achieved in the same way except that a minimum of 25% of the net value must be retained on each exercise or acquisition.
The Committee has discretion to increase the Initial Value andor Subsequent Value see below.
Shares owned beneficially by the director and hisher spouse count towards the MSR.
The MSR does not apply after the individual has ceased to be a director.
Any case of noncompliance would be dealt with by the Committee.
The following table sets out MSR Initial Value and Subsequent Value applicable from 2018 Initial Value Subsequent Value Chief Executive 150% 300% Chief Operating Officer 100% 200% Group Finance Director 100% 200% President and Chief Executive Officer of BAE Systems Inc.
212.5% 425% Executive directors policy table continued BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Directors remuneration policy continued Illustration of application of remuneration policy The charts below show the value of the package each of the executive directors would receive in the first year of operation of the
The values are based on 2017 levels for base salaries benefits and pension and assume that the officeholders at the date of this Policy coming into effect are employed throughout the first year of operation of the Policy.
Annual and longterm incentives are based on awards applying in 2018.
The charts assume the following scenarios minimum fixed pay including salary benefits and pension as provided in the single figure table on page 85 of the 2016 Annual Report pay receivable assuming ontarget performance is met and maximum pay assuming variable elements pay out in full.
The scenarios below exclude any share price appreciation and dividends.
Chief Executive
0 2000 4000 Value of package 000 6000 8000 23% 42% 32% 28% 45% 30% 100%
Minimum
Chief Operating Officer
0 2000 4000 Value of package 000 19% 36% 32% 30% 49% 34% 100%
Minimum
Group Finance Director 000
0 1000 2000 Value of package 000 3000 4000 28% 48% 26% 22% 46% 30% 100%
Minimum
President and Chief Executive Officer
Maximum
0 2000 4000 Value of package 000 6000 8000 33% 52% 29% 24% 38% 24% 100%
Minimum
Fixed elements of remuneration Annual bonus Performance Shares and Share Options Chief Executive designate
0 2000 4000 Value of package 000 18% 34% 34% 32% 48% 34% 100%
Minimum
Executive directorship changes As announced on 22 February 2017 Ian King will retire as Chief Executive on 30 June 2017 and Charles Woodburn Chief Operating Officer will be appointed as Chief Executive on 1 July 2017
Chief Executive throughout the year and the right hand chart above illustrates Charles Woodburns remuneration if he were Chief Executive throughout the year.
The chart to the left illustrates Charles Woodburns remuneration if he were Chief Operating Officer throughout the year.
Ian King Chief Executive as at 22 February 2017 retired on 30 June 2017.
Charles Woodburn Chief Operating Officer as at 22 February 2017 was appointed as Chief Executive with effect from 1 July 2017.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Governance Nonexecutive directors NEDs policy table
Purpose and link to strategy To attract NEDs who have a broad range of experience and skills to provide independent judgement on issues of strategy performance resources and standards of conduct.
Operation
NEDs fees are set by the NonExecutive Directors Fees Committee.
NEDs receive a basic fee with an additional fee for those who are chairmen of committees andor undertake the role of Senior Independent Director.
NEDs also receive a travel allowance per meeting on each occasion that a scheduled Board meeting necessitates air travel of more than five hours one way to the meeting location subject to a maximum of six travel allowances per year.
Fees are typically reviewed annually taking into account time commitment requirements and responsibility of the individual roles and after reviewing practice in other comparable companies.
The Chairmans fees are set by the Remuneration Committee on a threeyear basis and not normally subject to review during that period.
Maximum opportunity Actual fee levels are disclosed in the Annual remuneration report for the relevant financial year.
The current Chairmans fee has been set at 700000 from 1 February 2017 and is fixed at this level for three years.
The aggregate cost of fees and benefits paid to NEDs including the Chairman will not exceed an annual limit of 2.5m and the cost of fees and benefits paid to the Chairman will not exceed 1.25m annually.
Performance metrics used weighting and time period applicable
Benefits
Purpose and link to strategy Reimbursement for reasonable and documented expenses incurred in the performance of duties.
Operation
NEDs are not eligible to participate in any pension benefits provided by the Company nor do they participate in any performance related incentives.
The Chairman is provided with a chauffeurdriven car.
This may be used for nonCompany business but the cost of the benefit of such usage shall be paid by the Chairman.
Reimbursement of travel and subsistence costs including payment of the associated tax cost incurred by the director or hisher spouse whilst undertaking duties on behalf of the Company that may be assessed as a benefit for tax purposes.
Directors and Officers insurance cover is also provided for all directors.
Maximum opportunity See the aggregate limit under Fees above.
Prior commitments For the duration of this Policy the Company will honour any commitments made in respect of executive director and nonexecutive director remuneration and benefits before the date on which either i the Directors remuneration policy becomes effective or ii an individual becomes a director even where such commitments are not consistent with the policy set out in this report or prevailing at the time any such commitment is fulfilled.
This includes without limitation all existing share awards as detailed on page 102 of the 2013 Annual Report under the PSP SMP RSP ExSOP and ExSOP that remain outstanding Peter Lynas second residence allowance as detailed on page 93 of the 2013 Annual Report and any commitments entered into such as grants of share awards consistent with a previously approved Directors remuneration policy that was applicable at the relevant time.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Directors remuneration policy continued Approach to recruitment remuneration The recruitment policy provides an appropriate framework within which to attract individuals of the required calibre to lead a company of BAE Systems size scale and complexity.
The Remuneration Committee determines the remuneration package for any appointment to an executive director position either from within or outside BAE Systems.
Operation
The Remuneration Committee will take into consideration all relevant factors including overall total remuneration the type of remuneration being offered and the jurisdiction from which the candidate was recruited and will operate in order to ensure that arrangements are in the best interests of the Company and its shareholders without paying more than is necessary to secure the individual of the required calibre.
The fees and benefits applicable to the appointment of any new nonexecutive directors will be in accordance with the policy table on page 126.
Opportunity
The Committee seeks to align the remuneration package offered with the policy set out in the executive directors policy table above recognising that participation under the policy above varies by geography.
For UK and other nonUS executive director appointments participation in annual incentive plans will not exceed 225% of annual salary and longterm awards under this Policy will not exceed 550% of annual salary.
For US executive director appointments participation in annual incentive plans will not exceed 225% of annual salary and longterm awards under this Policy will not exceed 500% of annual salary.
The Committee may make awards on hiring an external candidate to buyout existing equity or in exceptional circumstances other elements of remuneration forfeited on leaving the previous employer.
In doing so the Committee will take account of relevant factors including any performance conditions attached to these awards the form in which they were granted e. time over which they would have vested.
Buyout awards would be capped to be no higher on recruitment than the fair value of those forfeited.
Full details will be disclosed in the next Annual remuneration report following recruitment which will include details of the need to grant a buyout award.
Fixed elements base salary retirement and other benefits The salary level will be set in accordance with the principles for setting base salary described in the executive directors policy table above.
The executive director shall be eligible to participate in applicable BAE Systems employee benefit plans including coverage under applicable executive and employee pension and benefit programmes in accordance with the terms and conditions of such plans as may be amended by the Company in its sole discretion from time to time.
In the case of promotion of an existing Group employee to an executive directorship on the Board commitments made before such promotion will continue to be honoured whether or not they are consistent with the remainder of this Policy.
Annual Incentive Plan The appointed executive director will be eligible to earn a discretionary annual bonus in accordance with the annual incentive framework as described in the executive directors policy table above.
The level of opportunity will be consistent with the policy disclosed in the executive directors policy table in this report and subject to the maximums referred to therein and under Opportunity above.
LongTerm Incentive Plan The executive director will be eligible for equity awards in such amounts as the Committee may determine in its sole discretion subject to this Policy and the rules of the LongTerm Incentive Plan.
The level of opportunity will be consistent with the policy set out in the executive directors policy table above and subject to the maximums referred to therein and under Opportunity above.
Other
For internal and external appointments the Committee may agree that the Company will meet certain relocation expenses in accordance with the provisions described under the Benefits section of the policy table on page 122.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Governance Executive directors
In accordance with longestablished policy all executive directors have rolling service agreements which may be terminated in accordance with the terms of these agreements.
Dates of appointment for executive directors Name Date of appointment Notice period Ian King 1 September 2008 12 months either party Charles Woodburn 1 July 2017 12 months either party Peter Lynas 1 April 2011 12 months either party Jerry DeMuro 1 February 2014 90 days either party Retired on 30 June 2017.
Appointed to the Board as Chief Operating Officer on 9 May 2016 appointed as Chief Executive with effect from 1 July 2017.
Jerry DeMuros contract of employment automatically renews for oneyear periods from 31 December each year unless one party gives at least 90 days notice of nonrenewal.
Notice period The Committees policy is that the service contracts of executive directors will not exceed 12 months.
In exceptional circumstances in relation to newly recruiting an executive director operating in a US environment the notice period may be extended to a maximum of 24 months and structured such that it reduces to no more than 12 months by no later than the end of the first complete year of service.
Change of control No executive director has provisions in his service contract that relate to a change of control of the Company.
Chairman
The Chairmans appointment is documented in a letter of appointment and he is required to devote no fewer than two days a week to his duties as Chairman.
His appointment as Chairman which commenced on 1 February 2014 will automatically terminate if he ceases to be a director of the Company.
The Chairmans appointment was reviewed by the Nominations Committee prior to the end of his initial threeyear term and has been extended until February 2020 unless it is terminated earlier in accordance with the Companys Articles of Association or by the Company or the Chairman giving not less than six months notice.
Nonexecutive directors The nonexecutive directors do not have service contracts but do have letters of appointment detailing the basis of their appointment.
The dates of their original appointment are shown below Name Date of appointment Expiry of current term Revathi Advaithi 01.01.2018 31.12.2020 Elizabeth Corley 01.02.2016 31.01.2019 Harriet Green 01.11.2010 31.10.2019 Chris Grigg 01.07.2013 30.06.2019 Paula Rosput Reynolds 01.04.2011 31.03.2020 Nick Rose 08.02.2010 07.02.2019 Ian Tyler 08.05.2013 07.05.2019 Appointed to the Board on 1 January 2018.
The nonexecutive directors are normally appointed for an initial threeyear term that subject to review may be extended subsequently for further such terms.
Any third term of three years is subject to rigorous review taking into account the need progressively to refresh the Board.
Nonexecutive directors do not have periods of notice.
In accordance with the UK Corporate Governance Code all directors are subject to annual election or reelection at the Companys AGM.
Policy on payment for loss of office
The policy on payment for loss of office provides a clear set of principles that govern the payments that will be made for loss of office and take account of the need to ensure a smooth transition for leadership roles during times of change.
The policy that will apply for a specific executive directors payments for loss of office will be the policy that was in place at the point when the payments for loss of office were agreed for the executive director in question.
Any termination payment made in connection with the departure of an executive director will be subject to approval by the Committee having regard to the terms of the service contract or other legal obligations and the specific circumstances surrounding the termination including whether the scenario aligns to an example under the approved leaver criteria performance service and health or other circumstances that may be relevant.
In addition to payments described below the Committee may pay such amounts as are necessary to settle or compromise any claim or by way of damages where the Committee views it as in the best interests of the Company to do so.
In the event of the termination of an executive directors contract it is the Committees policy to seek to limit any payment to not more than one years base salary.
Service contracts and letters of appointment BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Directors remuneration policy continued Notice and pay in lieu of notice Executive directors contracts allow for termination with contractual notice from either party or termination by way of payment of base salary in lieu of notice at the Companys discretion.
Neither notice nor a payment in lieu of notice will be given in the event of gross misconduct.
Any new executive director contracts since 2016 including the Chief Operating Officer concerning payment in lieu of notice provisions allow for the Committee to exercise discretion to apply phased payments and mitigation on that executive director securing alternative employment.
Jerry DeMuros contract of employment automatically renews for oneyear periods from 31 December each year unless one party gives at least 90 days notice of nonrenewal.
If the employment is a terminated by the Company other than for cause as defined in the contract or b he resigned for a Good Reason as defined in his contract he is entitled to a termination payment equal to i one years base salary and ii a bonus payable at target level prorated for service for the relevant financial year.
He will also be entitled to a continuation of medical benefits for 18 months or a cash payment in lieu.
Other than notice payments the Company has no obligation to make any termination payments when the Chairmans appointment terminates.
Nonexecutive directors do not have periods of notice and the Company has no obligation to make any termination payments when their appointment terminates other than to pay fees in accordance with the appointment letters.
Retirement benefits As governed by the rules of the relevant pension plan.
No enhancement for leavers will be made.
Annual Incentive Plan Where an executive directors employment is terminated after the end of a performance year but before the payment is made the executive director will remain eligible for an annual incentive award for that performance year subject to an assessment based on performance achieved over the period.
No award will be made in the event of gross misconduct.
The Committee may as set out below exercise its discretion to allow an annual incentive payment for the year of cessation as part of the termination package for executive directors.
Where it does so the exercise of the discretion and reason why the Committee considered such action appropriate will be disclosed.
Where an executive director leaves during the relevant performance year by reason of death illhealth disability retirement a transfer of business or redundancy the Committee may use its discretion to determine that an executive director will remain entitled to receive a bonus subject to an assessment based on performance over the performance year and prorated for time in respect of the financial year in which the individual ceased employment.
One third of the bonus will be subject to compulsory deferral as set out previously unless the Committee decides otherwise.
The Committees policy is not to award an annual incentive for any portion of the notice period not served.
The treatment set out above does not apply to the President and Chief Executive Officer of BAE Systems Inc.
LongTerm Incentive Plans The treatment of outstanding share awards in the event that an executive director leaves is governed by the relevant share plan rules.
Under the LongTerm Incentive Plan where an executive director leaves the Group by reason of illhealth injury disability retirement with the agreement of the Company sale of a business or employing company redundancy or leaving in such circumstances as the Committee determines each an approved leaver unvested awards and options generally continue and vest on the normal vesting date or in the case of Performance Shares held by US executive directors the first normal vesting date or if later cessation unless the Committee determines that the awards should vest on cessation.
Any performance conditions will be applied at the time of vesting.
On vesting the number of shares under award will unless the Committee decides otherwise be reduced prorata to reflect the period in which the executive director was in employment as a proportion of the relevant vesting period or in the case of Performance Shares held by US executive directors or Performance Shares granted prior to the 2017 AGM as a proportion of the initial threeyear vesting period.
In the event of death awards generally vest at the time of death subject to the satisfaction of any performance conditions at that time.
Awards are then prorated as set out above.
Where an executive directors employment is terminated for any other reason his unvested awards and options will lapse.
Options
If the Committee exercises its discretion to treat a director as an approved leaver as permissible under the leaver provisions of the share plan rules the exercise of the discretion and reason why the Committee considered such action appropriate will be disclosed.
Where an executive directors employment is terminated or an executive director is under notice of termination for any reason at the date of award of any LongTerm Incentive awards no LongTerm Incentive awards will be made.
Consideration of employment conditions elsewhere in the Company The Committee does not consult directly with employees as part of the process for reviewing executive pay.
When considering salary increases for the executive directors the Committee considers the general level of salary increase across the Group and in the external market.
Stakeholder considerations The Committee conducts an annual programme of consultation with major shareholders in order to seek their input to the development of remuneration policy or plans.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Governance Company registration BAE Systems plc is a public company limited by shares registered in England and Wales with the registered number .
Directors
The current directors who served during the 2017 financial year are listed on pages 78 and 79.
Ian King also served as a director until his retirement on 30 June 2017.
Revathi Advaithi was appointed to the Board on 1 January 2018.
Dividend
An interim dividend of 8.8p per share was paid on 30 November 2017.
The directors propose a final dividend of 13p per ordinary share.
Subject to shareholder approval the final dividend will be paid on 1 June 2018 to shareholders on the share register on 20 April 2018.
Information on dividend waivers is given on page 185.
Annual General Meeting AGM The Companys AGM will be held on 10 May 2018.
The Notice of Annual General Meeting is enclosed with this Annual Report and details the resolutions to be proposed at the meeting.
Certain information in the Strategic report The following items are set out in the Strategic report on pages 1 to 71 disclosures in relation to the use of financial instruments particulars of important events affecting the Group which have occurred since 31 December 2017 an indication of likely future developments in the business of the Group an indication of the activities of the Group in the field of research and development actions taken to introduce maintain or develop arrangements aimed at employees and greenhouse gas emissions.
Office of Fair Trading undertakings As a consequence of the merger between British Aerospace and the former Marconi Electronic Systems businesses in 1999 the Company gave certain undertakings to the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry now the Secretary of State for Business Energy and Industrial Strategy.
In February 2007 the Company was released from the majority of these undertakings and the remainder have been superseded and varied by a new set of undertakings.
Compliance with the undertakings is monitored by a compliance officer.
Further information regarding the undertakings and the contact details of the compliance officer may be obtained through the Company Secretary at the Companys registered office or through the Companys website.
Profit forecast In its halfyear results announcement on 2 August 2017 the Group made the following statement which is regarded as a profit forecast for the purposes of the Financial Conduct Authoritys Listing Rule 9.2.18 and which amended the US dollar planning rate from the profit forecast made in the Groups fullyear results announcement on 23 February and in the Annual Report 2016 In aggregate we expect the Groups underlying earnings per share for 2017 to be 5% to 10% higher than fullyear underlying earnings per share in 2016 of 40.3p.
This outlook remains unchanged despite moving the US dollar planning rate for the year from Underlying earnings per share was 43.5p in 2017.
Employees
The Group is committed to giving full and fair consideration to applications for employment from disabled people who meet the requirements for roles and making available training opportunities and appropriate accommodation to disabled people employed by the Group.
Political donations No political donations were made in 2017.
Issued share capital As at 31 December 2017 BAE Systems issued share capital of 86686002 comprised 3467440044 ordinary shares of 2.5p each and one Special Share of 1.
Treasury shares As at 1 January 2017 the number of shares held in treasury totalled 291449361 having a total nominal value of 7286234 and representing 8.4% of the Companys called up share capital at 1 January 2017.
During 2017 the Company used 10216622 treasury shares having a total nominal value of 255416 and representing 0.3% of the Companys called up share capital at 31 December 2017 to satisfy awards under the Free and Matching elements of the Share Incentive Plan 5457845 shares in aggregate awards under the Free and Matching elements of the International Share Incentive Plan 314147 shares in aggregate awards vested under the Performance Share Plan 486223 shares awards vested under the Restricted Share Plan 861480 shares and options exercised under the Executive Share Option Plan 3096927 shares.
The treasury shares utilised in respect of the Share Incentive Plan the International Share Incentive Plan and the Restricted Share Plan were disposed of by the Company for nil consideration.
The 3096927 shares disposed of by the Company in respect of the Executive Share Option Plan were disposed of by the Company for an aggregate consideration of 12047653.
As at 31 December 2017 the number of shares held in treasury totalled 281232739 having a total nominal value of 7030818 and representing 8.1% of the Companys called up share capital at 31 December 2017.
The rights to treasury shares are restricted in accordance with the Companies Act and in particular the voting and dividend rights attaching to these shares are automatically suspended.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Statutory and other information Rights and obligations of ordinary shares On a show of hands at a general meeting every holder of ordinary shares present in person and entitled to vote shall have one vote and every proxy entitled to vote shall have one vote unless the proxy is appointed by more than one member in which case the proxy has one vote for and one vote against if the proxy has been instructed by one or more members to vote for the resolution and by one or more members to vote against the resolution or if the proxy has been instructed by one or more shareholders to vote either for or against a resolution and by one or more of those shareholders to use his discretion how to vote.
On a poll every member present in person or by proxy and entitled to vote shall have one vote for every ordinary share held.
Subject to the relevant statutory provisions and the Companys Articles of Association holders of ordinary shares are entitled to a dividend where declared or paid out of profits available for such purposes.
Subject to the relevant statutory provisions and the Companys Articles of Association on a return of capital on a windingup holders of ordinary shares are entitled after repayment of the 1 Special Share to participate in such a return.
There are no redemption rights in relation to the ordinary shares.
Rights and obligations of the Special Share The Special Share is held on behalf of the Secretary of State for Business Energy and Industrial Strategy the Special Shareholder.
Certain provisions of the Companys Articles of Association cannot be amended without the consent of the Special Shareholder.
These provisions include the requirement that no foreign person or foreign persons acting in concert can have more than a 15% voting interest in the Company the requirement that the majority of the directors are British and the requirement that the Chief Executive and any executive Chairman are British.
The holder of the Special Share is entitled to attend a general meeting but the Special Share carries no right to vote or any other rights at any such meeting other than to speak in relation to any business in respect of the Special Share.
Subject to the relevant statutory provisions and the Companys Articles of Association on a return of capital on a windingup the holder of the Special Share shall be entitled to repayment of the 1 capital paid up on the Special Share in priority to any repayment of capital to any other members.
The holder of the Special Share has the right to require the Company to redeem the Special Share at par or convert the Special Share into one ordinary share at any time.
Restrictions on transfer of securities The restrictions on the transfer of shares in the Company are as follows the Special Share may only be issued to held by and transferred to the Special Shareholder or his successor or nominee the directors shall not register any allotment or transfer of any shares to a foreign person or foreign persons acting in concert who at the time have more than a 15% voting interest in the Company or who would following such allotment or transfer have such an interest the directors shall not register any person as a holder of any shares unless they have received i a declaration stating that upon registration the shares will not be held by foreign persons or that upon registration the shares will be held by a foreign person or persons ii such evidence if any as the directors may require of the authority of the signatory of the declaration and iii such evidence or information if any as to the matters referred to in the declaration as the directors consider appropriate the directors may in their absolute discretion refuse to register any transfer of shares which are not fully paid up but not so as to prevent dealings in listed shares from taking place the directors may also refuse to register any instrument of transfer of shares unless the instrument of transfer is in respect of only one class of share and it is lodged at the place where the register of members is kept accompanied by a relevant certificate or such other evidence as the directors may reasonably require to show the right of the transferor to make the transfer the directors may refuse to register an allotment or transfer of shares in favour of more than four persons jointly where a shareholder has failed to provide the Company with certain information relating to their interest in shares the directors can in certain circumstances refuse to register a transfer of such shares certain restrictions may from time to time be imposed by laws and regulations for example insider trading laws restrictions may be imposed pursuant to the Listing Rules of the Financial Conduct Authority whereby certain of the Groups employees require the Companys approval to deal in shares and awards of shares made under the Companys LongTerm Incentive Plan 2014 Deferred Bonus Plan Performance Share Plan Restricted Share Plan Share Incentive Plan International Share Incentive Plan Group AllEmployee Free Shares Plan and International Profit Sharing Scheme are subject to restrictions on the transfer of shares prior to vesting andor release.
The Company is not aware of any arrangements between its shareholders that may result in restrictions on the transfer of shares andor voting rights.
Significant direct and indirect holders of securities As at 31 December 2017 and unchanged as at 21 February 2018 the Company had been advised of the following significant direct and indirect interests in the issued ordinary share capital of the Company Name of shareholder
AXA S.
Barclays PLC 3.98% BlackRock Inc.
5.00% The Capital Group Companies Inc.
10.11% Franklin Resources Inc.
Invesco Limited 4.97% Silchester International Investors LLP 3.01% BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Governance Exercise of rights of shares in employee share schemes The trustees of the employee trusts do not seek to exercise voting rights on shares held in the employee trusts other than on the direction of the underlying beneficiaries.
No voting rights are exercised in relation to shares unallocated to individual beneficiaries.
Restrictions on voting deadlines The notice of any general meeting shall specify the deadline for exercising voting rights and appointing a proxy or proxies to vote in relation to resolutions to be proposed at the general meeting.
The number of proxy votes for against or withheld in respect of each resolution are publicised on the Companys website after the meeting.
Appointment and replacement of directors Subject to certain nationality requirements mentioned below the Company may by ordinary resolution appoint any person to be a director.
The directors also have the power to make appointments to the Board at any time.
Any individual so appointed will hold office until the next AGM and shall then be eligible for reelection.
The majority of directors holding office must be British.
Otherwise the directors who are not British shall vacate office in such order that those who have been in office for the shortest period since their appointment shall vacate their office first unless all of the directors otherwise agree among themselves.
Any director who holds the office of either Chairman in an executive capacity or Chief Executive shall also be British.
The Company must have not less than six directors holding office at all times.
If the number is reduced to below six then such number of persons shall be appointed as directors as soon as is reasonably practicable to reinstate the number of directors to six.
The Company may by ordinary resolution from time to time vary the minimum number of directors.
At each AGM of the Company any director who was elected or last reelected at or before the AGM held in the third calendar year before the then current calendar year must retire by rotation and such further directors must retire by rotation so that in total onethird of the directors retire by rotation each year.
A retiring director is eligible for reelection.
It is the Boards intention that all directors will stand for election or reelection in 2018 in compliance with the UK Corporate Governance Code.
Amendment of the Companys Articles of Association The Companys Articles of Association may only be amended by a special resolution at a general meeting of shareholders.
Where class rights are varied such amendments must be approved by the members of each class of shares separately.
In addition certain provisions of the Articles of Association cannot be amended without the consent of the Special Shareholder.
These provisions include the requirement that no foreign person or foreign persons acting in concert can have more than a 15% voting interest in the Company the requirement that the majority of the directors are British and the requirement that the Chief Executive and any executive Chairman are British.
Powers of the directors The directors are responsible for the management of the business of the Company and may exercise all powers of the Company subject to applicable legislation and regulation and the Articles of Association.
At the 2017 AGM the directors were given the power to buy back a maximum number of 317752630 ordinary shares at a minimum price of 2.5p each.
The maximum price was the higher of i an amount equal to 105% of the average of the middle market quotations of the Companys ordinary shares as derived from the London Stock Exchange Daily Official List for the five business days immediately preceding the day on which such ordinary shares are contracted to be purchased and ii the higher of the price of the last independent trade and the highest current independent bid on the London Stock Exchange as stipulated by Regulatory Technical Standards adopted by the European Commission pursuant to article 56 of the Market Abuse Regulation.
This power will expire at the earlier of the conclusion of the 2018 AGM or 30 June 2018.
A special resolution will be proposed at the 2018 AGM to renew the Companys authority to acquire its own shares.
At the 2017 AGM the directors were given the power to issue new shares up to a nominal amount of 26476737.
This power will expire on the earlier of the conclusion of the 2018 AGM or 30 June 2018.
Accordingly a resolution will be proposed at the 2018 AGM to renew the Companys authority to issue further new shares.
At the 2017 AGM the directors were also given the power to issue new issue shares up to a further nominal amount of 26476737 in connection with an offer by way of a rights issue.
This authority too will expire on the earlier of the conclusion of the 2018 AGM or 30 June 2018 however no resolution to renew this additional authority will be proposed at the 2018 AGM.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Statutory and other information continued Conflicts of interest As permitted under the Companies Act 2006 the Companys Articles of Association contain provisions which enable the Board to authorise conflicts or potential conflicts that individual directors may have.
To avoid potential conflicts of interest the Board requires the Nominations Committee to check that any individuals it nominates for appointment to the Board are free of potential conflicts.
In addition the Boards procedures and the induction programme for new directors emphasise a directors personal responsibility for complying with the duties relating to conflicts of interest.
The procedure adopted by the Board for the authorisation of conflicts reminds directors of the need to consider their duties as directors and not grant an authorisation unless they believe in good faith that this would be likely to promote the success of the Company.
As required by law the potentially conflicted director cannot vote on an authorisation resolution or be counted in the quorum.
Any authorisation granted may be terminated at any time and the director is informed of the obligation to inform the Company without delay should there be any material change in the nature of the conflict or potential conflict so authorised.
Directors indemnities The Company has entered into deeds of indemnity with all its current directors and those persons who were directors for any part of 2017 which are qualifying indemnity provisions for the purpose of the Companies Act 2006.
The directors of BAE Systems Pension Funds Trustees Limited BAE Systems 2000 Pension Plan Trustees Limited BAE Systems Executive Pension Scheme Trustees Limited and Alvis Pension Scheme Trustees Limited benefit from indemnities in the governing documentation of the BAE Systems Pension Scheme the BAE Systems 2000 Pension Plan the BAE Systems Executive Pension Scheme and the Alvis Pension Scheme respectively which are qualifying indemnity provisions for the purpose of the Companies Act 2006.
All such indemnity provisions are in force as at the date of this Directors report.
Change of control  significant agreements The following significant agreements contain provisions entitling the counterparties to exercise termination alteration or other similar rights in the event of a change of control of the Company The Group has entered into a 2bn Revolving Credit Facility dated 12 December 2013 which provides that in the event of a change of control of the Company the lenders are entitled to renegotiate terms or if no agreement is reached on negotiated terms within a certain period to call for the repayment or cancellation of the facility.
The Revolving Credit Facility was undrawn as at 31 December 2017.
The Company has entered into a Restated and Amended Shareholders Agreement with European Aeronautic Defence and Space Company EADS N.
EADS and Finmeccanica S.
Finmeccanica relating to MBDA S. as amended.
In the event that control of the Company passes to certain specified thirdparty acquirors the agreement allows EADS and Finmeccanica to exercise an option to terminate certain executive management level nomination and voting rights and certain shareholder information rights of the Company in relation to the MBDA joint venture.
Following the exercise of this option the Company would have the right to require the other shareholders to purchase its interest in MBDA at fair market value.
The Company and EADS have agreed that if Finmeccanica acquires a controlling interest in the Company EADS will increase its shareholding in MBDA to 50% by purchasing the appropriate number of shares in MBDA at fair market value.
The Company BAE Systems Inc.
BAE Systems Holdings Limited and BAE Systems Holdings Inc.
23 October 2015 with the US Department of Defense regarding the management of BAE Systems Inc. requirements.
In the event of a change of control of the Company the Agreement may be terminated or altered by the US Department of Defense.
In June 2017 BAE Systems Surface Ships Limited entered into a contract with the MoD for the manufacture of the first batch of three Type 26 frigates.
Where the MoD considers that a proposed change of control of BAE Systems Surface Ships Limited would be contrary to the defence national security or national interest of the UK or where the change of control would result in increased costs to the MoD under the contract then the change of control shall not proceed until agreement with the MoD is established.
If there is a change of control without notice or notwithstanding the objection of the MoD on such grounds then the MoD may terminate the contract with immediate effect.
The MSDF agreement between BAE Systems Surface Ships Limited and the MoD became effective on 1 October 2014 and establishes a framework until March 2019 for the provision of surface ship support work and services relating to HM Naval Base
Where the MoD considers that a proposed change of control of BAE Systems Surface Ships Limited would be contrary to the defence national security or national interest of the UK then the change of control shall not proceed until agreement with the MoD is established.
If there is a change of control without notice or notwithstanding the objection of the MoD the MoD shall be entitled to terminate the MSDF.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Governance  In August 2008 BAE Systems Land Systems Munitions and Ordnance Limited now BAE Systems Global Combat Systems Munitions Limited and the MoD entered into a 15year partnering agreement for the provision of ammunition to UK Forces the Munitions Acquisition Supply Solution MASS partnering agreement.
Where the MoD considers that a proposed change of control of BAE Systems Global Combat Systems Munitions Limited would be contrary to the defence national security or national interest of the UK then the change of control shall not proceed until agreement with the MoD is established.
In the event that there is a change of control of BAE Systems Global Combat Systems Munitions Limited notwithstanding the objection of the MoD on such grounds the MoD may having followed the dispute resolution process terminate the MASS agreement for default.
In November 2012 BAE Systems Marine Limited entered into a contract with the MoD for the design construction testing and commissioning of Boat 4 of the Astute Class programme.
In November 2015 BAE Systems Marine Limited entered into a contract with the MoD for the design construction testing and commissioning of Boat 5 of the Astute Class programme.
In March 2016 BAE Systems Marine Limited entered into a contract with the MoD for the design construction testing and commissioning of Boat 6 of the Astute Class Programme.
Where the MoD considers that a proposed change of control of BAE Systems Marine Limited would be contrary to the defence national security or national interest of the UK then the change of control shall not proceed until agreement is established with the MoD.
In the event that there is a change of control of BAE Systems Marine Limited notwithstanding the objection of the MoD on such grounds the MoD shall be entitled to terminate the agreements immediately.
In December 2011 BAE Systems Marine Limited entered into a contract with the MoD for the design of the Dreadnought submarines.
Where the MoD considers that a change of control of BAE Systems Marine Limited would be contrary to the defence national interest or national security of the UK then the change of control shall not take place until agreement is reached with the MoD on how to proceed.
In the event that there is a change of control notwithstanding the objection of the MoD on such grounds the MoD shall be entitled to terminate the contract with immediate effect.
In September 2016 BAE Systems Marine Limited entered into a contract with the MoD for the first phase of manufacture of Boat 1 of the Dreadnought Class programme.
The MoD is entitled to terminate the contract in the event of a change of control of BAE Systems Marine Limited provided that the MoD must act reasonably in exercising this right.
In addition the Companys share plans contain provisions as a result of which options and awards may vest and become exercisable on a change of control of the Company in accordance with the rules of the plans.
Auditors
As detailed on page 82 following the conclusion of a formal tender process led by the Companys Audit Committee the Board has approved the proposed appointment of Deloitte LLP as the Companys auditors for the financial year ending 31 December 2018 subject to approval by Companys shareholders at the AGM on 10 May 2018.
Statement of directors responsibilities in respect of the Annual Report and the financial statements The directors are responsible for preparing the Annual Report and the Group and parent company financial statements in accordance with applicable law and regulations.
Company law requires the directors to prepare Group and parent company financial statements for each financial year.
Under that law they are required to prepare the Group financial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as adopted by the European Union IFRSs as adopted by the EU and applicable law and have elected to prepare the parent company financial statements in accordance with UK accounting standards including Financial Reporting Standard FRS 101 Reduced Disclosure Framework.
Under company law the directors must not approve the financial statements unless they are satisfied that they give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Group and parent company and of their profit or loss for that period.
In preparing each of the Group and parent company financial statements the directors are required to select suitable accounting policies and then apply them consistently make judgements and estimates that are reasonable relevant reliable and prudent for the Group financial statements state whether they have been prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the EU for the parent company financial statements state whether applicable UK accounting standards have been followed subject to any material departures disclosed and explained in the parent company financial statements assess the Group and parent companys ability to continue as a going concern disclosing as applicable matters related to going concern and use the going concern basis of accounting unless they either intend to liquidate the Group or the parent company or to cease operations or have no realistic alternative but to do so.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Statutory and other information continued The directors are responsible for keeping adequate accounting records that are sufficient to show and explain the parent companys transactions and disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the financial position of the parent company and enable them to ensure that its financial statements comply with the Companies Act 2006.
They are responsible for such internal control as they determine is necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error and have general responsibility for taking such steps as are reasonably open to them to safeguard the assets of the Group and to prevent and detect fraud and other irregularities.
Under applicable law and regulations the directors are also responsible for preparing a strategic report directors report directors remuneration report and corporate governance statement that complies with that law and those regulations.
The directors are responsible for the maintenance and integrity of the corporate and financial information included on the companys website.
Legislation in the UK governing the preparation and dissemination of financial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
Statement of disclosure of information to auditors The directors who held office at the date of approval of this Directors report confirm that so far as they are each aware there is no relevant audit information of which the Companys auditors are unaware and each director has taken all the steps that heshe ought to have taken to make himselfherself aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that the Companys auditors are aware of that information.
Responsibility statement of the directors in respect of the Annual Report and financial statements Each of the directors listed below confirms that to the best of their knowledge the financial statements prepared in accordance with the applicable set of accounting standards give a true and fair view of the assets liabilities financial position and profit or loss of the Company and the undertakings included in the consolidation taken as a whole and the Strategic report and Directors report taken together include a fair review of the development and performance of the business and the position of the Company and the undertakings included in the consolidation taken as a whole together with a description of the principal risks and uncertainties that they face.
In addition each of the directors considers that the Annual Report taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Companys position and performance business model and strategy.
Sir Roger Carr Chairman Charles Woodburn Chief Executive Jerry DeMuro President and Chief Executive Officer of BAE Systems Inc.
Peter Lynas Group Finance Director Revathi Advaithi Nonexecutive director Elizabeth Corley Nonexecutive director Harriet Green Nonexecutive director Chris Grigg Nonexecutive director Paula Rosput Reynolds Nonexecutive director Nick Rose Nonexecutive director Ian Tyler Nonexecutive director On behalf of the Board Sir Roger Carr
21 February 2018 Directors report The Directors report was approved by the board of directors on 21 February 2018.
David Parkes Company Secretary BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Governance Opinions and conclusions arising from our audit Our opinion is unmodified We have audited the financial statements of BAE Systems plc the Company for the year ended 31 December 2017 which comprise the Consolidated income statement the Consolidated statement of comprehensive income the Consolidated statement of changes in equity the Consolidated balance sheet the Consolidated cash flow statement the Company Statement of comprehensive income the Company Statement of changes in equity the Company Balance sheet and the related notes including the accounting policies on pages 144 to 207.
In our opinion the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the Groups and of the parent companys affairs as at 31 December 2017 and of the Groups profit for the year then ended the Group financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as adopted by the European Union the parent company financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with UK accounting standards including FRS 101 Reduced Disclosure Framework and the financial statements have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006 and as regards the Group financial statements Article 4 of the IAS Regulation.
Basis for opinion We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing UK ISAs UK and applicable law.
Our responsibilities are described below.
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is a sufficient and appropriate basis for our opinion.
Our audit opinion is consistent with our report to the Audit Committee.
We were appointed as auditor by the directors during the period of the Companys incorporation in 1981.
The period of total uninterrupted engagement is for the 37 financial years ended 31 December 2017.
We have fulfilled our ethical responsibilities under and we remain independent of the Group in accordance with UK ethical requirements including the FRC Ethical Standard as applied to listed public interest entities.
No nonaudit services prohibited by that Standard were provided during 2017 by KPMG.
Key audit matters our assessment of risks of material misstatement Key audit matters are those matters that in our professional judgement were of most significance in the audit of the Group financial statements and include the most significant assessed risks of material misstatement whether or not due to fraud identified by us including those which had the greatest effect on the overall audit strategy the allocation of resources in the audit and directing the efforts of the engagement team.
We summarise below the key audit matters in decreasing order of audit significance in arriving at our audit opinion above together with our key audit procedures to address those matters and as required for public interest entities our results from those procedures.
These matters were addressed and our results are based on procedures undertaken in the context of and solely for the purpose of our audit of the financial statements as a whole and in forming our opinion thereon and consequently are incidental to that opinion and we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters.
Group financial statements Net retirement benefit obligations Refer to page 84 Audit Committee report and pages 174 to 183 accounting policy and financial disclosures Groups share of the net IAS 19 deficit 3920m 2016 6054m Risk versus 2016 The risk Subjective valuation The valuation of the defined benefit pension deficit depends on a number of judgemental assumptions and estimates including the discount rates used to calculate the current value of the future payments the Group expects to pay pensioners the rate of inflation that must be incorporated in the estimate of the future pension payments and the life expectancy of pension scheme members.
There is a considerable amount of judgement required in setting the above assumptions and given the size of the schemes a small change in the assumptions and estimates may have a significant impact on the retirement benefit obligations.
Further assumptions are made in the determination of the Groups share of assets and liabilities of the multiemployer schemes in which it participates and the corresponding amounts attributed to other participating employers.
Our response Our audit procedures included Our actuarial expertise We used our own actuarial specialists to challenge key assumptions and estimates used in the calculation of the pension deficit.
The key assumptions and estimates we tested included the discount rate inflation and life expectancy assumptions that were applied to the valuation.
We also compared the IAS 19 valuation with the triennial funding valuations of the UK schemes notwithstanding that they were prepared on a different basis and as at different dates.
Benchmarking assumptions We performed a comparison of key assumptions against our own benchmark ranges which are derived from externallyavailable data as well as comparing against those used by other companies reporting on the same period.
Methodology assessment We used our own actuarial specialists to assess the appropriateness and consistency of the methodology applied by management in setting the key assumptions.
We challenged the reasons for any changes in methodology and considered the presence of indicators for bias.
Multiemployer allocation We challenged management in respect of their selection of the basis upon which to allocate a portion of the multiemployer retirement benefit obligations to other participating employers and in respect of the largest participating employer being MBDA agreed the amount allocated to their records.
Assessing transparency We considered the adequacy of the Groups disclosure in respect of retirement benefits in particular the net retirement benefit obligation and the assumptions used which are set out in note 21 to the financial statements.
Results
We found the valuation of the net retirement benefit obligation to be acceptable 2016 result acceptable.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017
Independent Auditors report
Recognition of revenues and profits on longterm contracts Refer to page 84 Audit Committee report and pages 148 to 150 accounting policy and financial disclosures Revenues 11910m 2016 11659m Risk versus 2016 The risk Subjective estimate Longterm contracts include complex technical and commercial requirements and often specify performance milestones to be achieved throughout the contract period which can last many years.
At each balance sheet date estimates and assumptions involving a high degree of judgement and estimation uncertainty are required in order to assess the proportion of revenues to recognise in line with milestones achieved and progress made on contracts forecast the outturn profit margin on each contract incorporating appropriate allowances for technical and commercial risks related to performance milestones yet to be achieved particularly in the case of fixedprice contracts and appropriately identify value and provide for lossmaking contracts.
The directors have detailed procedures and processes called Lifecycle Management LCM in place to manage the commercial technical and financial aspects of longterm contracts.
The LCM process includes the regular preparation of a Contract Status Report CSR which includes key accounting and forecast information for the relevant contract.
The contracts requiring the highest degree of judgement that occupied a significant proportion of the audit effort included Typhoon aircraft European Saudi and Omani Astute Class submarines Queen Elizabeth Class aircraft carrier US commercial shipbuilding contracts and Saudi British Defence Cooperation Programme.
Our response Our audit procedures included Control design observation and operation We tested the design and operating effectiveness of key controls within the LCM process that support contractrelated balances including transactional controls that underpin the production of longterm contractrelated balances including cost information on contracts We tested the operation of purchasetopay cycle and payroll controls programmelevel controls We inspected results from periodic peer reviews performed by experienced employees independent to the contract to challenge assumptions made and judgements taken at predetermined stages of the contract lifecycle and higherlevel controls We observed monthly contract review meetings quarterly business unit review meetings and Grouplevel review meetings.
For significant contracts including those listed in our audit risk description determined on the basis of the current and future technical or commercial complexity financial significance and any forecast to be in significant lossmaking positions Personnel interviews We obtained an understanding of the performance and status of the contract through discussion with contract project teams Group and business unit directors as well as through attendance at project teams contract review meetings.
We applied our cumulative knowledge of the status of the contracts and challenged the appropriateness of the contract position at the reporting date including any central overlays to positions reported by subsidiaries and whether or not there were any indications of management override of controls or management bias.
Benchmarking assumptions We challenged the Groups positions through the examination of externallyavailable evidence such as customer correspondence and in the case of one significant programme met the customer directly to further corroborate the status of contracts and recoverability of workinprogress and receivables.
Our valuations expertise In the case of one specific project we used our own valuation specialist to assess the valuation performed on behalf of the Group by an external valuation expert.
Results
The results of our testing were satisfactory and we considered the amount of revenue and profit on longterm contracts recognised to be acceptable 2016 result acceptable.
Valuation of goodwill Refer to page 85 Audit Committee report and pages 158 to 160 accounting policy and financial disclosures Goodwill 9996m 2016 10902m Risk versus 2016 The risk Forecastbased valuation The Group holds a significant amount of goodwill relating to UK and overseas principally US acquisitions during the past 20 years.
The Group estimates recoverable amounts based on value in use which requires significant estimation and judgement in forecasting future cash flows and determining discount rates.
The US Department of Defense fiscal year 2018 budget and the current programme of work support the planning assumptions for the Groups US businesses.
However future year budgets and the allocation of the budget between the Group and its competitors remains uncertain.
This places continued importance on the US business to secure export contracts.
Both of these factors contribute to the risk that the goodwill allocated to the Groups US CashGenerating Units CGUs may not be recoverable although we consider this risk to have reduced from the prior year.
The Applied Intelligence CGU with an allocated goodwill balance of 0.2bn at the reporting date 2016 0.6bn operates in a highly competitive and fragmented market where significant investment is required for growth and where the future business pipeline is much shorter than in most other business units in the Group.
As such we consider the uncertainty in forecasting cash flows higher and the valuation of this CGU to have a higher risk due to these sectorrelated factors.
An impairment charge of 384m was recognised in respect of this CGU in 2017 2016 nil.
The remaining goodwill of 1.9bn is primarily allocated to CGUs based in the UK.
Whilst there remains an inherent risk in the forecasting of future cash flows for these businesses many of them hold sizeable order backlogs much of which is with government agencies providing increased support to the forecasts.
We consider the valuation risks around these CGUs to be lower than Applied Intelligence.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Governance Our response Our audit procedures included Historical comparison Assessing the reasonableness of the directors assumptions by reference to past performance.
Benchmarking assumptions Assessing the reasonableness of the directors assumptions by reference to publiclyavailable information such as future defence expenditure.
We also compared the directors assumptions to externallyderived data for example bond yields and inflation statistics and internallyderived data to challenge other key inputs such as projected economic growth and gearing leverage.
Comparing valuations We compared the sum of the discounted cash flows to the Groups market capitalisation to assess the reasonableness of those cash flows and challenged managements explanation in reconciling the two.
Our sector experience Our valuation specialists assisted in evaluating the reasonableness of assumptions and methodologies underlying the discount rates adopted by the directors including the discount rate applied in the valuation of the Applied Intelligence CGU.
Sensitivity analysis We have run scenariospecific models including changes to the discount rate forecast cash flows and breakeven analyses to stresstest the valuations of CGUs recoverable amounts.
Assessing transparency We considered the adequacy of the Groups disclosure in respect of the sensitivities to changes in key assumptions and the risks inherent in the valuation of goodwill.
Results
We found the Groups assessment of the recoverable amount of goodwill to be acceptable 2016 result acceptable.
Tax accruals Refer to page 85 Audit Committee report and page 171 accounting policy and financial disclosures Tax accruals 351m 2016 365m Risk versus 2016 The risk Dispute outcomes Accruals for tax contingencies require the directors to make judgements and estimates in relation to tax risks.
This is one of the key judgement areas that our audit is concentrated on due to the Group operating in a number of tax jurisdictions the complexities of local and international tax legislation and the number of years which some matters can take to resolve.
The tax matters are at various stages from the first identification of risks to discussions with tax authorities and through to tax tribunal or court proceedings.
Our response Our audit procedures included Our taxation expertise Our tax specialists assisted in assessing the Groups tax positions its exposure to future cash outflows and the assumptions used by the directors to estimate the tax accruals.
This included an inspection of the Groups correspondence with the relevant tax authorities and the Groups external tax advisers.
Benchmarking assumptions We used our knowledge and experience of the application of the international and local legislation by the relevant authorities and courts in order to challenge the positions taken by the directors.
In support of these positions we separately met with certain key external tax advisers of the Group.
In respect of certain matters we compared the position taken by the directors with outcomes of similar cases.
Assessing transparency We have also considered the adequacy of the Groups tax disclosures.
Results
The results of our testing were satisfactory and we found the resulting estimate of tax accruals to be acceptable 2016 result acceptable.
Deferred tax assets Refer to page 85 Audit Committee report and pages 169 to 171 accounting policy and financial disclosures Deferred tax assets 724m 2016 1251m Risk versus 2016 The risk Subjective estimate The directors are required to estimate the valuation of deferred tax assets and to record those assets to the extent their recovery is probable.
This requires a significant element of judgement.
The majority of the deferred tax asset balance is in relation to the Groups retirement benefit obligations.
As a result of the reduction in the valuation of the Groups net share of the retirement benefit obligations the Groups related deferred tax asset has also reduced compared with last year the period required for the Group to recover the amount of deferred tax is less.
For this reason we have determined that the audit risk has reduced from the prior year.
Our response Our audit procedures included Assessing forecasts We assessed and challenged the directors judgement as to why it is deemed probable that the deferred tax assets recognised will be recovered considering the appropriateness and reliability of forecasts used by management to estimate the recovery period the timeframe of the pension deficit recovery plan and the consistency of this judgement with other assumptions and estimates made by the directors for example those used to test impairment of assets including goodwill.
Benchmarking assumptions We considered the funding arrangements agreed with the Trustees of the UK pension schemes.
We compared the views and estimates arrived at by the directors as described above with advice received by the Trustees in arriving at the funding arrangements on the covenant provided by the Group over the deficit recovery periods.
Tests of detail We analysed the calculations used to determine the estimated recovery period and tested the accuracy of these calculations.
Results
As a result of our work we found the level of deferred tax assets recognised to be acceptable 2016 result acceptable.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017
Independent Auditors report
Our application of materiality and an overview of the scope of our audit The materiality for the Group financial statements as a whole was set at 55m 2016 55m determined with reference to a benchmark of Group profit before taxation from continuing operations of which it represents 4.9% 2016 4.8%.
Materiality for the parent company financial statements as a whole was set at 32m 2016 30m as communicated by the Group audit team.
This is lower than the materiality we would otherwise have determined with reference to a benchmark of company net assets and represents 0.8% 2016 0.8% of the Companys net assets.
We agreed to report to the Audit Committee any corrected or uncorrected identified misstatements exceeding 3m for income statement items in addition to other identified misstatements that warranted reporting on qualitative grounds.
Of the Groups 41 2016 41 reporting components we subjected 11 2016 11 to fullscope audits for Group purposes and 14 2016 14 to specified riskfocused procedures.
The latter were in our opinion not individually financially significant enough to require an audit for Group reporting purposes but did present specific individual risks that needed to be addressed.
The components within the scope of our work accounted for the following percentages of the Groups results For the remaining components we performed analysis at an aggregated level to confirm our preliminary assessment that there were no significant risks of material misstatements within these.
The Group audit team instructed component auditors as to the significant areas to be covered including the relevant risks detailed above and the information to be reported back.
The Group audit team approved the component materiality levels which ranged from 2.7m to 32m 2016 4m to 37m having regard to the mix of size and risk profile across the components.
The work on seven of the 25 2016 seven of the 25 inscope components was performed by component auditors and the remainder including the audit of the parent company by the Group audit team.
The Group audit team held a global audit conference in 2014 where all significant component audit teams came together in London to consider the audit risk and strategy.
Similar planning days took place in 2017 with the most significant component teams from the UK US and Saudi Arabia.
In addition the Group audit team visited component teams in the UK US Saudi Arabia and Australia to assess the audit risk and strategy discuss and moderate the results of controls testing and discuss preliminary findings of audit procedures.
Video and telephone conference meetings were also held with these component auditors and any others in our audit scope that were not physically visited.
At these visits and meetings the findings reported to the Group audit team were discussed in more detail and any further work required by the Group audit team was then performed by the component auditor.
We have nothing to report on going concern We are required to report to you if we have anything material to add or draw attention to in relation to the directors statement in the financial statements on page 142 on the use of the going concern basis of accounting with no material uncertainties that may cast significant doubt over the Group and Companys use of that basis for a period of at least 12 months from the date of approval of the financial statements or the related statement under the Listing Rules set out on page 81 is materially inconsistent with our audit knowledge.
We have nothing to report in these respects.
We have nothing to report on the other information in the Annual Report The directors are responsible for the other information presented in the Annual Report together with the financial statements.
Our opinion on the financial statements does not cover the other information and accordingly we do not express an audit opinion or except as explicitly stated below any form of assurance conclusion thereon.
Our responsibility is to read the other information and in doing so consider whether based on our financial statements audit work the information therein is materially misstated or inconsistent with the financial statements or our audit knowledge.
Based solely on that work we have not identified material misstatements in the other information.
Number of components
Group profit before taxation %
Audits for Group reporting purposes Specified riskfocused audit procedures
Audits for Group reporting purposes Specified riskfocused audit procedures Total .
In the UK US Saudi Arabia and Australia.
In the UK US and Saudi Arabia.
Parent company financial statements Amounts relating to Group affiliates These comprise Investments in subsidiary undertakings and participating interests 8439m 2016 8399m Amounts owed by subsidiary undertakings and Group joint ventures 2576m 2016 2954m Amounts owed to subsidiary undertakings and Group joint ventures 8183m 2016 8461m The risk Material amounts The carrying amount of the Companys investments in subsidiaries held at cost less impairment and intercompany receivables represent 77% 2016 79% of the Companys total assets.
The Companys intercompany liabilities represent 80% 2016 79% of the Companys total liabilities.
We do not consider the valuation of these investments and recovery of intercompany receivables or completeness of intercompany liabilities to be at a high risk of significant misstatement or to be subject to a significant level of judgement.
However due to their materiality in the context of the Company financial statements this is considered to be the area that had the greatest effect on our overall parent company audit.
Our response Tests of detail We compared the investments and receivables to the net assets of the relevant entities to identify whether these net assets being an approximation of their minimum recoverable amounts were in excess of the investment carrying amounts.
We agreed that the intercompany liabilities setoff against subsidiary counterparties in the Group consolidation.
Our sector experience We evaluated key assumptions in the impairment models for certain significant investments in particular those for profit contribution and growth against our own knowledge of the historic trading performance of the relevant entities.
Control observation We tested the automated controls over the process for matching and elimination of intercompany balances in the Group consolidation.
Results
We found the assessment of the amounts recorded to be acceptable.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Governance Strategic report and Directors report Based solely on our work on the other information we have not identified material misstatements in the Strategic report and the Directors report in our opinion the information given in those reports for the financial year is consistent with the financial statements and in our opinion those reports have been prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 2006.
Directors remuneration report In our opinion the part of the Directors remuneration report to be audited has been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 2006.
Disclosures of principal risks and longerterm viability Based on the knowledge we acquired during our financial statements audit we have nothing material to add or draw attention to in relation to the directors confirmation within the viability statement on page 81 that they have carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Group including those that would threaten its business model future performance solvency and liquidity the principal risks disclosures describing these risks and explaining how they are being managed and mitigated and the directors explanation in the viability statement of how they have assessed the prospects of the Group over what period they have done so and why they considered that period to be appropriate and their statement as to whether they have a reasonable expectation that the Group will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the period of their assessment including any related disclosures drawing attention to any necessary qualifications or assumptions.
Under the Listing Rules we are required to review the viability statement.
We have nothing to report in this respect.
Corporate governance disclosures We are required to report to you if we have identified material inconsistencies between the knowledge we acquired during our financial statements audit and the directors statement that they consider that the annual report and financial statements taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Groups position and performance business model and strategy or the section of the Annual Report describing the work of the Audit Committee does not appropriately address matters communicated by us to the Audit Committee.
We are required to report to you if the part of the Directors report section relating to the Companys compliance does not properly disclose a departure from the 11 provisions of the UK Corporate Governance Code specified by the Listing Rules for our review.
We have nothing to report in these respects.
We have nothing to report on the other matters on which we are required to report by exception Under the Companies Act 2006 we are required to report to you if in our opinion adequate accounting records have not been kept by the parent company or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or the parent company financial statements and the part of the Directors remuneration report to be audited are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns or certain disclosures of directors remuneration specified by law are not made or we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit.
We have nothing to report in these respects.
Respective responsibilities Directors responsibilities As explained more fully in their statement set out on pages 134 and 135 the directors are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements including being satisfied that they give a true and fair view such internal control as they determine is necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error assessing the Group and parent companys ability to continue as a going concern disclosing as applicable matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless they either intend to liquidate the Group or the parent company or to cease operations or have no realistic alternative but to do so.
Auditors responsibilities Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or other irregularities see below or error and to issue our opinion in an auditors report.
Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance but does not guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with ISAs UK will always detect a material misstatement when it exists.
Misstatements can arise from fraud other irregularities or error and are considered material if individually or in aggregate they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of the financial statements.
A fuller description of our responsibilities is provided on the FRCs website at www. rc.
Irregularities  ability to detect Our audit aimed to detect noncompliance with relevant laws and regulations irregularities that could have a material effect on the financial statements.
In planning and performing our audit we considered the impact of laws and regulations in the specific areas of export control defence contracting and antibribery and corruption legislation.
We identified these areas through discussion with the directors and other management as required by auditing standards from our sector experience and from inspection of the Groups legal correspondence.
In addition we had regard to laws and regulations in other areas including financial reporting and company and taxation legislation.
We considered the extent of compliance with those laws and regulations that directly affect the financial statements being antibribery and corruption and as part of our procedures on the related financial statement items.
For the remaining laws and regulations we made enquiries of directors and other management as required by auditing standards and inspected legal correspondence.
We communicated identified laws and regulations throughout our team and remained alert to any indications of noncompliance throughout the audit.
This included communication from the Group to component audit teams of relevant laws and regulations identified at Group level with a request to report on any indications of potential existence of irregularities in these areas or other areas directly identified by the component team.
As with any audit there remained a higher risk of nondetection of irregularities as these may involve collusion forgery intentional omissions misrepresentations or the override of internal controls.
The purpose of our audit work and to whom we owe our responsibilities This report is made solely to the Companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006.
Our audit work has been undertaken so that we might state to the Companys members those matters we are required to state to them in an auditors report and for no other purpose.
To the fullest extent permitted by law we do not accept or assume responsibility to anyone other than the Company and the Companys members as a body for our audit work for this report or for the opinions we have formed.
Ian Starkey Senior Statutory Auditor For and on behalf of KPMG LLP Statutory Auditor Chartered Accountants 15 Canada Square London E14 5GL 21 February 2018 BAE Systems Annual Report 2017
Independent Auditors report
Accounting policies are included within the relevant note to the Group accounts.
Preparation 142 Consolidated income statement 144 Consolidated statement of comprehensive income 145 Consolidated statement of changes in equity 145 Consolidated balance sheet 146 Consolidated cash flow statement 147 Segmental analysis 148 Operating costs 151 Employees 152 Other income 152 Net finance costs 153 Taxation expense 154 Earnings per share 157 Intangible assets 158 Property plant and equipment 161 Investment property 164 Equity accounted investments 165 Trade and other receivables 167 Other financial assets and liabilities 168 Deferred tax 169 Inventories 171 Current tax 171 Cash and cash equivalents 171 Geographical analysis of assets 172 Loans and overdrafts 172 Trade and other payables 173 Retirement benefits 174 Provisions 184 Share capital and other reserves 185 Operating business cash flow 187 Movement in assets and liabilities arising from financing activities 188 Net debt 188 Fair value measurement 189 Financial risk management 190 Sharebased payments 192 Related party transactions 193 Contingent liabilities 194 C o m m i t m e n t s 1 9 4 Information about related undertakings 195 Adoption of IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers 199 Company statement of comprehensive income 202 Company statement of changes in equity 202 Company balance sheet 203 Notes to the Company accounts 204 Group accounts Company accounts BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Financial statements
Basis of preparation The consolidated financial statements of BAE Systems plc have been prepared on a going concern basis as discussed in the Directors report on page 81 and in accordance with EUendorsed International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS and the Companies Act 2006 applicable to companies reporting under IFRS.
The consolidated financial statements are presented in pounds sterling and unless stated otherwise rounded to the nearest million.
They have been prepared under the historical cost convention as modified by the revaluation of availableforsale financial assets and other relevant financial assets and financial liabilities including derivative instruments.
Transactions in foreign currencies are translated at the exchange rates ruling at the dates of the transactions.
Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are retranslated at the exchange rates ruling at the balance sheet date with the resulting exchange differences recognised in the income statement.
Significant accounting policies The significant accounting policies applied in the preparation of these consolidated financial statements are set out in the relevant notes.
These policies have been applied consistently to all the years presented unless otherwise stated.
The directors believe that the consolidated financial statements reflect appropriate judgements and estimates and provide a true and fair view of the Groups financial performance and position.
Critical accounting policies Certain of the Groups significant accounting policies are considered by the directors to be critical because of the level of complexity judgement or estimation involved in their application and their impact on the consolidated financial statements.
The critical accounting policies are listed below and explained in more detail in the relevant notes to the Group accounts Critical accounting policy Description Notes Revenue and profit recognition The majority of longterm contracts are accounted for under IAS 1 1 Construction Contracts.
Revenue on longterm contracts is recognised when performance milestones have been completed.
Profit is recognised progressively as risks have been mitigated or retired.
The ultimate profitability of longterm contracts is based on estimates of revenue and costs including allowances for technical and other risks which are reliant on the knowledge and experience of the Groups project managers engineers and finance and commercial professionals.
Material changes in these estimates could affect the profitability of individual contracts.
Revenue and cost estimates are reviewed and updated at least quarterly and more frequently as determined by events or circumstances.
Carrying value of goodwill Goodwill is not amortised but is tested annually for impairment and carried at cost less accumulated impairment losses.
For the purposes of impairment testing goodwill is allocated to CashGenerating Units on a consistent basis.
The impairment review calculations require the use of estimates of the future profitability and cashgenerating ability of the acquired businesses based on the Groups fiveyear Integrated Business Plan and the pretax discount rate used in discounting these projected cash flows.
Deferred tax asset on retirement benefit obligations The Group has recognised a deferred tax asset in respect of the deficits in its pension retirement schemes.
It is managements judgement that the Group will generate sufficient taxable profits to recover the net deferred tax asset recognised.
This judgement requires the use of estimates of future taxable profits based on the Groups Integrated Business Plan.
Tax provisions Provision is made for known issues based on managements interpretation of country specific legislation and the likely outcome of negotiations or litigation.
The Groups approach is to consider each uncertain tax position separately.
Where management considers it is probable that there will be a future outflow of funds to a tax authority a provision is recognised.
The position is reviewed on an ongoing basis.
Provisions are measured using managements best estimate of the most likely amount being the single most likely amount in a range of possible outcomes.
The Group discloses any significant uncertainties in relation to tax matters to the relevant tax authority.
The resolution of tax positions taken by the Group can take a considerable period of time to conclude and in some cases it is difficult to predict the outcome.
Valuation of retirement benefit obligations Defined benefit pension scheme accounting valuations are prepared by independent actuaries.
The liabilities of the pension schemes are valued based on a number of actuarial assumptions.
For each of the actuarial assumptions used there is a range of possible values and management estimates the point within that range that most appropriately reflects the Groups circumstances.
Small changes in these assumptions can have a significant impact on the size of the deficit.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017
Judgements made in applying accounting policies In the course of preparing the financial statements no judgements have been made in the process of applying the Groups accounting policies other than those involving estimates that have had a significant effect on the amounts recognised in the financial statements.
Sources of estimation uncertainty The application of the Groups accounting policies requires the use of estimates.
In the event that these estimates prove to be incorrect there may be an adjustment to the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities within the next financial year.
The significant estimates in relation to the Groups critical accounting policies are set out above.
The only significant risk of a material adjustment to the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities during 2018 relates to the determination of the discount rate and inflation assumptions underpinning the valuation of the liabilities of the Groups defined benefit pension schemes.
A description of the discount rate and inflation assumptions together with sensitivity analysis is set out in note 21 to the Group accounts.
Changes in accounting policies IFRS 9 Financial Instruments IFRS 9 is effective from 1 January 2018.
The standard replacing the requirements of IAS 39 Financial Instruments Recognition and Measurement introduces new requirements for recognition classification and measurement a new impairment model for financial assets based on expected credit losses and simplified hedge accounting.
Any changes to the classification and measurement of financial instruments are applied retrospectively by adjusting opening retained earnings at 1 January 2018.
There is no requirement to restate comparatives for prior periods.
The Group has determined that there is no adjustment to retained earnings on transition to IFRS 9.
IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers IFRS 15 is effective from 1 January 2018.
The standard requires the identification of performance obligations in contracts with customers and allocation of the total contractual value to each of the performance obligations identified.
Revenue is recognised as each performance obligation is satisfied either at a point in time or over time.
The standard will replace IAS 11 Construction Contracts IAS 18 Revenue and all other existing revenue accounting requirements within IFRS.
The impact of the adoption of IFRS 15 on BAE Systems is set out in note 34.
IFRS 16 Leases IFRS 16 is effective from 1 January 2019.
The standard which replaces IAS 17 Leases was EU endorsed in October 2017.
Whilst lessor accounting is similar to IAS 17 lessee accounting is significantly different.
Under IFRS 16 the Group will recognise within the balance sheet a rightofuse asset and a lease liability for future lease payments in respect of all leases unless the underlying assets are of low value or the lease term is 12 months or less.
Within the income statement rental expense on the impacted leases will be replaced with depreciation on the rightofuse asset and interest expense on the lease liability.
As set out in note 32 BAE Systems has operating lease commitments totalling 1.6bn at 31 December 2017 and therefore IFRS 16 will have a material impact on the Group.
The implications of the standard are currently under review and the Group has not yet determined which transition option will be applied.
As the impact of transition is dependent on the option chosen the Group is unable to quantify the effect at this time.
Consolidation
The financial statements of the Group consolidate the results of the Company and its subsidiary entities and include its share of its joint ventures results accounted for under the equity method.
A subsidiary is an entity controlled by the Group.
The Group controls a subsidiary when it is exposed or has the rights to variable returns from its involvement with the subsidiary and has the ability to affect those returns through its power over the subsidiary.
The results of subsidiaries are included in the income statement from the date of acquisition.
Intragroup balances and transactions and any unrealised income and expenses arising from intragroup transactions are eliminated in preparing the consolidated financial statements.
Joint ventures are accounted for under the equity method where the Consolidated income statement includes the Groups share of their profits and losses and the Consolidated balance sheet includes its share of their net assets within equity accounted investments.
The assets and liabilities of overseas subsidiaries and equity accounted investments are translated at the exchange rates ruling at the balance sheet date.
The income statements of such entities are translated at average rates of exchange during the year.
All resulting exchange differences are recognised directly in a separate component of equity.
Translation differences that arose before the transition date to IFRS 1 January 2004 are presented in equity but not as a separate component.
When a foreign operation is sold the cumulative exchange differences recognised in equity since 1 January 2004 are recognised in the income statement as part of the profit or loss on sale.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Financial statements 2017 2016 Notes m
Total
Continuing operations Sales 1 19626 19020 Deduct Share of sales by equity accounted investments 1 2575 2427 Add Sales to equity accounted investments 1 1271 1197 Revenue 1 18322 17790 Operating costs 2 17089 16274 Other income 4 131 136 Group operating profit 1364 1652 Share of results of equity accounted investments 1 116 90 Underlying EBITA 1 2034 1905 Nonrecurring items 1 13 12 EBITA 2021 1893 Amortisation of intangible assets 1 86 87 Impairment of intangible assets 1 384 Financial expense of equity accounted investments 5 34 28 Taxation expense of equity accounted investments 6 37 36 Operating profit 1 1480 1742 Financial income 416 713 Financial expense 762 1304 Net finance costs 5 346 591 Profit before taxation 1134 1151 Taxation expense 6 250 213 Profit for the year 884 938 Attributable to Equity shareholders 854 913 Noncontrolling interests Earnings per share 7 Basic earnings per share 26.8p 28.8p Diluted earnings per share 26.7p 28.7p BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Consolidated income statement for the year ended 31 December 2017 2016
Other
Retained earnings
Other
Retained earnings
Profit for the year  884 884  938 938 Other comprehensive income Items that will not be reclassified to the income statement
Remeasurements on retirement benefit schemes  2105 2105  1468 1468 Tax on items that will not be reclassified to the income statement 6  490 490  260 260 Equity accounted investments net of tax  53 53  53 53 Items that may be reclassified to the income statement
Currency translation on foreign currency net investments 625  625 1287  1287 Amounts credited to hedging reserve 59  59 96  96 Tax on items that may be reclassified to the income statement 6 11  11 17  17 Equity accounted investments net of tax 15  15 45  45 Total other comprehensive income for the year net of tax 592 1668 1076 1411 1261 150 Total comprehensive income for the year 592 2552 1960 1411 323 1088 Attributable to Equity shareholders 587 2522 1935 1408 348 1060 Noncontrolling interests 5 592 2552 1960 1411 323 1088 An analysis of other reserves is provided in note 23.
Consolidated statement of changes in equity for the year ended 31 December Attributable to equity holders of BAE Systems plc
Share premium
Retained earnings
Non controlling interests
At 1 January 2017 87 1249 6685 4583 3438 26 3464 Profit for the year    Total other comprehensive income for the year   587 1668 1081 5 1076 Sharebased payments inclusive of tax    53 53  53 Net purchase of own shares    1 1  1 Ordinary share dividends    684 684 8 692 At 31 December 2017 87 1249 6098 2693 4741 43 4784 At 1 January 2016 87 1249 5277 3624 2989 13 3002 Profit for the year    Total other comprehensive income for the year   1408 1261 147 3 150 Sharebased payments inclusive of tax    59 59  59 Net sale of own shares    3 3  3 Ordinary share dividends    670 670 24 694 Partial disposal of shareholding in subsidiary undertaking    3 3 9 6 At 31 December 2016 87 1249 6685 4583 3438 26 3464 An analysis of other reserves is provided in note 23.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Consolidated statement of comprehensive income for the year ended 31 December Notes Noncurrent assets Intangible assets 8 10378 11264 Property plant and equipment 9 2230 2098 Investment property 10 101 110 Equity accounted investments 11 384 299 Other investments 6 6 Other receivables 12 387 351 Retirement benefit surpluses 21 302 223 Other financial assets 13 226 345 Deferred tax assets 14 724 1251 14738 15947 Current assets Inventories 15 723 744 Trade and other receivables including amounts due from customers for contract work 12 3586 3305 Current tax 16 20 5 Other financial assets 13 89 204 Cash and cash equivalents 17 3271 2769 Assets held for sale 26 2 7715 7029 Total assets 18 22453 22976 Noncurrent liabilities Loans 19 4069 4425 Other payables 20 1722 1027 Retirement benefit obligations 21 4222 6277 Other financial liabilities 13 133 102 Deferred tax liabilities 14 4 10 Provisions 22 413 372 10563 12213 Current liabilities Loans and overdrafts 19 14 Trade and other payables 20 6322 6540 Other financial liabilities 13 104 212 Current tax 16 305 311 Provisions 22 345 234 Liabilities held for sale 16 2 7106 7299 Total liabilities 17669 19512 Net assets 4784 3464 Capital and reserves Issued share capital 23 87 87 Share premium 1249 1249 Other reserves 23 6098 6685 Retained earnings  deficit 2693 4583 Total equity attributable to equity holders of BAE Systems plc 4741 3438 Noncontrolling interests 43 26 Total equity 4784 3464 Approved by the Board on 21 February 2018 and signed on its behalf by C N Woodburn P J Lynas Chief Executive Group Finance Director BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Consolidated balance sheet as at 31 December Notes Profit for the year 884 938 Taxation expense 6 250 213 Research and development expenditure credits 4 20 22 Share of results of equity accounted investments 1 116 90 Net finance costs 5 346 591 Depreciation amortisation and impairment 2 728 345 Profit on disposal of property plant and equipment 24 1 5 Profit on disposal of investment property 24 9 12 Loss on disposal of businesses 2 13 Cost of equitysettled employee share schemes 61 55 Movements in provisions 150 122 Decrease in liabilities for retirement benefit obligations 138 214 Increasedecrease in working capital Inventories 29 95 Trade and other receivables 449 93 Trade and other payables 454 263 Taxation paid 227 187 Net cash flow from operating activities 1897 1229 Dividends received from equity accounted investments 11 72 38 Interest received Purchase of property plant and equipment and investment property 389 408 Purchase of intangible assets 87 82 Proceeds from sale of property plant and equipment and investment property 34 45 Proceeds from sale of intangible assets 1 Purchase of subsidiary undertakings 3 Equity accounted investment funding 11 3 5 Cash flow from sale of subsidiary undertakings 6 6 Cash and cash equivalents disposed of with subsidiary undertakings 2 Net cash flow from investing activities 360 396 Interest paid Net purchasesale of own shares 1 3 Equity dividends paid 23 684 670 Dividends paid to noncontrolling interests 8 24 Cash flow from matured derivative financial instruments 83 480 Cash flow from movement in cash collateral 15 32 Cash flow from repayment of loans  286 Net cash flow from financing activities 25 995 675 Net increase in cash and cash equivalents 542 158 Cash and cash equivalents at 1 January 2771 2537 Effect of foreign exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents 49 76 Cash and cash equivalents at 31 December 3264 2771
Cash and cash equivalents 17 3271 2769 Overdrafts 19 7 Cash classified as held for sale  2 Cash and cash equivalents at 31 December 3264 2771 Represented to reclassify interest paid from investing to financing activities.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Consolidated cash flow statement for the year ended 31 December 1.
Segmental analysis Revenue and profit recognition Revenue represents income derived from the provision of goods and services by the Company and its subsidiary undertakings.
Longterm contracts The majority of the Groups longterm contract arrangements are accounted for under IAS 11 Construction Contracts.
Revenue is recognised when the Group has obtained the right to consideration in exchange for its performance which is when a separately identifiable phase milestone of a contract or development has been completed.
Profit is calculated by reference to reliable estimates of contract revenue and forecast costs after making suitable allowances for technical and other risks related to performance milestones yet to be achieved.
No profit is recognised until the outcome of a contract can be reliably estimated.
Profit is recognised progressively as risks have been mitigated or retired.
When it is probable that total contract costs will exceed total contract revenue the expected loss is recognised immediately as an expense.
Goods sold and services rendered Revenue is measured at the fair value of the consideration received or receivable net of returns rebates and other similar allowances.
Revenue from the sale of goods not under longterm contract is recognised in the income statement when the significant risks and rewards of ownership have been transferred to the buyer recovery of the consideration is probable there is no continuing management involvement with the goods and the amount of revenue and costs can be measured reliably.
Profit is recognised at the time of sale.
Revenue from the provision of services not under longterm contract is recognised in the income statement in proportion to the stage of completion of the contract at the reporting date.
The stage of completion is measured on the basis of direct expenses incurred as a percentage of total expenses to be incurred for material contracts and labour hours delivered as a percentage of total labour hours to be delivered for time contracts.
Revenue from the sale of software licences is recognised on delivery to the customer when the Group has no remaining obligations to perform and collection of the consideration is considered probable.
In circumstances where the Group has future obligations to perform as part of a software licence and related services contract revenue is recognised over the contract term.
Revenue and profits on intercompany trading are determined on an armslength basis.
Research and development The Group undertakes research and development activities either on its own behalf or on behalf of customers.
Where the research and development activity is performed on behalf of customers the revenue arising is recognised in the income statement in accordance with the Groups revenue recognition policy on longterm contracts.
Reporting segments During the year ended 31 December 2017 the Group had the following six reporting segments Electronic Systems comprises the US and UKbased electronics activities including electronic warfare systems electrooptical sensors military and commercial digital engine and flight controls nextgeneration military communications systems and data links persistent surveillance capabilities and hybrid electric drive systems Cyber and Intelligence comprises the USbased Intelligence and Security business and UKheadquartered Applied Intelligence business and covers the Groups cyber security secure government and commercial and financial security activities Platforms and Services US with operations in the US UK and Sweden manufactures combat vehicles weapons and munitions and delivers services and sustainment activities including ship repair and the management of governmentowned munitions facilities Platforms and Services UK comprises the Groups UKbased air maritime land and shared services activities Platforms and Services International comprises the Groups businesses in Saudi Arabia Australia and Oman together with its 37.5% interest in the panEuropean MBDA joint venture and HQ comprises the Groups head office activities together with a 49% interest in Air Astana.
Effective 1 January 2018 the Group revised its reporting segments to reflect the organisational changes described on page 17.
The Group continues to have six reporting segments and there were no changes to the Electronic Systems Cyber and Intelligence and Platforms and Services US reporting segments.
The Platforms and Services UK and Platforms and Services International management structures have been removed with the organisation streamlined and Air and Maritime reporting segments created.
Air comprises the Groups UKbased air activities for European and International markets and UKbased US Programmes and its businesses in Saudi Arabia and Australia together with its 37.5% interest in the panEuropean MBDA joint venture.
Maritime comprises the Groups UKbased maritime and land activities.
The HQ reporting segment includes the Groups UKbased head office and shared services activities as well as a 49% interest in Air Astana.
These reporting segments align with the Groups strategic direction determined with reference to the products and services they provide and the markets in which they operate.
The Board the chief operating decision maker as defined by IFRS 8 Operating Segments monitors the results of these reporting segments to assess performance and make decisions about the allocation of resources.
Segmental performance is evaluated based on Key Performance Indicators  sales see page 149 and underlying EBITA see page 150.
Finance costs and taxation expense are managed on a Group basis.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Notes to the Group accounts 1.
Segmental analysis continued Key Performance Indicator  Sales Definition Revenue plus the Groups share of revenue of equity accounted investments.
Purpose Allows management to monitor the sales performance of subsidiaries and equity accounted investments.
Sales and revenue by reporting segment
Deduct
Share of sales by equity accounted investments
Sales to equity accounted investments Revenue Electronic Systems 3635 3282 95 79 95 79 3635 3282 Cyber and Intelligence 1820 1778     1820 1778 Platforms and Services US 2928 2874 103 91   2825 2783 Platforms and Services UK 7682 7806 1088 1118 1030 1011 7624 7699 Platforms and Services International 4138 3943 1002 906   3136 3037 20490 19916 2575 2427 1125 1090 19040 18579 Intragroup salesrevenue 864 896   146 107 718 789 19626 19020 2575 2427 1271 1197 18322 17790 Intragroup revenue Revenue from external customers Electronic Systems 73 92 3562 3190 Cyber and Intelligence 88 58 1732 1720 Platforms and Services US 23 43 2802 2740 Platforms and Services UK 529 592 7095 7107 Platforms and Services International 5 4 3131 3033 718 789 18322 17790 Sales and revenue by customer location Sales Revenue UK 4057 4033 3825 3869 Rest of Europe 2073 2174 1457 1645 US 7698 6920 7695 6920 Canada Saudi Arabia 3228 4043 3107 3808 Rest of Middle East 1235 720 1149 693 Australia 62telRest of Asia and Pacific 50telAfrica and Central and South America 626 19020 18322 17790 Includes 0.9bn 2016 1.0bn generated under the Typhoon workshare agreement with Eurofighter Jagdflugzeug GmbH.
Revenue by category Longterm contracts 11910 11659 Sale of goods 3547 3223 Provision of services 2854 2903 Royalty income 11 5 18322 17790 BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Notes to the Group accounts continued Segmental analysis continued Revenue by major customer Revenue from the Groups three principal customers which individually represent over 10% of total revenue is as follows US Department of Defense 4558 4319 UK Ministry of Defence 4348 4402 Kingdom of Saudi Arabia Ministry of Defence and Aviation 2967 3726 Includes 0.9bn 2016 1.0bn generated under the Typhoon workshare agreement with Eurofighter Jagdflugzeug GmbH.
Revenue from the UK Ministry of Defence and the US Department of Defense was generated by the five principal reporting segments.
Revenue from the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia Ministry of Defence and Aviation was generated by the Platforms and Services UK and Platforms and Services International reporting segments.
Key Performance Indicator  Underlying EBITA Definition Operating profit excluding amortisation and impairment of intangible assets finance costs and taxation expense of equity accounted investments EBITA and nonrecurring items.
Purpose Provides a measure of operating profitability that is comparable over time.
Amortisation and impairment of intangible assets are excluded because they are not related to the inyear operational performance of the business being driven by the timing and amount of investment in acquired businesses and software.
Finance costs and taxation expense of equity accounted investments are excluded for consistency with preinterest pretax business performance.
Nonrecurring items are not relevant to an understanding of the Groups underlying performance and include The loss of 13m represents the loss on disposal of the BAE Systems San Francisco Ship Repair business.
The loss of 12m represented an impairment against the carrying value of the BAE Systems San Francisco Ship Repair business.
Operating profitloss by reporting segment Underlying EBITA
Financial and taxation expense of equity accounted investments Nonrecurring items
Electronic Systems 562 494 20 20     542 474 Cyber and Intelligence 52 90 419 31     367 59 Platforms and Services US 242 211 9 15 2 2 13 12 218 182 Platforms and Services UK 794 810 16 15 4 15   774 780 Platforms and Services International 472 400 6 6 39 29   427 365 2034 1905 470 87 71 64 13 12 1480 1742 Net finance costs 346 591 Profit before taxation 1134 1151 Taxation expense 250 213 Profit for the year 884 938 Share of results of equity accounted investments within reporting segments Underlying EBITA
Financial expense
Share of results of equity accounted investments Electronic Systems 6 5       6 5 Platforms and Services US 13 12   3 2 1  11 10 Platforms and Services UK 14 15   2 5 2 10 10 Platforms and Services International 133 107 4 4 7 6 32 23 90 74 BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 2.
Operating costs
Lease payments made under operating leases including any incentives granted are recognised in the income statement on a straightline basis over the lease term.
Research and development The Group undertakes research and development activities either on its own behalf or on behalf of customers.
Groupfunded expenditure on research and on development activities not meeting the conditions for capitalisation is written off as incurred and charged to the income statement.
Customerfunded expenditure on research and development activities is held in longterm contract balances as a contract cost within trade and other receivables and recognised in the income statement in accordance with the Groups revenue recognition policy on longterm contracts.
Raw materials subcontracts and other boughtin items used 6414 5742 Change in inventories of finished goods and workinprogress 656 1415 Cost of inventories expensed 7070 7157 Staff costs note 3 5830 5440 Depreciation amortisation and impairment 728 345 Lease expense 295 284 Loss on disposal of property plant and equipment and investment property 1 2 Loss on disposal of businesses 13 Other operating charges 3152 3046 Operating costs 17089 16274 Operating costs include research and development expenditure of 1576m 2016 1416m of which 238m 2016 206m was funded by the Group.
In addition the Groups share of the research and development expenditure of its equity accounted investments was 131m 2016 99m.
Fees payable to the Companys auditor and its associates included in operating costs 2017 2016
Overseas
Total
UK
Overseas
Total
Fees payable to the Companys auditor for the audit of the Companys annual accounts 2034  2034 1776  1776 Fees payable to the Companys auditor and its associates for other services pursuant to legislation The audit of the Companys subsidiaries 2809 4471 7280 2663 4143 6806 Interim review 506  506 497  497 Other Auditrelated assurance services Advice on accounting matters Tax compliance services Tax advisory services Other assurance services Nonstatutory financial statements audit     7 7 Other nonaudit services Investor relations Other Total fees payable to the Companys auditor and its associates 5967 4774 10741 5357 4882 10239 Total fees payable to the Companys auditor and its associates for audit services and interim review 9820 9079 Fees in respect of BAE Systems pension schemes Tax compliance  5 5  2 2 Tax advisory    23  23 2017 includes advice in respect of IFRS 15.
With effect from 1 January 2017 certain tax services and investor information services are no longer provided by KPMG in order to ensure compliance with the Financial Reporting Councils revised regulations on ethical standards for auditors and EU regulations adopted by the UK which apply prohibitions to a range of engagements that could result in an auditor facing a conflict of interest.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Notes to the Group accounts continued
The weekly average and yearend numbers of employees excluding those in equity accounted investments were as follows Weekly average At year end
Number
Number
Number
Electronic Systems Cyber and Intelligence Platforms and Services US Platforms and Services UK Platforms and Services International HQ The aggregate staff costs of Group employees excluding employees of equity accounted investments were as follows Wages and salaries 4972 4672 Social security costs Sharebased payments note 29 61 55 Pension costs  defined contribution plans note 21 Pension costs  defined benefit plans note 21 242 183 US healthcare costs note 21 2 2 5830 5440 After excluding the impact of exchange translation wages and salaries increased by 3% per employee on 2016.
2016 reclassified.
Other income
Lease income under operating leases is recognised in the income statement on a straightline basis over the lease term.
Research and development expenditure credits 20 22 Rental income from operating leases  investment property 23 24 Rental income from operating leases  other 16 18 Profit on disposal of property plant and equipment 2 7 Profit on disposal of investment property 9 12 Management recharges to equity accounted investments note 30 16 16 Royalties 9 8
Other income 131 136 Includes 11m 2016 10m in respect of management fees relating to the building works at the Barrow site for the Dreadnought submarine programme.
There are no other individual amounts in excess of 10m.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 5.
Net finance costs Interest income and borrowing costs Interest income and borrowing costs are recognised in the income statement in the period in which they are incurred.
Interest income 24 10 Gain on remeasurement of financial instruments at fair value through profit or loss Foreign exchange gains Financial income 416 713 Interest expense on bonds and other financial instruments 202 208 Facility fees 4 4 Net present value adjustments 44 43 Net interest expense on retirement benefit obligations note 21 165 169 Loss on remeasurement of financial instruments at fair value through profit or loss Foreign exchange losses Financial expense 762 1304 Net finance costs 346 591 Comprises gains and losses on derivative financial instruments including derivative instruments to manage the Groups exposure to interest rate fluctuations on external borrowings and exchange rate fluctuations on balances with the Groups subsidiaries and equity accounted investments.
The decrease in the gain on remeasurement of financial instruments primarily reflects exchange rate movements on derivatives relating to US dollardenominated borrowings 2017 19m 2016 446m.
Loss on remeasurement of financial instruments includes 299m 2016 23m in respect of these exchange rate movements.
The foreign exchange gains primarily reflect exchange rate movements on US dollardenominated borrowings 319m.
The foreign exchange losses in 2016 in respect of these exchange rate movements were 592m.
Additional analysis Net finance costs Group 346 591 Share of equity accounted investments 34 28 Analysed as Underlying net interest expense Group 226 245 Share of equity accounted investments 19 12
Group
Net interest expense on retirement benefit obligations 165 169 Fair value and foreign exchange adjustments on financial instruments and investments Share of equity accounted investments Net interest expense on retirement benefit obligations 8 8 Fair value and foreign exchange adjustments on financial instruments and investments 7 8 The net gainloss primarily reflects foreign exchange translational gainslosses on US dollardenominated bonds held by BAE Systems plc.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Notes to the Group accounts continued Taxation expense Income tax expense comprises current and deferred tax.
Current and deferred tax is recognised in profit or loss except to the extent that it relates to a business combination or items recognised directly in equity or other comprehensive income.
Current tax Current tax is the expected tax payable or receivable on the taxable profit or loss for the year using tax rates enacted or substantively enacted at the reporting date and any adjustment to tax payable in respect of previous years.
Deferred tax Deferred tax is recognised in respect of temporary differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and the amounts used for taxation purposes.
Deferred tax is not recognised for temporary differences on the initial recognition of assets or liabilities in a transaction that is not a business combination and that affects neither accounting nor taxable profit or loss related to investments in subsidiaries and equity accounted investments to the extent that it is probable that they will not reverse in the foreseeable future and arising on the initial recognition of goodwill.
Deferred tax is measured at the tax rates that are expected to be applied to temporary differences when they reverse based on the laws that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the reporting date.
Taxation expense Current taxation
Current tax 132 74 Adjustments in respect of prior years 21 29
Current year 160 164 Adjustments in respect of prior years 40 5 Total current taxation 273 214 Deferred taxation
Origination and reversal of temporary differences 48 14 Adjustments in respect of prior years 3 4 Tax rate adjustment 1
Origination and reversal of temporary differences 54 28 Adjustments in respect of prior years 13 13 Tax rate adjustment Total deferred taxation 23 1 Taxation expense 250 213 Overseas 147 186 Taxation expense 250 213 The US federal tax rate has been reduced from 35% to 21% with effect from 1 January 2018 while the estimated state tax rate has increased from 5% to 6%.
In line with this change the rate applying to US deferred tax assets and liabilities at 31 December 2017 has been reduced from 40% to 27% creating a rate adjustment in 2017 which is partly reflected in the Consolidated income statement and partly in the Consolidated statement of comprehensive income.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 6.
Taxation expense continued Reconciliation of taxation expense The following table reconciles the theoretical income tax expense using the UK corporation tax rate to the reported tax expense.
The reconciling items represent besides the impact of tax rate differentials and changes nontaxable benefits or nondeductible expenses arising from differences between the local tax base and the reported financial statements.
Profit before taxation 1134 1151 UK corporation tax rate 19.25% 20.0% Expected income tax expense 218 230 Effect of tax rates in foreign jurisdictions including US state taxes 101 81 Effect of intragroup financing 15 15 Expenses not tax effected 8 15 Income not subject to tax 46 37 Research and development tax credits and patent box benefits 18 12 Nondeductible goodwill impairment 74 Chargeable gains 2 3 Utilisation of previously unrecognised tax losses 3 3 Adjustments in respect of prior years 9 41 Adjustments in respect of equity accounted investments 22 18 Tax rate adjustment Other 1 8 Taxation expense 250 213 2017 includes a 40m credit in respect of US tax reform enacted in December 2017.
Calculation of the underlying effective tax rate Profit before taxation 1134 1151 Add back Taxation expense of equity accounted investments note 1 37 36 Goodwill impairment note 8 384 Adjusted profit before taxation 1555 1187 Taxation expense 250 213 Taxation expense of equity accounted investments note 1 37 36 Exclude Impact of US tax reform enacted in December 2017 40 Adjusted taxation expense including equity accounted investments 327 249 Underlying effective tax rate 21% 21% BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Notes to the Group accounts continued Taxation expense continued Tax recognised in other comprehensive income 2017 2016
Tax expense benefit Net of tax
Tax benefit expense Net of tax Items that will not be reclassified to the income statement
Remeasurements on retirement benefit schemes 2105 407 1698 1468 246 1222 Tax rate adjustment Equity accounted investments 66 13 53 66 13 53 Items that may be reclassified to the income statement
Currency translation on foreign currency net investments 625  625 1287  1287 Amounts creditedcharged to hedging reserve 59 11 48 96 17 79 Equity accounted investments 14 1 15 43 2 45 1591 515 1076 108 258 150 2017 comprises 67m in relation to the US and 16m in relation to the UK.
2017 2016
Retained earnings
Other
Retained earnings
Current tax
Remeasurements on retirement benefit schemes  23 23  27 27 Deferred tax
Remeasurements on retirement benefit schemes  430 430  219 219 Tax rate adjustment Amounts charged to hedging reserve 11  11 17  17 Equity accounted investments 1 13 14 2 13 15 Tax on other comprehensive income 12 503 515 15 273 258 2017 comprises 67m in relation to the US and 16m in relation to the UK.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 7.
Earnings per share Key Performance Indicator  Underlying earnings per share Definition Basic earnings per share excluding amortisation and impairment of intangible assets noncash finance movements on pensions and financial derivatives nonrecurring items and in 2017 the impact of US tax reform enacted in December 2017.
Purpose Provides a measure of underlying performance that is comparable over time.
Amortisation and impairment of intangible assets are excluded because they are not related to the inyear operational performance of the business being driven by the timing and quantum of investment in acquired businesses and software.
Noncash finance movements on pensions are excluded because they are driven by external factors such as corporate bond yields and inflation.
Noncash finance movements on financial derivatives are excluded because they are driven by external factors such as foreign exchange rates and interest rates.
Nonrecurring items are not relevant to an understanding of the Groups underlying performance.
The impact of US tax reform enacted in December 2017 has been excluded because it does not reflect the Groups inyear underlying tax rate.
2017 2016
Diluted pence per share m
Diluted pence per share Profit for the year attributable to equity shareholders 854 26.8 26.7 913 28.8 28.7 Add backdeduct Amortisation and impairment of intangible assets post tax Impairment of goodwill 384 Noncash movements being net interest expense on retirement benefit obligations post tax Noncash movements being fair value and foreign exchange adjustments on financial instruments and investments post tax Nonrecurring items post tax Impact of US tax reform enacted in December 2017 40 Underlying earnings post tax 1383 43.5 43.3 1277 40.3 40.1 Millions Millions Millions Millions Weighted average number of shares used in calculating basic earnings per share 3182 3182 3171 3171 Incremental shares in respect of employee share schemes 15 14 Weighted average number of shares used in calculating diluted earnings per share 3197 3185 The tax impact is calculated using the underlying effective tax rate of 21% 2016 21%.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Notes to the Group accounts continued Intangible assets Intangible assets are carried at cost or valuation less accumulated amortisation and impairment losses.
Cost or valuation
Under the acquisition method for business combinations goodwill is the acquisitiondate fair value of the consideration transferred less the net of the acquisitiondate fair values of the identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed.
Goodwill on acquisitions of subsidiaries is included in intangible assets.
Goodwill on acquisitions of joint ventures and associates is included in the carrying value of equity accounted investments.
Gains and losses on the disposal of an entity include the carrying amount of goodwill relating to the entity sold.
Software
Software includes Computer software licences acquired for use within the Group are capitalised as an intangible asset on the basis of the costs incurred to acquire and bring to use the specific software and Software development costs that are directly associated with the production of identifiable and unique software products controlled by the Group and that will probably generate economic benefits exceeding costs beyond one year are recognised as intangible assets.
Groupfunded expenditure associated with enhancing or maintaining computer software programs for sale is recognised as an expense as incurred.
Development costs Development costs funded by the Group on activities applied to a plan or design for the production of new or substantially improved products are capitalised as an internally generated intangible asset if certain conditions are met.
The costs capitalised include materials direct labour and related overheads.
Programme and customerrelated Intangible assets recognised by the Group include those relating to ongoing programmes within businesses acquired mainly in respect of customer relationships and order backlog.
Other
Other intangible assets includes patents trademarks and licences.
Amortisation
Goodwill is not amortised.
Amortisation on intangible assets excluding goodwill is charged to the income statement on a straightline basis over their estimated useful lives.
For programmerelated intangibles amortisation is set on a programmebyprogramme basis over the life of the individual programme.
Amortisation for customerrelated intangibles is also set on an individual basis.
The estimated useful lives are as follows Software 2 to 5 years Development costs up to 10 years Programme and customerrelated up to 15 years Other up to 20 years The Group has no indefinitelife intangible assets other than goodwill.
Impairment of intangible assets property plant and equipment investment property and equity accounted investments The carrying amounts of the Groups intangible assets excluding goodwill property plant and equipment investment property and equity accounted investments are reviewed at each balance sheet date to determine whether there is any indication of impairment as required by IAS 36 Impairment of Assets.
If any such indication exists the assets recoverable amount is estimated.
For goodwill and intangible assets that are not yet available for use impairment testing is performed annually.
An impairment loss is recognised whenever the carrying amount of an asset or its CashGenerating Unit exceeds its recoverable amount.
The recoverable amount is the greater of fair value less costs to sell and value in use.
In assessing value in use the estimated future cash flows are discounted to their present value using an appropriate pretax discount rate.
For an asset that does not generate largely independent cash flows the recoverable amount is determined for the CashGenerating Unit to which the asset belongs.
Impairment losses are recognised in the income statement.
An impairment loss in respect of goodwill is not reversed.
An impairment loss in respect of other intangible assets property plant and equipment investment property and equity accounted investments is reversed if the subsequent increase in recoverable amount can be related objectively to an event occurring after the impairment loss was recognised or if there has been a change in the estimate used to determine the recoverable amount.
An impairment loss is reversed only to the extent that the assets carrying amount does not exceed the carrying amount that would have been determined net of depreciation or amortisation if no impairment loss had been recognised.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 8.
Intangible assets continued
Software
Development costs
Other
Total
Cost or valuation At 1 January 2016 1404tel83 15212
Acquired separately Internally developed
Reclassification from held for sale     3 3 Transfer from property plant and equipment  57    57 Foreign exchange adjustments 1 1496 At 31 December 2016 1540tel99 16705
Acquired separately  42    42 Internally developed  45    45 Business acquisitions 3     3
Reclassification as held for sale     4 4 Transfer from property plant and equipment  33   8 41 Foreign exchange adjustments 684 18 11 20 4 737 At 31 December 2017 14 15813 Amortisation and impairment At 1 January 2016 4 5095
Disposals
Reclassification from held for sale     3 3 Foreign exchange adjustments At 31 December 2016 4 5441
Impairment charge 384     384
Reclassification as held for sale     4 4 Transfer from property plant and equipment  7    7 Foreign exchange adjustments 159 13 5 17 3 197 At 31 December 2017 4 5435 Net book value At 31 December 2017 9 10378 At 31 December 2016 10 11264 At 1 January 2016 9 10117 Represented to separate software and development costs from other intangible assets.
Represented to separate internally developed software intangible asset additions from those acquired separately.
Includes intangible assets with nil net book value no longer used by the Group.
Amortisation of 85m includes 82m charged to the income statement as an amortisation expense and 3m recoverable on customer contracts.
Impairment testing The recoverable amount of the Groups goodwill is based on value in use estimated using riskadjusted future cash flow projections from the fiveyear Integrated Business Plan IBP and a terminal value based on the projections for the final year of that plan with growth rate assumptions in the range 0% to 2% applied.
The IBP process includes the use of historical experience available government spending data and the Groups order backlog.
Pretax discount rates derived from the Groups posttax weighted average cost of capital of 6.60% 2016 7.01% adjusted for risks specific to the market in which the CashGenerating Unit CGU operates have been used in discounting these projected riskadjusted cash flows.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Notes to the Group accounts continued Intangible assets continued Significant CGUs Goodwill allocated to CGUs which are largely dependent on US government spending on defence aerospace and security represents 7.9bn 2016 8.4bn of the Groups total goodwill balance.
The Group monitors changes in defence budgets on an ongoing basis.
Allocated goodwill Pretax discount rate CashGenerating Unit Key assumptions bn bn % % Electronic Systems Continued demand from the US government for electronic warfare systems where the business has a leadership position other technologybased solutions and growth in the commercial avionics market Intelligence and Security within Cyber and Intelligence Continued demand in the US for the Groups services in the areas of homeland security law enforcement and counterintelligence Platforms and Services US Continued demand in the Groups principal markets for existing and successor military tracked vehicles naval guns missile launchers artillery systems munitions upgrade programmes and support and in the US for complex infrastructure maritime and aviation services The headroom calculated as the difference between net assets including allocated goodwill as at 31 December 2017 and the valueinuse calculations for the CGUs listed above is shown below.
The table also shows the headroom assuming a 1% reduction in the terminal value growth rate assumption and a 1% increase in the discount rate used in the valueinuse calculations.
Headroom as at 31 December Headroom assuming a 1% reduction in the terminal value growth rate assumption Headroom assuming a 1% increase in the discount rate CashGenerating Unit bn bn bn bn bn bn Electronic Systems 5.7 3.5 4.0 2.2 3.7 2.0 Intelligence and Security 0.6 0.3 0.4 0.2 0.4 0.1 Platforms and Services US 3.5 1.6 2.2 0.7 2.0 0.5 Other CGUs The remaining goodwill balance of 2.1bn 2016 2.5bn is allocated across multiple CGUs including 0.2bn 2016 0.6bn in the Applied Intelligence CGU with no individual CGU exceeding 10% of the Groups total goodwill balance.
The majority of the projected cash flows within these CGUs are underpinned by expected levels of primarily UK government spending on defence aerospace and security and the Groups ability to capture a broadly consistent market share.
In the case of Applied Intelligence the future cash flow projections are based on the expectation of growth in cyber and intelligence in the UK and overseas government markets together with increasing demand for products and services in commercial markets.
Impairment
In 2017 the impairment charge of 384m reflects lower growth assumptions in the Applied Intelligence CGU.
The recoverable amount of the Applied Intelligence CGU is based on value in use calculated using a pretax discount rate of 16% 2016 11%.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 9.
Property plant and equipment
Items of property plant and equipment are stated at cost less accumulated depreciation and impairment losses.
The cost of selfconstructed assets includes the cost of materials direct labour and an appropriate proportion of production overheads.
The cost of demonstration assets is written off as incurred.
The reimbursement of the cost of an item of property plant and equipment by a customer is presented as deferred income and recognised in the income statement on a basis consistent with the depreciation of the asset over its estimated useful life.
Assets held for leasing out under operating leases are included in property plant and equipment at cost less accumulated depreciation and impairment losses.
Depreciation
Depreciation is provided normally on a straightline basis to write off the cost of items of property plant and equipment over their estimated useful lives to any estimated residual value using the following rates Buildings up to 50 years or the lease term if shorter Plant and machinery Computing equipment and motor vehicles 4 to 5 years Other equipment 10 to 20 years or the project life if shorter For certain items of plant and equipment in the Groups US businesses depreciation is normally provided on a basis consistent with cost reimbursement profiles under US government contracts.
Typically this provides for a faster rate of depreciation than would otherwise arise on a straightline basis.
No depreciation is provided on freehold land and assets in the course of construction.
The assets residual values useful lives and depreciation methods are reviewed and adjusted if appropriate at each balance sheet date.
Impairment
The carrying amounts of the Groups property plant and equipment are reviewed at each balance sheet date to determine whether there is any indication of impairment in accordance with the policy shown in note 8.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Notes to the Group accounts continued Property plant and equipment continued Land and buildings Plant and machinery
Cost
At 1 January 2016 1770 2806 4576
Transfer to investment properties 9  9 Transfer to other intangible assets  57 57 Reclassification between categories 28 28 Disposals 22 72 94 Foreign exchange adjustments 194 256 450 At 31 December 2016 2176 3229 5405
Transfer to other intangible assets 2 39 41 Reclassification between categories 42 42 Disposals 41 144 185 Foreign exchange adjustments 97 146 243 At 31 December 2017 2212 3232 5444 Depreciation and impairment At 1 January 2016 1005 1873 2878 Depreciation charge for the year 73 178 251 Impairment charge for the year 8 1 9 Reclassification as held for sale 20 2 22 Transfer to investment properties 9  9 Disposals 13 70 83 Foreign exchange adjustments 104 179 283 At 31 December 2016 1148 2159 3307 Depreciation charge for the year 66 194 260 Impairment charge for the year  1 1 Impairment write back 4  4 Reclassification as held for sale  11 11 Transfer to other intangible assets  7 7 Reclassification between categories 33 33 Disposals 39 139 178 Foreign exchange adjustments 55 99 154 At 31 December 2017 1083 2131 3214 Net book value At 31 December 2017 1129 1101 2230 At 31 December 2016 1028 1070 2098 At 1 January tel1698 Includes 109m 2016 143m of land and buildings and 42m 2016 25m of plant and machinery at BarrowinFurness UK relating to the Dreadnought submarine programme funded by the UK government.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 9.
Property plant and equipment continued Net book value Land and buildings Plant and machinery
Freehold property 963  963 Long leasehold property 31  31 Short leasehold property 135  135 Plant and machinery  1024 1024 Fixtures fittings and equipment  77 77 At 31 December 2017 1129 1101 2230 Net impairment Electronic Systems 4 Platforms and Services US  9 Platforms and Services International 1 The impairment write back in Electronic Systems relates to the carrying value of a property in New Jersey US.
The impairment charge in Platforms and Services US represented a charge against the carrying value of the BAE Systems San Francisco Ship Repair business.
Assets in the course of construction Land and buildings Plant and machinery
At 31 December tel555 At 31 December tel598 Includes 178m 2016 161m at BarrowinFurness UK relating to the Dreadnought submarine programme funded by the UK government.
2016 included 78m in respect of a new dry dock in San Diego US which became operational in February 2017.
Operating leases The future aggregate minimum lease income from the noncancellable elements of operating leases for assets capitalised including investment property  see note 10 are as follows Receipts due Not later than one year 24 25 Later than one year and not later than five years 95 90 Later than five years Under the terms of the lease agreements no contingent rents are receivable.
The leases have varying terms including escalation clauses and renewal rights.
None of these terms represent unusual arrangements or create material onerous or beneficial rights or obligations.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Notes to the Group accounts continued Investment property
Land and buildings that are leased to nonGroup entities are classified as investment property.
The Group measures investment property at its cost less accumulated depreciation and impairment losses.
Depreciation
Depreciation is provided on a straightline basis to write off the cost of investment property over its estimated useful life of up to 50 years.
The assets residual values and useful lives are reviewed and adjusted if appropriate at each balance sheet date.
Impairment
The carrying amounts of the Groups investment property are reviewed at each balance sheet date to determine whether there is any indication of impairment in accordance with the policy shown in note 8.
Cost
At 1 January 2016 176 Additions 9 Transfer from property plant and equipment 9 Disposals 24 At 31 December 2016 170 Additions 15 Disposals 24 At 31 December 2017 161 Depreciation and impairment At 1 January 2016 56 Depreciation charge for the year 2 Transfer from property plant and equipment 9 Disposals 7 At 31 December 2016 60 Depreciation charge for the year 3 Impairment charge 2 Disposals 5 At 31 December 2017 60 Net book value At 31 December 2017 101 At 31 December 2016 110 At 1 January 2016 120 Fair value At 31 December 2017 173 At 31 December 2016 167 The fair values above are based on and reflect current market values as prepared by inhouse professionals who have the appropriate professional qualifications and recent experience of valuing properties in the location and of the type being valued.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 11.
Equity accounted investments A joint venture is a joint arrangement whereby the parties that have joint control have rights to the net assets of the arrangement.
Carrying value The carrying value of an equity accounted investment comprises the Groups share of net assets and purchased goodwill and is assessed for impairment as a single asset.
The carrying amounts of the Groups equity accounted investments are reviewed at each balance sheet date to determine whether there is any indication of impairment in accordance with the policy shown in note 8.
Principal equity accounted investments Joint venture Principal activities Shareholding
Eurofighter Jagdflugzeug Management and control of the European Typhoon programme 33% Germany MBDA Development and manufacture of guided weapons 37.5% Europe The following tables summarise the financial information of the Groups principal equity accounted investments included in their own financial statements as adjusted for fair value adjustments at acquisition and differences in accounting policies and reconcile this to the Groups interest in those equity accounted investments.
2017 2016
Jagdflugzeug
MBDA
Eurofighter
Jagdflugzeug
MBDA
Revenue 100% 3011 2723 2986 2416 Underlying EBITA excluding depreciation Depreciation and amortisation 1 46 2 74 Financial income Financial expense  82 9 77 Taxation expense 4 84 26 56 Profitloss for the year 100% 7 203 17 173 Remeasurements on retirement benefit schemes net of tax  141  139 Amounts charged to hedging reserve net of tax  6  30 Foreign exchange adjustments  8  31 Total comprehensive income for the year 100% 7 330 17 35 Groups share of total comprehensive income for the year 2 124 5 13 Noncurrent assets 12 2065 11 1996 Cash and cash equivalents 30 2420 26 1613 Current assets excluding cash and cash equivalents 1144 4029 1746 3870 Current assets 1174 6449 1772 5483 Noncurrent financial liabilities excluding trade and other payables and provisions  4  101 Other noncurrent liabilities 29 789 26 937 Noncurrent liabilities 29 793 26 1038 Current financial liabilities excluding trade and other payables and provisions 3 8  32 Other current liabilities 1130 7206 1740 6100 Current liabilities 1133 7198 1740 6132 Net assets 100% .
Operating profit excluding amortisation and impairment of intangible assets EBITA and nonrecurring items.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Notes to the Group accounts continued Equity accounted investments continued 2017 2016
Jagdflugzeug
MBDA
Total
Eurofighter
Jagdflugzeug
MBDA
Total
Groups share of net assets Goodwill adjustment  6 6  5 5 Carrying value 8 202 210 5tel 2016
Jagdflugzeug
MBDA
Total
Eurofighter
Jagdflugzeug
MBDA
Total
Dividends received  47 47  13 13 Group summary The Group also has a number of individually immaterial joint ventures the carrying values of the most significant of which at 31 December 2017 are as follows Advanced Electronics Company 53m FADEC International 40m Air Astana 30m and Panavia Aircraft 19m.
The following table shows a reconciliation of opening to closing carrying value for both the Groups principal and immaterial joint ventures in aggregate.
Principal equity accounted investments
Total
At 1 January tel250 Groups share of profit for the year 59 31 90 Groups share of remeasurements on retirement benefit schemes 66  66 Tax on items that will not be reclassified to the income statement 13  13 Foreign exchange adjustments 13 20 33 Amounts chargedcredited to hedging reserve 14 5 9 Tax on items that may be reclassified to the income statement 3 1 2 Groups share of total comprehensive income for the year 8 55 63 Equity accounted investment funding  5 5 Dividends received from equity accounted investments 13 25 38 Foreign exchange adjustments 10 9 19 At 31 December tel299 Groups share of profit for the year 79 37 116 Groups share of remeasurements on retirement benefit schemes 66  66 Tax on items that will not be reclassified to the income statement 13  13 Foreign exchange adjustments 4 5 9 Amounts chargedcredited to hedging reserve 2 4 2 Tax on items that may be reclassified to the income statement  1 1 Groups share of total comprehensive income for the year 126 35 161 Equity accounted investment funding  3 3 Dividends received from equity accounted investments 47 25 72 Foreign exchange adjustments 5 12 7 At 31 December tel384 Contingent liabilities The Group is not aware of any material contingent liabilities in respect of its equity accounted investments.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 12.
Trade and other receivables Trade receivables are stated at their cost less provision for bad debts.
A provision for bad debt is established when there is objective evidence that the Group will not be able to collect all amounts due according to the original terms of the receivables.
Significant financial difficulties of the debtor probability that the debtor will enter bankruptcy or financial reorganisation and default or delinquency in payments are considered indicators that the trade receivable is impaired.
Receivables with a shortterm duration are not discounted.
A loss on provision for bad debt is reversed if the subsequent increase in recoverable amount can be related objectively to an event occurring after the impairment loss was recognised.
Amounts due from customers for contract work includes longterm contract balances and amounts due from contract customers less attributable progress payments.
Longterm contract balances are stated at cost less provision for any anticipated losses.
Provisions for losses on contracts are recorded when it becomes probable that total estimated contract costs will exceed total contract revenues.
Such provisions are recorded as write downs of longterm contract balances for that portion of the work which has already been completed and the remainder is included as amounts due to longterm contract customers within trade and other payables.
Losses are determined on the basis of estimated results on completion of contracts and are updated regularly.
Progress payments are amounts received from customers in accordance with the terms of contracts which specify payments in advance of delivery and are credited as progress payments against any expenditure incurred for the particular contract.
Any unexpended balance in respect of progress payments is held in trade and other payables as customer stage payments or if the amounts are subject to advance payment guarantees unrelated to Group performance as cash received on customers account.
Amounts due from contract customers represent unbilled income and are stated at cost plus attributable profit.
US deferred compensation plan assets are measured at fair value in accordance with IAS 19 Employee Benefits.
Noncurrent
Prepayments and accrued income 5 35 US deferred compensation plan assets 302 296 Other receivables
Longterm contract balances 2506 3128 Deduct Attributable progress payments 1706 2282 Amounts due from contract customers 422 435 Amounts due from customers for contract work 1222 1281 Trade receivables 1688 1437 Amounts owed by equity accounted investments note 30 86 69 Prepayments and accrued income 284 256 Other receivables 3586 3305 Includes 89m which is reimbursable in respect of reorganisation costs incurred in 2017 noncurrent 45m current 44m.
The aggregate amount of costs incurred and recognised profits less recognised losses to date in respect of contracts in progress at 31 December 2017 is estimated to be 26.8bn 2016 27.5bn.
Trade receivables are disclosed net of a provision for bad debts.
Disclosures relating to the ageing of trade receivables and movements in the provision for bad debts are provided in note 28.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Notes to the Group accounts continued Other financial assets and liabilities Derivative financial instruments and hedging activities The international nature of the Groups business means it is exposed to volatility in currency exchange rates.
In order to protect itself against currency fluctuations the Groups policy is to hedge all material firm transactional exposures.
The Group uses interest rate derivative instruments to manage the Groups exposure to interest rate fluctuations on its borrowings and deposits by varying the proportion of fixed rate debt relative to floating rate debt over the forward time horizon.
The Group uses foreign exchange derivative instruments to manage the Groups exposure to currency fluctuations on its borrowings and deposits with the Groups subsidiaries and equity accounted investments.
In accordance with its treasury policy the Group does not hold derivative financial instruments for trading purposes.
The Group aims to achieve hedge accounting treatment for all derivatives that hedge material foreign currency exposures and those interest rate exposures where hedge accounting can be achieved.
Derivative financial instruments are recognised initially at fair value.
Subsequent to initial recognition such instruments are stated at fair value at the balance sheet date.
The fair values are estimated by discounting expected future cash flows.
Fair value through profit or loss Gains and losses on derivative financial instruments that do not qualify for hedge accounting are recognised in the income statement for the period.
Cash flow hedges Where a derivative financial instrument is designated as a hedge of cash flows relating to a highly probable forecast transaction income or expense the effective portion of any change in the fair value of the instrument is recognised in other comprehensive income and presented in the hedging reserve in equity.
Amounts recognised in equity are reclassified from reserves into the cost of the underlying transaction and recognised in the income statement when the underlying transaction affects profit or loss.
The ineffective portion of any change in the fair value of the instrument is recognised in the income statement immediately.
Fair value hedges Where a derivative financial instrument is designated as a fair value hedge changes in the fair value of the underlying asset or liability attributable to the hedged risk and gains and losses on the derivative instrument are recognised in the income statement for the period.
2017 2016
Liabilities
Assets
Liabilities
Noncurrent
Cash flow hedges  foreign exchange contracts 147 114 138 102 Other foreign exchangeinterest rate contracts  19 93 Debtrelated derivative financial instruments  assets
Cash flow hedges  foreign exchange contracts 77 48 151 184 Other foreign exchangeinterest rate contracts 12 37 53 28 Debtrelated derivative financial instruments  liabilities  19 Includes fair value hedges of nil 2016 4m.
Cash flow hedges The hedged highly probable forecast transactions denominated in foreign currency are predominantly expected to occur at various stages during the next 12 months.
The majority of those extending beyond 12 months are expected to have been transacted within five years of the balance sheet date.
Amounts credited to the hedging reserve in respect of cash flow hedges were 61m 2016 87m including 24m 2016 74m on reclassification to profit and loss and 37m 2016 13m credit on contracts held at 31 December 2017.
Fair value hedges The loss arising in the income statement on fair value hedging instruments was 4m 2016 3m.
The gain arising in the income statement on the fair value of the underlying hedged items was 4m 2016 1m.
Debtrelated derivative financial instruments The debtrelated derivative financial instruments represent the fair value of crosscurrency interest rate and foreign exchange derivatives relating to the US500m 2.85% bond repayable 2020 the US800m 3.8% bond repayable 2024 the US750m 3.85% bond repayable 2025 the US500m 7.5% bond repayable 2027 and the US550m 4.75% bond repayable 2044 see note 19.
These derivatives have been entered into specifically to manage the Groups exposure to foreign exchange or interest rate risk.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 14.
Deferred tax A deferred tax asset is recognised for unused tax losses tax credits and deductible temporary differences to the extent that it is probable that future taxable profits will be available against which they can be utilised.
Deferred tax assets are reviewed at each reporting date and reduced to the extent that it is no longer probable that the related tax benefit will be realised.
The most significant recognised deferred tax assets relate to the deficits on the Groups pensionretirement schemes see below.
This is because retirement benefit costs are deducted in determining accounting profit as service is provided by employees but deducted in determining taxable profit either when contributions are paid to the pensionretirement schemes or when retirement benefits are paid.
In reviewing the probability that taxable profits will be available in the future against which such contributionspayments can be deducted account has been taken of the new deficit recovery plans agreed with the trustees of the relevant schemes in November 2017 under which the deficits are expected to be cleared between 2021 and 2026 see note 21.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are offset if there is a legally enforceable right to offset current tax liabilities and assets and they relate to income taxes levied by the same tax authority on the same taxable entity or on different taxable entities but they intend to settle current tax liabilities and assets on a net basis or their tax assets and liabilities will be realised simultaneously.
Deferred tax assetsliabilities Deferred tax assets Deferred tax liabilities Net balance at 31 December Property plant and equipment 16 20 94 119 78 99 Intangible assets 13 18 14 28 1 10 Provisions and accruals 224 343   224 343 Goodwill   275 428 275 428 Pensionretirement schemes Deficits 710 1212   710 1212 Additional contributions and other Sharebased payments 14 23   14 23 Financial instruments   11 5 11 5 Other items 27 39 1  26 39 Rolled over capital gains   10 11 10 11 Capital losses carried forward 10 11   10 11 Trading losses carried forward 12 17   12 17 Deferred tax assetsliabilities 1126 1832 406 591 720 1241 Set off of tax 402 581 402 581 Net deferred tax assetsliabilities 724 1251 4 10 720 1241 Includes deferred tax assets on US deferred compensation plans.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Notes to the Group accounts continued Deferred tax continued Movement in temporary differences during the year
1 January
Recognised in income
At
31 December Property plant and equipment 99 9 12  78 Intangible assets 10 1 10  1 Provisions and accruals 343 22 97  224 Goodwill 428 31 122  275 Pensionretirement schemes Deficits 1212 17 28 513 710 Additional contributions and other Sharebased payments 23  1 8 14 Financial instruments 5  5 11 11 Other items 39  13  26 Rolled over capital gains 11  1  10 Capital losses carried forward 11  1  10 Trading losses carried forward 17  5  12
1 January
Recognised in income
At
31 December Property plant and equipment 85 16 2  99 Intangible assets 17  7  10 Provisions and accruals 299 54 10  343 Goodwill 326 67 35  428 Pensionretirement schemes Deficits 212 Additional contributions and other Sharebased payments 15  4 4 23 Financial instruments 10 1 1 17 5 Other items 35 6 2  39 Rolled over capital gains 12  1  11 Capital losses carried forward 12  1  11 Trading losses carried forward 21 1 5   1241 Includes a credit of 39m recognised in income in respect of tax rate adjustments.
Includes a debit of 83m recognised in equity in respect of tax rate adjustments.
Includes deferred tax assets on US deferred compensation plans.
Unrecognised deferred tax assets and liabilities Deferred tax assets have not been recognised in respect of the following items 2017 2016
Unrecognised deferred tax asset
Unrecognised deferred tax asset Deductible temporary differences including tax credits Capital losses carried forward Trading and other losses carried forward These assets have not been recognised as the incidence of future profits in the relevant countries and legal entities cannot be accurately predicted at this time.
The Group has not recognised any deferred tax liability on temporary differences totalling 237m 2016 274m relating to potentially taxable unremitted earnings of overseas subsidiaries and equity accounted investments because any withholding tax due on the remittance of those earnings is expected to be insignificant.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 14.
Deferred tax continued Future changes in tax rates The US federal tax rate has been reduced from 35% to 21% with effect from 1 January 2018 while the estimated state tax rate has increased from 5% to 6%.
This will reduce future US current tax charges accordingly.
Recognised US deferred tax balances as at 31 December 2017 have been calculated at a combined federal and state tax rate of 27% 2016 40%.
The UK current tax rate reduced from 20% to 19% with effect from 1 April 2017 and will reduce to 17% with effect from 1 April 2020.
This will reduce future UK current tax charges accordingly.
Both recognised and unrecognised UK deferred tax balances as at 31 December 2017 have been calculated at a blended rate of 17.5% 2016 18%.
Inventories
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost including all relevant overhead expenditure and net realisable value.
Shortterm workinprogress 377 416 Raw materials and consumables 260 256 Finished goods and goods for resale The Group recognised 9m 2016 10m as a write down of inventories to net realisable value.
Current tax Current tax for the current and prior periods is recognised as a liability to the extent that it has not yet been settled and as an asset to the extent that the amounts already paid exceed the amount due or the benefit of a tax loss can be carried back to recover current tax of a prior period.
Current tax assets and liabilities are measured at the amount expected to be paid to or recovered from taxation authorities using the rates that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the balance sheet date.
Tax provisions 351 365 Research and development expenditure credits receivable 131 105 Other 65 46 Represented by Current tax assets 20 5 Current tax liabilities 305 311 Tax provisions of 351m 2016 365m are in respect of known tax issues of which 292m 2016 325m relates to nonUK jurisdictions.
Whilst there is inherent uncertainty regarding the timing of any resolution of tax positions the Group does not consider that there is a significant risk of material change in 2018.
Cash and cash equivalents Cash and cash equivalents includes cash in hand call and term deposits investments in money market funds and other shortterm liquid investments with original maturities of three months or less and which are subject to an insignificant risk of change in value.
For the purpose of the cash flow statement cash and cash equivalents also includes bank overdrafts that are repayable on demand.
Cash 913 419 Money market funds 899 869 Shortterm deposits 1459 1483 3271 2771 Deduct Cash and cash equivalents included within assets held for sale  2 3271 2769 BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Notes to the Group accounts continued Geographical analysis of assets Analysis of noncurrent assets by geographical location Asset location
UK 2711 2755 Rest of Europe 590 586 US 9283 9864 Saudi Arabia 438 443 Australia 459 474 Rest of Asia and Pacific 5 6 Noncurrent segment assets 13486 14128 Retirement benefit surpluses 21 302 223 Other financial assets 13 315 549 Tax 1416 744 1256 Inventories 15 723 744 Current trade and other receivables 12 3586 3305 Cash and cash equivalents 17 3271 2769 Assets held for sale 26 2 Consolidated total assets 22453 22976 Loans and overdrafts Loans and overdrafts are recognised initially at fair value less attributable transaction costs.
Subsequent to initial recognition loans and overdrafts are stated at either amortised cost or where hedge accounting has been adopted fair value in respect of the hedged risk.
Any difference between the amount initially recognised and the redemption value is recognised in the income statement over the period of the borrowings.
Noncurrent
Albertville Hangar bond repayable 2018  8 US1bn 6.375% bond repayable telUS500m 2.85% bond repayable telUS500m 4.75% bond repayable tel400m 4.125% bond repayable telUS800m 3.8% bond repayable telUS750m 3.85% bond repayable telUS500m 7.5% bond repayable telUS400m 5.8% bond repayable telUS550m 4.75% bond repayable tel4069 4425
Albertville Hangar bond repayable 2018 7 Overdrafts 7 US500m of the US1bn 6.375% bond repayable 2019 has been converted to a floating rate bond by utilising interest rate swaps that mature in June 2019 and give an effective rate during 2017 of 6.2%.
The US500m 2.85% bond repayable 2020 has been converted to a sterling fixed rate bond by utilising foreign exchange swaps that mature in February 2018 and give an effective rate during 2017 of 2.5%.
US500m of the US800m 3.8% bond repayable 2024 has been converted to a floating rate bond by utilising interest rate swaps that mature in October 2024 and give an effective rate during 2017 of 3.5%.
US500m of the US800m bond is measured at amortised cost as adjusted for the fair value of the interest rate risk.
US734m of the US750m 3.85% bond repayable 2025 has been converted to a sterling fixed rate bond by utilising crosscurrency swaps that mature in June 2019 and give an effective rate during 2017 of 4.0%.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 19.
Loans and overdrafts continued The US500m 7.5% bond repayable 2027 was converted at issue to a sterling fixed rate bond by utilising crosscurrency swaps and has an effective rate of 7.6%.
The US400m 5.8% bond repayable 2041 has been converted to a floating rate bond by utilising interest rate swaps that mature in October 2024 and give an effective rate during 2017 of 5.8%.
US244m of the US550m 4.75% bond repayable 2044 has been converted to a sterling fixed rate bond by utilising crosscurrency swaps that mature in June 2019 and give an effective rate during 2017 of 4.2%.
Trade and other payables Trade and other payables are stated at their cost.
US deferred compensation plan liabilities represent the present value of expected future payments required to settle the obligation to employees in accordance with IAS 19 Employee Benefits.
Noncurrent
Amounts due to longterm contract customers 808 173 Amounts due to other customers 16 10 Amounts owed to equity accounted investments note 30 15 24 Accruals and deferred income US deferred compensation plan liabilities 318 326 Other payables 119 194 1722 1027
Amounts due to longterm contract customers 2147 3084 Amounts due to other customers 148 169 Trade payables 638 707 Amounts owed to equity accounted investments note 30 912 726 Other taxes and social security costs 239 206 Accruals and deferred income 1946 1406 Other payables 292 242 6322 6540 Included above Amounts due to longterm contract customers including contract losses 2955 3257 Advances from longterm contract customers 2880 3133 Advances from other customers 164 179 Includes 344m 2016 209m of funding received from the UK government for property plant and equipment at BarrowinFurness UK relating to the Dreadnought submarine programme.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Notes to the Group accounts continued Retirement benefits Pension schemes Defined contribution Obligations for contributions are recognised as an expense in the income statement as incurred.
Defined benefit The cost of providing benefits is determined periodically by independent actuaries and charged to the income statement in the period in which those benefits are earned by the employees.
Remeasurements including actuarial gains and losses are recognised in the Consolidated statement of comprehensive income in the period in which they occur.
Past service costs resulting from a plan amendment or curtailment are recognised immediately in the income statement.
The retirement benefit surpluses and obligations recognised in the Groups balance sheet represent the fair value of scheme assets less the present value of the defined benefit obligations calculated using a number of actuarial assumptions as set out on page 178.
The bid values of scheme assets are not intended to be realised in the short term and may be subject to significant change before they are realised.
The present values of scheme liabilities are derived from cash flow projections over long periods and are therefore inherently uncertain.
IAS 19 Employee Benefits limits the measurement of a defined benefit surplus to the lower of the surplus in the defined benefit scheme and the asset ceiling.
The asset ceiling is the present value of any economic benefits available in the form of refunds from the scheme or reductions in future contributions to the scheme.
IFRIC 14 IAS 19  The Limit on a Defined Benefit Asset Minimum Funding Requirements and their Interaction issued in 2007 provides an interpretation of the requirements of IAS 19 clarifying that a refund is available if the entity has an unconditional right to a refund in certain circumstances.
The Group has applied IFRIC 14 and has determined that there is no limit on the recognition of the surpluses in its defined benefit pension schemes as at 31 December 2017.
MBDA participates in the Groups defined benefit schemes and as these are multiemployer schemes the Group has allocated a share of the IAS 19 pension surpluses and deficits to MBDA based on the relative payroll contributions of active members which is consistent with prior years.
Whilst this methodology is intended to reflect a reasonable estimate of the share of the deficit it may not accurately reflect the obligations of the participating employers.
In the event that an employer who participates in the Groups pension schemes fails or cannot be compelled to fulfil its obligations as a participating employer the remaining participating employers are obliged to collectively take on its obligations.
The Group considers the likelihood of this event arising as remote.
The Groups share of the IAS 19 pension deficit allocated to the equity accounted investments is included in the balance sheet within equity accounted investments.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 21.
Retirement benefits continued
Pension schemes BAE Systems plc operates pension schemes for the Groups qualifying employees in the UK US and other countries.
The principal schemes in the UK and US are funded defined benefit schemes and the assets are held in separate trusteeadministered funds.
The two largest funded defined benefit schemes are the Main Scheme and the BAE Systems 2000 Pension Plan 2000 Plan which in aggregate represent 81% 2016 69% of the total IAS 19 defined benefit obligation at 31 December 2017.
The schemes in other countries are primarily defined contribution schemes.
At 31 December 2017 the weighted average durations of the UK and US defined benefit pension obligations were 18 years 2016 19 years and 12 years 2016 12 years respectively.
The split of the defined benefit pension liability on a funding basis between active deferred and pensioner members for the Main Scheme 2000 Plan and US schemes in aggregate is set out below
Deferred %
Main Scheme
US schemes Source Main Scheme actuarial valuation report as at 31 March 2017.
Source 2000 Plan actuarial valuation report as at 31 March 2017.
Source Annual updates of the US schemes as at 1 January 2017.
Regulatory framework The funded UK schemes are registered and subject to the statutory scheme specificfunding requirements outlined in UK legislation including the payment of levies to the Pension Protection Fund as set out in the Pension Act 2004.
These schemes were established under trust and the responsibility for their governance lies jointly with the trustees and the Group.
The funded US schemes are taxqualified pension schemes regulated by the Pension Protection Act 2006 and insured by the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation PBGC up to certain limits.
These schemes were established under and are governed by the US Employee Retirement Income Security Act 1974 and the BAE Systems Administrative Committee is a named fiduciary with the authority to manage their operation.
Benefits
The UK defined benefit schemes provide benefits to members in the form of a set level of pension payable for life based on members final salaries.
The benefits attract inflationrelated increases both in deferment and payment.
All UK defined benefit schemes are closed to new entrants with benefits for new employees being provided through a defined contribution scheme.
The Normal Retirement Age for active members of the Main Scheme and 2000 Plan is 65.
Specific benefits applicable to members differ between schemes.
Further details on the benefits provided by each scheme are provided on the BAE Systems Pensions websitesite The US defined benefit schemes ceased to be final salary schemes in January 2013.
The benefits accrued based on the final salaries of members at that point will become payable on retirement.
The Normal Retirement Age for the largest scheme in the US is 65.
Other retirement benefits The Group operates a number of nonpension retirement benefit schemes under which certain employees are eligible to receive benefits after retirement the majority of which relate to the provision of medical benefits to retired employees of the Groups subsidiaries in the US.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Notes to the Group accounts continued Retirement benefits continued
Introduction
Disclosures in respect of pension funding are provided below.
Disclosures in respect of pension accounting under IAS 19 are provided on pages The majority of the UK and US defined benefit pension schemes are funded by the Groups subsidiaries and equity accounted investments.
The individual pension schemes funding requirements are based on actuarial measurement frameworks set out in their funding policies.
For funding valuation purposes pension scheme assets are included at market value at the valuation date whilst the liabilities are measured on an actuarial funding basis using the projected unit credit method and discounted to their present value based on prudent assumptions set by the trustees following consultation with scheme actuaries.
The funding valuations are performed by professionally qualified independent actuaries and include assumptions which differ from the actuarial assumptions used for IAS 19 accounting purposes shown on page 178.
The purpose of the funding valuations is to design funding plans which ensure that the schemes have sufficient funds available to meet future benefit payments.
UK valuations Funding valuations of the Groups nine UK defined benefit pension schemes are performed every three years.
The latest valuations were performed as at 31 March 2017.
The next funding valuation will have an effective date of no later than 31 March 2020.
In November the 2017 triennial funding valuations and where necessary deficit recovery plans were agreed with the trustees and certified by the scheme actuaries after consultation with the UK Pensions Regulator.
The funding valuations have resulted in a significantly lower deficit than under IAS 19.
The results of the most recent triennial valuations are shown below At 31 March 2017
Scheme bn
Other
Total bn Market value of assets 12.8 4.3 4.5 21.6 Present value of liabilities 14.4 4.6 4.7 23.7 Funding deficit 1.6 0.3 0.2 2.1 Percentage of accrued benefits covered by the assets at the valuation date 89% 93% 96% 91% The valuations were determined using the following mortality assumptions Life expectancy of a male currently aged 65 years 86  89 Life expectancy of a female currently aged 65 years 88  90 Life expectancy of a male currently aged 45 years 88  92 Life expectancy of a female currently aged 45 years 91  93 The discount rate assumptions are based on prudent levels of expected returns for the assets held by each of the schemes.
The discount rates are curves which provide a different rate for each year into the future.
The discount rates used in the 2014 valuation were based on a traditional gilts yield plus a margin which varied by scheme and over time.
The discount rates used in the 2017 valuation are directly based on prudent return assumptions for the assets held by the schemes reflecting the planned investment strategies and maturity profiles of each scheme.
The inflation assumptions are derived using data from the Bank of England which is based on the difference between the yields on indexlinked and fixed interest longterm government bonds.
The inflation assumption is a curve which provides a different rate for each year into the future.
In aggregate the net funding deficit across the UK schemes at 31 March 2017 was 2.1bn.
The funding deficit is approximately 3bn lower than the accounting deficit of the equivalent UK schemes prepared under IAS 19 using likeforlike mortality assumptions and asset values at 31 December 2017 largely due to lower liabilities reflecting the higher discount rate assumption.
Under IAS 19 the discount rate for accounting purposes is based on thirdparty AA corporate bond yields whereas for funding valuation purposes the discount rate is based on a prudent level of expected returns from the broader and mixed types of investments held in the schemes which are expected to yield higher returns than bonds.
The agreements reached are underpinned by contingency plans which include a commitment by the Group to a further 50m of deficit funding into the largest scheme prior to the next triennial valuation in the event that the scheme funding level was to fall below predetermined parameters.
In addition the Group would be required to pay 187m across its schemes with deficits at the valuation date if the funding levels for those schemes were to fall significantly and were to remain at or below those levels for nine months.
There will be no change to the contributions or benefits as set out in the rules of the schemes for pension scheme members as a result of the new funding valuations.
The results of future triennial valuations and associated funding requirements will be impacted by a number of factors including the future performance of investment markets and anticipated members longevity.
US valuations The Groups US pension schemes are valued annually with the latest valuations performed as at 1 January 2017.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 21.
Retirement benefits continued
Under the terms of the trust deeds of the UK schemes the Group is required to have a funding plan determined at the conclusion of the triennial funding valuations.
Equity accounted investments make regular contributions to the schemes in which they participate in line with the schedule of contributions and are allocated a share of deficit funding contributions.
In 2017 total contributions to the Groups pension schemes were 433m 2016 461m including amounts funded by equity accounted investments of 31m 2016 50m and included approximately 209m and 62m of deficit recovery payments in respect of the UK and US schemes respectively.
Based on the new funding valuations current annual deficit recovery payments to the UK schemes including amounts funded by equity accounted investments will increase to 220m a year from 1 April 2018.
Deficit contributions will further increase in line with any percentage growth in dividend payments made by the Group.
Under the new deficit recovery plans these annual payments would subsequently fall by 50m in 2022 as the deficits on certain schemes are expected to be cleared.
The annual payments are expected to end in 2026 when all deficits are projected to be cleared.
Under the last agreement made in 2014 all scheme deficits were projected to be cleared in 2026.
Based on the latest valuations of the Groups US pension schemes contributions are expected to remain at a level consistent with 2017 through to 2022.
In 2018 the Group expects to make total contributions to its pension schemes of 0.5bn.
Risk management
The defined benefit pension schemes expose the Group to actuarial risks including market investment risk interest rate risk inflation risk and longevity risk.
Risk Mitigation Market investment risk Asset returns may not move in line with the liabilities and may be subject to volatility.
The investment portfolios are highly diversified investing in a wide range of assets in order to provide reasonable assurance that no single security or type of security could have a materially adverse impact on the total portfolio.
To reduce volatility certain assets are held in a matching portfolio which largely consists of indexlinked bonds gilts and swaps designed to mirror movements in corresponding liabilities.
Some 47% 2016 47% of the Groups pension scheme assets are held in equities and pooled investment vehicles due to the higher expected level of return over the long term.
Some of the Groups pension schemes use derivative financial instruments as part of their investment strategy to manage the level of market risk.
The Main Scheme has a longdated equity option strategy protecting 1.4bn of assets against a significant fall in equity markets.
Interest rate risk Liabilities are sensitive to movements in interest rates with lower interest rates leading to an increase in the valuation of liabilities.
In addition to investing in bonds as part of the matching portfolio some of the UK schemes invest in interest rate swaps to reduce the exposure to movements in interest rates.
The swaps are held with several banks to reduce counterparty risk.
The discount rate assumptions set as part of the 2017 UK funding valuations more directly reflect the expected returns on assets held by the schemes and therefore the liabilities are less sensitive to interest rate risk than they were in the 2014 funding valuation.
Accordingly the 2017 approach provides a more natural hedge against interest rate risk.
The planned investment strategy which is reflected in the discount rate and liability calculation is for the schemes to increase their investments in bonds or other assets which match the liabilities as the schemes mature.
Under the 2017 UK funding valuation the Group expects the schemes to be fully hedged against interest rate movements following a fiveyear transition period to the planned investment strategy.
Inflation risk Liabilities are sensitive to movements in inflation with higher inflation leading to an increase in the valuation of liabilities.
In addition to investing in indexlinked bonds as part of the matching portfolio the principal UK schemes invest in longterm inflation swaps to reduce the exposure to movements in inflation.
The swaps are held with several banks to reduce counterparty risk.
The Groups US schemes are not indexed with inflation.
The approach to the 2017 UK funding valuation provides a more natural hedge against inflation movements and therefore the liabilities are less sensitive to inflation risk than they were in the 2014 funding valuation.
Under the 2017 UK funding valuation approach the Group is already fully hedged against inflation movements and under the planned investment strategy the Group aims to maintain a fully hedged position.
In 2014 the Main Scheme implemented a pension increase exchange to allow retired members to elect for a higher current pension in exchange for foregoing certain rights to future pension increases.
Longevity risk Liabilities are sensitive to life expectancy with increases in life expectancies leading to an increase in the valuation of liabilities.
Longevity adjustment factors are used in the majority of the UK pension schemes in order to adjust the pension benefits payable so as to share the cost of people living longer with employees.
In 2013 with the agreement of the Company the trustees of the 2000 Plan Royal Ordnance Pension Scheme and Shipbuilding Industries Pension Scheme entered into arrangements with Legal and General to insure against longevity risk for the current pensioner population covering a total of 4.4bn of pension scheme liabilities.
These arrangements reduce the funding volatility relating to increasing life expectancy.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Notes to the Group accounts continued Retirement benefits continued IAS 19 accounting The disclosures below relate to postretirement benefit schemes in the UK US and other countries which are accounted for as defined benefit schemes in accordance with IAS 19.
Principal actuarial assumptions The assumptions used are estimates chosen from a range of possible actuarial assumptions which due to the longterm nature of the obligation covered may not necessarily occur in practice.
UK USteltel Financial assumptions Discount rate  past service % 2.6 2.7 3.9 3.7 4.2 4.5 Discount rate  future service % 2.7 2.7 3.9 3.7 4.2 4.5 Retail Prices Index RPI inflation % 3.1 3.2 3.2 na na na Rate of increase in salaries % 3.1 3.2 3.2 na na na Rate of increase in deferred pensions % 2.13.1 2.23.2 2.33.2 na na na Rate of increase in pensions in payment % 1.6  3.7 1.7  3.7 1.8  3.6 na na na Demographic assumptions Life expectancy of a male currently aged 65 years 86  88 86  89 87  Life expectancy of a female currently aged 65 years 88  90 89  90 89  Life expectancy of a male currently aged 45 years 88  90 88  91 89  Life expectancy of a female currently aged 45 years 90  92 91  92 91  Discount rate The discount rate assumptions are derived through discounting the projected benefit payments using a thirdparty AA corporate bond yield curve to produce a single equivalent discount rate for the UK and US territories.
This inherently captures the maturity profile of the expected benefit payments.
For the UK territory the discount rate used for future service differs from that used for past service as it only uses the cash flows relating to active members which have a different duration.
Further information on the duration of the schemes is detailed on page 175.
Retail Prices Index RPI inflation In the UK the inflation assumptions are derived by reference to the difference between the yields on indexlinked and fixedinterest longterm government bonds or advice from the local actuary depending on the available information.
In the US inflation assumptions are not relevant as the Groups US pension schemes are not indexed with inflation.
Rate of increase in salaries The rate of increase in salaries for the UK schemes is assumed to be RPI inflation of 3.1% 2016 RPI inflation of 3.2% plus a promotional scale.
From 1 January 2013 employees in the US schemes no longer accrue salaryrelated benefits.
Rate of increase in deferred pensions The rate of increase in deferred pensions for the UK schemes is based on Consumer Prices Index CPI inflation of 2.1% 2016 CPI inflation of 2.2% with the exception of the 2000 Plan which is based on RPI inflation of 3.1% 2016 RPI inflation of 3.2%.
For all UK schemes the rate of increase in deferred pensions is subject to inflation caps.
Rate of increase in pensions in payment The rate of increase in pensions in payment differs between UK schemes.
Different tranches of the schemes increase at rates based on either RPI or CPI inflation and some are subject to an inflation cap.
With the exception of two smaller schemes the rate of increase in pensions in payment is based on RPI inflation.
Life expectancy For its UK pension schemes the Group has used the SelfAdministered Pension Schemes S2 mortality tables based on year of birth as published by the Institute of Actuaries for both pensioner and nonpensioner members in conjunction with the results of an investigation into the actual mortality experience of scheme members and information on the demographic profile of the schemes membership.
In addition to allow for future improvements in longevity the Continuous Mortality Investigation 2016 tables published by the Institute of Actuaries have been used in 2016 the Continuous Mortality Investigation 2015 tables were used with an assumed longterm rate of future annual mortality improvements of 1.25% 2016 1.25% for both pensioner and nonpensioner members.
In October 2015 the Society of Actuaries in the US released updated mortality assumptions reflecting the results of its comprehensive mortality study.
For the majority of the US schemes the mortality tables used at 31 December 2017 are a blend of the fully generational RP2014 Aggregate table and the RP2014 White Collar table both projected using Scale MP2017.
The IRS have approved the new mortality tables to be adopted for funding valuation purposes from 2018.
US healthcare schemes The latest valuations of the principal schemes covering retiree medical and life insurance schemes in certain US subsidiaries were performed by independent actuaries as at 1 January 2017.
These valuations were rolled forward to reflect the information at 31 December 2017.
The method of accounting for these is similar to that used for defined benefit pension schemes.
The assumption for longterm healthcare cost increases is 4.9% 2016 4.8% based on the assumptions that the increases are 7.8% in 2017 reducing to 4.5% by 2026 and 4.5% each year thereafter for preretirement and 8.5% in 2017 reducing to 4.5% by 2026 and 4.5% each year thereafter for postretirement.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 21.
Retirement benefits continued Summary of movements in retirement benefit obligations
US and other
Total net IAS 19 deficit at 1 January 2017 5778 792 6570 Actual return on assets excluding amounts included in net interest expense 1082 444 1526 Increase in liabilities due to changes in financial assumptions 242 291 533 Decrease in liabilities due to changes in mortality assumptions 971 24 995 Decrease in liabilities due to changes in other demographic assumptions 202  202 Experience gainslosses 136 29 107 Contributions in excess of service cost 98 53 151 Past service cost  plan amendments 2  2 Net interest expense 147 32 179 Foreign exchange adjustments  55 55 Movement in US healthcare schemes  2 2 Total net IAS 19 deficit at 31 December 2017 3680 566 4246 Allocated to equity accounted investments 326  326 Groups share of net IAS 19 deficit excluding Groups share of amounts allocated to equity accounted investments at 31 December 2017 3354 566 3920 The decrease in liabilities due to changes in mortality assumptions in the UK schemes reflects updated assumptions both to base tables and future improvements.
Contributions in excess of service cost on an IAS 19 accounting basis of 151m are lower than on a funding basis 271m because the service cost is higher on an IAS 19 accounting basis.
Amounts recognised on the balance sheet The table below shows a reconciliation between the gross assets and liabilities of the Groups UK US and other postretirement benefit schemes and the amounts recognised on the Groups balance sheet after allocation to equity accounted investments.
2017 2016 UK defined benefit pension schemes US and other pension schemes
Total
UK defined benefit pension schemes US and other pension schemes
Total
Present value of unfunded obligations 49 146  195 74 153  227 Present value of funded obligations 26071 4803 168 31042 27099 4981 169 32249 Fair value of scheme assets 22440 4352 199 26991 21395 4313 198 25906 Total net IAS 19 deficitsurplus 3680 597 31 4246 5778 821 29 6570 Allocated to equity accounted investments 326   326 516   516 Groups share of net IAS 19 deficitsurplus 3354 597 31 3920 5262 821 29 6054 Represented by Retirement benefit surpluses Retirement benefit obligations 3563 651 8 4222 5394 870 13 6277 3354 597 31 3920 5262 821 29 6054 Groups share of net IAS 19 deficit of equity accounted investments 126   126 193   193 Total cumulative actuarial losses recognised in equity since the transition to IFRS are 4.6bn 2016 6.7bn.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Notes to the Group accounts continued Retirement benefits continued IAS 19 accounting continued Changes in the fair value of scheme assets before allocation to equity accounted investments UK defined benefit pension schemes US and other pension schemes
Total
Value of scheme assets at 1 January 2016 20209 3452 166 23827 Impact of sectionalisation of the Main Scheme 1779   1779 Interest income Actual return on assets excluding amounts included in interest income 2649 180 2 2831 Actual return on assets 3359 346 10 3715 Contributions by employer Contributions by employer in respect of employee salary sacrifice arrangements 86   86 Total contributions by employer Members contributions 9   9 Administrative expenses  17  17 Foreign exchange translation  679 33 712 Benefits paid 879 218 12 1109 Value of scheme assets at 31 December 2016 21395 4313 198 25906 Interest income Actual return on assets excluding amounts included in interest income 1082 444 19 1545 Actual return on assets 1650 613 27 2290 Contributions by employer Contributions by employer in respect of employee salary sacrifice arrangements 84   84 Total contributions by employer Members contributions 8   8 Administrative expenses  16  16 Foreign exchange translation  394 19 413 Benefits paid 1049 245 9 1303 Value of scheme assets at 31 December 2017 22440 4352 199 26991 BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 21.
Retirement benefits continued Assets of defined benefit pension schemes UK US and other Total
Unquoted
Total
Quoted
Unquoted
Total
Quoted
Unquoted
Total
Equities
UK
4453 1 4454    4453 1 4454 Overseas 3074 287 3361 346  346 3420 287 3707 Pooled investment vehicles 1327 2269 3124 2271 4395 Fixed interest securities UK gilts 1556 25 1581    1556 25 1581 UK corporates 2214 1213 3427    2214 1213 3427 Overseas government 50  50 97  97 147  147 Overseas corporates 1319 8 1327 2953  2953 4272 8 4280 Indexlinked securities UK gilts 2164 54 2218    2164 54 2218 UK corporates 928 375 1303    928 375 1303
1648 1648  129 129  1777 1777
1011 1011     1011 1011
Foreign currency  3 3 27  Other 138 78 216 Total 17444 4996 22440 4220 132 4352 21664 5128 26792 UK US and other Total
Unquoted
Total
Quoted
Unquoted
Total
Quoted
Unquoted
Total
Equities
UK
4030  4030    4030  4030 Overseas 2774  2774 430  430 3204  3204 Pooled investment vehicles 1503 2428 3931 988  988 2491 2428 4919 Fixed interest securities UK gilts 1947  1947    1947  1947 UK corporates 2389 145 2534    2389 145 2534 Overseas government 79  79 151  151 230  230 Overseas corporates 1069 230 1299 2509  2509 3578 230 3808 Indexlinked securities UK gilts 2039  2039    2039  2039 UK corporates 1046 546 1592    1046 546 1592
1460 1460  147 147  1607 1607
Cash
Sterling 345  345    345  345 Foreign currency  Other  15 15  9 9  24 24 Total 17253 4157 156 4313 Includes 33m 2016 32m of the Companys own ordinary shares.
Primarily invested in equities.
The amounts classified as unquoted primarily comprise investments in private equity valued in accordance with International Private Equity and Venture Capital Valuation Guidelines.
Valued on the basis of open market value at the end of the year determined in accordance with the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors Appraisal and Valuation Standards and the Practice Note contained therein.
Includes 243m 2016 229m of property occupied by Group companies.
Includes interest rate inflation and longevity swaps.
The valuations are based on valuation techniques using underlying market data and discounted cash flows.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Notes to the Group accounts continued Retirement benefits continued IAS 19 accounting continued Changes in the present value of the defined benefit obligations before allocation to equity accounted investments UK defined benefit pension schemes US and other pension schemes
Total
Defined benefit obligations at 1 January 2016 25033 4203 145 29381 Impact of sectionalisation of the Main Scheme 2446   2446 Current service cost 180 11 1 192 Contributions by employer in respect of employee salary sacrifice arrangements 86   86 Total current service cost 266 11 1 278 Members contributions 9   9 Past service cost  plan amendments 7 4 1 12 Actuarial loss due to changes in financial assumptions 4815 170 5 4990 Actuarial gain due to changes in demographic assumptions Experience gains Interest expense 860 200 7 1067 Foreign exchange translation  814 26 840 Benefits paid 879 218 12 1109 Defined benefit obligations at 31 December 2016 27173 5134 169 32476 Current service cost 254 12 1 267 Contributions by employer in respect of employee salary sacrifice arrangements 84   84 Total current service cost 338 12 1 351 Members contributions 8   8 Past service cost  plan amendments 2  1 3 Actuarial loss due to changes in financial assumptions 242 291 13 546 Actuarial gain due to changes in mortality assumptions Actuarial gain due to changes in other demographic assumptions 202   202 Experience gains 136 29 1 106 Interest expense 715 201 7 923 Foreign exchange translation  449 14 463 Benefits paid 1049 245 9 1303 Defined benefit obligations at 31 December 2017 26120 4949 168 31237 Amounts recognised in the income statement after allocation to equity accounted investments 2017 2016 UK defined benefit pension schemes US and other pension schemes
Total
UK defined benefit pension schemes US and other pension schemes
Total
Included in operating costs Current service cost 228 12 1 241 161 11 1 173 Past service cost  plan amendments 2  1 3 7 4 1 12 Administrative expenses  16  16  17  17 Included in net finance costs Net interest expenseincome on retirement benefit Group defined benefit schemes included in share of results of equity accounted investments Groups share of equity accounted investments operating costs 12   12 10   10 Groups share of equity accounted investments finance costs 5   5 5   5 The Group incurred a charge of 193m 2016 189m restated in relation to defined contribution schemes for employees.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 21.
Retirement benefits continued Sensitivity analysis The sensitivity information has been derived using scenario analysis from the actuarial assumptions as at 31 December 2017 and keeping all other assumptions as set out on page 178.
Financial assumptions The estimated impact of changes in the discount rate and inflation assumptions on the defined benefit pension obligation together with the estimated impact on scheme assets is shown in the table below.
The estimated impact on scheme assets takes into account the Groups risk management activities in respect of interest rate and inflation risk.
The sensitivity analysis on the defined benefit obligation is measured on an IAS 19 accounting basis and therefore does not reflect the natural hedging in the discount rate used for funding valuation purposes.
Increasedecrease
Increasedecrease
Discount rate 0.1 percentage point increase 0.5 0.2 0.1 percentage point decrease 0.5 0.2
0.1 percentage point increase 0.5 0.2 0.1 percentage point decrease 0.5 0.2 Before allocation to equity accounted investments.
The sensitivity of the valuation of the liabilities to changes in the inflation assumption presented above assumes that a 0.1 percentage point change to expectations of future inflation results in a 0.1 percentage point change to all inflationrelated assumptions rate of increase in salaries rate of increase in deferred pensions and rate of increase in pensions in payment used to value the liabilities.
However upper and lower limits exist on the majority of inflationrelated benefits such that a change in expectations of future inflation may not have the same impact on the inflationrelated benefits and hence will result in a smaller change to the valuation of the liabilities.
Accordingly extrapolation of the above results beyond the specific sensitivity figures shown may not be appropriate.
To illustrate this the increasedecrease in the defined benefit pension obligation resulting from larger changes in the inflation assumption would be as follows
Inflation
0.5 percentage point increase 1.5 0.5 percentage point decrease 1.5 1.0 percentage point increase 3.1 1.0 percentage point decrease 2.8 Before allocation to equity accounted investments.
Demographic assumptions Changes in the life expectancy assumption including the benefit of longevity swap arrangements see longevity risk on page 177 would have the following effect on the total net IAS 19 deficit
Life expectancy Oneyear increase 1.1 Oneyear decrease 1.1 Before allocation to equity accounted investments.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Notes to the Group accounts continued
A provision is recognised in the balance sheet when the Group has a present legal or constructive obligation as a result of a past event it is probable that an outflow of economic benefits will be required to settle the obligation and the amount has been reliably estimated.
If the effect is material provisions are determined by discounting the expected future cash flows at an appropriate pretax discount rate.
Warranties and aftersales service Warranties and aftersales service are provided in the normal course of business with provisions for associated costs being made based on an assessment of future claims with reference to past experience.
A provision for warranties is recognised when the underlying products and services are sold.
The provision is based on historical warranty data and a weighting of possible outcomes against their associated probabilities.
Reorganisations
A provision for restructuring is recognised when the Group has approved a detailed and formal restructuring plan and the restructuring has either commenced or has been publicly announced.
The costs associated with the reorganisation programmes are supported by detailed plans and based on previous experience as well as other known factors.
Future operating costs are not provided for.
Legal contractual and environmental The Group holds provisions for expected legal contractual and environmental costs that it expects to incur over an extended period.
Management exercises judgement to determine the amount of these provisions.
Provision is made for known issues based on past experience of similar items and other known factors.
Each provision is considered separately and the amount provided reflects the best estimate of the most likely amount being the single most likely amount in a range of possible outcomes.
Warranties and aftersales service
Legal contractual and environmental
Total
Noncurrent
Current
At 1 January Created Utilised 37 16 36 10 99 Acquisitions    2 2 Reclassified between categories   3 3
Net present value adjustments   17 2 19 Foreign exchange adjustments 5  16 3 24 At 31 December tel394 71 758 Represented by
There are no individual provision releases in excess of 10m.
Warranties and aftersales service Warranty and aftersales service costs are generally incurred within three years postdelivery.
Whilst actual events could result in potentially significant differences to the quantum but not the timing of the outflows in relation to the provisions management has reflected current knowledge in assessing the provision levels.
Reorganisations
Reorganisation costs are generally incurred within one to three years.
There is limited volatility around the timing and amount of the ultimate outflows related to these provisions.
Other debtors includes 89m which is reimbursable in respect of reorganisation costs incurred in 2017 see note 12.
Legal contractual and environmental Reflecting the inherent uncertainty within many legal proceedings the amount of the outflows could differ significantly from the amount provided and the timing of the outflows cannot be reliably estimated.
Other
There are no individually significant provisions included within other provisions.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 23.
Share capital and other reserves Share capital Equity Nonequity Total Ordinary shares of 2.5p each Special Share of 1 Number of shares
Number of shares
Nominal value Issued and fully paid At 1 January 2016 31 December 2016 and 31 December 2017 3 Special Share One Special Share of 1 in the Company is held on behalf of the Secretary of State for Business Energy and Industrial Strategy the Special
Certain provisions of the Companys Articles of Association cannot be amended without the consent of the Special Shareholder.
These provisions include the requirement that no foreign person or foreign persons acting in concert can have more than a 15% voting interest in the Company the requirement that the majority of the directors are British and the requirement that the Chief Executive and any executive Chairman are British citizens.
The effect of these requirements can also be amended by regulations made by the directors and approved by the Special Shareholder.
The Special Shareholder may require the Company at any time to redeem the Special Share at par or to convert the Special Share into one ordinary voting share.
The Special Shareholder is entitled to receive notice of and to attend general meetings and class meetings of the Companys shareholders but has no voting right nor other rights other than to speak in relation to any business in respect of the Special Share.
Treasury shares As at 31 December 2017 281232739 2016 291449361 ordinary shares of 2.5p each with an aggregate nominal value of 7030818 2016 7286234 were held in treasury.
During 2017 10216622 2016 10358742 treasury shares were used to satisfy awards and options under the Share Incentive Plan International Share Incentive Plan Performance Share Plan Restricted Share Plan and Executive Share Option Plan.
Own shares held Own shares held including treasury shares and shares held by BAE Systems Employee Share Option Plan ESOP Trust are recognised as a deduction from retained earnings.
BAE Systems ESOP Trust The Group has an ESOP discretionary trust to administer the share plans and to acquire Company shares using funds loaned by the Group to meet commitments to Group employees.
Dividend waivers were in operation for shares within the ESOP Trust other than those owned beneficially by the participants for the dividends paid in June and November 2017.
At 31 December 2017 the ESOP held 1680035 2016 1327731 ordinary shares of 2.5p each with a market value of 10m 2016 8m.
The shares held by the ESOP are recorded at cost and deducted from retained earnings until such time as the shares vest unconditionally to employees.
A dividend waiver was also in operation for the dividends paid in June and November 2017 over shares within the Companys share incentive plan trusts other than those shares owned beneficially by the participants.
Equity dividends Equity dividends on ordinary share capital are recognised as a liability in the period in which they are declared.
The interim dividend is recognised when it has been approved by the Board and the final dividend is recognised when it has been approved by the shareholders at the Annual General Meeting.
Prior year final 12.7p dividend per ordinary share paid in the year 2016 12.5p 404 397 Interim 8.8p dividend per ordinary share paid in the year 2016 8.6p 28telAfter the balance sheet date the directors proposed a final dividend of 13p per ordinary share.
The dividend which is subject to shareholder approval will be paid on 1 June 2018 to shareholders registered on 20 April 2018.
The exdividend date is 19 April 2018.
Shareholders who do not at present participate in the Companys Dividend Reinvestment Plan and wish to receive the final dividend in shares rather than cash should complete a mandate form for the Dividend Reinvestment Plan and return it to the registrars no later than 10 May 2018.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Notes to the Group accounts continued Share capital and other reserves continued Other reserves
Statutory reserve
Capital redemption reserve
Translation reserve
At 1 January 2016 462 535 5277
Currency translation on foreign currency net investments      1284 1284 Amounts credited to hedging reserve     96  96 Tax on other comprehensive income     17  17 Equity accounted investments net of tax     7 52 45 At 31 December 2016 4 1871 6685
Currency translation on foreign currency net investments      620 620 Amounts credited to hedging reserve     59  59 Tax on other comprehensive income     11  11 Equity accounted investments net of tax     1 16 15 At 31 December 2017 4 1235 6098 Merger reserve The merger reserve arose on the acquisition of the Marconi Electronic Systems MES business by British Aerospace in 1999 to form BAE Systems and represents the amount by which the fair value of the shares issued by British Aerospace as consideration exceeded their nominal value.
Statutory reserve Under Section 4 of the British Aerospace Act 1980 this reserve may only be applied in paying up unissued shares of the Company to be allotted to members of the Company as fully paid bonus shares.
Revaluation reserve The revaluation reserve relates to the revaluation at fair value of the net assets of the BVT joint venture previously held as an equity accounted investment on the acquisition of the remaining 45% interest in 2009.
Capital redemption reserve The capital redemption reserve represents the cumulative nominal value of the Companys ordinary shares repurchased and subsequently cancelled.
Hedging reserve The hedging reserve comprises the effective portion of the cumulative net change in the fair value of cash flow hedging instruments related to hedged transactions that have not yet occurred.
Translation reserve The translation reserve comprises all foreign currency differences arising from the translation of the financial statements of foreign operations.
Capital
The Group funds its operations through a mixture of equity funding and debt financing including bank and capital market borrowings.
At 31 December 2017 the Groups capital was 4725m 2016 3454m which comprises total equity of 4784m 2016 3464m excluding amounts accumulated in equity relating to cash flow hedges of 59m 2016 10m.
Net debt was 752m 2016 1542m.
The capital structure of the Group reflects the judgement of the directors of an appropriate balance of funding required.
The Groups policy is to maintain an investment grade credit rating and ensure operating flexibility whilst meeting its pension obligations pursuing organic investment opportunities paying dividends in line with the Groups policy of longterm sustainable cover of around two times underlying earnings see note 7 making accelerated returns of capital to shareholders when the balance sheet allows and when the return from doing so is in excess of the Groups Weighted Average Cost of Capital and investing in valueenhancing acquisitions where market conditions are right and where they deliver on the Groups strategy.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 24.
Operating business cash flow Key Performance Indicator  Operating business cash flow Definition Net cash flow from operating activities excluding taxation and including net capital expenditure financial investment and dividends from equity accounted investments.
Purpose Allows management to monitor the operational cash generation of the Group.
Taxation is excluded because it is not relevant to the pretax operational cash generation of the Group.
Net capital expenditure and financial investment are included as a measure of the investment in the business to support the operational performance of the Group.
Dividends received from equity accounted investments are included as a measure of the operating cash generation of the Groups equity accounted investments.
Reconciliation of net cash flow from operating activities to operating business cash flow Net cash flow from operating activities 1897 1229 Add back Taxation paid 227 187 Purchase of property plant and equipment and investment property 389 408 Purchase of intangible assets 87 82 Proceeds from sale of property plant and equipment and investment property 34 45 Proceeds from sale of intangible assets 1 Equity accounted investment funding 3 5 Net capital expenditure and financial investment 444 450 Dividends received from equity accounted investments 72 38 Operating business cash flow 1752 1004 Reconciliation of operating business cash flow to net cash flow from operating activities by reporting segment Operating business cash flow
Dividends received from equity accounted investments Add back Net capital expenditure and financial investment Net cash flow from operating activities Electronic Systems 450 469 3 2 12telCyber and Intelligence 116 83   Platforms and Services US 222 58 8 9 Platforms and Services UK 427 199 9 3 18telPlatforms and Services International 671 435 52 19 HQ 134 240  5   134 245 1752 1004 72 38 444 450 2124 1416 Taxation paid Net cash flow from operating activities 1897 1229 Taxation is managed on a Groupwide basis.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Notes to the Group accounts continued Movement in assets and liabilities arising from financing activities Noncash movements
Foreign exchange movements Fair value and other movements Noncurrent assets Other financial assets 345   119 226 Current assets Other financial assets 204 164  49 89 Noncurrent liabilities Loans 4425  350 6 4069 Other financial liabilities 102 6  37 133 Cash collateral reported in other payables 32 15   17 Current liabilities Loans    7 7 Other financial liabilities 212 241  133 104 Interest paid 204 Net purchase of own shares 1 Equity dividends paid 684 Dividends paid to noncontrolling interests 8 Net cash flow from financing activities 995 Net debt Key Performance Indicator  Net debt Definition Cash and cash equivalents less loans and overdrafts including debtrelated derivative financial instruments.
Purpose Allows management to monitor the indebtedness of the Group.
Components of net debt
Cash and cash equivalents 17 3271 2769 Debtrelated derivative financial instrument assets  noncurrent 13 79 114 Loans  noncurrent 19 4069 4425 Loans and overdrafts  current 19 14 Debtrelated derivative financial instrument liabilities  current 13 19 Net debt 752 1542 BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 27.
Fair value measurement Fair value of financial instruments Certain of the Groups financial instruments are held at fair value.
The fair value of a financial instrument is the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the balance sheet date.
The fair values of financial instruments held at fair value have been determined based on available market information at the balance sheet date and the valuation methodologies listed below the fair values of forward foreign exchange contracts are calculated by discounting the contracted forward values and translating at the appropriate balance sheet rates and the fair values of both interest rate and crosscurrency swaps are calculated by discounting expected future principal and interest cash flows and translating at the appropriate balance sheet rates.
Due to the variability of the valuation factors the fair values presented at 31 December may not be indicative of the amounts the Group would expect to realise in the current market environment.
Fair value hierarchy The fair value measurement hierarchy is as follows Level 1  Quoted prices unadjusted in active markets for identical assets or liabilities Level 2  Inputs other than quoted prices included within level 1 that are observable for the asset or liability either directly i. or indirectly i.
Level 3  Inputs for the asset or liability that are not based on observable market data i. unobservable inputs.
Carrying amounts and fair values of certain financial instruments 2017 2016
Carrying amount
Carrying amount
Financial instruments measured at fair value
Availableforsale financial assets Other financial assets 1tel345 Other financial liabilities 13 133 133 102 102
Other financial assets Other financial liabilities 13 104 104 212 212 Financial instruments not measured at fair value
Loans
19 4069 4478 4425 4805
Cash and cash equivalents 17 3271 3271 2769 2769 Loans and overdrafts 19 14 14 US500m of the US800m 3.8% bond repayable 2024 has been converted to a floating rate bond by utilising interest rate swaps.
These derivatives have been designated as fair value hedges.
Changes in the fair value of the interest rate risk on the bond and gains and losses on the derivatives are recognised in the income statement.
The bond has been included in financial instruments not measured at fair value because its carrying value has only been adjusted for the fair value of the interest rate risk on a portion of the bond which has been calculated by discounting the future cash flows and translating at the appropriate balance sheet rate.
All of the financial assets and liabilities measured at fair value are classified as level 2 using the fair value hierarchy.
There were no transfers between levels during the year.
Financial assets and liabilities in the Groups Consolidated balance sheet are either held at fair value or their carrying value approximates to fair value with the exception of loans most of which are held at amortised cost.
The fair value of loans presented in the table above is derived from market prices.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Notes to the Group accounts continued Financial risk management Interest rate risk The Groups objective is to manage its exposure to interest rate fluctuations on borrowings through varying the proportion of fixed rate debt relative to floating rate debt with derivative instruments including interest rate and crosscurrency swaps.
The Groups interest rate management policy is that a minimum of 50% 2016 50% and a maximum of 90% 2016 90% of gross debt is maintained at fixed interest rates.
At 31 December 2017 the Group had 82% 2016 81% of fixed rate debt and 18% 2016 19% of floating rate debt based on a gross debt of 4.0bn including debtrelated derivative financial assets 2016 4.3bn.
Based on contracted maturities andor repricing dates the following amounts are exposed to interest rate risk over the future as shown below Less than one year Between one and two years More than two years Cash and cash equivalents 3271 Loans and overdrafts 746 739 661 The floating rate debt has been predominantly achieved by entering into interest rate swaps which swap the fixed rate US dollar interest payable on debt into either floating rate sterling or US dollars.
At the end of 2017 the Group had a total of 1.0bn 2016 1.0bn of this type of swap outstanding with a weighted average duration of 5.6 years 2016 2.6 years.
In respect of the fixed rate debt the weighted average period in respect of which interest is fixed was 9.5 years 2016 11.6 years.
Given the level of shortterm interest rates during the year the average cost of the floating rate debt was 4.6% 2016 4.1% on US dollars.
The cost of the fixed rate debt was 4.9% 2016 4.8%.
A change of 100 basis points in shortterm rates applied to the average fixedfloating mix and level of borrowings would vary the interest cost to the Group by 7m 2016 8m.
In respect of cash deposits given the fluctuation in the Groups working capital requirements cash is generally invested for shortterm periods based at floating interest rates.
A change of 100 basis points in the average interest rates during the year applied to the average cash deposits would vary the interest receivable by 14m 2016 14m.
Liquidity risk Contractual cash flows on financial liabilities The contracted cash flows on loans and overdrafts and derivative financial instruments at the reporting date are shown below classified by maturity.
The cash flows are shown on a gross basis are not discounted and include estimated interest payments where applicable.
31 December 2017 31 December 2016 Contracted cash flow Contracted cash flow
Less than one year
More than five years
Carrying amount
Between one and five years
Total
Loans and overdrafts 4083 213 2474 3217 5904 4425 217 2354 4055 6626 Purchasesale contracts US dollar 396 23 30 343 Other 1 Cash flow hedges  foreign exchange contracts 63 1 1 1 1 3 8 1  9 Purchasesale contracts US dollar 821   821 1809   1809 Sterling 1867 11  1856 2624   2624 Interest rate contracts 9 25 2 32 7 106  113 Other foreign exchangeinterest rate contracts 45 9 25 2  113 Debtrelated derivative financial instruments Other financial assets and liabilities telContractual cash flows in respect of all other financial liabilities are equal to the balance sheet carrying amount.
Current contractual amounts relating to other financial liabilities such as trade payables are settled within the normal operating cycle of the business.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 28.
Financial risk management continued Borrowing facilities The Groups objective is to maintain adequate undrawn committed borrowing facilities.
At 31 December 2017 the Group had a committed Revolving Credit Facility RCF of 2bn 2016 2bn.
The RCF is contracted until 2018 at 2bn and from 2018 to 2020 at 1.9bn.
The RCF was undrawn throughout the year.
The RCF also acts as a back stop to Commercial Paper issued by the Group.
At 31 December 2017 the Group had no Commercial Paper in issue 2016 nil.
Cash management Cash flow forecasting is performed by the businesses on a monthly basis.
The Group monitors a rolling forecast of its liquidity requirements to ensure that there is sufficient cash to meet operational needs and maintain adequate headroom.
Surplus cash held by the businesses over and above balances required for working capital management is loaned to the Groups centralised treasury department.
Surplus cash is invested in instantaccess current accounts shortterm deposits and money market funds choosing instruments with appropriate maturities or sufficient liquidity to provide adequate headroom as determined by cash forecasts.
The Groups objective is to monitor and control counterparty credit risk and credit limit utilisation.
The Group adopts a conservative approach to the investment of its surplus cash which is deposited with financial institutions with strong credit ratings for short periods.
The cash and cash equivalents balance at 31 December 2017 of 3271m 2016 2769m was invested with 33 2016 33 financial institutions.
A credit limit is allocated to each institution taking account of its market capitalisation credit rating and credit default swap price.
The cash and cash equivalents of the Group are invested in nonspeculative financial instruments which are usually highly liquid such as shortterm deposits.
The Group therefore believes it has reduced its exposure to counterparty credit risk through this process.
Currency risk The Groups objective is to reduce its exposure to transactional volatility in earnings and cash flows from movements in foreign currency exchange rates mainly the US dollar euro Saudi riyal and Australian dollar.
The Group is exposed to movements in foreign currency exchange rates in respect of foreign currency denominated transactions.
All material firm transactional exposures are hedged and the Group aims where possible to apply hedge accounting to these transactions.
The Group is exposed to movements in foreign currency exchange rates in respect of the translation of net assets and income statements of foreign subsidiaries and equity accounted investments.
The Group does not hedge the translation effect of exchange rate movements on the income statements or balance sheets of foreign subsidiaries and equity accounted investments it regards as longterm investments.
The estimated impact on foreign exchange gains and losses in net finance costs of a ten cent movement in the closing US dollar exchange rate on the retranslation of US dollardenominated bonds held by BAE Systems plc is approximately 49m 2016 59m.
Credit risk The Group has material receivables due from the UK US and Saudi Arabian governments where credit risk is not considered an issue.
For the remaining trade receivables a provision for bad debts has been calculated taking into account individual assessments based on past credit history and prior knowledge of debtor insolvency or other credit risk and no one counterparty constitutes more than 2% of the balance 2016 11%.
The ageing of trade receivables is detailed below 2017 2016
Provision
Net
Gross
Provision
Net
Not past due and not impaired 1143  1143 850  850 Up to 180 days overdue and not impaired 369  369 466  466 Past 180 days overdue and not impaired 176  176 76  76 Past 180 days overdue and impaired 35 35  85 40 45 1723 35 1688 1477 40 1437 Movements on the provision for bad debts are as follows At 1 January 40 34 Created 16 15 Utilised 1 2 Released 19 13 Foreign exchange adjustments 1 6 At 31 December 35 40 BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Notes to the Group accounts continued Sharebased payments The Group has granted equitysettled share options and LongTerm Incentive Plan arrangements which are measured at fair value at the date of grant using an option pricing model.
The fair value is expensed on a straightline basis over the vesting period based on the Groups estimate of the number of shares that will actually vest.
Details of the terms and conditions of each sharebased payment plan are given in the Annual remuneration report on pages 96 to 115.
Expense in year Executive Share Option Plan 6 6 Performance Share Plan 12 11 Restricted Share Plan The Group also incurred a charge of 37m 2016 33m in respect of the equitysettled allemployee Free Shares and Matching Partnership Shares elements of the Share Incentive Plan.
Executive Share Option Plan 2017 2016 Number of shares
Number of shares
Outstanding at the beginning of the year 34315 4.59 32165 4.26 Granted during the year 9816 6.48 10981 5.02 Exercised during the year 7491 3.92 6255 3.81 Expired during the year 3733 4.86 2576 4.28 Outstanding at the end of the year 32907 5.28 34315 4.59 Exercisable at the end of the year 5835 3.81 5961 3.
Range of exercise price of outstanding options  3.01  6.49 3.01  5.56 Weighted average remaining contracted life years 8 8 Weighted average fair value of options granted  0.88 0.65 Performance Share Plan Share Matching Plan and Restricted Share Plan Performance Share Plan Share Matching Plan Restricted Share Plan Number of shares Number of shares Number of shares Number of shares Number of shares Number of shares Outstanding at the beginning of the year 22992 19662  2252 3328 2847 Granted during the year 6979 8638   1463 1393 Exercised during the year 456 361   766 699 Expired during the year 8757 4947  2252 256 213 Outstanding at the end of the year 20758 22992   3769 3328 Exercisable at the end of the year 38 81    teltel Weighted average remaining contracted life years 5 5   5 5 Weighted average fair value of awards granted  5.36 4.09   6.49 5.01 The exercise price for the Performance Share Plan and Restricted Share Plan is nil 2016 nil.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 29.
Sharebased payments continued Details of optionsawards granted in the year The fair value of equitysettled optionsawards granted in the year has been measured using the weighted average inputs below and the following valuation models Executive Share Option Plan  Binomial Performance Share Plan  Monte Carlo Restricted Share Plan  Dividend valuation 2017 2016 Range of share price at date of grant  6.05  6.49 4.99  5.56 Expected optionaward life years 3  10 3  10 Volatility % 19 20 Risk free interest rate % 0.2 0.1  0.4 Volatility was calculated with reference to the Groups weekly share price volatility after allowing for dividends for the greater of 30 weeks or for the period until vest date.
The average share price in the year was 6.11 2016 5.24.
Related party transactions The Group has a related party relationship with its directors and key management personnel see below equity accounted investments note 11 and pension schemes note 21.
Transactions occur with the equity accounted investments in the normal course of business are priced on an armslength basis and settled on normal trade terms.
The more significant transactions are disclosed below Sales to related party Purchases from related party Amounts owed by related party Amounts owed to related party
Related party Advanced Electronics Company Limited   5 CTA International SAS 8 6   3 4 Eurofighter Jagdflugzeug GmbH 1004 997 FADEC International LLC 95 79 FAST Training Services Limited 2 Gripen International KB      18  16 MBDA SAS Panavia Aircraft GmbH 1271 1 Also relates to disclosures under IAS 24 Related Party Disclosures for the parent company BAE Systems plc.
At 31 December 2017 884m 2016 631m was owed by BAE Systems plc and 43m 2016 119m by other Group subsidiaries.
Amounts owed to related party in 2016 excludes 285m included within amounts due to longterm contract customers.
The Group considers key management personnel as defined under IAS 24 Related Party Disclosures to be the members of the Groups Executive Committee and the Companys nonexecutive directors.
Fuller disclosures on directors remuneration are set out in the Annual remuneration report on pages 96 to 1 15.
Total emoluments for directors and key management personnel charged to the Consolidated income statement were Shortterm employee benefits 16878 19389 Postemployment benefits 1661 1931 Sharebased payments 5123 5744 23662 27064 BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Notes to the Group accounts continued Contingent liabilities Contingent liabilities are potential future cash outflows which are either not probable or cannot be measured reliably.
The Group has entered into a number of guarantee and performance bond arrangements in the normal course of business and regards these as insurance contracts.
Various Group undertakings are parties to legal actions and claims which arise in the normal course of business.
Provision is made for any amounts that the directors consider may become payable see note 22.
The Group has no individually significant contingent liabilities.
Commitments
Operating lease commitments The Group leases various offices factories and shipyards under noncancellable operating lease agreements.
The leases have varying terms including escalation clauses renewal rights and purchase options.
None of these terms represent unusual arrangements or create material onerous or beneficial rights or obligations.
The future aggregate minimum lease payments under noncancellable operating leases and associated future minimum sublease income are as follows Payments due Not later than one year 251 255 Later than one year and not later than five years 769 699 Later than five years 626 802 1646 1756 Total of future minimum sublease income under noncancellable subleases 101 115 Capital commitments Capital expenditure contracted for but not provided for in the accounts is as follows Property plant and equipment Intangible assets .
Includes 100m 2016 158m at BarrowinFurness UK relating to the Dreadnought submarine programme funded by the UK government.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 33.
Information about related undertakings In accordance with Section 409 of the Companies Act 2006 a full list of subsidiaries and equity accounted investments as at 31 December 2017 is disclosed below.
Unless otherwise stated the Groups shareholding represents ordinary shares held indirectly by BAE Systems plc the year end is 31 December and the address of the registered office is Warwick House PO Box 87 Farnborough Aerospace Centre Farnborough Hampshire GU14 6YU United Kingdom.
For companies incorporated outside of the United Kingdom the country of incorporation is shown in the address.
No subsidiary undertakings have been excluded from the consolidation.
Subsidiaries  whollyowned 4219 Lafayette LLC 4219120 Lafayette Center Drive Chantilly VA 20151 United States Aerosystems International Limited Lupin Way Alvington Yeovil Somerset BA22 8UZ United Kingdom Alvis Pension Scheme Trustees Limited Alvis Limited Alvis Vickers Limited Armor Holdings Inc.
2000 North 15th Street 11th Floor Arlington VA 22201 United States Armstrong Whitworth Aircraft Limited Australian Marine Engineering Corporation Finance Pty Limited Evans Building Taranaki Road Edinburgh Parks Edinburgh SA 5111 Australia Avro International Aerospace Limited BAE Systems Al Diriyah C4i Limited BAE Systems Aviation Services Limited BAE Systems Canada Inc.
220 Laurier Avenue West Suite 1200 Ottawa ON K1P 5Z9
BAE Systems Combat and Radar Systems Limited PO Box 727 St.
Pauls Gate New Street St.
Helier JE4 8ZB Jersey BAE Systems Consultancy Services Limited BAE Systems Corporate Air Travel Limited BAE Systems CSandSI  Qatar Limited BAE Systems Defence Systems Limited BAE Systems Dynamics Limited BAE Systems Farnborough 1 Limited BAE Systems Farnborough 2 Limited BAE Systems Farnborough 3 Limited BAE Systems Finance Limited BAE Systems Funding Three Limited BAE Systems Funding Two Limited BAE Systems Gripen Overseas Limited BAE Systems Hawk Synthetic Training Limited BAE Systems Holdings Limited BAE Systems Insurance Limited BAE Systems International Limited BAE Systems Kazakhstan Limited BAE Systems Land and Sea Systems Limited BAE Systems Malaysia Sdn Bhd 16th Floor Wisma Sime Darby Jalan Raja Laut 50350 Kuala Lumpur Malaysia BAE Systems MEH Limited BAE Systems Military Air Overseas Limited BAE Systems Moose Jaw Inc.
LeBlanc Nichols The Chambers 1000300 Terry Fox Drive Ottawa ON K2K 0E3 Canada BAE Systems Nominees Limited BAE Systems Oman Limited BAE Systems Operations Limited BAE Systems Operations Singapore Pte Limited One Marina Boulevard 2800 Singapore  Singapore BAE Systems Overseas Holdings Limited BAE Systems Poland Sp. z o. ul.
Abp.
A.
Baraniaka 88 61131 Poznan Poland BAE Systems Projects Limited BAE Systems Property Investments Limited BAE Systems Sweden AB co Advokatfirman DLA Nordic KB Box 7315 SE103 90 Stockholm Sweden BAE Systems Vehicles and Equipment Limited BAE Systems 2000 Pension Plan Trustees Limited BAE Systems AB Box 5676 SE114 86 Stockholm Sweden BAE Systems Al Diriyah Programme Limited BAE Systems Applied Intelligence Asia Pacific Pte Limited United Square 101 Thomson Road 250304
BAE Systems Applied Intelligence Australia Pty Limited Level 12 1620 Bridge Street Sydney NSW 2000 Australia BAE Systems Applied Intelligence Belgium NV Geldenaaksebaan 329 B3001 Heverlee Leuven Belgium BAE Systems Applied Intelligence Canada Inc.
1959 Upper Water Street Suite 900 Halifax NS B3J 2X2
BAE Systems Applied Intelligence Connect AS Bouet Mollevej 35 9400 Norresundby Denmark BAE Systems Applied Intelligence Inc.
5th Floor Suite 1920 256 Franklin Street Boston MA 02110 United States BAE Systems Applied Intelligence GCS Inc.
1676 International Drive 10th Floor Suite 1000 McLean VA 22102 United States BAE Systems Applied Intelligence GCS Limited Surrey Research Park Guildford Surrey GU2 7YP United Kingdom BAE Systems Applied Intelligence Germany GmbH Mainzer Landstrasse 50 60325 Frankfurt am Main Germany BAE Systems Applied Intelligence Integration Limited Surrey Research Park Guildford Surrey GU2 7YP United Kingdom BAE Systems Applied Intelligence International Limited Priestley Road Surrey Research Park Guildford Surrey GU2 7YP United Kingdom BAE Systems Applied Intelligence Ireland Limited Level 5 Block 4 Dundrum Town Centre Sandyford Road Dundrum Dublin 16 D16 A4W6 Ireland BAE Systems Applied Intelligence Japan KK Ark Mori Building Regus Serviced Office 11232 Akasaka Minatoku Tokyo Japan 1076024 BAE Systems Applied Intelligence Luxembourg SARL 1 Boulevard de la Foire L1528 Luxembourg Luxembourg BAE Systems Applied Intelligence Spain S.
Paseo de la Castellana 141 Cuzco IV 28046 Madrid Spain BAE Systems Applied Intelligence UK Limited BAE Systems Applied Intelligence AS Bouet Mollevej 3 9400 Norresundby Denmark BAE Systems Applied Intelligence France SAS 19 Boulevard Malesherbes 75008 Paris France BAE Systems Applied Intelligence Limited Surrey Research Park Guildford Surrey GU2 7YP United Kingdom BAE Systems Applied Intelligence LLC 5th Floor Suite 1920 256 Franklin Street Boston MA 02110 United States BAE Systems Applied Intelligence Malaysia Sdn Bhd 16th Floor Wisma Sime Darby Jalan Raja Laut 50350 Kuala Lumpur Malaysia BAE Systems Applied Intelligence New Zealand Limited co Russell McVeagh Vero Centre 48 Shortland Street Auckland Central 1140 New Zealand BAE Systems Applied Intelligence Pty Limited Level 12 1620 Bridge Street Sydney NSW 2000 Australia BAE Systems Applied Intelligence US Corp 440 Wheelers Farms Road Suite 202 Milford CT 06461 United States BAE Systems Australia Datagate Pty Limited Evans Building Taranaki Road Edinburgh Parks Edinburgh SA 5111 Australia BAE Systems Australia Defence Holdings Pty Limited Evans Building Taranaki Road Edinburgh Parks Edinburgh SA 5111 Australia BAE Systems Australia Defence Pty Limited Evans Building Taranaki Road Edinburgh Parks Edinburgh SA 5111 Australia BAE Systems Australia Electronic Systems Pty Limited Evans Building Taranaki Road Edinburgh Parks Edinburgh SA 5111 Australia BAE Systems Australia NSW Holdings Pty Limited Evans Building Taranaki Road Edinburgh Parks Edinburgh SA 5111 Australia BAE Systems Australia NSW Pty Limited Evans Building Taranaki Road Edinburgh Parks Edinburgh SA 5111 Australia BAE Systems Australia Singapore Pte Limited 60 Paya Lebar Road 0843 Paya Lebar Square
BAE Systems Australia Holdings Limited Evans Building Taranaki Road Edinburgh Parks Edinburgh SA 5111 Australia BAE Systems Australia Limited Evans Building Taranaki Road Edinburgh Parks Edinburgh SA 5111 Australia BAE Systems Australia Logistics Pty Limited Evans Building Taranaki Road Edinburgh Parks Edinburgh SA 5111 Australia BAE Systems Australia Sea Sentinel Project Pty Limited Evans Building Taranaki Road Edinburgh Parks Edinburgh SA 5111 Australia BAE Systems Avionics Singapore Pte Limited One Marina Boulevard 2800 Singapore  Singapore BAE Systems Bofors AB SE691 80 Karlskoga Sweden BAE Systems Bofors Holdings Sdn Bhd Level 21 Suite 21.01 The Gardens South Tower Mid Valley City Lingkaran Syed Putra 59200 Kuala Lumpur Malaysia BAE Systems China Exports Limited BAE Systems CITS AB Box 5676 SE114 86 Stockholm Sweden BAE Systems Communications Limited BAE Systems Communications Solutions LLC Knowledge Oasis Building 4 Second Floor 0402Z427 Knowledge Oasis Muscat PO Box 16 Postal Code 135 Muscat Oman BAE Systems Controls Inc.
1098 Clark Street Endicott NY 13760 United States BAE Systems Creole Inc.
3701 Outlet Ctr.
Drive Suite 15 Sealy TX 774744904 United States BAE Systems Datagate Limited BAE Systems Datagate Holdings Limited BAE Systems Defence Limited BAE Systems Deployed Systems Limited BAE Systems Display Technologies Limited BAE Systems do Brasil Ltda SCN Quadra 5 Bloco A Ed.
Brasilia Shopping Torre Norte Sala 426 Brasilia DF CEP70715900 Brazil BAE Systems Electronic Systems Overseas Limited BAE Systems Electronics Limited BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Notes to the Group accounts continued Information about related undertakings continued Subsidiaries  whollyowned continued BAE Systems Enterprises Limited BAE Systems Executive Pension Scheme Trustees Limited BAE Systems Finance Ireland Unlimited Company Level 5 Block 4 Dundrum Town Centre Sandyford Road Dundrum Dublin 16 D16 A4W6 Ireland BAE Systems Finance B. co SGG Netherlands N.
Hoogoorddreef 15 1101 BA Amsterdam Netherlands BAE Systems Finance Inc.
1101 Wilson Blvd Ste 2000 Arlington VA 22209 United States BAE Systems Flight Training Australia Pty Limited Evans Building Taranaki Road Edinburgh Parks Edinburgh SA 5111 Australia BAE Systems Funds Management BAE Systems Global Combat Systems Bridging Limited BAE Systems Global Combat Systems Limited BAE Systems Global Combat Systems Munitions Limited BAE Systems Global Tactical Systems LLC 3701 Outlet Ctr.
Drive Suite 15 Sealy TX 774744904 United States BAE Systems Hgglunds AB SE691 80 Karlskoga Sweden BAE Systems Hawaii Shipyards Inc.
3049 Ualena Street Suite 915 Honolulu HI 96819 United States BAE Systems Holdings South Africa Pty Limited Central Office Park No.
5 257 Jean Avenue Centurion Gauteng 0157 South Africa BAE Systems Holdings B. co SGG Netherlands N.
Hoogoorddreef 15 1101 BA Amsterdam Netherlands BAE Systems Holding GmbH Hauptstrasse 48 82433 Bad Kohlgrub Germany BAE Systems Holdings Inc.
1101 Wilson Blvd Ste 2000 Arlington VA 22209 United States BAE Systems Holdings International LLC 1101 Wilson Blvd Ste 2000 Arlington VA 22209 United States BAE Systems IAP Research Inc.
CT Corporation System 4400 Easton Commons Way Ste 125 Columbus OH 43219 United States BAE Systems Imaging Solutions Inc.
1841 Zanker Road Suite 50 San Jose CA 95112 United States BAE Systems Inc.
1101 Wilson Blvd Ste 2000 Arlington VA 22209 United States BAE Systems India Services Private Limited 2nd Floor Hotel LeMeridien Commercial Tower Raisina Road New Delhi  India BAE Systems India Homeland Security Private Limited 2nd Floor Hotel LeMeridien Commercial Tower Raisina Road New Delhi  India BAE Systems India Technology Private Limited 2nd Floor Hotel LeMeridien Commercial Tower Raisina Road New Delhi  India BAE Systems India Ventures Private Limited 2nd Floor Hotel LeMeridien Commercial Tower Raisina Road New Delhi  India BAE Systems Information and Electronic Systems Integration Inc.
65 Spit Brook Road Nashua NH 03061 United States BAE Systems Insurance Isle of Man Limited Tower House Loch Promenade Douglas IM1 2LZ Isle of Man United Kingdom BAE Systems Integrated System Technologies KSA Limited BAE Systems Integrated System Technologies Overseas Limited BAE Systems Integrated System Technologies GmbH
2b 85540 Haar Germany BAE Systems Integrated System Technologies Limited BAE Systems International Inc.
1101 Wilson Blvd Ste 2000 Arlington VA 22209 United States BAE Systems Jacksonville Ship Repair LLC 8500 Heckscher Drive Jacksonville FL 32226 United States BAE Systems Land and Armaments Holdings LLC 2000 North 15th Street 11th Floor Arlington VA 22201 United States BAE Systems Land and Armaments Inc.
2000 North 15th Street 11th Floor Arlington VA 22201 United States BAE Systems Land and Armaments L.
2000 North 15th Street 11th Floor Arlington VA 22201 United States BAE Systems Land Systems ATF Limited BAE Systems Land Systems Finance Limited BAE Systems Land Systems FMTV International Inc.
1101 Wilson Blvd Ste 2000 Arlington VA 22209 United States BAE Systems Land Systems Investments South Africa
BAE Systems Land Systems Investments Limited BAE Systems Land Systems Logistics Limited BAE Systems Land Systems Pinzgauer Limited BAE Systems Land Systems Pinzgauer Holdings Limited BAE Systems Land Systems Ranges Limited BAE Systems Land Systems Singapore Investments
BAE Systems Logistica Ltda SCN Quadra 5 Bloco A Ed.
Brasilia Shopping Torre Norte Sala 426 Brasilia DF CEP70715900 Brazil BAE Systems MAI Turkey Hava Sistemleri A.
Kizilimak Mahallesi 1445.
Sok No 2 The Paragon B Blok K 23 i Kapi No 113 ukurambar ankaya Ankara Turkey BAE Systems Marine Holdings Limited BAE Systems Marine YSL Limited BAE Systems Marine Limited BAE Systems Norfolk Ship Repair Inc.
750 West Berkley Avenue Norfolk VA 23523 United States BAE Systems Oman LLC PO Box 74 Postal Code 111 Seeb Oman BAE Systems Ordnance Systems Inc.
4509 West Stone Drive Kingsport TN 376609982 United States BAE Systems Overseas Inc.
1101 Wilson Blvd Ste 2000 Arlington VA 22209 United States BAE Systems PAMCO Services International Inc.
3701 Outlet Ctr.
Drive Suite 15 Sealy TX 774744904 United States BAE Systems Pension Funds CIF Trustees Limited BAE Systems Pension Funds Investment Management Limited BAE Systems Pension Funds Trustees Limited BAE Systems Project Services Limited BAE Systems Projects Canada Limited BAE Systems Properties Limited BAE Systems Quest Limited BAE Systems Regional Aircraft Japan KK Minami Azabu TandF Building 8th Floor 41122 Minami Azabu Minatoku Tokyo Japan BAE Systems Regional Aircraft Colombia SAS co Brigard and Urrutia Calle 70 A No.
441 Bogota Colombia BAE Systems Resolution Inc.
3701 Outlet Ctr.
Drive Suite 15 Sealy TX 774744904 United States BAE Systems RO Defense Inc.
1801 Electronics Drive Anniston AL 36207 United States BAE Systems Rokar International Limited PO Box 45059 11 Hartom Street Mount Hotzvim 91450 Jerusalem Israel BAE Systems SandS Holdings Inc.
3701 Outlet Ctr.
Drive Suite 15 Sealy TX 774744904 United States BAE Systems SandS Operations Inc.
3701 Outlet Ctr.
Drive Suite 15 Sealy TX 774744904 United States BAE Systems San Diego Ship Repair Inc.
2205 East Belt Street Foot of Sampson Street San Diego CA 92113 United States BAE Systems Saudi Limited PO Box 1732 Riyadh 11441 Saudi Arabia BAE Systems Saudi America Limited Business Gate Building 7 Floor 1 Riyadh 11482 Saudi Arabia BAE Systems Saudi Arabia Maintenance and Equipment Services Limited PO Box 1732 Riyadh 11441 Saudi Arabia BAE Systems Saudi Arabia Vehicles and Equipment Holdings Limited BAE Systems Saudi Arabia Vehicles and Equipment Nominees Limited BAE Systems Servios de Avinicos Ltda.
Rua Boa Vista No.
254 13th Floor Suite 15 Centro So Paulo So Paulo 01014907 Brazil BAE Systems Shared Services Inc.
11215 Rushmore Drive Charlotte NC 28277 United States BAE Systems Shared Services Overseas Limited BAE Systems Share Plans Trustee Limited BAE Systems Ship Repair Inc.
750 West Berkley Ave.
Norfolk VA 23523 United States BAE Systems Southeast Shipyards Alabama LLC 8500 Heckscher Drive Jacksonville FL 32226 United States BAE Systems Southeast Shipyards AMHC Inc.
8500 Heckscher Drive Jacksonville FL 32226 United States BAE Systems Surface Ships Holdings Limited BAE Systems Surface Ships Limited BAE Systems Surface Ships Projects Limited BAE Systems Surface Ships Intermediate Holdings
BAE Systems Surface Ships Integrated Support Limited BAE Systems Surface Ships International Limited BAE Systems Surface Ships Maritime Limited BAE Systems Surface Ships Portsmouth Limited BAE Systems Surface Ships Projects Malaysia Sdn Bhd Level 14 West Block Wisma Selangor Dredging 142C Jalan Ampang 50450 Kuala Lumpur Malaysia BAE Systems Surface Ships Property Services Limited BAE Systems Surface Ships Support Limited BAE Systems Surface Ships Overseas Limited BAE Systems SWS Defence AB SE691 80 Karlskoga Sweden BAE Systems Tactical Vehicle Systems LP 3701 Outlet Ctr.
Drive Suite 15 Sealy TX 774744904 United States BAE Systems Technology Solutions and Services Inc.
520 Gaither Road Rockville MD 20850 United States BAE Systems Training Services Limited BAE Systems TVS Holdings Inc.
3701 Outlet Ctr.
Drive Suite 15 Sealy TX 774744904 United States BAE Systems TVS Holdings LLC 3701 Outlet Ctr.
Drive Suite 15 Sealy TX 774744904 United States BAE Systems TVS Inc.
3701 Outlet Ctr.
Drive Suite 15 Sealy TX 774744904 United States BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 33.
Information about related undertakings continued Subsidiaries  whollyowned continued BAE Systems Zephyr Corporation co The Corporation Trust Company Corporation Trust Center 1209 Orange Street City of Wilmington County of New Castle DE 19801 United States BAE Systems Zephyr Fifth Corporation co The Corporation Trust Company Corporation Trust Center 1209 Orange Street City of Wilmington County of New Castle DE 19801 United States BAE Systems Zephyr Fourth Corporation co The Corporation Trust Company Corporation Trust Center 1209 Orange Street City of Wilmington County of New Castle DE 19801 United States BAE Systems Zephyr Second Corporation co The Corporation Trust Company Corporation Trust Center 1209 Orange Street City of Wilmington County of New Castle DE 19801 United States BAE Systems Zephyr Third Corporation co The Corporation Trust Company Corporation Trust Center 1209 Orange Street City of Wilmington County of New Castle DE 19801 United States Brabazon Limited British Aerospace Far East Limited Level 54 Hopewell Centre 183 Queens Road East Hong Kong British Aerospace Malaysia Sdn Bhd Unit 3001 Level 30 Tower A Vertical Business Suite Avenue 3 Bangsar South No.8 Jalan Kerinchi 59200 Kuala Lumpur Malaysia British Aircraft Corporation Pension Fund Trustees
British Aircraft Corporation Limited Buckfield Properties Limited Cashhold Limited CPS International Inc.
Ave.
Samuel Lewis PO Box  Panama 5 Panama Creole Nigeria Limited Tapa House 2nd Floor 45 Imman Dauda St Abosede Kuboye Crescent Entrance Surulere Lagos Nigeria Detica B.
Luna ArenA Herikerbergweg 238 1101 CM Amsterdam
Detica Group Holdings Ireland Limited Level 5 Block 4 Dundrum Town Centre Sandyford Road Dundrum Dublin 16 D16 A4W6 Ireland Detica Group Limited Detica Ireland Limited Level 5 Block 4 Dundrum Town Centre Sandyford Road Dundrum Dublin 16 D16 A4W6 Ireland Detica Mexico S. de R. de C.
Torre Esmeralda II Blvd Manuel Avila Camacho No.
Piso 18 Lomas de Chapultepec 11000 D.
Mexico
Detica Patent Limited Level 5 Block 4 Dundrum Town Centre Sandyford Road Dundrum Dublin 16 D16 A4W6 Ireland Detica Services Inc.
5th Floor Suite 1920 256 Franklin Street Boston MA 02110 United States ETI Engineering Inc.
1676 International Drive 10th Floor Suite 1000 McLean VA 22102 United States Gloster Aircraft Limited Granada Enterprises Limited PO Box 1732 Riyadh 11441 Saudi Arabia Hadrian Trustees Limited Hadrian Holdings Inc.
521 Fifth Avenue New York NY  United States Hgglunds Vehicle GmbH ErnstGrote Strasse 13 30916 Isernhagen Germany Hawker Siddeley Aviation Limited Hawker Siddeley Dynamics Limited HB Utveckling HB Development AB Nybrogatan 7 SE114 34 Stockholm Sweden Hertfordshire Estates Limited HSAHSD Pension Fund Trustees Limited Hunter Aerospace Corporation Pty Limited Evans Building Taranaki Road Edinburgh Parks Edinburgh SA 5111 Australia International Military Sales Limited Jetstream Aircraft Limited Prestwick International Airport Prestwick Ayrshire KA9 2RW United Kingdom Kalamind Limited Lemacrown Limited MES Holdco Limited PO Box 727 St.
Pauls Gate New Street St.
Helier JE4 8ZB Jersey MES Interco Meslink Limited Muiden Chemie International B. co SGG Netherlands N.
Hoogoorddreef 15 1101 BA Amsterdam Netherlands Newcombe Properties Limited PAMCO Servicios Internationales de Mexico de R. de C. co Gonzalez Calvillo y Forastieri S.
Centro Empresarial Lomas Monte Peloux No.
111 Piso 5 Lomas de Chapultepec 11000 D.
Mexico
Piper Group plc Pitch Technologies AB Repslagaregatan 25 SE582 22 Linkping Sweden Pitch Technologies Limited Sweden House 5 Upper Montagu Street London W1H 2AG United Kingdom Port Solent Limited Port Solent Marina Limited
BAE Systems Services Wisma 46 Kota BNI 34th Floor Suite 34.01.
Jl.
Jenderal Sudirman Kavling 71 Jakarta 10220 Indonesia Reflectone UK Limited 15 Canada Square London E14 5GL United Kingdom Representaciones SSTS CA Ave Francisco de Miranda Centro Lido El Rosal Oficina 71B Caracas Venezuela Royal Ordnance B. co SGG Netherlands N.
Hoogoorddreef 15 1101 BA Amsterdam Netherlands Royal Ordnance Crown Service Pension Scheme Trustees Limited Royal Ordnance Senior Staff Pension Scheme Trustees Limited Royal Ordnance Speciality Metals Limited RWT Limited Salford Electrical Instruments Limited Scentcivil Limited Scottish Aviation Limited Prestwick International Airport Prestwick Ayrshire KA9 2RW United Kingdom Sepia LLC 4219120 Lafayette Center Drive Chantilly VA 20151 United States Shipbuilding MSF Pty Limited Evans Building Taranaki Road Edinburgh Parks Edinburgh SA 5111 Australia Shipbuilding VIC Pty Limited Evans Building Taranaki Road Edinburgh Parks Edinburgh SA 5111 Australia Stephen Howe Systems Limited Alvington Yeovil Somerset BA22 8UZ United Kingdom Stewart and Stevenson Operations Nigeria Limited Tapa House 2nd Floor 45 Imman Dauda St Abosede Kuboye Crescent Entrance Surulere Lagos Nigeria Stewart and Stevenson TVS UK Limited
Unit F31 Blok F Third Floor CBD Perdana 3 Jalan Perdana Cyber 12 63000 Cyberjaya Selangor Darul Ehsan Malaysia Support Solutions General Services and Contracting CompanyLimited Liability company House No.
145 Street No.
1 Qtr.
611 Al Andulous Area Al Mansour Baghdad Iraq TDS International Pty Limited Evans Building Taranaki Road Edinburgh Parks Edinburgh SA 5111 Australia TDS International Holdings Pty Limited Evans Building Taranaki Road Edinburgh Parks Edinburgh SA 5111 Australia Tenix Philippines Inc.
Unit 702 7th Floor Philippine AXA Life Centre 1286 Sen Gil Puyat Avenue Makati City 1200 Philippines The Blackburn Aeroplane and Motor Co Limited The Bristol Aviation Company Limited The British and Colonial Aeroplane Co.
Limited
The Leeds Partnership Limited The Supermarine Aviation Works Limited Thomas Sopwith Aviation Company Limited VSEL Birkenhead Limited Warship Design Services Limited Westover Controls Incorporated 1098 Clark Street Endicott NY 13760 United States BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Notes to the Group accounts continued Information about related undertakings continued Subsidiaries  not whollyowned Aircraft Accessories and Components Co Limited 82.2% PO Box 13532 Jeddah 21434 Saudi Arabia Aircraft Research Association Limited 87.1% Manton Lane Bedford MK41 7PF United Kingdom ARA Pension Fund Trustees Limited 87.1% Manton Lane Bedford MK41 7PF United Kingdom BAE Systems Saudi Development and Training Company Limited 95% PO Box 67775 Riyadh 11517 Saudi Arabia BAE Systems SDT UK Limited 95% Flight Control System Management GmbH 66.6% PO Box  81663 Munich Germany Hadrian Properties Inc.
95% 521 Fifth Avenue New York NY  United States International Systems Engineering Company Limited 86.9% PO Box 54002 Riyadh 11514 Saudi Arabia Overhaul and Maintenance Company Limited 95.9% PO Box 1732 Riyadh 11441 Saudi Arabia Saudi Maintenance and Supply Chain Management Company Limited 51% PO Box 1732 Riyadh 11441 Saudi Arabia Saudi Technology and Logistics Services Limited 65% PO Box 1732 Riyadh 11441 Saudi Arabia SMSCMC UK Limited 51%
Munitions LLC 51% 1713 Burdette Crossing Blue Springs MO 64015 United States Equity accounted investments Abercromby Property International 20.42% Advanced Electronics Company Limited 48% PO Box 90916 Riyadh 11623 Saudi Arabia Air Astana 49% Zakarpatskaya Str 4A  Almaty Kazakhstan AMSH B.
50% Weena 210212 3012 NJ Rotterdam Netherlands BAeHAL Software Limited 40% Airport Lane HAL Estate Bangalore  India BHIC Bofors Defense Asia Sdn Bhd 49% Level 21 Suite 21.01 The Gardens South Tower Mid Valley City Lingkaran Syed Putra 59200 Kuala Lumpur Malaysia BAE Consultancy Services Malaysia Sdn Bhd 49% Tkt.11 Wisma Damansara Damansara Heights 50490 Kuala Lumpur Malaysia Canadian Naval Support Limited 50% 3099 Barrington Street Halifax NS B3K 5M7 Canada CTA International SAS 50% 13 Route De La Miniere 78000 Versailles France Data Link Solutions L.
50% 400 Collins Ave Cedar Rapids IA 52498 United States Eurofighter Aircraft Management GmbH 33% Am Soldnermoos 17 85399 Hallbergmoos Germany Eurofighter Jagdflugzeug GmbH 33% Am Soldnermoos 17 85399 Hallbergmoos Germany European Aerosystems Limited 50% FADEC International LLC 50% 1098 Clark Street Endicott NY 13760 United States FAST Holdings Limited 50% FAST Training Services Limited 50% FBV Designs Limited 50% 33 Wigmore Street London W1U 1QX United Kingdom FNSS Savunma Sistemleri A.
49% PK 37 Golbasi 06830 Ankara Turkey Gripen International KB 50% SE581 88 Linkping Sweden MBDA Holdings SAS 25% 1 Avenue Raumur 92350 Le PlessisRobinson France Nobeli Business Support AB 34% SE691 80 Karlskoga Sweden Nurol BAE Systems Hava Sistemleri Anonim S  irketi 49% niversiteler Mah 1605.
Panavia Aircraft GmbH 42.5% Am Soldnermoos 17 85399 Hallbergmoos Germany Patria Hgglunds Oy 50% Naulakatu 3 Fl 33100 Tampere Finland Reaction Engines Limited 20% Hill House 1 Little New Street London EC4A 3TR United Kingdom SaabBAe Systems Gripen AB 50% SE581 88 Linkping Sweden Saab Bofors Test Center AB 30% SE691 80 Karlskoga Sweden Sealand Support Services Limited 33.3% MoD Sealand Welsh Road Sealand Deeside Flintshire CH5 2LS United Kingdom SeeleAlvis Fenestration Limited 43.5% Unit A33 Jacks Place 6 Corbett Place London E1 6NN United Kingdom SIKA International Limited 50% Spectrum Technologies Limited 20% Western Avenue Bridgend Industrial Estate Bridgend Mid Glamorgan CF31 3RT United Kingdom Tirs Mateen and Co LLC 50% PO Box 3369 Postal Code 111 Seeb Oman Winner Developments Limited 33.3%
Directly owned by BAE Systems plc.
40% owned by BAE Systems plc.
1% owned by BAE Systems plc.
33.3% owned by BAE Systems plc.
Ownership held in common stock.
Ownership held in common shares.
Ownership held in authorized shares.
Ownership held in class of A shares.
Ownership held in class of B shares.
Ownership held in class of A shares and B shares.
Ownership held in class of A shares B shares and preference shares.
Ownership held in ordinary shares and class of A shares.
Ownership held in ordinary shares and preference shares.
Ownership held in ordinary shares and redeemable preference shares.
Ownership held in common shares and B Preferred shares.
In members voluntary liquidation.
In liquidation.
Year end 31 March.
Year end 5 April.
Year end 30 June.
Year end 30 September.
Unincorporated entity for which the address given is the principal place of business.
Unlimited company.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 34.
Adoption of IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers Adoption of IFRS 15 From 1 January 2018 the Group will adopt IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers.
The standard replaces IAS 11 Construction Contracts IAS 18 Revenue and all other existing revenue accounting requirements within IFRS.
It applies to all revenue arising from contracts with customers unless the contracts are within the scope of other existing standards such as IAS 17 Leases.
IFRS 15 outlines principles for the measurement and recognition of revenue from contracts with customers with the core principle being that revenue should be recognised at an amount that reflects the consideration to which an entity expects to be entitled in exchange for the transfer of goods and services to the customer.
In order to achieve this objective the standard sets out a fivestep model Identify the contracts with a customer.
Identify the performance obligations in the contract.
Determine the transaction price.
Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract.
Recognise revenue when or as the entity satisfies a performance obligation.
The standard also covers the accounting for the incremental costs of obtaining a contract and the costs to fulfil a contract together with presentation and disclosure requirements.
The Group will adopt IFRS 15 fully retrospectively in accordance with paragraph C3 a.
Comparatives for the year ended 31 December 2017 will be restated.
Impact of adoption of IFRS 15 Revenue recognition Revenue on the majority of contracts currently being recognised based on the completion of milestones or deliveries will cumulatively be recognised earlier.
Under IAS 11 revenue under longterm contracts is recognised when a separately identifiable phase milestone has been completed.
Under
IAS 18 revenue from the sale of goods not under longterm contracts is recognised when the significant risks and rewards of ownership have been transferred to the customer for example upon delivery.
The Group has determined that the performance obligations identified in the majority of its contracts will satisfy the criteria in IFRS 15 for recognition over time rather than at a point in time.
In order to qualify for revenue recognition over time the Groups performance must not create assets with alternative uses and it must have an enforceable right to payment for performance completed to date.
The majority of the Groups products are designed andor manufactured under contract to the customers individual specifications.
The Group is therefore limited in its ability to sell its products to alternative customers due to the substantial rework costs involved.
Under IAS 11 the recognition of revenue over time based on milestones gives rise to workinprogress in respect of costs expended in pursuit of milestones which have not been completed at the balance sheet date.
Under IFRS 15 it is not deemed appropriate to recognise significant workinprogress as an asset on the Groups balance sheet when revenue is recognised over time as the Standard considers the control of the workinprogress to have been transferred to the customer.
Consequently under IFRS 15 the Group will recognise revenue based on costs incurred reflecting the continuous transfer of the benefit of the Groups performance to the customer.
The adoption of IFRS 15 will not impact contracts for the provision of services currently accounted for on the basis of the stage of completion measured on the basis of either direct expenses incurred or labour hours delivered as these have already been determined to meet the criteria for over time revenue recognition.
If the over time criteria for revenue recognition are not met revenue is recognised at the point in time that control is transferred to the customer which is usually when legal title passes and the business has the right to payment.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Notes to the Group accounts continued Adoption of IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers continued Profit recognition Profit on contracts will continue to be recognised progressively as risks have been mitigated or retired.
Profit will be recognised earlier on shorterterm contracts in the Groups US businesses.
On contracts for both development and production in the Groups MBDA joint venture there will be lower profit recognised during the development phase.
On the majority of the Groups contracts profit is calculated by reference to reliable estimates of contract revenue and costs after making suitable allowances for technical and other risks related to performance milestones yet to be achieved.
No profit is recognised until the outcome of a contract can be reliably estimated.
Profit is recognised progressively as risks have been mitigated or retired.
Forecast losses are recognised immediately in full.
On adoption of IFRS 15 profit on these contracts will continue to be recognised progressively on this basis.
In the Groups Platforms and Services UK and Platforms and Services International businesses contracts are typically longerterm in nature than in the Groups other businesses.
Whilst the recognition of revenue is accelerated under IFRS 15 as a result of the measure of progress being based on costs incurred there is less impact on the timing of recognition of profit as operationally the next risk retirement point will still not have been achieved on the contract.
Conversely in the Groups US businesses contracts are typically shorterterm with cumulative profit to date traded at close to outturn margin.
Accordingly the acceleration of revenue recognised under IFRS 15 will accelerate profit recognition on the Groups US contracts.
The Groups MBDA joint venture is undertaking a number of significant contracts which include both development and production elements.
Under IAS 11 MBDA has previously recognised profit on contracts with both development and production elements at a single blended outturn profit margin.
Under IFRS 15 the development and production elements of the contract represent separate performance obligations with development satisfied over time and production typically satisfied at a point in time.
The development activity on these contracts has a lower margin than the subsequent production activity and therefore under IFRS 15 less profit is allocated to development with more allocated to production.
Licence revenue Some licence revenue in Applied Intelligence originally recognised upfront under IAS 18 will be deferred and recognised over the licence term under IFRS 15.
BAE Systems Applied Intelligence generates revenue from the sale of licences of its intellectual property.
The licences have varying terms and conditions and can be provided for a fixed term or in perpetuity.
Under
IAS 18 the Group recognises revenue in respect of software licences in line with the substance of those transactions either on delivery to the customer or spread over the licence term typically five years or in relation to perpetual licences over the related customer relationship.
The Group has determined that under IFRS 15 certain licences that qualified for upfront recognition under IAS 18 in its Applied Intelligence business represent the right to access the Groups intellectual property on the basis that the customers have an expectation that the Group will provide significant updates to the software during the licence term to ensure its continuing value to the customer.
Accordingly revenue relating to these licences is deferred and recognised over the licence term under IFRS 15 rather than being recognised upfront under IAS 18.
Financing
No financing as defined by IFRS 15 in the Groups contracts.
IFRS 15 states that the consideration in a contract must be adjusted for the time value of money if the timing of payments either explicitly or implicitly provides the customer or the entity with a significant benefit of financing the transfer of goods or services to the customer.
In the ordinary course of business certain of the Groups businesses can receive downpayments from customers in advance of the delivery of the contracted products and services.
Advances are not significant in the Groups US businesses.
At 31 December 2017 advances from longterm contract customers totalled 2.9bn.
The advances received are typically utilised within 12 months of the balance sheet date.
As such the Group can apply the practical expedient in IFRS 15 by which revenue does not have to be adjusted for financing if the period between the downpayment and the recognition of the related revenue is one year or less.
The Group also had 1.7bn and 0.3bn of progress payments allocated to longterm and shortterm workinprogress respectively at 31 December 2017.
On transition to IFRS 15 most of this workin progress and associated progress payments will be recognised as revenue.
Balance sheet Most balance sheet contract workinprogress replaced with a contract receivable representing accrued revenue based on costs incurred and including attributable profit.
Under IAS 11 fulfilment costs incurred on the Groups contracts are carried in the balance sheet until the associated revenue is recognised upon achievement of performance milestones.
Under IFRS 15 it is not appropriate to recognise significant workinprogress as an asset on the Groups balance sheet when revenue is recognised over time.
Accordingly contract workinprogress both shortterm and longterm is replaced with a contract receivable representing accrued revenue based on costs incurred and including attributable profit.
Inventories
Impact on reported results The Group will adopt IFRS 15 fully retrospectively in accordance with paragraph C3 a.
Provisional comparatives for the year ended 31 December 2017 are shown in the following tables.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 34.
Adoption of IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers continued Consolidated income statement Year ended 31 December 2017
IFRS 15 adjustments Restated on adoption of IFRS 15 Continuing operations Sales 19626 1139 18487 Deduct Share of sales by equity accounted investments 2575 41 2534 Add Sales to equity accounted investments 1271  1271 Revenue 18322 1098 17224 Operating costs 17089 1046 16043 Other income 131  131 Group operating profit 1364 52 1312 Share of results of equity accounted investments 116 9 107 Underlying EBITA 2034 60 1974 Nonrecurring items 13  13 EBITA 2021 60 1961 Amortisation of intangible assets 86  86 Impairment of intangible assets 384  384 Financial expense of equity accounted investments 34  34 Taxation expense of equity accounted investments 37 1 38 Operating profit 1480 61 1419 Financial income 416  416 Financial expense 762  762 Net finance costs 346  346 Profit before taxation 1134 61 1073 Taxation expense 250 34 216 Profit for the year 884 27 857 Attributable to Equity shareholders 854 27 827 Noncontrolling interests 30  30 Earnings per share Basic earnings per share 26.8p 0.8p 26.0p Diluted earnings per share 26.7p 0.8p 25.9p Underlying earnings per share Restated underlying earnings per share excludes an additional 18m benefit in respect of the impact of US tax reform enacted in December 2017 included in the restated taxation expense above.
Consolidated net assets The following table shows the effect of adopting IFRS 15 on net assets in the Consolidated balance sheet at 31 December 2016 and 2017 Increase in net assets at 31 December 2016 92 Decrease in profit for the year ended 31 December 2017 27 Decrease in total other comprehensive income for the year ended 31 December 2017 net of tax 8 Increase in net assets at 31 December 2017 57 BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Financial statements 2017 Profit for the year 962 590 Other comprehensive income Items that will not be reclassified to the income statement Remeasurements on retirement benefit schemes 142 56 Items that may be reclassified to the income statement Amounts charged to hedging reserve 2 13 Total other comprehensive income for the year net of tax 140 69 Total comprehensive income for the year 1102 521 Restated to recognise an increase in investments in subsidiary undertakings representing the cost of the Free and Matching elements of the Share Incentive Plan awarded to employees of subsidiary undertakings.
Company statement of changes in equity for the year ended 31 December Issued share capital
Other
Retained earnings
At 1 January 2016 87 1249 218 2209 3763 Profit for the year Total other comprehensive income for the year   13 56 69 Sharebased payments    50 50 Net sale of own shares    3 3 Ordinary share dividends    670 670 At 31 December 2016 87 1249 205 2126 3667 Profit for the year    962 962 Total other comprehensive income for the year   2 142 140 Sharebased payments    55 55 Net purchase of own shares    1 1 Ordinary share dividends    684 684 At 31 December 2017 87 1249 203 2600 4139 The nondistributable portion of retained earnings is 649m 2016 604m.
Retained earnings restated to recognise an increase in investments in subsidiary undertakings representing the cost of the Free and Matching elements of the Share Incentive Plan awarded to employees of subsidiary undertakings.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Company statement of comprehensive income for the year ended 31 December Notes Noncurrent assets Intangible assets 38 34 Property plant and equipment 29 31 Investments in subsidiary undertakings and participating interests 2 8439 8399 Other receivables 3 4 Retirement benefit surpluses 8 27 8 Other financial assets 4 280 385 8816 8861 Current assets Trade and other receivables 3 2653 3038 Current tax 14 14 Other financial assets 4 145 347 Cash and cash equivalents 2707 2168 5519 5567 Total assets 14335 14428 Noncurrent liabilities Loans 5 1059 1122 Other payables 19 33 Retirement benefit obligations 8 186 308 Other financial liabilities 4 216 182 Provisions 7 101 97 1581 1742 Current liabilities Loans and overdrafts 7 Trade and other payables 6 8416 8664 Other financial liabilities 4 172 332 Provisions 7 20 23 8615 9019 Total liabilities 10196 10761 Net assets 4139 3667 Capital and reserves Issued share capital 87 87 Share premium 1249 1249 Other reserves 9 203 205 Retained earnings 2600 2126 Total equity 4139 3667 Restated to recognise an increase in investments in subsidiary undertakings representing the cost of the Free and Matching elements of the Share Incentive Plan awarded to employees of subsidiary undertakings.
The Companys profit for the year is 962m 2016 590m Approved by the Board on 21 February 2018 and signed on its behalf by C N Woodburn P J Lynas Chief Executive Group Finance Director Registered number telBAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Company balance sheet as at 31 December 1.
Preparation
Basis of preparation The financial statements of BAE Systems plc have been prepared on a going concern basis as discussed in the Directors report on page 81 and in accordance with Financial Reporting Standard FRS 101 Reduced Disclosure Framework issued in September 2015.
The amendments to FRS 101 201516 cycle issued in July 2016 and FRS 101 201617 cycle issued in July 2017 have no impact on the Company.
In preparing these financial statements the Company applies the recognition measurement and disclosure requirements of International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS as adopted by the EU EUadopted IFRS but makes amendments where necessary in order to comply with the Companies Act 2006 and has set out below where advantage of the FRS 101 disclosure exemptions has been taken the requirements of paragraphs 45b and 46 to 52 of IFRS 2 Sharebased Payment the requirements of paragraphs 62 B64d B64e B64g B64h B64j to B64m B64nii B64oii B64p B64qii B66 and B67 of IFRS 3 Business Combinations the requirements of paragraph 33c of IFRS 5 Noncurrent Assets Held for Sale and Discontinued Operations the requirements of IFRS 7 Financial Instruments Disclosures the requirements of paragraphs 91 to 99 of IFRS 13 Fair Value
Statements to present comparative information in respect of paragraph 79aiv of IAS 1 paragraph 73e of IAS 16 Property Plant and Equipment paragraph 118e of IAS 38 Intangible Assets and paragraphs 76 and 79d of IAS 40 Investment Property the requirements of paragraphs 10d 10f 16 38A 38B 38C 38D 40A 40B 40C 40D 111 and 134 to 136 of IAS 1 Presentation of Financial Statements the requirements of IAS 7 Statement of Cash Flows the requirements of paragraphs 30 and 31 of IAS 8 Accounting Policies Changes in Accounting Estimates and Errors the requirements of paragraphs 17 and 18A of IAS 24 Related Party and 135c to 135e of IAS 36 Impairment of Assets.
The Company intends to continue to prepare its financial statements in accordance with FRS 101.
In accordance with Section  of the Companies Act 2006 the Company is exempt from the requirement to present its own income statement.
The amount of profit for the year of the Company is disclosed in the Company statement of comprehensive income.
The financial statements have been prepared under the historical cost convention as modified by the revaluation of relevant financial assets and financial liabilities including derivative instruments.
Significant accounting policies The significant accounting policies applied in the preparation of these individual financial statements are set out below.
These policies have been applied consistently to all the years presented unless otherwise stated.
Investments in subsidiary undertakings and participating interests Fixed asset investments in shares in subsidiary undertakings and participating interests are stated at cost less provision for impairment.
Other significant accounting policies Other significant accounting policies are consistent with the Group accounts and the table below references where they are disclosed.
Significant accounting policy Page Loans and overdrafts 172 Retirement benefits 174 Provisions 184 Prior year restatement The Company has restated comparatives for the year ended 31 December 2016 to recognise a 250m increase in investments in subsidiary undertakings and a corresponding increase in nondistributable retained earnings representing the cost of the Free and Matching elements of the Share Incentive Plan awarded to employees of subsidiary undertakings.
The Company had previously recognised the cost of these awards in the income statement with a corresponding credit in equity.
Accordingly investments and nondistributable retained earnings at 1 January 2016 have increased by 220m and profit for the year ended 31 December 2016 has increased by 30m.
Investments in subsidiary undertakings and participating interests
At 1 January 2017 Additions 45 At 31 December 2017 8458 Impairment provisions At 1 January 2017 14 Impairment charge 5 At 31 December 2017 19 Net carrying value At 31 December 2017 8439 At 31 December 2016 Restated to recognise an increase in investments in subsidiary undertakings representing the cost of the Free and Matching elements of the Share Incentive Plan awarded to employees of subsidiary undertakings.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Notes to the Company accounts 3.
Trade and other receivables
Amounts owed by subsidiary undertakings 2571 2954 Amounts owed by Group joint ventures 5 Prepayments and accrued income 62 37 Other receivables 15 47 2653 3038 Other financial assets and liabilities 2017 2016
Liabilities
Assets
Liabilities
Noncurrent
Cash flow hedges  foreign exchange contracts  1 1 Other foreign exchangeinterest rate contracts 201 215 274 182 Debtrelated derivative financial instruments  assets 79  110
Cash flow hedges  foreign exchange contracts  1 1 2 Other foreign exchangeinterest rate contracts 145 152 346 330 Debtrelated derivative financial instruments  liabilities  19 The contractual cash flows on derivative financial instruments at the reporting date are shown below classified by maturity.
Less than one year 17 11 Between one and five years 76 136 More than five years 9telFull disclosures relating to the Groups other financial assets and liabilities and financial risk management strategies are given in notes 13 27 and 28 to the Group accounts.
Loans
Noncurrent
US500m 4.75% bond repayable tel400m 4.125% bond repayable telUS400m 5.8% bond repayable tel1059 1122 Trade and other payables
Amounts owed to subsidiary undertakings 7299 7830 Amounts owed to Group joint ventures 884 631 Accruals and deferred income 120 121 Other payables 113 82 8416 8664 BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Notes to the Company accounts continued
Contracts and other Noncurrent 97 Current 23 At 1 January 2017 120 Created 4 Utilised 8 Released 1 Net present value adjustments 6 At 31 December 2017 121 Represented by Noncurrent 101 Current 20 The Company holds provisions for contractual costs that it expects to incur over an extended period.
These costs are based on past experience of similar items and represent managements best estimate of the likely outcome.
Retirement benefits The Company participates in all of the Groups UK pension schemes.
Regular contributions to the schemes are made in line with the schedule of contributions and a share of deficit funding is allocated to participating employers.
The deficit allocation methodology is based on the relative payroll contributions of active members.
Full disclosures relating to these schemes are given in note 21 to the Group accounts.
Amounts recognised on the balance sheet The table below shows the Companys share of the Groups UK pension schemes after allocation to other participating employers.
Present value of unfunded obligations 33 39 Present value of funded obligations 1326 1429 Fair value of scheme assets 1200 1168 Companys share of net IAS 19 deficit 159 300 Represented by Retirement benefit surpluses 27 8 Retirement benefit obligations 186 308 Share capital and other reserves Share capital Disclosures in respect of the Companys share capital are provided in note 23 to the Group accounts.
Other reserves
Capital redemption reserve
Total
At 1 January Amounts credited to hedging reserve   13 13 At 31 December 2016 202 3  205 Amounts charged to hedging reserve   2 2 At 31 December 2017 202 3 2 203 Statutory reserve Under Section 4 of the British Aerospace Act 1980 this reserve may only be applied in paying up unissued shares of the Company to be allotted to members of the Company as fully paid bonus shares.
Capital redemption reserve The capital redemption reserve represents the cumulative nominal value of the Companys ordinary shares repurchased and subsequently cancelled.
Hedging reserve The hedging reserve comprises the effective portion of the cumulative net change in the fair value of cash flow hedging instruments related to hedged transactions that have not yet occurred.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 10.
Sharebased payments Options over shares of the Company have been granted to employees of the Company under various plans.
Details of the terms and conditions of each sharebased payment plan are given in the Annual remuneration report on pages 96 to 115.
2017 2016 Range of exercise price of outstanding options
Years
Range of exercise price of outstanding options
Years
Executive Share Option Plan 3.01  6.49 8 3.01  5.56 8 Performance Share Plan  5  5 The average share price in the year was 6.11 2016 5.24.
Employees
The total number of employees of the Company at 31 December 2017 was 1134 2016 1101.
Total staff costs excluding charges for sharebased payments were as follows Wages and salaries 86 98 Social security costs 9 9 Pension costs  defined contribution plans 2 2 Pension costs  defined benefit plans .
Other information Company audit fee Fees payable to the Companys auditor for the audit of the Companys annual accounts totalled 2034000 2016 1776000.
Related party transactions Disclosures in respect of related party transactions are provided in note 30 to the Group accounts.
The Company also has amounts receivable from Aircraft Accessories and Co.
Limited of 7m 2016 nil and Aircraft Research Association Limited of 4m 2016 1m which are not whollyowned subsidiaries.
The Company also has a related party relationship with its directors and key management personnel and pension schemes.
Directors emoluments Under Schedule 5 of the Large and MediumSized Companies and Groups Accounts and Reports Regulations 2008 Schedule 5 total directors emoluments excluding Company pension contributions were 8748961 2016 10806172 these amounts are calculated on a different basis to emoluments in the Annual remuneration report which are calculated under Schedule 8 of the Large and MediumSized Companies and Groups Accounts and Reports Amendment Regulations 2013 Schedule 8 .
These emoluments were paid for their services on behalf of the BAE Systems Group.
No emoluments related specifically to their work for the Company.
Under Schedule 5 the aggregate gains made by the directors from the exercise of share options in 2017 as at the date of exercise was 1002325 2016 158125 and the net aggregate value of assets received by directors in 2017 from LongTerm Incentive Plans as calculated at the date of vesting was 1016511 2016 nil these amounts are calculated on a different basis from the valuation of share plan benefits under Schedule 8  in the Annual remuneration report.
Retirement benefits are accruing to one director in respect of defined benefit schemes and to two directors in respect of defined contribution schemes.
Company guaranteed borrowings Borrowings by subsidiary undertakings totalling 3010m 2016 3295m which are included in the Groups borrowings have been guaranteed by the Company.
Information about related undertakings In accordance with Section 409 of the Companies Act 2006 a full list of the Companys subsidiaries and significant holdings is included in note 33 to the Group accounts.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 Financial statements Registered office 6 Carlton Gardens
SW1Y 5AD United Kingdom
Company websitesite Registered in England and Wales No.
Registrars
Equiniti Limited Aspect House Spencer Road
West Sussex BN99 6DA United Kingdom If you have any queries regarding your shareholding or need to notify any changes to your personal details please contact Equiniti.
Equinitis website help. a shareholding.
If you cannot find the answer to your question there is an online email form which will help to ensure your question is directed to the most appropriate team for a response.
Alternatively you can call the BAE Systems Helpline ontel or from outside the UK 44tel.
Lines are open from 8.30am to 5.30pm Monday to Friday excluding UK Bank holidays.
In addition the following services are offered to shareholders Shareview  online access to your shareholding including balance movements indicative share prices and information on recent payments Dividend mandates  have your dividends paid directly into either your UK bankbuilding society account or an overseas bank account Dividend reinvestment plan DRIP  have your dividend reinvested in shares purchased on the stock market More information on all these services can be found on Equinitis website site.
American Depositary Receipts BAE Systems plc American Depositary Receipts ADRs are traded on the Over The Counter market OTC under the symbol BAESY.
One ADR represents four BAE Systems plc ordinary shares.
JPMorgan Chase Bank N. is the depositary.
If you should have any queries please contact JPMorgan Chase and Co PO Box 64504 St Paul MN 551640854 USA Email jpmorgan.
Telephone number for general queries 800 990 1135 Telephone number from outside the US 1tel
ShareGift the share donation charity registered charity number accepts donations of small parcels of shares which may be uneconomic to sell.
Details of the scheme are available from ShareGift at sharegift. or by email email.
Share price information The middle market price of the Companys ordinary shares on 31 December 2017 was 573.0p and the range during the year was 535.5p to 677.0p.
For more information Visit the Shareholder information section of our website investors.
FINANCIAL CALENDAR Financial year end 31 December Annual General Meeting 10 May 2018 2017 final ordinary dividend payable 1 June 2018 2018 halfyearly results announcement 1 August 2018 2018 interim ordinary dividend payable 30 November 2018 2018 fullyear results preliminary announcement Annual Report February 2019 March 2019 2018 final ordinary dividend payable June 2019 BEWARE OF SHARE FRAUD Fraudsters use persuasive and highpressure tactics to lure investors into scams.
They may offer to sell shares that turn out to be worthless or nonexistent or to buy shares at an inflated price in return for an upfront payment.
While high profits are promised if you buy or sell shares in this way you will probably lose your money.
Victims of share fraud lose an average of 20000 to these scams with as much as 200m being lost in the UK each year.
How to avoid share fraud Keep in mind that firms authorised by the FCA are unlikely to contact you out of the blue with an offer to buy or sell shares.
Call the FCA ontel if the firm does not have contact details on the Register or you are told they are out of date.
Do not get into a conversation note the name of the person and firm contacting you and then end the call.
Search the list of unauthorised firms to avoid at scamsmart. ca.
Check the Financial Services Register from fca. by the FCA.
Consider that if you buy or sell shares from an unauthorised firm you will not have access to the Financial Ombudsman Service or Financial Services Compensation Scheme.
Beware of fraudsters claiming to be from an authorised firm copying its website or giving you false contact details.
Think seriously about getting independent financial and professional advice before you hand over any money.
Use the firms contact details listed on the Register if you want to call it back.
Remember if it sounds too good to be true it probably is Report a scam If you are approached by fraudsters please tell the FCA using the FCA Consumer Helpline ontel or the share fraud reporting form at fca. itescams where you can also find out more about investment scams.
If you have already paid money to share fraudsters you should contact Action Fraud ontel or online at actionfraud.
BAE Systems Annual Report 2017 certified paper.
Park is an EMAS certified company and its Environmental Management System is certified to ISO 14001.
100% of the inks used are vegetable oil based 95% of press chemicals are recycled for further use and on average 99% of any waste associated with this production will be recycled.
The papers are the combination of 100% virgin fibre and 50% recycled fibre sourced from well managed responsible FSC certified forests.
The pulp for each is bleached using an Elemental Chlorine Free ECF process.
Designed and produced by Radley Yeldar.
Download the BAE Systems iPad Investors App BAE Systems Investor Relations App gives you all the latest investor and financial media information you need in an iPadoptimised App.
Registered in England and Wales No.
BAE Systems plc 2018.
All rights reserved BAE SYSTEMS is a registered trade mark of BAE Systems plc.
