BUIL DING BETT ER FINANCIAL FUTURES Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ONE ARROW ONE ARROW LIVING OUR
We continue to run the business in line with our One Arrow Group values and are proud of the role Arrow Global plays in Building Better Financial Futures for our stakeholders ensuring a positive outcome for both our customers and the Group.
LIVING OUR VALUES Its been another successful year of growth and value creation for Arrow Global.
CONTENTS
STRATEGIC REPORT 03 Highlights 2017 04 Chairmans statement 06 At a glance 08 Business model 12 Market 14 Our strategy 16 Group chief executive officers review 20 Group chief financial officers review 24 IFRS to cash result reconciliations 26 Executive management team 28 Country reviews 34 Our people 36 Sustainability 38 Principal risks and uncertainties 43 Statement of viability
44 Board of directors 46 Corporate governance report 51 Audit committee report 56 Risk committee report 58 Nomination committee report 60 Directors remuneration report 79 Report of the directors 83 Directors responsibilities statement FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 84 Independent auditors report 90 Consolidated statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income 91 Consolidated and parent company statement of financial position 92 Consolidated and parent company statement of changes in equity 93 Consolidated and parent company statement of cash flows 94 Notes to the financial statements 136 Additional information unaudited 138 Glossary IBC Shareholder information Find out more about us at www. rrowglobalir.
Taking ownership and ensuring a positive outcome for both our customers and our business.
We do this by being collaborative and supporting each other wherever we work or reside.
In October 2017 we committed to Building Better Financial Futures for our stakeholders when we formally launched the Groups purpose and values in every country and across all businesses.
The Group has grown quickly and has been successful steadily increasing our profit and delivered great returns for our shareholders.
While we must continue to deliver against our targets and budgets how we do this and the behaviours we adopt in doing so are equally important.
We are convinced that for any business to be successful and to sustain this success it has to embrace a higher purpose and have common values whatever the local cultural nuances local regulations and laws.
Our purpose is Building Better Financial Futures and is an important step to building a One Arrow culture that we believe is critical to our continued success.
Building better financial futures is inspirational and aspirational.
It inspires because it takes our outward focus to a new level not just emphasising the importance of doing the right thing for our customers or clients but ensuring we understand their needs by putting every one of us in our customers shoes.
It is aspirational as it will drive us to continually do better.
Everyone in the Group has a role to play and the more we use the purpose as our guiding principle the more we will make a difference for our stakeholders.
Underpinning this is a set of common values our framework for how we all agree to behave and treat each other  as individuals and as a business.
The values were shaped by colleagues in each country through workshops and meetings.
Alongside the values we introduced a Group employee recognition scheme to all companies in the
This gives everyone in the Group the opportunity to recognise those colleagues who are living the values in their daytoday roles going above and beyond what is required and demonstrating how they are helping to build better financial futures.
Our purpose should guide all that we do.
The
Groups values should become the behaviours and actions we will live by.
Our actions will become stories.
And it is the stories that will make us who we are.
We see many examples of our colleagues in all countries embracing our purpose and values and truly acting as One Arrow and it is this that will inspire us all to a new level of excellence.
INTRODUCING THE GROUPS PURPOSE AND VALUES LIVING OUR VALUES 03 Strategic report www. rrowglobalir.
HIGHLIGHTS 2017 DELIVERING GROWTH
FINANCIAL HIGHLIGHTS
24% underlying EPS growth Strong underlying ROE growth Increased capitallight asset management revenues 84month and 120month ERC growth Strengthened balance sheet continue to reduce cost of funding and extend duration
OPERATIONAL HIGHLIGHTS
Diversified portfolio purchases by geography and asset class Continued to outperform underwriting forecasts performance at 103% Maintained stable returns across all geographies One Arrow investment programme launched driving future efficiency gains and sustainable growth Profit before tax 2016 31.4m Assets under management 53.4bn
Customer accounts Different geographies Fullyear dividend 2016 9.1p Underlying profit after tax 2016 45.6m Diversified revenue streams 22.3% asset management 77.7% debt purchase Total purchased loan portfolios and loan notes 2016 804.1m Total revenue 2016 235.9m Important notes IFRS cash metrics and underlying results are important to understand the key drivers of the business.
The reconciliations and commentary on pages 24 and 25 have been prepared to aid this understanding which helps to support the commentary of the financial review for the year.
A glossary of the terms can be found on pages 138 to 140.
22.3% 77.7% STRATEGIC REPORT 04 STRATEGIC REPORT Arrow Global Group PLC  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 FURTHER GROWTH and CONSISTENT DELIVERY
CHAIRMANS STATEMENT
Arrow Globals stated mission is to Build Better Financial Futures and I believe that the strides the Company has made this year put it in a stronger position to do this than ever before.
Another strong year of growth and delivery I am pleased to be able to present another strong set of financial results during a year which saw the Company continue to register significant growth and add another market to our geographical footprint.
We have continued to diversify our earnings with further growth in our high quality capital light income from our asset management business which grew revenues by 53.5%.
We are a more diversified Group than ever before growing the geographical and asset class mix of our debt purchase business by investing 36.7% of our capital in the UK 24.7% in Portugal 18.9% in Italy and 19.7% in Benelux.
During the year we completed the acquisitions of Zenith in Italy and Mars Capital in the UK and Ireland significantly enhancing our European capabilities.
Profit after tax increased by 51.7% to 39.9 million giving an increase in basic earnings per share of 51.0% to 22.8p.
Financially we have again delivered against our guidance with underlying basic earnings per share increasing 24.1% to 32.4p and underlying return on equity increasing by 3.8 percentage points to 32.9%.
Strategic report www. rrowglobalir.
This strong performance enables us to propose a final 2017 dividend of 8.1p bringing the full year dividend to 11.3p 2016 9.1p which is at the top of our payout range.
Once
The evolution of our model Our strategy of building top three positions in our chosen European markets has remained on track throughout 2017.
The servicing capabilities we have continued to build underpinned by the strong relationships we have with institutional investors has meant our asset management division has been the fastest growing part of the Group.
The highly cash generative nature of this business has further improved the quality of the Companys earnings stream.
We have a clear plan in place to continue to grow this business as we identify further high value niches within our large markets where Arrows superior technology data and relationships provide us with a competitive advantage.
Group governance The Group operates in a number of countries with strong local management teams that have responsibility for their operations.
This structure has been enhanced by the appointment of Dave Sutherland as Group chief operating officer who the country management teams now report to.
The appointment of our new Group chief risk officer Clodagh Gunnigle earlier in the year has also brought greater structure and diligence to our risk and governance procedures with Group wide risk and compliance teams all reporting to her .
This revised structure has allowed management at the Group level to focus on strategy origination and capital allocation.
Overseen by our Group chief executive officer and Group chief financial officer I believe that this is the most efficient structure for the Groups governance and consider the company very well positioned to perform optimally at the operational level.
The Board The Arrow board is a strong group of highly experienced individuals who all bring valuable experience and skills to bear in Arrows thinking and strategy.
Last year we announced that we had appointed Paul Cooper as our new Group chief financial officer.
His strong financial services experience and track record of driving operational change through large companies means he is a great addition to the team.
Our previous Group chief financial officer Rob Memmott left us at the end of February 2018 and I would like to thank Rob on behalf of the Board for his dedication and the important role he has played in successfully growing the Company.
Our
Group chief executive officer Lee Rochford continues to deliver effectively on the Groups strategic objectives.
Lee leads a strong Executive team comprising a mix of established members and new hires.
Their energy commitment and focus on key strategic deliverables have had a marked impact on our results.
One Arrow  fostering a culture that underpins our values Arrows mission statement is to Build Better Financial Futures for our customers across all the markets in which we operate.
In order to continue to build and improve on this goal throughout the course of the year we launched each of our four Group values We succeed together Were trusted and valued Were brave and creative and We do the right thing.
In order to embed these into our Company DNA and Groupwide approach to our operations the management team embarked on a series of roadshows around all countries in the Group to present their vision for the business and get feedback from employees.
I am pleased to say that feedback to this initiative from across the Group has been overwhelmingly positive and it is a great source of pride for us that our employees are so committed to a positive working culture focused on excellent customer experience and outcomes.
Looking forward I am pleased that Arrow has registered another year of strong growth and that so much has been achieved to integrate the business more fully ensuring we are well positioned to continue to deliver the consistent financial performance we have registered since IPO.
We are well positioned for 2018 the market opportunity for the business remains compelling and I believe we have the strategy management team and employee base to continue to deliver on market expectations.
Finally I would like to thank my fellow board members the senior leadership team and all colleagues for their hard work and commitment in 2017 and our shareholders for their ongoing support as we continue to evolve Arrows differentiated business model.
I look ahead with a great deal of confidence for the business.
The opportunities for Arrow are significant and I believe we have the right skill set at all levels of the Company to capitalise on them and continue to deliver growth and value.
Jonathan Bloomer
1 March 2018 For more information see our corporate governance report on page 46 STRATEGIC REPORT Arrow Global Group PLC  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 AT A GLANCE OUR BUSINESS TODAY OUR PURPOSE BUILDING BETTER FINANCIAL FUTURES OUR BUSINESS Debt purchase A year of strong collections growth Core Collections 342.2m 19 .7% Asset management Another record year of revenue growth
71.1m 53.5% Read more about our  nancial performance on page 20 OUR AIM To be the most sophisticated purchaser and specialist asset manager of debt portfolios across all of our markets.
OUR CORE BUSINESS MODEL Debt purchase We buy debt at a discount to face value and use our data analytics and collections expertise to provide our customers with flexible payment plans resulting in collections significantly above cost of acquisition.
Specialist asset management We advise on manage and collect debt portfolios generating fee income from clients.
Often we will coinvest alongside clients ensuring our interests are fully aligned.
Our model consists of both primary servicing where we service the debt directly for clients and master servicing where we provide oversight on behalf of our clients to ensure their portfolio is placed with the best primary servicer to deliver their investment targets.
MULTI ASSET CLASSES Credit cards Personal loans
Student loans 1st Liens
REOs
Motor
SME
Utilities
Retail
Telco
Buytolet
Residential
2nd Liens
BETTER
FINANCIAL
FUTURES
CUSTOMERS
CLIENTS
ARROW
Leading service Loan portfolios Strong partnerships Data analytics Specialist partners Read more about our Business model on page 08 07 www. rrowglobalir.
OUR OPPORTUNITIES OUR MARKETS United Kingdom and Ireland Assets under management 16.0bn To read about UK and Irish operations see pages 2829
Assets under management 6.8bn To read about Portuguese operations see page 30
Assets under management 5.0bn To read about Benelux operations see page 31
Assets under management 25.6bn To read about Italian operations see page 32 OUR STRATEGY To be a leading player and operator in our chosen markets To build a diversified riskweighted investment portfolio To grow our specialist asset management business To transform the customer journey within our industry To attract and retain the best talent To read about our strategy see page 14 Increased pressure from European Banking Authority EBA and European Central Bank ECB to deal with legacy nonperforming loans NPLs Introduction of IFRS 9 in January 2018 will accelerate provisions by banks meaning more NPLs become available Final confirmed European sales volumes for 2017 expected to exceed 120 billion
PRESSURE
DRIVING BANK
120bn 2 TRILLION NPLS ACROSS EUROPE PLUS SECONDARY MARKET SALES 2tr
CHANGES STRATEGIC REPORT BUSINESS MODEL BUILDING BETTER FINANCIAL FUTURES Customerfocused approach underpinned by sophisticated debt portfolio investment and specialist asset management
BETTER
FINANCIAL
FUTURES
CUSTOMERS
CLIENTS
ARROW
Strong returns Leading service Loan portfolios Strong partnerships Turn page to find out more about how we work with our customers clients and how we deliver excellence DATA ANALYTICS We have a unique data tool that allows us to match debt portfolios efficiently.
This has been compiled since the Companys inception in 2005 and consists of over 35 million records.
The richness of the data assets we hold informs our investment decisions and collections strategy allowing us to accurately value potential portfolios and optimise servicing.
Crucially it also positions us well to provide the best treatment for our customers as we are able to understand their financial position and needs.
SPECIALIST PARTNERS We have over 110 client relationships.
Having started as a capital investor ourselves we are unique in how we approach relationships with thirdparty credit investors.
As a preferred partner of institutional investors we assist with valuation coinvest alongside them if the portfolios characteristics align with our targets and manage the acquired assets as part of an ongoing asset management agreement focused on achieving required returns.
As we are a logical buyer of these familiar portfolios once the assets investor decides to exit we will often purchase the tails of these providing our balance sheet with predictable cashgenerative assets.
08 www. rrowglobalir.
Strategic Report DELIVERING VALUE Our customers We understand that debt is a prominent issue and aim to work with customers to help them improve their financial situation.
We work with credit charities and other organisations that provide free impartial services to ensure our customers get the best advice available.
By using our industry leading data and customer segmentation systems we are able to better understand our customers and their financial situations enabling us to interact with them on an individual basis.
Our ultimate aim is to help customers rehabilitate their finances improve their credit file and gain access to more affordable mainstream credit services currently unavailable to them.
Our clients We have exceptionally strong relationships with financial institutions and institutional investors.
This means we are able to assist financial institutions to deleverage by acquiring portfolios from them our debt purchase business and are strongly positioned to help our investment partners value and service their own portfolio acquisitions our asset management business.
This means we make many of our portfolio investments off market either in a bilateral trade with an institution or the purchase of an asset tail from an exiting credit investor on our servicing platform helping us to mitigate pricing pressure and giving us greater visibility on returns.
Our colleagues Our people provide the essential talent and energy to fulfil our purpose and goals.
We rely on them to consistently do the right thing in order to drive great customer service and deliver excellent customer outcomes.
Our employees share in the Companys success through our share optionspurchase schemes while remuneration across the Company is linked to a mixture of Group performance and personal success against our One Arrow values scorecards.
This means their financial futures are aligned to ours and those of our other stakeholders.
Our communities We believe in working with the communities where we operate ensuring that we do all we can to have a positive influence through supporting local charities and initiatives.
We have a clear strategy to support charities that focus on financial education and financial support and more generally we work closely with Citizens Advice CA as well as a range of debt charities including StepChange Payplan and Christians Against Poverty.
Our shareholders We believe that if we fulfil our obligations to our customers clients colleagues and communities our shareholders are the ultimate beneficiaries.
We aim to deliver strong returns to our shareholders targeting return on equity in the midtwenties percentage and EPS growth in the highteens percentage over the medium term.
This consistency is further underpinned by good balance sheet management that prioritises stable longterm funding.
BUILDING
BETTER FINANCIAL FUTURES FOR
COLLEAGUES by valuing and rewarding our talent
SHAREHOLDERS by creating value
BUSINESS MODEL BUILDING BETTER FINANCIAL FUTURES Turn page to find out more about how we work with our customers clients and how we deliver excellence Arrow Global Group PLC  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT BUSINESS MODEL CONTINUED PUTTING OUR CUSTOMERS FIRST Continual improvements in the customer journey We work with our customers leading debt charities industry bodies and thirdparty research agencies to help us understand our customers needs.
We aim to establish longterm affordable repayment plans which help our customers rehabilitate their credit listing and gain access to more affordable mainstream financial products.
Through our data models we are able to build consolidated customer profiles that reflect customers current circumstances and invest in leading customer service platforms to ensure that all our customers receive optimised service.
In the UK our collections colleagues are rewarded based on the customer outcomes they achieve rather than the amount they collect.
In 2016 we launched our UK digital customer portal and saw an immediate increase in online payments of over 60%.
The flexibility this system provides has continued to prove popular with customers making it easy for them to engage with us and stay in control of their payments.
We are continuing to focus on enhancing the fully integrated UK customer service platform and introducing the same approach across the Group.
This gives us greater flexibility to work across multiple asset classes performing and nonperforming loans allowing us to develop a true single customer view and assist in making more informed collections decisions.
Every collections colleague receives specialist training in handling vulnerable customers and all collection staff regularly undertake refresher courses.
CUSTOMERS CLIENTS OPERATIONAL EXCELLENCE We have built a strong track record of underwriting discipline ensuring we acquire portfolios in line with our target returns and risk management framework.
Cumulatively we have collected 103% of our prepurchase underwriting forecast and have a track record of outperformance.
ORIGINATION EXPERTISE Our focus on customer outcomes and strong track record means that we are a preferred purchaser from financial institutions.
We will either purchase portfolios  often bilateral trades with the vendor  or for larger acquisitions will purchase via a consortium structure alongside our institutional investor fund partners.
Our strong relationships with large institutions means we perform the majority over 70% in 2017 of our portfolio acquisitions off market rather than as part of an auction process this offers increased contractual stability.
Our servicing business also provides purchasing opportunities as credit investors utilising our servicing platforms look to recycle their capital.
How we acquire loan portfolios and servicing assets  strong client relationships Partner with thirdparty funds to acquire large portfolios can then service the assets Majority of portfolio purchases made off market trusted buyer Able to purchase assets from own servicing platforms prior knowledge enhances performance Focus on customer service and positive outcomes makes Arrow a preferred buyer from credit originators Strength of asset management platform means Arrow is the first choice portfolio manager for many institutional investors clients
ACQUISITION
MODEL
PARTNER WITH
PURCHASE
FROM
CURRENT
SERVICING
PLATFORMS
PURCHASE
FROM CREDIT
COINVEST ASSET MANAGE Strategic report
STRONG
RETURNS and HIGH MARGIN
INTELLIGENT
APPROACH
TO CORPORATE
MAJORITY OF PURCHASES OFF
DEEP SERVICING
IN CHOSEN
COINVEST
ALONGSIDE
CLIENTS
SOPHISTICATED
SMALL SCALE
INVESTMENTS
Corporate acquisitions Excellence of execution Specialise at identifying high value niches and then expanding into them Strong track record of buying synergistic bolton businesses at sensible valuations Retain and incentivise quality management teams with a strong cultural fit Expertise in scaling acquired businesses into desirable platforms for clients Considerable success with rapidly growing AUM of acquired businesses
FINANCIAL EXCELLENCE The combination of our debt purchase and asset management businesses provides good flexibility between a highreturn capital intensive operation and an assetlight cashgenerative operation.
A balanced longduration capital structure with low weighted average cost of debt 3.9% provides a robust financial position.
Arrows business model is highly differentiated Arrow is a sophisticated investor and asset manager not a bulk buyer of loans Approach driven by strong client relationships Coinvestment structure aligns with client interests for servicing Majority of portfolio purchases transacted offmarket avoiding auction pressure Taking incremental steps towards discretionary asset management model Aim to be a top three player in chosen markets do not target geographic growth for its own sake 12 STRATEGIC REPORT Arrow Global Group PLC  Annual Report and Accounts 2017
SIGNIFICANT OPPORTUNITY Arrow is a well positioned credit management services provider when considering wider market trends of deleveraging  nancial institutions and increasing consumer debt WELL POSITIONED BUSINESS Our debt purchase and asset management businesses are both well positioned to capitalise on prevailing market trends Debt purchase Set up to help banks deleverage by purchasing their loan portfolios Customerfocused model and well regulated business activities attractive to vendor banks Logical purchaser of asset tails from own platform as credit fund clients look to realise investments Strong balance sheet able to fund future growth Asset management Strong institutional investor relationships make Arrow a preferred servicing partner Italian market knowledge and expertise significantly enhanced by Zenith acquisition Mars Capital acquisition has provided further secured servicing capability in the UK and new opportunities in the attractive Irish market Increased capabilities will facilitate transition to discretionary asset management Our market share 0.5% PwC estimates that European banks currently hold 2.3 trillion of nonperforming loans and noncore assets on their balance sheets.
In order for the European banking system to fully recover from the 2008 financial crisis and for the banks to start lending efficiently again the majority of these assets will need to be divested over time.
This divestment programme is beginning to be accelerated by strong European Central Bank action to encourage banks to recognise and provide for NPLs much faster than they previously have done.
We are already seeing the effect this is having on the NPL market with total portfolio sales in 2017 expected to conclude nearly 30 billion ahead of 2016.
Across Arrow Globals six geographies we see approximately 60 billion of NPL sales a year and only purchase just over 200.0 million.
Generally the favoured method of divestment is by selling large pools of noncore and nonperforming assets.
With
Arrow Globals strong client relationships allowing us to partner with large institutional investors coinvest alongside them and then service the entire asset on our servicing platform.
There continue to be exciting longterm opportunities for us to grow both our debt purchase and asset management businesses.
We operate across an increasing and diversified range of geographies and asset classes affording us a degree of protection from the economic cycle of any one market or business segment.
Our strong position in each country provides greater opportunities for the Group to evaluate transactions enabling us to deploy increasing levels of capital whilst maintaining investment discipline.
60bn T otal annual NPL sales across our geographies 13 Strategic report www. rrowglobalir.
ADDRESSABLE MARKET ARROW INDUSTRY POSITIONING 500 billion addressable NPL market for Arrow today These assets will continue to see secondary and tertiary sales over many years Achieved through leadership positions in 6 large markets 56 markets at a relatively early stage of industry development Arrow Global is positioning itself as an essential longterm utility for the European financial system Unique position to deliver significant growth given Relationships and service offering to industry investor participants Expertise in portfolio carveouts Excellence in data BANKING SYSTEM ASSETS European banking market much larger than US counterpart European capital markets still underdeveloped vs.
US
80% of corporate debt in Europe is bank lending Remainder from corporate bond markets reverse of US Capacity shortfall in European capital markets estimated at 1 trillion on likefor like comparison 500bn outstanding NPL Stage of market maturity  propensity to sell Source Deloittes Deleveraging Europe H1 2017 PwCs Portfolio Advisory Group Market Update Q1 2017.
1 Calculated as NPL salesface value of NPLs.
45tr
16tr
UK 22% UK 60bn
21%
11%
342bn
22% Ireland 59bn Portugal 13% Portugal 18bn Belgium 5% Belgium 23bn 1 Source Fed and company estimate.
Source Open Markets How U. and EU Capital Markets are Different httpopenmarkets. ite10431howusandeucapitalmarketsaredifferent.
Netherlands 42bn 14 STRATEGIC REPORT Arrow Global Group PLC  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 OUR STRATEGY CLEAR STRA TEGIC PRIORITIES Focused on achieving objectives to drive growth and value TO BE A LEADING PLAYER AND OPERATOR IN OUR CHOSEN MARKETS TO GROW OUR DIVERSIFIED RISK WEIGHTED INVESTMENT PORTFOLIO
2017 progress Key priorities in 2018 We aim to buy and build businesses which have marketleading operations and management We have therefore acquired leading servicing platforms in each of our chosen markets to enable us to increase asset management capability supporting consortium transactions We are an increasingly diversified business by both geography and asset class and are able to invest at target returns while maintaining investment discipline We are regulated in all of our jurisdictions and actively participate in industry bodies that help lead change in legislation and best practice Our strong reputation and relationships make us a favoured buyer of portfolios enabling us to engage in a greater number of offmarket transactions Acquisition of Mars Capital in UK and Ireland Strategic partnership signed with Oaktree Acquisition of Zenith in Italy Purchased loan portfolios and loan notes of 223.9m and increased 84month ERC by 177.8m Continue to drive operational excellence throughout the business Focus on incorporating recent acquisitions into the Group structure Continue to identify attractive bolton acquisitions in highvalue niches We have continued to enter new geographies and scale our presence in current markets We have an established approach of purchasing pilot portfolios in new geographies and asset classes across Europe to understand the market and potential returns before making acquisitions We have a strong underwriting track record and governance framework to ensure portfolios are acquired in line with our riskadjusted target returns We have lowcost longduration funding that allows us to capitalise on potential opportunities Invested 223.9 million in a record number of portfolio purchases Expanded the Group to cover six geographies Ended the year with our 2017 vintage geographic split of UK 36.7% Portugal 24.7% Benelux 19.7% and Italy 18.9% 40.7% of our investment was in secured assets Further progress in growing asset management revenue towards 30% of Group total To continue to invest in loan portfolios that meet our strict returns criteria To grow prudently our exposure to the newer geographies 15 Strategic report www. rrowglobalir.
TO GROW OUR SPECIALIST ASSET MANAGEMENT
TO TRANSFORM THE CUSTOMER JOURNEY WITHIN OUR INDUSTRY TO ATTRACT and RETAIN THE BEST TALENT Our specialist asset management business focuses on the servicing of loan portfolios for our clients Purchasing primary servicing businesses in new geographies allows us to build our knowledge before deploying our own capital We service portfolios for institutional investors often coinvesting our own capital alongside which ensures interests are aligned Grew assets under management AUM from 41.3 billion to 53.4 billion Zenith our master servicing business was fully integrated increasing its AUM by 72% over the course of the year and providing a deep insight into the Italian market Acquired Mars Capital which provided expertise in UK secured assets and entry into the Irish market Strategic partnership agreed with Oaktree Capital one of the largest credit fund investors worldwide as part of the Mars Capital deal Grow our AUM across all geographies Consider further bolton acquisitions of leading primary servicing businesses at sensible prices Continue to evolve the business towards a discretionary model We understand that debt can be a challenging issue for our customers and aim to work with them to help them Build Better Financial Futures for themselves By using our industryleading data and analytics we can better understand our customers financial situations and tailor our interactions with them on an individual basis Our goal is to enable customers to rehabilitate their finances improve their credit file and gain access to mainstream credit markets again We work with credit charities and other organisations that provide free impartial services to ensure that customers get the best possible advice We have continued to see increased customer engagement though our digital customer platform Our inhouse operations continued to deliver excellent customer outcomes We won two awards at the Credit Strategy Collections and Customer Service Awards 2017 for Debt Purchaser of the Year for the fourth year running and Vulnerable Customer Support Initiative Continued to develop a strong relationship with Citizens Advice Worked closely with and funded StepChange Playplan and Christian Against Poverty on consumer debt issues Continue to place the customer experience and outcomes at the heart of everything we do Further enhance systems to offer customers more flexibility Continue to reward staff based on positive customer outcomes We support our people through accessible career planning and training valued incentives and recognition programmes and a collaborative and customer orientated culture We recognise that the ongoing commitment to build leadership strength is vital to our continued growth We offer professional development opportunities and a competitive package of pay and benefits we recognise that a highly motivated and engaged workforce provides excellent customer service and strong advocates for our Group values Launched Group values and purpose programme with Groupwide management roadshows Strengthened country leadership teams Added 145 employees to the Group following Mars Capital and Zenith acquisitions Continue to cultivate a rewarding and enjoyable working atmosphere and provide competitive packages to attract the best talent Further develop our culture of Doing the right thing for our customers and colleagues 16 STRATEGIC REPORT Arrow Global Group PLC  Annual Report and Accounts 2017
GROUP CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICERS REVIEW
It has been another excellent year of growth and  nancial performance.
2017 review 2017 has been another exciting year for the business.
We have expanded our European footprint and client offering further across attractive markets where the Group targets leadership positions.
When viewed alongside our diversified investment portfolio and expanding asset management business it has been another excellent year of growth and financial performance.
Strong financial performance Total revenue grew 35.2% to 319.0 million 2016 235.9 million driven by core collections 19.7% higher at 342.2 million 2016 286.0 million.
Profit after tax increased by 51.7% to 39.9 million 2016 26.3 million.
Adjusted EBITDA increased 10.2% to 230.6 million 2016 209.2 million.
We continue to see an increase in the contribution from the capitallight asset management business with revenues increasing by 53.5% year on year our aim is to continue to grow this business over the mediumterm both organically and via acquisitions.
Strong performance across the business enabled us to deliver a significant increase in underlying profit after tax up 24.1% to 56.6 million 2016 45.6 million and underlying return on equity ROE now stands at 32.9% 2016 29.1%.
Basic EPS increased by 51.0% to 22.8p 2016 15.1p with underlying basic EPS increasing by 24.1% to 32.4p 2016 26.1p.
The business has a track record of strong cash generation and this enables us to deliver excellent returns to shareholders while simultaneously investing for future growth.
As a result the fullyear dividend including the proposed final dividend of 8.1p will increase to 11.3p representing an increase of 24.2% and a 35.0% payout ratio  the top of our guided range.
Debt purchasing  strong portfolio investment 2017 was another strong year for investment.
We acquired a record number of loan portfolios and loan notes with a face value of 2.4 billion for a purchase price of 223.9 million.
Of the purchase price invested 40.7% related to secured accounts.
Additionally over 70% of portfolio purchases were offmarket a record for the Group  largely driven by our unique model of purchasing the tails of asset portfolios already being serviced on our platforms.
Our investment portfolios across the Group continue to be well diversified by both geography and asset class providing us with good resilience against adverse conditions in any country or market.
Our specialist asset management business focusing on the servicing of loan portfolios for our clients continues to be an important growth area for the Group with revenues from this business growing strongly in 2017.
A TRANSFORMA TIONAL YEAR 17 Strategic report www. rrowglobalir.
Asset management  continued revenue growth When moving into new markets we have a strong track record of acquiring leading servicing businesses.
By working to retain skilled management teams we are able to acquire earningsaccretive operations and gather deep data and insight  allowing us to deploy more of our own capital at strong returns in that market in the future.
We expect to repeat this model with our acquisition of Mars Capital.
This provided us with a strategic entry into Ireland  a new market for the Group offering a 59 billion NPL opportunity  and significantly enhanced our servicing capabilities for mortgages in the UK.
The acquisition is already delivering value and we closed our first deal on the new platform in December.
As part of the acquisition we also announced a strategic partnership with Oaktree a leading global asset manager with over USD100 billion under management.
The strategic partnership with a tier one institutional investor and the two Italian acquisitions we have announced represent another important step in the evolution of our asset management business as we move closer towards our ambition of managing discretionary funds on behalf of our clients.
Our aspirations for the asset management business continue to be high and we are aiming to continue to grow significantly the business contribution to Group revenues.
The Italian opportunity Italy is a core strategic market for us.
The large size of its NPL market with over 300 billion of NPLs on bank balance sheets and extended asset tails provides significant longterm opportunities.
Its specific characteristics mean that we have entered the country with diligence and discipline.
The team took two years to analyse the market before deciding that Zenith the master servicing business we purchased in 2017 was the right entry point.
This acquisition has exceeded our expectations in all respects AUM has grown by over 70% and the deep insight it has given us into the Italian markets characteristics has allowed us to invest our own capital ahead of forecasts and at excellent returns.
Importantly all investments were originated in offmarket deals from the Zenith platform and are therefore assets on which we have excellent performance visibility.
Having made a successful start and established strong foundations we believe that now is the right time to expand the business.
Market activity is high as regulatory pressure to deal with Italian bank balance sheets has started to take effect and asset sales rose from 34.0 billion in 2016 to a projected 64.0 billion in 2017.
The market potential remains considerable and we are seeing strong demand from Arrows clients in the alternative asset space for us to deploy the same capability in Italy that we have successfully offered them elsewhere offering our crossasset class special servicing capabilities in high level niches we understand well and where we are prepared to invest our own money.
This targeted approach is key to our success we will not attempt to cover the entire Italian market but only the parts where we can develop an edge and generate solid returns.
In other markets we have built the leading servicing platform for both ourselves and thirdparty investors through a combination of acquisitions and organic build.
We believe that this strategy will serve us well in Italy too given our longterm commitment to the market.
Our track record demonstrates that we are able to achieve the following identify the right management teams which fit with Arrows culture and bring local expertise buy platforms at attractive prices in offmarket deals where value accretes to our shareholders and grow acquired platforms swiftly after acquisition by tapping into Arrows broad origination footprint across a wide range of financial institutions and alternative asset manager clients.
The two new bolton acquisitions of Parr Credit  a specialist servicer for sophisticated financial investors that has diversified into small ticket utilities and telecoms servicing  and Europa Investimenti  an expert investor in nonperforming corporate and SME business  are consistent with this approach.
In addition investment will be required in order to build out our credit platform offering for clients.
Expanding asset class offerings notably secured systems governance and risk infrastructure and adding management depth will involve a twoyear programme of investment.
This will contribute to our ability to grow our investment portfolio conservatively with continued underwriting discipline and to our stated ambition to grow asset management revenues materially by the end of 2018 and beyond.
Strengthened funding During the year we took the opportunity to strengthen and secure our longterm funding.
In March the Group issued 400 million senior secured floating rate notes due 2025 at a coupon of E2.875%.
This has meant that the Groups weighted average cost of debt has been significantly reduced to 3.9% 2016 4.9% and the weighted average maturity of the Groups debt at 31 December 2017 was 6.1 years 2016 5.8 years with no facility maturing before March 2022.
This positions us well to continue to run the balance sheet efficiently and capitalise on opportunities presented by market conditions.
We continue to be open to further opportunities to reduce our weighted average cost of debt and extend its duration.
Investing for growth  One Arrow While the runway for growth provided by our significant market opportunity remains substantial our strategy centres on controlled growth of our balance sheet allowing us to maintain underwriting discipline and returns within our balanced capital structure.
The combination of our origination strengths client relationships and servicing platforms means that we are well positioned to take advantage of the potential to grow capitallight asset management revenues.
To achieve this in a safe disciplined and sustainable way we took the decision earlier in the year to invest further in our core capabilities.
This will see us strengthening governance and Group capabilities using our knowledge and expertise from certain geographies in order to improve efficiency across the board.
Areas of focus will be in our core centres of excellence Origination Data and Analytics Portfolio Management Risk Management and Change and IT Functions.
In addition we are increasing investment in our servicing and operating platforms across the Group to improve customer journeys through enhanced digital capabilities which in turn will produce improvements in our productivity.
We have outlined an investment and restructuring programme totalling 22.0 million across 2017 and 2018.
On completion we will have more scalable resilient platforms optimised to support future growth.
STRATEGIC REPORT Arrow Global Group PLC  Annual Report and Accounts 2017
GROUP CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICERS REVIEW CONTINUED
Our people We have continued to grow welcoming new colleagues during the year.
At the Group executive level our Group chief financial officer Rob Memmott decided to step down following nearly seven years of excellent service.
I would like to thank Rob for his huge contribution to the growth of the Company and wish him the very best for the future.
We announced in October last year that Paul Cooper would be joining us as Group chief financial officer in January 2018 and I look forward to working closely with Paul as we continue to steer the business along a strong growth trajectory in the coming years.
The way in which the business develops and operates will be key to its success and we welcomed Clodagh Gunnigle as our new Group chief risk officer earlier in the year.
Clodagh has significant experience driving risk strategy at large financial companies and will play a pivotal role in ensuring that Arrow continues to grow prudently.
Most recently we announced the appointment of Dave Sutherland as our new Group chief operating officer.
His experience will add considerably to our management expertise at a time when we are continuing to grow our operations and ensure we maintain and strengthen our leading management capabilities.
Following these appointments at the Group executive level we streamlined the management structure.
The country heads now report directly into Dave Sutherland which will ensure that we share best practice and drive operational excellence across the business.
As ever I would like to take the opportunity to thank the wider Arrow Global team for all their hard work this year.
Good culture is such an important part of any organisation and I am proud to see the ongoing commitment from all my colleagues to Arrows commitment to Building Better Financial Futures for all of our stakeholders.
Im excited about what we can all achieve together in the coming year as we continue to place our values at the heart of the business.
Outlook
I continue to be optimistic about the potential for the business in a growing market.
Focus on the health of financial institutions balance sheets continues to increase.
Indeed this year saw the European Central Bank being particularly vocal on the issue suggesting banks must provision for nonperforming loans much faster than they currently do.
Combined with the European Banking Authoritys focus on reducing the stock of NPLs this is likely to lead to increased volumes of asset sales across Europe generating opportunities for Arrow to purchase and manage more portfolios feeding both our debt purchase and asset management businesses.
Consensus regarding forecasts for UK and European GDP growth remains positive but we remain well positioned to capitalise on any market opportunities presented by a turn in the economic cycle.
This is supported by our resilient back book of paying customers and the ensuing front book opportunities that would arise from a portfolio pricing perspective in a downward cycle.
As previously guided we do not expect Brexit to impact our ability to operate and purchase portfolios in Europe since we are individually licensed in all of our jurisdictions and are not reliant on the UKs continuing membership of the EU.
We believe that regulatory oversight will continue to evolve in European markets and view this as favourable for businesses such as Arrow that have scale strong funding structures and a focus on the right customer outcomes.
We constantly evaluate and evolve risk and compliance activities across the entire Group regardless of geography and wherever possible share best practice.
Increasingly our clients look for respected partners which comply with regulatory requirements and have strong reputations for dealing fairly with customers.
At Arrow Global we are committed to achieving the right outcomes for our customers and I believe we are well positioned to continue to take advantage of the opportunities this presents.
We remain neutral on pricing in each of our markets.
While competition is evident across all jurisdictions our model of purchasing the majority of our portfolio acquisitions offmarket provides us with a degree of protection.
The fact that we purchase only around half a per cent on an annual basis of all NPLs sold across the markets in which we operate means that we can be highly selective only acquiring portfolios where we are confident we can achieve our required returns.
Our
We remain relatively well insulated against the potential for interest rate rises when viewed alongside our strengthened funding position and reduced weighted average cost of debt fixed over a long duration.
Moreover  over 60% of our unsecured customers do not have a mortgage the asset most geared towards interest rate hikes meaning we would not expect to see a material increase in payment breakage rates should interest rates rise.
Furthermore over two thirds of our balance sheet is hedged against rate rises.
In the coming year we will remain focused on the strategic advantages afforded by our unique business model.
We will purchase specialist portfolios where we have a data advantage maintain our strong relationships with primary lenders and our institutional investor clients to continue to buy offmarket as a preferred purchaser target acquisitions that provide a strategic fit continue to scale up our presence in geographies that fit our investment criteria and focus on our partner relationships with institutional investors to continue to expand our asset management business.
We therefore remain confident in our ability to deliver on our targets of achieving a mediumterm underlying ROE percentage in the midtwenties high teen EPS growth and a progressive dividend policy.
Lee Rochford Group chief executive officer 1 March 2018 BUILDING BETTER FINANCIAL FUTURES FOR OUR CUSTOMERS Were trusted and valued We earn trust from our customers by treating them as individuals.
We learn and change based on what our customers tell us.
We take our corporate responsibilities seriously and act as an example to all in our industry.
Read more online www. rrowglobal.
LIVING OUR VALUES Louise takes back control Louise works in the public sector.
Her circumstances improved and she was earning more money each month.
Previously she had run up debts with different providers and she had taken the decision to appoint a debt management company to work on her behalf.
This can be a useful way of dealing with creditors but the debt management company charged a monthly fee and Louise realised the substantial amount she had paid in fees over many years.
With her improved situation Louise decided to take control of her finances and called Arrow Global directly to discuss her current and future repayments.
Our agent took time to discuss Louises income and expenditure and it was identified that Louise could afford to increase her repayments from 52 per month to 100 per month.
This would significantly reduce the time it would take Louise repay her debt.
After further discussion Louise wanted to retain some flexibility on her disposable income in case of emergencies so Louise agreed to increase her repayments to 80 per month.
A further review was scheduled for six months as Louise felt her circumstances may improve again.
In this case our agent was helpful throughout the call appropriately signposting the free money advice services that are available but after it was apparent Louise wanted to take control of her repayments to us we supported her to ensure we found the most appropriate outcome for Louises circumstances.
STRATEGIC REPORT Arrow Global Group PLC  Annual Report and Accounts 2017
GROUP CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICERS REVIEW
The business has produced another good set of numbers delivering strong returns and with a robust capital structure.
STRONG RETURNS FOR 2017 I am pleased to present another good set of results for 2017.
They demonstrate strong returns together with high growth underpinned by operational and financial excellence across the business contributing to sustainable profitable growth and enhanced shareholder value.
Important note Both IFRS and cash metrics are important to understand the key drivers of the business.
The reconciliations and commentary on the following pages have been prepared to aid this understanding which helps to support the commentary of the financial review for the year.
Profit after tax increased Profit after tax for the Group for 2017 has risen by 51.7% to 39 .
9 million 2016 26.3 million.
The growth in earnings has been driven by increased revenues from both our debt purchase business and our asset management business.
Collections performance has been strong ahead of our ERC forecast across the Group.
Our capitallight asset management revenues have increased by 24.8 million from 46.3 million to 71.1 million driven by the Zenith acquisition completed in April 2017 and a fullyear effect of the Vesting acquisition completed in May 2016.
Capitallight asset management revenue is now 22% of Group revenues and we aim to increase this further in 2018.
The 2017 profit after tax of 39.9 million 2016 26.3 million includes 2.4 million of acquisition costs and 27 .4 million associated with restructuring the Groups longterm financing.
The saving in interest costs as a result of the refinancing will be beneficial to the Groups income statement in future years.
The refinancing extended the maturity of our facilities at a lower finance cost ensuring the financial position is sufficiently well structured to support and fund the continued growth plans of the Group.
In October 2017  we completed the sale of our 15% economic interest in MCS Groupe.
The disposal generated a pretax gain of 14.7 million and proceeds of 18.1 million.
The proceeds will be reinvested in the Mars Capital acquisition and the One Arrow programme.
Strong returns and increased dividend delivered The underlying return on equity ROE for the Group in 2017 is 32.9% up from 29.1% last year and well above our target of mid20s underlying ROE.
This metric is a key driver of shareholder value.
Basic EPS for 2017 is 22.8p compared to 15.1p in 2016 with the increase largely due to the growth in revenue.
Underlying basic EPS has increased 24.1% to 32.4p 2016 26.1p.
The Group has established a progressive dividend policy.
The strong cash result for the year supported by the continued growth in the asset management business enables good returns to be made www. rrowglobalir.
Strategic report to our shareholders whilst allowing for future investment and growth.
As such the fullyear dividend including the proposed final dividend of 8.1p for 2017 will increase to 11.3p up 24.2% and represents a 35% payout of underlying profit after tax.
Strong portfolio purchases Our purchased loan portfolio asset base and loan notes increased by 18.3% to 951.5 million 2016 804.1 million which helps to support the future flow of collections and revenue streams.
This was driven by another excellent year of organic portfolio purchases of 223.9 million a slight increase from 2016s 223.0 million.
The face value of debt portfolios acquired in the year was 2450 million with an average purchase price of 9.1p per 1.
For the year to 31 December 2017 the 120month expected gross money multiple for this vintage is 1.8 times 2016 1.9 times from the date of purchase.
This is slightly below our 2.0 times target and the 2016 comparative given the proportion of secured portfolios and portfolios acquired from our asset management platforms which we regard as lower risk within the vintage.
Of the purchase price invested 40.7% related to secured portfolios and 33.8% was acquired from our asset management business.
There was a good balance of investment by geography including a healthy level of investment in Italy.
In the year the Group acquired debt portfolios significantly in excess of the required replacement rate the amount of annual investment required to keep the ERC constant.
This higher level of acquired portfolios will increase future collections.
This is reflected in the increased value of the ERC 84 months from 1339.1 million to 1516.9 million an increase of 13.3%.
In addition in the year we decided to allocate an additional 18.0 million of capital to legal collection costs in order to enhance the value of the back book.
This has increased collections and our ERC.
As described on page 24 it is the collections performance and size of the ERC which drives income recognised on loan portfolios.
All portfolios continue to be monitored carefully and where appropriate adjusted for in the ERC forecast based upon our detailed modelling.
Although it has increased in total the ERC has been adjusted down to account for any areas of underperformance.
Core collections increased Core collections increased to 342.2 million 2016 286.0 million reflecting the increase in our portfolio asset base.
Collections were ahead of our ERC forecast and reflect the impact of collection strategy initiatives such as litigation the digital customer portal and the increased use of data sources.
Collections on UK books in particular have performed strongly in the year .
Collections on our Portuguese portfolios have improved in the second half of 2017.
In the period we acquired our first portfolios in Italy to date these portfolios have collected in line with our underwriting forecast.
As at 31 December 2017 we have cumulatively collected 103% of our original underwriting forecast 2016 103% excluding foreign exchange impacts reflecting the success of our data driven approach to underwriting.
Alternative performance measures The Group believes that the use of alternative performance measures APMs for profitability earnings per share and cash metrics provide valuable information to the readers of the financial statements.
They can provide a more comparable basis for assessing the Groups performance between financial periods by adjusting for items that by virtue of their size nature or incidence are not necessarily representative of the ongoing performance of the business.
APMs also reflect key operating targets and are used to monitor performance by the Board.
However any APMs in this document are not a substitute for but complement reported measures and readers should also consider the reported measures.
2017 2016
Tax
PAT
PBT
Tax
PAT
Reported profit 50559 10644 39915 31367 5061 26306 Acquisition costs 2444 267 2177 5022 156 4866 One Arrow costs 4645 896 3749 Bond refinancing costs 27352 5265 22087 17994 3599 14395 Gain on sale of associate 14696 3374 11322 70304 13698 56606 54383 8816 45567 Noncontrolling interest 44 Underlying profit after tax 56562 45tel
Underlying
Reported
Underlying
Profit after tax 39915 56562 26306 45567 Opening net assets 167391 167391 145356 145356 Closing net assets 195148 195148 167391 167391 Average net assets 171905 171905 156374 156374 ROE % 23.2% 32.9% 16.8% 29.1% Weighted average ordinary shares 174768 174768 174373 174373 Basic EPS p 22.8p 32.4p 15.1p 26.1p 22 STRATEGIC REPORT Arrow Global Group PLC  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Revenues and EBITDA increased Total revenue for the year was 319.0 million an increase of 35.2% from the 2016 comparative of 235.9 million.
58.3 million of the increase came from purchased loan portfolios and loan notes and 24.8 million was from asset management services.
The latter was due to a full period of results for Vesting and the acquisition of Zenith in April 2017.
The increase in collections drove an increase in Adjusted EBITDA of 10.2% to 230.6 million 2016 209.2 million.
The reconciliation for the year of net operating cash flow to the cash result including a reconciliation to Adjusted EBITDA is provided on page 137.
Adjusted EBITDA is a key driver of the cash result and allows us to monitor the operating performance of the Group.
Total income from asset management in 2017 was 22.3% 2016 19.6% of total revenue and we expect this to continue to grow in 2018.
As noted above we increased our spend on litigation collections strategies in the period by 18 million this has increased our ERC but also our cost ratios in the period in combination with a larger asset management business which has higher costs to collect.
Reflecting this and the enlarged business collection costs increased by 68.6% to 118.5 million 2016 70.3 million.
Underlying performance Profit after tax for the year increased to 39.9 million from 26.3 million in 2016 largely due to the growth in revenue.
The contribution from our minority interest in MCS Groupe reduced from 2.4 million to 1.6 million as a result of divestment of the business in October 2017.
This resulted in a gain on disposal of 14.7 million.
Profit before tax was adjusted by items totalling 19.7 million which arose from the refinancing of both the 400 million floating rate note and the Groups RCF costing 27.4 million One Arrow costs of 4.7 million and 2.4 million from corporate acquisitions that completed in the year.
These costs were partially offset by the gain on disposal of the Groups associate
Costs of the One Arrow programme were split broadly evenly between the Netherlands in respect of the office consolidation and in the UK where the cost covered reorganising a number of aspects of the business.
All of these items are adjusted from reported profit to give an underlying profit as the items are considered due to their size and nature to be outside of the normal operating activities of the Group.
These items had a tax impact of 3.1 million.
The tax charge for 2017 represents an effective tax rate of 21.1% 2016 16.1% on profit before tax.
The effective tax rate has increased due to higher expenses not deductible for tax purposes a higher level of taxable incoming from overseas countries with higher tax rates and a chargeable gain.
The effective tax rate on underlying profit was 19.5% 2016 16.2%.
Net assets funding and net debt Net assets increased 27.9 million during the period mostly reflecting the retained profit for the period of 39.9 million foreign currency translation of 2.4 million and sharebased payment movements of 3.3 million offset by the final 2016 approved dividend and 2017 interim dividend paid totalling 16.8 million.
Net debt increased by 132.4 million to 948.4 million 2016 816.0 million driven by the acquisitions of Zenith and Mars Capital organic portfolio purchases and foreign exchange.
The Group is committed to maintaining its strong financial profile and aims to maintain the ratio of secured net debt to adjusted EBITDA between 3.5x4.0x achieving 3.9x in both 2017 and 2016.
Similarly cash interest cover was 5.9x comfortably ahead of target at greater than 4.0x and ahead of 2016s 5.2x.
The ratio of net debt to 84month ERC LTV was 62.5% as at 31 December 2017 2016 60.8% which is significantly below our financial covenant of 75%.
The secured loan to value ratio which cannot exceed 65.0% is 59.7% 2016 57.0%.
In February 2017 Moodys upgraded the Groups credit rating and Notes rating to Ba3 from B1.
In addition the Group increased its RCF by 35 million to 215 million adding a fifth bank.
On 30 March 2017 the Group issued 400 million senior secured floating rate notes due 2025 at a coupon of E2.875% the 2025 Notes.
The proceeds of the 2025 Notes were used to redeem the existing 2021 Notes pay the early redemption and transaction costs and repay drawings under our RCF.
The early redemption of the 2021 Notes resulted in finance costs of 27.4 million of which 17.6 million related to the cash call premium and cancellation of interest rate hedging linked to the 2021 Notes with the remaining 9.8 million due to a noncash writeoff of related transaction fees.
In January 2018 the Group increased the RCF by 40 million to 255 million and extended that facility to 2023 meaning that the Group has cash and RCF headroom of 136.5 million and an average debt maturity of 6.2 years with no debt maturing before January 2023.
To maintain headroom the Group has entered into a 60 million bridge facility which expires on 15 May 2018.
Summary
The financial performance of the Group for 2017 was strong.
We have continued to grow our asset management business broadened and deepened our geographical footprint and reduced our cost of capital with an extended funding maturity.
We have invested in the Group via the One Arrow programme which will see stronger governance improved centres of excellence and increased efficiency and productivity across the Groups operating platforms.
Paul Cooper Group chief financial officer 1 March 2018 GROUP CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICERS REVIEW CONTINUED We do the right thing We keep our promises.
We help customers repay their debts in a timely and a ordable way.
We do this by empathising with our customers and treating them fairly.
Read more online www. rrowglobal.
LIVING OUR VALUES Jennifer and the impact of illness and bereavement Jennifer is retired and suffering from a longterm illness recently being hospitalised.
The shock of the unexpected death of her grandson added to her distress and meant she was unable to keep up with her finances.
When Jennifer was discharged from the hospital she was keen to resume her repayments to us.
Her only income is her pension and pension credits and after payment of priority bills and other outgoings she has a modest surplus each fortnight.
Her outstanding debt with Arrow is a few hundred pounds and she was keen to repay this as quickly as possible.
While we will discuss with customers the option to consider higher repayments where they can as this will often substantially reduce the time it takes to repay their outstanding debt in this instance our agent cautioned against not overstretching herself.
After further discussion it was agreed that a lower repayment than Jennifer initially suggested would be taken over five months but with the provision to review if this caused her any problems.
In this instance this is a great example of how a customer often tries to repay their debt as soon as possible and where we need to help them strike a balance of reducing their debt whilst not causing additional hardship.
Supporting our customers to take control of their finances is important but equally understanding our customers full background and taking time to understand their circumstances can help us assist them in achieving the best outcome for them.
BUILDING BETTER FINANCIAL FUTURES FOR OUR CUSTOMERS 24 STRATEGIC REPORT Arrow Global Group PLC  Annual Report and Accounts 2017
We provide two reconciliations between reported IFRS profit and cash measures.
The first looks at the movement in our purchased loan portfolios and loan notes compared to the movements in the ERC  the gross cash value of the portfolio before it is discounted to present value for inclusion in the reported results.
The second reconciles the reported profit for the period to the cash result.
For completeness we also separate out other adjusting items.
A number of the terms referred to in this section are defined in the glossary on pages 138 to 140.
Our core competence is using data to identify manage and collect nonperforming purchased loan portfolios.
We use this competence to drive two key revenue streams debt purchase where we acquire the portfolio and asset management where we manage the portfolio but do not take capital risk.
The way in which the business recognises revenue on each of these business streams differs substantially.
Debt purchase For the debt purchase part of the business we acquire portfolios and turn these into regular  predictable and longterm cash flows this involves high volumes of low value collections from customers.
We use analytical models to estimate cash flows we expect at an individual account level.
The output of these account level forecasts is aggregated to a portfolio and then into the Groups total ERC.
The price paid for the portfolio collections experience and our ERC drive portfolio income.
When we purchase loan portfolios and loan notes we recognise them in the statement of financial position at the purchase price in accordance with IFRS.
In terms of the equivalent cash measure we add the portfolio ERC to the Group ERC at the point of purchase.
We quote both 84month and 120month ERC forecasts as key performance measures for the business.
The ERC forecast to 84 months or 120 months from date of purchase divided by the purchase price is the gross money multiple GMM that we expect to achieve from that investment.
The GMM is an important measure to understand the gross cash return on our investment.
The GMM therefore is a measure of portfolio asset quality and is one of the metrics we evaluate when we appraise a portfolio.
In 2017  we purchased portfolios and loan notes for 223.9 million which with an 84month GMM of 1.6 times added 352.0 million to ERC and a 120month GMM of 1.8 times added 390.2 million to ERC.
We are required to calculate the effective interest rate EIR.
This is the discount rate which would allow the estimated future cash flows to be discounted to the day one purchase price of the portfolio.
This rate is used to calculate the amount of revenue we recognise each period.
The EIR is fixed shortly after the point of purchase.
The EIR is used to allocate the collections received between a repayment of our original purchase price this is accounted for as a reduction in the loan balance amortisation and the balance of the collection as interest income which is accounted for as revenue from purchased loan portfolios.
This is akin to the way in which a mortgage would pay down.
The ERC extends beyond 15 years however we only include 84 months of cash flow in assessing our purchased loan portfolio and loan note assets.
As we progress through the months of each year we roll forward the ERC forecast meaning we always have 84 months of expected cash flow from our portfolios recognised on the statement of financial position.
Due to the nature of our business actual collections on portfolios and loan notes will not perform exactly as initially forecast and each half year we review performance against collections experience and update the ERC forecast where appropriate.
This updated cash flow forecast discounted at the fixed discount rate EIR is the periodend carrying value of the purchasedloan portfolios.
This movement of the purchasedloan portfolios is reflected in income from loan portfolios in the income statement.
The size of the portfolio asset associated ERC and cash collections in the year are therefore all key drivers to the result we report.
As we collect on our portfolios the statement of financial position value ERC and income we receive decreases over time.
Based upon our target returns that we expect to invest at we are able to calculate a replacement rate or maintenance capex being the amount we need to invest to replace the reducing portfolios and to keep the Groups total portfolio value constant.
During a period if we invest higher than the replacement rate at target returns the revenue from debt purchase grows.
The replacement rate is a key driver to the cash result the business generates.
Asset management As part of our strategy to diversify the business the Group has also strengthened its capabilities in servicing and asset management to complement the strength it has in debt purchase.
Asset management revenue is driven by commissions received largely based on collections plus fee income.
Asset management revenue does not require significant capital investment and therefore the development of this business is important to improving both the IFRS and cash result for the business.
IFRS TO CASH RESULT RECONCILIATIONS www. rrowglobalir.
Strategic report Movement in purchased loan portfolios and loan notes under IFRS reconciled to cash ERC
ERC
84month
120month Loan portfolios and loan notes  31 Dec 2016 804107 1339108 1544535 ERC 31 Dec 16 Portfolios acquired during the year 223949 351990 390239 ERC acquired during the year Collections in the year 342210 342210 342210 Collections in the year Income from purchased loan portfolios Fair value gain on loan notes 5298 Exchange and other movements 20748 168021 187681 ERC roll forward and reforecast 1516909 1780245 ERC 31 Dec 17 Effect of discounting Loan portfolios and loan notes 31 Dec 2017 951467 951467
Purchased loan portfolios 900769 Loan notes 50698 Portfolios including loan notes acquired in the year are added to the statement of financial position carrying value of purchased loan portfolios and loan notes at their initial purchase price.
The undiscounted forecast of estimated remaining collections is included in the ERC.
Collections made in the year are deducted from both the IFRS carrying value of purchased loan portfolios and ERC.
Income on purchased loan portfolios is calculated with reference to the EIR of the portfolio.
This income is recognised after taking account of new portfolios collections updated ERC forecasts disposals and any FX impacts.
See 6 for more detail on total revenue.
The ERC roll forward and reforecast reflects managements updated estimation of future collections.
It takes account of updated information on specific portfolios and the latest exchange rate and rolls forward the 84month forecast collection period.
Under IFRS the carrying value of purchased loan portfolios includes 84 months of discounted cash flows however we expect to see cash flows beyond this period of time and report a 120month ERC also as is customary for the industry.
Reconciliation of profit after tax to the cash result
Adjusting items
Other
Cash result
Income from loan portfolios 239575  239575 100920 340495 Collections in the year Profit on portfolio sales 1329  1329 1329 Fair value gains on loan notes 5298  5298 5298 Income from loan notes 1715  1715  1715 Income from asset management 71098  71098  71098 Income from asset management Total revenue 319015  319015 94293 413308 Total operating expenses 213071 7089 205982 14726 191256 Cash operating expenses Operating profit 105944 7089 113033 109019 222052 Net financing costs 71660 27352 44308 5324 Share of profit in associate 1578  1578 5655 7233 Share of profit in associate Disposal of intangible asset    1332 1332 Gain on sale of associate 14697 14697 Profit before tax 50559 19744 70303 121330 191633 Taxation charge on ordinary activities 10644 3053 13697 4099 9598 Profit after tax 39915 16691 56606 125429 182035 9021 Capital expenditure 125314 Replacement rate 47700 Cash result Total revenue is largely derived from income from purchased loan portfolios as explained in 3 plus income from asset management being commission on collections for third parties and fee income received.
The noncash items add back loan portfolio amortisation to get to core collections.
Amortisation reflects a reduction in the statement of financial position carrying value of the purchase loan portfolios arising from collections which are not allocated to revenue.
Amortisation plus income from purchase loan portfolios equates to core collections.
Includes noncash items including depreciation and amortisation sharebased payment charges and FX.
Noncash amortisation of fees and interest.
The cash result is viewed on an underlying basis which excludes certain items see APM table on page 21.
These items have been excluded to provide a more comparable basis for assessing the Groups performance between financial periods.
Details of the adjusting items are provided in the Group chief financial officers review on page 21.
The sum of these balances is the adjusted EBITDA for the business of 230.6 million which is a key driver to the cash result.
This measure allows us to monitor the operating performance of the Group.
See the additional information provided on page 137 for a detailed reconciliation of adjusted EBITDA.
Replacement rate is the level of purchased loan portfolio and loan note purchases at our target portfolio returns required during 2018 to maintain the 2017 average 84month ERC.
STRATEGIC REPORT Arrow Global Group PLC  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 EXECUTIVE MANAGEMENT TEAM Lee Rochford Group chief executive o cer Skills and experience Lee was chief financial officer at Virgin Money between October 2013 and August 2015 seeing the Group through its successful IPO and into life as a listed company.
Prior to this he held a number of roles at RBS between 2007 and 2013 culminating as managing director and head of the Financial Institutions Group.
Earlier in his career Lee was managing director of Wachovia Securities Principal Finance team managing director and head of European asset finance at Credit Suisse and head of Northern European securitisation at BNP Paribas.
Lee has a degree in Philosophy Politics and Economics from Oxford University.
Paul Cooper Group chief  nancial o cer Skills and experience Paul has over 20 years experience in financial services roles both within the UK and overseas.
He joins Arrow from leading global insurance business Sompo Canopius Group where he has been in a variety of senior executive roles since 2013.
Previously Paul was a partner at Ernst and Young LLP in the Financial Services division following five years as a Finance Director at the quoted insurer Hiscox.
Paul is a Chartered Accountant having trained at PwC.
Zachary Lewy Founder and Group chief investment o cer Skills and experience Zachary is the founder and Group chief investment officer of Arrow Global.
He was the CEO of the business from its inception before moving to his current role.
Prior to Arrow Zachary was an officer of Sallie Mae a director of Vertex the BPO division of United Utilities and a founder and executive director of 7C a UK BPO company acquired by
Zachary has previously chaired SCOR and was also the Chair of the UK Debt Buyers
He was named an Ernst and Young Entrepreneur of the Year in 2010.
Zachary is on the board of the English National Ballet the English National Ballet School and the organising committee for the Marie Curie Charity fundraiser.
He graduated from Princeton University with a BA in Economics with Honours and a Certificate in Applied and Computational Mathematics with Honours. www. rrowglobalir.
Strategic report Stewart Hamilton General counsel and company secretary Skills and experience Stewart has over 13 years experience as a solicitor in corporate and commercial law.
He joined the Company from Addleshaw Goddard in 2011.
During this time he worked principally on private company acquisitions and disposals and public fund raising as well as gaining direct experience with the Clydesdale Bank plc and healthcare company Assura Group Limited.
Stewart holds an M.
Hons in economics and law from the University of Edinburgh and trained at Linklaters LLP.
Tracy French Group HR director Skills and experience Tracy has over 25 years experience in Human Resources with expertise in the areas of transformation and change organisational effectiveness talent management and employee engagement.
Before she joined Arrow Global Tracy was director and owner of Joint Resolutions Ltd.
Prior to that she has worked as a senior human resources professional predominantly in the service sector supporting a broad range of private equity corporate and privately owned organisations from retail banking insurance mobile utilities and food services to undertake large change and transformation programmes.
Tracy holds an honours degree in Business from the University of Central England.
Dave Sutherland Group chief operating o cer Skills and experience Before joining Arrow Global in January 2018 Dave was the UK managing director at Neilson Financial Services NFS.
Before joining NFS he spent four years as Chief operating officer at TD Wealth International and was responsible for Customer Services Global Trading Operations Technology Shared Services and Business Change.
He has also previously worked as COO for Santander Cards UK COO and Transformation Director of GE Moneys UK Card Services and Regional Director for Boots plc.
Dave has an MSc.
Management from Sheffield Hallam University and a MBA from the University of Leeds.
Clodagh Gunnigle Group chief risk o cer Skills and experience Clodagh joined Arrow Global in May from GE Capital where she spent 17 years in various risk roles including chief risk officer of GEs UK business and chief credit officer of GE Capitals Global Consumer Finance business.
Clodagh is a qualified Chartered Accountant and has a depth of experience in managing all aspects risk including credit conduct operational financial and enterprise across European portfolios but in particular in the UK Ireland Portugal France Italy and the Netherlands.
STRATEGIC REPORT Arrow Global Group PLC  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 COUNTRY REVIEW UNITED KINGDOM and IRELAND The acquisition of Mars Capital has broadened our secured servicing o ering and provided access to the attractive Irish market.
Lee Pearson Chief commercial officer and CoHead Arrow UK Oliver Stratton Chief operating officer and CoHead Arrow UK Assets under management 16.0bn
Locations
Regulated by FCA and CBI Key 2017 highlights Appointment of Oliver Stratton and Lee Pearson as coheads of UK business strengthening the UK leadership team Successful deployment of operational strategies proprietary tracing tools and dialler optimisation driving strong collections outperformance of the UK back book Cost to collect improvements driven by further rationalisation of the external servicing panel and internal operational efficiencies Completed the acquisition of Mars Capital enhancing our secured servicing capabilities and providing entry into Ireland All operating systems migrated to a single platform decommissioning of legacy front office system outsourcing of UK infrastructure to a single managed service provider and continued investment in digital capability Bespoke asset management partnership with a major UK client to service customers in specialist circumstances Industry thought leadership including contribution to StepChange Debt Charitys 2017 Impact Report Tackling Problem Debt Winner of 2017 UK Credit Strategy Awards for Debt Purchaser of the Year and Vulnerable Customer Support Initiative Yearonyear increase in UK portfolio purchases in line with target return hurdles including successes in UK bank auctions offmarkets trades and purchases of loan books from our asset management business 82.1 million of purchased loan portfolios and loan notes acquired 2016 72.6 million
Manchester
Dublin
Farnborough
London
Leatherhead 29 www. rrowglobalir.
Strategic report
The acquisition of Mars Capital completed in December 2017.
It is a leading UK and Irish credit servicing company and provides servicing for residential buytolet and SME commercial mortgages.
The acquisition strengthens Arrow Globals asset management capabilities and reinforces its leading position in the UK but also provides strategic entry into Ireland a new market for the Group offering significant debt purchasing and servicing potential.
In addition we also announced the establishment of a strategic partnership in the UK and Ireland with Oaktree Capital Management L.
Oaktree a leading global asset manager with around USD100 billion under management.
The strategic partnership with Oaktree provides significant portfolio investment and asset management opportunities going forward in the UK and Ireland strengthening Arrow Globals highly visible earnings stream.
Market overview and outlook Ireland is a large NPL market at 59 billion and as such offers significant deal flow.
Ireland has a growing economy falling unemployment and recovering house prices and Irish banks have improved their capital positions and have high propensity to sell NPLs.
In the last five years we have seen around 63 billion of sales to Arrow Globals stable of institutional investor relationships which gives us confidence in the future potential for the market.
Market overview The UK has one of the most mature debt purchase and collection markets in Europe characterised by a relatively high propensity of financial institutions to sell nonperforming debt.
This is driven by a large and wellestablished consumer finance sector that continues to grow due to healthy volumes of new lending.
The UK debt purchasing and servicing landscape remained competitive in 2017.
To remain successful Arrow Global relies on its deep client relationships disciplined approach to underwriting and data analytics operational excellence and scale.
Reputation and track record are both critical considerations for financial institutions considering an outright sale of a portfolio or the choice of a servicing partner.
Outlook
We expect to see a continued supply of debt sale volumes across unsecured and secured markets but with strong competition for assets in 2018.
Unsecured consumer lending grew at near doubledigit rates in 2017 and the secured retail debt sale market has grown significantly in recent years.
The secured asset class in particular is forecast to remain strong and with the acquisition of Mars Capital Arrow Global is now well placed to benefit from this.
While the competitive environment will remain challenging we have a healthy pipeline entering into 2018 including a number of investments already contracted.
STRATEGIC REPORT Arrow Global Group PLC  Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Porto
COUNTRY REVIEW CONTINUED
We maintained our market leading asset management position and returns continue to be strong.
Joao Bugalho Chief executive officer Assets under management 6.8bn
Locations
Regulated by
Key 2017 highlights Whitestar won the servicing for the 271 million secured loans in the vora securitisation the first public securitisation of NPLs in Portugal Maintained our marketleading asset management position having acquired six additional NPL portfolios with a face value of 612 million 63.1 million of purchased loan portfolios and loan notes acquired Strong collections throughout the year aided by improving economy Market overview The European Banking Authority estimates that as at Q2 2017 NPLs in Portugal totalled 35 billion from around 41 billion the previous year.
This does not account for other nonperforming assets NPAs inside banks balance sheets and others sitting in real estate funds nor for restructured loans.
The Portuguese banking sector has stabilised in 2017 mainly because of the extension of the maturity of loans granted to the Resolution Fund capital increases by some of the main banks and completion of the sale of Novo
However the banking system remains threatened by low profitability and weak asset quality NPL ratio of 17.5% according to the EBA estimate particularly concentrated in the corporate sector.
The central bank expects economic activity in Portugal to continue to expand at a pace close to that projected for the Euro area.
Gross domestic product GDP is estimated to grow by 2.6% in 2017 2.3% in 2018 and 1.9% in 2019.
Outlook
In line with other European markets the Bank of Portugal is maintaining pressure on banks to reduce the volume of NPLs and noncore assets as agreed with the Single Supervisory Mechanism especially given the need to access international financial markets to meet regulatory requirements.
However in 2017 NPL sales were somewhat slower than the prior year.
2018 should bring more debt portfolio sales as the banks continue the deleveraging process. www. rrowglobalir.
Strategic report
We commenced our consolidation into one o ce and continue to see exciting opportunities for the business.
Madiha Mouchtak Chief executive officer
Locations
Regulated by
Key 2017 highlights Madiha Mouchtak joined as Chief executive officer for Benelux in January 2018 Successful integration of Focum credit bureau into Vesting operations helping optimise collection strategies on owned and thirdparty portfolios Commencement of major investment in the servicing platform and IT infrastructure scheduled to be completed in 2018 Purchases of loan books from our asset management business demonstrating the value of these relationships Landmark deal to acquire the servicing capability and coinvestment in the loan book from RNHB mortgage bank 50.8 million of purchased loan portfolios and loan notes acquired Start of pilot endtoend consumer credit servicing for a nonDutch bank Centralisation of Dutch offices to Amersfoort will finalise in Q2 2018 Market overview While nonperforming and performing loans sales historically have been less common in Benelux than in other geographies this is increasing and the Group is well placed to acquire these due to our longstanding banking relationships and the Vesting platform.
In 2016 sales of nonperforming loans in The Netherlands reached 9.5 billion mainly from Commercial Real Estate and secured retail portfolios.
As at Q3 2017 sales were less at 3.2 billion and while secured retail sales again feature we also saw the emergence of Corporate and Small and Medium Size Enterprise SME loans being sold.
Financial services dominate nonperforming loans but telecoms utilities and consumer loans are also being sold in the Dutch market.
The financial services industry and utilities dominates the Belgian debt sale market.
However with other industries such as telecoms and health services becoming interested in this opportunity we expect an increase of debt sale projects.
Outlook
As with most European markets the pressure on structural reform from both government and regulators is increasing and Dutch banks will need to deleverage.
We expect compliance requirements for those who participate in the market to increase.
In the UK we have seen panel sizes reduce as a result of this.
This provides an opportunity for well run and highly compliant businesses such as Arrow Global to take advantage of this as the NPL market continues to accelerate from its current takeoff phase.
Heerenveen
Almere
Amsterdam
Hilversum
Ghent
Assets under management 5.0bn
STRATEGIC REPORT Arrow Global Group PLC  Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Rome
COUNTRY REVIEW CONTINUED IT AL Y The completion of the Zenith acquisition marked our entry into Italy and we are building on this with further acquisitions and organic growth.
John Calvo Chief executive officer Assets under management 25.6bn
Locations
Regulated by BANK OF ITALY Key 2017 highlights Significant growth year onyear in AUM up 10.7 billion to 25.6 billion for the year ending 2017 Positive annual review with Standard and Poors that resulted in an upgrade to Zenith s Master Servicing rating to Strong the highest rating available from Standard and Poors Enhanced operational capabilities in order to accompany strong inyear growth Further investment in staff systems and processes dedicated to the salaryassignment loan servicing Three significant and market facing NPL securitisations totalling 8.5 billion executed in 2017 Mandated in all the GAC transactions executed in the Italian market to date Carige Creval and BP Bari as monitoring agent M a r k e t o v e r v i e w Italy is Europes largest NPL market and its extended asset tails provide significant longterm opportunities.
In 2017 the Italian banking sector was very dynamic and characterised by the efforts of many banks to actively address the NPL issues.
Such issues were represented by high volumes of non performing exposures NPE still sitting on the banks balance sheets and the difficulty to find the right measures to properly manage the NPE lifecycle in line with the guidelines of the regulator.
Outlook
Although the market was active in 2017 the banks still retain a large volume of NPLs that need to be resolved 300 billion as of 30 June 2017 vs.
324 billion as of the end of 2016.
Many Italian banks are still addressing the ECB guidelines however proforma figures as of 31 December 2017 are equal to 250 billion including the NPL disposal of Unicredit 17.7 billion Project Fino and Banca Popolare di VicenzaVeneto Banca 16.8 billion which were not deconsolidated in the 30 June 2017 figures.
To remain successful Zenith relies on its deep client relationships tailor made service and strong market positioning.
Reputation and track record are both critical considerations for financial institutions and investment funds when choosing a servicing partner.
Read more online www. rrowglobal.
BUILDING BETTER FINANCIAL FUTURES FOR OUR CUSTOMERS Were brave and creative We thrive on positivity   exibility and challenge.
We share ideas and have courage to lead  we are not afraid to do things di erently.
We use our insight to lead change and innovation.
LIVING OUR VALUES James and Leanne are having a baby James and Leanne are expecting their first baby.
He works full time and Leanne works part time.
They have an outstanding debt that Capquest is collecting and which they have been making monthly repayments towards.
A missed payment is often an indicator of changed circumstances.
Our
We also learned that the couple had moved into bigger rented accommodation.
Life changes such as this are not uncommon and so understanding how it impacts on longer term finances is important.
Our agent took time to discuss in detail the new monthly income and expenditure that would apply and identified there were now no longer other outstanding creditors.
While some of their priority bills had increased slightly and they needed to consider additional outgoings related to the baby they still had an increase in disposable income.
James was keen to get things back on track cover the missed payment and establish a new regular direct debit.
Given the improved circumstances the benefit of increasing the monthly repayment and reducing the balance more quickly was considered.
James agreed and a higher monthly repayment was set meaning the balance will now be repaid within 14 months.
This a is an interesting example of how everyday developments can change our customers circumstances.
Our agents handle hundreds of similar calls every day and in them supporting our customers to build better financial futures is our priority.
Taking time to understand their position can help us assist them in achieving the best outcome for them giving them control and comfort on what they can afford to repay.
STRATEGIC REPORT Arrow Global Group PLC  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 SUPPORTING OUR
The Arrow Global Community Champions help support our local communities and provide social and sporting opportunities to our colleagues.
Supporting debt charities We support the activities of a number of debt charities.
We have a place on the Citizens Advice Advisory Group and are responsible for developing its new Debt Management Service with endtoend free advice and debt management plans.
We make significant FairShare contributions to both StepChange and Payplan.
Helping our local communities We had a very successful 2017.
The Arrow Global Community Champions help support our local communities and provide social and sporting opportunities to our colleagues.
One of the key aims this year was to provide increased awareness and charity donation initiatives across all of our UK sites.
This included International Womens Day Stress Awareness Month Mental Health Awareness Week National Walking Month with free pedometers Jeans for Genes Day and Breast Awareness Month with pink ribbons.
Some of the main charity donations are summarised below Arrow Global donated 15000 to the We Love Manchester Emergency Fund Arrow Global colleagues collected 2555 for Children in Need and Arrow Global colleagues collected 1008 for Macmillan Coffee Morning.
In Glasgow we supported our chosen charity Brightest Star through dress down days and summer events.
In doing so we raised 3060.
We also hosted a DKMS donor event and registered 43 employees on the stem cell donor database and in Farnborough we have raised 5435 supporting national charities like Save the Children Children in Need and Macmillan.
We also support colleagues contributions to the community by matching funds raised by them for our chosen charities and we encourage our staff to volunteer and assist local community organisations both in and out of Company time.
Financial education According to Money Advice Service research just four in ten young people in the UK say they have received financial education designed to teach children how to handle their finances confidently.
This is despite 90% who had received financial education lessons saying they found them very useful.
OUR PEOPLE 35 www. rrowglobalir.
Strategic report We continue to see this gap in education manifest itself through the challenges our customers face on a daily basis and so our role in financial capability education is critical to help address this imbalance for future generations.
Arrow Global has established a strong partnership with the Young Enterprise charity which stretches back to 2014.
Initially
Academy supporting it in attaining national accreditation as a Centre of Excellence for the provision of financial education to its students.
In 2016 we expanded our reach to more young people in our local Manchester community through the delivery of financial education.
This was achieved through the Money Matters workshop designed to educate and inspire young people to take ownership of their finances.
This year we have built upon the successes of the provision of financial education in local schools in the Manchester area by supporting young people in the local communities in our Farnborough and Glasgow office locations as well.
There are workshops taking place in Farnborough Glasgow and Manchester so that by February 2018 over 80 colleagues will have been involved in delivering financial education workshops.
Arrow
Global colleagues delivering financial capability workshops are a very rewarding experience for pupils teachers and Arrow Global volunteers alike.
In Benelux Vesting Finance is a sponsor of Stichting LEF a foundation that strives to reduce debt problems in society by increasing financial awareness amongst young people.
Similar to the Money Matters workshop in the UK LEF has developed a Money Management programme for young people and invites volunteers to teach skills in local schools.
Vesting Finance also participates in the Finance Run an annual running event where colleagues run 5 or 10 kilometres to raise money for Stichting LEF.
In Portugal Whitestar sponsors a Mozambican school Ilocone providing financial support to ensure the effective delivery of education programmes to children aged between three and six years old.
The company also started a market analysis in order to implement a financial literacy programme for children starting in 2018.
In addition Whitestar sponsored various initiatives for people with special needs.
Volunteering and mentoring with City Year City Year seeks to address the important issues of academic underachievement of children from deprived backgrounds and the risk of no experience no job for young people entering the employment market.
Arrow Global began its relationship with City Year in 2015 as a founding partner to the City Years launch in the Greater Manchester area and are a member of the charitys Manchester Advisory Council.
The relationship has gone from strength to strength and 2017 was a fantastic year with all areas of our participation with the charity growing.
We now have 11 volunteers involved in the Bridge Building programme whereby one volunteer from Arrow Global mentors a City Year volunteer for six months.
We also designed and delivered a Money Management workshop which focused on educating the City Year volunteers about personal financial management.
This was exceptionally well received and is paving the way for further workshops being developed.
As with previous years we shall continue our role in playing host to the Interview Skills Day.
On Friday 19th May 2017 Arrow Global colleagues hosted an Interview Skills Day for City Year volunteer mentors at the Arrow Global offices.
Our people Staff split By gender By gender at 31 December 2017 Total 1464 Staff split By age By age at 31 December 2017 Total 1464 Female 54% Male 46% 12% 23% 4150 4150 43% 3140 3140 21% Up to 30 Up to 30 36 STRATEGIC REPORT Arrow Global Group PLC  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 INDUSTRY ENGAGEMENT Regulatory and industry engagement During the year Arrow Global has actively contributed to a wide range of initiatives across the collections and debt advice sectors.
In 2017 we held a number of important industry positions After an extended threeyear presidency of the Credit Services Association CSA we retained a board seat for Public and European Affairs promoting better relationships with the FCA and government the debt advice sector and other stakeholders to ensure they are made aware of the processes and high standards of Arrow Global and the rest of the membership of the CSA.
First Chair then a continuing member of the Steering Committee on Reciprocity SCOR which governs the rules for credit data sharing in the UK bringing about important new rules and safeguards for the use of credit data by debt buyers.
The vice presidency of the Federation of European National Collection Associations FENCA.
Consistent FENCA lobbying resulted in significant changes to the final wording of the forthcoming EU General Data Protection Regulation GDPR and we now hold the FENCA portfolio of developing Codes of Conduct for GDPR as it relates to collections and then for panEuropean collections as a whole.
The Code for GDPR is currently in development and will be in place by May 2018 when GDPR comes into force.
This Code will help provide a level playing field for the European consumer and clarity on the GDPR regulation for our industry and may forestall further regulation from Brussels which could adversely affect Arrow Global and our customers.
Through FENCA we have also contributed to consultations on the NPL secondary market and attended meetings with highranking officials across DG Just and DG FISMA.
We hold a board position on the influential and newly incorporated Money Advice Liaison Group and a trusteeship of the FairLife Charity  promoting fair treatment of the consumer across financial services.
In 2016 we represented the credit industry on a subcommittee of the MOJ Civil Procedure Rule Committee responsible for drafting the preaction protocol for debt claims known as PAP.
This engagement resulted in significant improvements to the final outcome including usage of the standard financial statement and the dropping of the requirement to send an original agreement to every customer before legal action is commenced.
The PAP came into effect in October 2017 and has been well adopted by the sector.
SUSTAINABILITY
We actively contribute to a wide range of initiatives across the collections and debt advice sectors to help Build Better Financial Futures for our customers Helping a customer who is struggling with their debt makes all the hard work worthwhile. www. rrowglobalir.
Strategic report In addition to our various CSR initiatives at Group and country level specialising in financial education and data philanthropy we have supported a number of debt charities during the year including assisting Citizens Advice to implement its Debt Management Service trial.
We were also delighted to help Christians Against Poverty CAP toward its successful matched funding target and made FairShare contributions to CAP StepChange and Payplan.
We have continued to actively engage at numerous trade body events and conferences during 2017 and we chaired and presented regularly at nonperforming loan and industry events and conferences throughout the year.
We have a constructive and open relationship with the FCA and have contributed to recent projects on due diligence for debt purchase common misconceptions in CONC CCA retained provisions and remediation and the ongoing authorisation of feecharging debt management firms.
We also contributed to the Money Advice Service Debt Advice Operational Group considering the future funding of debt advice resulting in Peter Wymans recent report and contributing a wellregarded case study indicating the benefits of free financial advice to our customers.
We remain fully committed to raising standards promoting fairer practices in the collection of debt by government and other sectors we are active in lobbying for a really effective successor to The Money Advice Service and supporting better financial futures for children and those adults who as shown by our Debt Britain report are so often in need of our help and support.
Following on from the success of our Debt Britain report in 2016 later in the year we will be publishing new findings based on the latest OBR figures and our own customer research.
Supporting human rights All the Groups current activities are carried out in developed countries that have strong legislation governing human rights and Arrow Global complies with applicable legislation in every country where it operates.
Sustainability  caring for the environment Due to the nature of its business activities the Groups environmental impact is considered minimal.
An environmental policy is in place to increase employee awareness of environmental issues and complies with all relevant regulatory requirements.
With the acquisitions made in the last two years the Group now has a truly European structure.
This has inevitably seen an increase in international travel but to reduce the impact of this and other travel on our carbon footprint we actively encourage colleagues to increase the use of video and telephone conferencing facilities.
In the UK we offer colleagues a cycle to work scheme and at appropriate sites we have car shares and group transport schemes in place.
Key areas of the policy addressing the business environmental impact are as follows minimising paper usage and the purchase of recycled paper and packaging where possible energy efficient office products recycling office waste increased use of video and conference calls and Skype for business facilities and only booking travel for essential business reasons.
Its great to be able to help people with their  nancial situations and give them options for the future.
STRATEGIC REPORT Arrow Global Group PLC  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Identification and effect of controls Formal Risk Acceptance or Action Management PRINCIPAL RISKS and UNCERTAINTIES OUR APPROACH TO
RISK MANAGEMENT
Risk management framework Delivering our strategic priorities relies on the successful identification assessment management and reporting Delivering our strategic priorities relies on the successful identification assessment management and reporting of risk.
We focus on the top risks that impact our business and also monitor emerging risks that might affect us in of risk.
We focus on the top risks that impact our business and also monitor emerging risks that might affect us in the future.
We continue to invest in people and tools to enhance and embed our EnterpriseWide Risk the future.
We continue to invest in people and tools to enhance and embed our EnterpriseWide Risk Management Framework based on the following approach.
Management Framework based on the following approach.
TARGET
RISK
INHERENT
RISK
RESIDUAL
RISK
RISK and CONTROL SELFASSESSMENT RCSA BUSINESS ENVIRONMENT
EXTERNAL INCIDENT
INTERNAL INCIDENTS
BREACHES
GOVERNANCE and OVERSIGHT MANAGEMENT REPORTING KEY RISK INDICATORS RISK APPETITE Sound risk management is at the centre of our daytoday activities.
It benefits our business by ensuring balanced growth Sound risk management is at the centre of our daytoday activities.
It benefits our business by ensuring balanced growth and stability of earnings while also protecting the sustainability of our future prospects. and stability of earnings while also protecting the sustainability of our future prospects.
Delivering our strategic priorities relies on the successful identification assessment management and reporting of risk.
Delivering our strategic priorities relies on the successful identification assessment management and reporting of risk.
We focus on the top risks that impact our business and also monitor emerging risks that might affect us in the future.
We focus on the top risks that impact our business and also monitor emerging risks that might affect us in the future.
The investment that we are making in key areas supports the management of these risks and greater consistency across The investment that we are making in key areas supports the management of these risks and greater consistency across the Group. the Group.
The overall framework is underpinned by our risk appetite statements and a suite of policies.
Risk is governed by the board The overall framework is underpinned by our risk appetite statements and a suite of policies.
Risk is governed by the board executive management and various risk committees. executive management and various risk committees.
The Group operates a three lines of defence model with internal audit performed by a combination of Deloitte LLP and our The Group operates a three lines of defence model with internal audit performed by a combination of Deloitte LLP and our own internal audit functions in our European subsidiaries. own internal audit functions in our European subsidiaries.
Our principal risks are categorised as strategic operational and financial.
The disclosures below should not be regarded as a Our principal risks are categorised as strategic operational and financial.
The disclosures below should not be regarded as a comprehensive list of all the risks and uncertainties facing the Group but rather provide a summary of some of the key areas comprehensive list of all the risks and uncertainties facing the Group but rather provide a summary of some of the key areas that could have the biggest impact. that could have the biggest impact. www. rrowglobalir.
Strategic report Key risk Key mitigation actions Strategic risk The risk to earnings arising from changes in the business environment and from adverse business decisions improper implementation of decisions The risk to earnings arising from changes in the business environment and from adverse business decisions improper implementation of decisions or lack of responsiveness to changes in the business environment. or lack of responsiveness to changes in the business environment.
EXTERNAL
ENVIRONMENT
Changes in the competitive economic or Changes in the competitive economic or political including Brexit environment in political including Brexit environment in the UK or Eurozone could impact our the UK or Eurozone could impact our ability to collect from portfolios or ability to collect from portfolios or competitively purchase and invest in line competitively purchase and invest in line with our Company objectives e. as a with our Company objectives e. result of consolidation within the sector. result of consolidation within the sector.
Management monitors the competitive economic and political environments in which we operate to Management monitors the competitive economic and political environments in which we operate to influence future strategy.
The board regularly carries out reviews of the markets and strategy with influence future strategy.
The board regularly carries out reviews of the markets and strategy with impacts managed through our governance activities and by operating in accordance with regulatory impacts managed through our governance activities and by operating in accordance with regulatory requirements and industry best practice in each jurisdiction. requirements and industry best practice in each jurisdiction.
We have specifically considered the risks associated with Brexit including the potential disruption in We have specifically considered the risks associated with Brexit including the potential disruption in the UK political landscape.
Our analysis indicates that we do not anticipate material adverse consequences the UK political landscape.
Our analysis indicates that we do not anticipate material adverse consequences to arise from Brexit and remain well positioned to capitalise on any market opportunities whilst our to arise from Brexit and remain well positioned to capitalise on any market opportunities whilst our increased geographic diversification provides further protection. increased geographic diversification provides further protection.
INTERNAL
ORGANISATION
Ineffective organisational structure Ineffective organisational structure technological strategy strategic technological strategy strategic relationships culture and values could relationships culture and values could impact our ability to maintain impact our ability to maintain competitive advantage. competitive advantage.
Crossfunctional and crossgeographic forums are in place to achieve best practice across the business Crossfunctional and crossgeographic forums are in place to achieve best practice across the business with Groupwide policies to ensure alignment of key business principles and behaviours.
The organisation with Groupwide policies to ensure alignment of key business principles and behaviours.
The organisation structure has been developed to provide functional alignment across the Group a common set of values structure has been developed to provide functional alignment across the Group a common set of values has been defined and rolled out and culture assessments are being undertaken.
Strong relationships has been defined and rolled out and culture assessments are being undertaken.
Strong relationships have been developed with our creditor client base and investment funds in order to maintain have been developed with our creditor client base and investment funds in order to maintain competitive advantage. competitive advantage.
Financial risk The Groups overarching financial risk management strategy is governed by a treasury policy and is overseen by the treasury and tax committee The Groups overarching financial risk management strategy is governed by a treasury policy and is overseen by the treasury and tax committee which is a delegated committee from the Groups board and executive risk committees.
Financial risk includes which is a delegated committee from the Groups board and executive risk committees.
Financial risk includes MARKET RISK The risk of losses in portfolios due to The risk of losses in portfolios due to changes in foreign exchange rates and changes in foreign exchange rates and the level of interest rates. the level of interest rates.
The Group aims to mitigate foreign exchange risk a market risk by matching foreign currency assets The Group aims to mitigate foreign exchange risk a market risk by matching foreign currency assets with foreign currency liabilities.
The Group manages remaining exposures to foreign exchange at a with foreign currency liabilities.
The Group manages remaining exposures to foreign exchange at a Group level principally through the use of forward contracts.
Interest rate risk is managed principally Group level principally through the use of forward contracts.
Interest rate risk is managed principally using interest rate swaps. using interest rate swaps.
FUNDING and LIQUIDITY RISK The risk that the Group is unable to meet The risk that the Group is unable to meet its obligations as they fall due. its obligations as they fall due.
Funding and liquidity risk is managed through matching the maturity of our funding facilities with the Funding and liquidity risk is managed through matching the maturity of our funding facilities with the maturity of our assets by forecasting funding requirements applying appropriate stress testing and maturity of our assets by forecasting funding requirements applying appropriate stress testing and ensuring that we maintain a balanced maturity profile of debt facilities.
We are highly cash generative ensuring that we maintain a balanced maturity profile of debt facilities.
We are highly cash generative and aim to maintain a flexible cost base.
Portfolio investment is largely discretionary and this provides and aim to maintain a flexible cost base.
Portfolio investment is largely discretionary and this provides us with a large degree of control over working capital.
In addition appropriate currency liquidity us with a large degree of control over working capital.
In addition appropriate currency liquidity management and scenario planning is in place. management and scenario planning is in place.
PORTFOLIO
CREDIT RISK The risk of returns adverse to forecast as The risk of returns adverse to forecast as a result of inadequate portfolio purchase a result of inadequate portfolio purchase analysis and consequent mispricing or analysis and consequent mispricing or inadequate portfolio performance inadequate portfolio performance therefore affecting ERC. therefore affecting ERC.
Portfolio credit risk is managed through rigorous due diligence and controls to consider risks Portfolio credit risk is managed through rigorous due diligence and controls to consider risks including operational risks and accurately price new investment opportunities.
These include including operational risks and accurately price new investment opportunities.
These include executive review through an investment gate process and in certain circumstances board approval executive review through an investment gate process and in certain circumstances board approval prior to purchase execution.
Portfolio performance is regularly monitored by senior management and prior to purchase execution.
Portfolio performance is regularly monitored by senior management and the board with portfolio stress testing and reporting being developed. the board with portfolio stress testing and reporting being developed.
COUNTERPARTY
CREDIT RISK The risk to earnings or capital arising The risk to earnings or capital arising when a client or counterparty defaults on when a client or counterparty defaults on its contractual obligations including its contractual obligations including failure to perform obligations in a failure to perform obligations in a timely manner. timely manner.
Counterparty credit risk is managed through regular monitoring of the quality of new and existing Counterparty credit risk is managed through regular monitoring of the quality of new and existing counterparties and of our exposure to each.
Counterparty risk with debt sellers is mitigated through counterparties and of our exposure to each.
Counterparty risk with debt sellers is mitigated through warranties.
Counterparty risk relating to our cash balances is mitigated by spreading balances across warranties.
Counterparty risk relating to our cash balances is mitigated by spreading balances across multiple banks subject to maximum exposure limits based on assessment of risk. multiple banks subject to maximum exposure limits based on assessment of risk.
STRATEGIC REPORT Arrow Global Group PLC  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 PRINCIPAL RISKS and UNCERTAINTIES CONTINUED Key risk Key mitigation actions Financial risk continued TAX RISK Tax compliance risks arise from the Tax compliance risks arise from the complex nature of tax legislation complex nature of tax legislation and practice. and practice.
Tax risk is addressed through the use of inhouse and external tax specialists who advise the Group Tax risk is addressed through the use of inhouse and external tax specialists who advise the Group on its tax compliance obligations application of tax legislation and the transactions and activities on its tax compliance obligations application of tax legislation and the transactions and activities undertaken by the Group. undertaken by the Group.
PENSION RISK The risk that the Group is unable to The risk that the Group is unable to meet its payment liabilities to former meet its payment liabilities to former employee beneficiaries. employee beneficiaries.
Our exposure to liabilities arising from pension risk is negligible as employees are on defined Our exposure to liabilities arising from pension risk is negligible as employees are on defined contribution schemes.
A number of employees of Vesting Finance were entitled to pension benefits contribution schemes.
A number of employees of Vesting Finance were entitled to pension benefits that the Company insured an arrangement which met the definition of a defined benefit plan. that the Company insured an arrangement which met the definition of a defined benefit plan.
During 2017 we moved this to a defined contribution scheme and agreed settlement with the During 2017 we moved this to a defined contribution scheme and agreed settlement with the scheme members resulting in the derecognition of the defined benefit scheme. scheme members resulting in the derecognition of the defined benefit scheme.
Operational risk Operational risk is managed in line with our operational risk policy which sets out the framework and processes for managing this risk type.
Operational risk is managed in line with our operational risk policy which sets out the framework and processes for managing this risk type.
Operational risk includes Operational risk includes REGULATORY RISK Risk of noncompliance with regulatory Risk of noncompliance with regulatory obligations increased regulatory scrutiny obligations increased regulatory scrutiny and inappropriate conduct and and inappropriate conduct and customer treatment. customer treatment.
We operate in a highly regulated environment particularly in the UK and increasingly in other We operate in a highly regulated environment particularly in the UK and increasingly in other European countries with any action that leads to poor customer outcomes or customer detriment European countries with any action that leads to poor customer outcomes or customer detriment and could lead to a breach of regulations resulting in censure financial loss and reputational and could lead to a breach of regulations resulting in censure financial loss and reputational damage to our brand. damage to our brand.
Poor customer outcomes or customer detriment could arise through the debt collection activities Poor customer outcomes or customer detriment could arise through the debt collection activities within our inhouse operations or the thirdparty servicer network of collection agencies whether we within our inhouse operations or the thirdparty servicer network of collection agencies whether we are collecting debt which we have acquired or on behalf of clients.
We always seek to ensure we are collecting debt which we have acquired or on behalf of clients.
We always seek to ensure we adhere to all local best practice collections approaches and we have established increased adhere to all local best practice collections approaches and we have established increased governance over our remediation activities to address instances of customer detriment governance over our remediation activities to address instances of customer detriment including on behalf of clients. including on behalf of clients.
We employ industry specialists to monitor the latest regulations and update our internal policies We employ industry specialists to monitor the latest regulations and update our internal policies accordingly and where required we take external specialist advice.
We also engage in regular accordingly and where required we take external specialist advice.
We also engage in regular training and assurance activity to ensure compliance with internal policies. training and assurance activity to ensure compliance with internal policies.
Regulatory conduct and Treating Customers Fairly TCF are at the heart of our business our Regulatory conduct and Treating Customers Fairly TCF are at the heart of our business our purpose being to Build Better Financial Futures.
Employees and third parties acting on our behalf purpose being to Build Better Financial Futures.
Employees and third parties acting on our behalf receive mandatory training including conduct risk handling vulnerable customers and complaints receive mandatory training including conduct risk handling vulnerable customers and complaints relevant to the local market and our activities. relevant to the local market and our activities.
IT RISK Risk of IT failures as a result of inadequate Risk of IT failures as a result of inadequate IT infrastructure security andor systems IT infrastructure security andor systems and applications. and applications.
The Group relies on IT systems for customer and data management and data analytics.
Should these The Group relies on IT systems for customer and data management and data analytics.
Should these systems experience performance issues or outage through for example cyberattack our systems experience performance issues or outage through for example cyberattack our customers would be impacted and we could experience financial loss. customers would be impacted and we could experience financial loss.
IT systems are regularly tested backed up and managed through a set of quality and security IT systems are regularly tested backed up and managed through a set of quality and security policies supported by disaster recovery and business continuity plans.
We are investing significantly policies supported by disaster recovery and business continuity plans.
We are investing significantly in consolidating our IT infrastructure and systems across all geographies enabling us to be more in consolidating our IT infrastructure and systems across all geographies enabling us to be more efficient automate processes and manage data more effectively. efficient automate processes and manage data more effectively. www. rrowglobalir.
Strategic report Key risk Key mitigation actions Operational risk continued DATA and INFORMATION RISK Risk of deficiencies in data quality and Risk of deficiencies in data quality and documentation impacting areas such as documentation impacting areas such as pricing through modelling techniques pricing through modelling techniques through to customer communications. through to customer communications.
There is a risk of data quality and documentation deficiencies in purchased portfolios that require There is a risk of data quality and documentation deficiencies in purchased portfolios that require remediation postpurchase.
The effectiveness of this remediation activity potentially affects the remediation postpurchase.
The effectiveness of this remediation activity potentially affects the enforceability of debt our future collections and credit risk or the quality of customer outcomes. enforceability of debt our future collections and credit risk or the quality of customer outcomes.
Due diligence is undertaken on prospective investment purchases to identify potential data quality Due diligence is undertaken on prospective investment purchases to identify potential data quality and documentation weaknesses see portfolio credit risk section above. and documentation weaknesses see portfolio credit risk section above.
We are also exposed to risks relating to data protection and the way in which we manage data We are also exposed to risks relating to data protection and the way in which we manage data including its deletion.
The General Data Protection Regulation GDPR has provided further guidance including its deletion.
The General Data Protection Regulation GDPR has provided further guidance on how data should be managed and more stringent consequences in the event that we fail to meet on how data should be managed and more stringent consequences in the event that we fail to meet these regulatory requirements.
We have instigated a major programme across the Group to ensure these regulatory requirements.
We have instigated a major programme across the Group to ensure that we appropriately protect and manage data and expect to have made significant progress by that we appropriately protect and manage data and expect to have made significant progress by implementation of GDPR in May 2018. implementation of GDPR in May 2018.
LEGAL RISK Risk that the Group does not comply with Risk that the Group does not comply with local legislation or contracting requirements. local legislation or contracting requirements.
Our legal team is involved in all purchases with contractual terms and warranties used to manage Our legal team is involved in all purchases with contractual terms and warranties used to manage contracting risks and provide acceptable protection against legacy issues.
We actively manage contracting risks and provide acceptable protection against legacy issues.
We actively manage contractual relationships with third parties and provide board visibility on material litigation activity. contractual relationships with third parties and provide board visibility on material litigation activity.
Specialist legal teams are also in place across all Group geographies to ensure compliance with local Specialist legal teams are also in place across all Group geographies to ensure compliance with local legislation and contracting requirements.
External legal advice is taken where required. legislation and contracting requirements.
External legal advice is taken where required.
SUPPLIER RISK Risk that suppliers are not adequately Risk that suppliers are not adequately sourced managed and terminated. sourced managed and terminated.
We choose to outsource the management of some customer accounts to thirdparty partners who We choose to outsource the management of some customer accounts to thirdparty partners who collect on our behalf.
We are also dependent upon thirdparty firms with which customers engage collect on our behalf.
We are also dependent upon thirdparty firms with which customers engage to manage their debt or insolvency.
Should these third parties experience sustained business to manage their debt or insolvency.
Should these third parties experience sustained business interruption be subject to takeover by an unfriendly competitor or fraudulent activity or fail interruption be subject to takeover by an unfriendly competitor or fraudulent activity or fail to maintain regulatory authorisation we could suffer financial loss andor potential detriment to maintain regulatory authorisation we could suffer financial loss andor potential detriment to customers.
We undertake ongoing oversight of our suppliers including thirdparty partners to customers.
We undertake ongoing oversight of our suppliers including thirdparty partners involved in the collection of payments from customers.
This oversight includes their treatment of involved in the collection of payments from customers.
This oversight includes their treatment of customers compliance with regulation information security and business continuity arrangements. customers compliance with regulation information security and business continuity arrangements.
We monitor industry consolidation activity and have a diversified panel of partners to ensure that We monitor industry consolidation activity and have a diversified panel of partners to ensure that we are not reliant on any particular thirdparty servicer.
Exit plans have been developed for critical we are not reliant on any particular thirdparty servicer.
Exit plans have been developed for critical suppliers covering impact assessments timescales for exit and alternative suppliers. suppliers covering impact assessments timescales for exit and alternative suppliers.
Consistent standards for supplier management will be deployed across all countries.
Consistent standards for supplier management will be deployed across all countries.
BUSINESS
CONTINUITY RISK Risk that processes and procedures Risk that processes and procedures are not in place to manage unforeseen are not in place to manage unforeseen business disruption. business disruption.
Business continuity arrangements are managed on a countrybycountry basis with a view to Business continuity arrangements are managed on a countrybycountry basis with a view to adopting a Groupwide approach to the governance and management of business disruption adopting a Groupwide approach to the governance and management of business disruption to provide a consistent methodology.
Disaster recovery plans are in place to mitigate against to provide a consistent methodology.
Disaster recovery plans are in place to mitigate against unexpected disruptions to our core infrastructure with regular testing of plans. unexpected disruptions to our core infrastructure with regular testing of plans.
PEOPLE RISK The risk of inadequate employee The risk of inadequate employee engagement ability and capacity engagement ability and capacity impacts on performance and behaviours. impacts on performance and behaviours.
We believe that people are our greatest asset and as such invest in employee training through We believe that people are our greatest asset and as such invest in employee training through further education and continuous professional development programmes using both internal further education and continuous professional development programmes using both internal and external resources.
We monitor employee engagement levels through employee satisfaction and external resources.
We monitor employee engagement levels through employee satisfaction surveys and take steps to address key themes. surveys and take steps to address key themes.
We have a strong sense of cultural alignment across the Group with Group values in place across We have a strong sense of cultural alignment across the Group with Group values in place across all Group geographies. all Group geographies.
STRATEGIC REPORT Arrow Global Group PLC  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 PRINCIPAL RISKS and UNCERTAINTIES CONTINUED Key risk Key mitigation actions Operational risk continued
EXECUTION RISK Risk that poorly executed processes and Risk that poorly executed processes and transactions result in financial loss andor transactions result in financial loss andor poor customer outcomes. poor customer outcomes.
Where established we have a quarterly Risk and Control SelfAssessment RCSA process to identify and Where established we have a quarterly Risk and Control SelfAssessment RCSA process to identify and assess key operational risks including process execution risk.
Our risk assessment processes are assess key operational risks including process execution risk.
Our risk assessment processes are trained out to acquired businesses to develop consistency across the Group.
Key risk areas are trained out to acquired businesses to develop consistency across the Group.
Key risk areas are governed by a suite of policies approved by the board or executives to ensure standards are governed by a suite of policies approved by the board or executives to ensure standards are appropriately set across the Group. appropriately set across the Group.
Process execution failures are managed through our incident process with clearly defined reporting Process execution failures are managed through our incident process with clearly defined reporting escalation and governance in place.
Incidents are assessed against a severity matrix which considers escalation and governance in place.
Incidents are assessed against a severity matrix which considers the impact from both a business customer and thirdparty perspective ensuring that we reduce the impact from both a business customer and thirdparty perspective ensuring that we reduce these impacts where possible.
We seek to learn from all instances of process failures undertaking these impacts where possible.
We seek to learn from all instances of process failures undertaking rootcause analysis in order that we can learn take appropriate action to resolve the incident and rootcause analysis in order that we can learn take appropriate action to resolve the incident and make improvements to avoid repeated failings.
With the expansion of the Group we are investing make improvements to avoid repeated failings.
With the expansion of the Group we are investing to improve process execution in all countries and seeking opportunities to enhance efficiency to improve process execution in all countries and seeking opportunities to enhance efficiency through application of consistent Groupwide approaches. through application of consistent Groupwide approaches.
CHANGE RISK Risk of inadequately executed Risk of inadequately executed change activities. change activities.
Change governance is in place across all Group geographies with change committees charged with Change governance is in place across all Group geographies with change committees charged with ensuring that change and associated benefits ensuring that change and associated benefits are delivered on time and budget.
We are standardising are delivered on time and budget.
We are standardising the governance and management of change across the Group with a consistent change methodology the governance and management of change across the Group with a consistent change methodology facilitated by a programme management office. facilitated by a programme management office.
FINANCIAL CRIME RISK The risk of internalexternal fraud The risk of internalexternal fraud theft and money laundering. theft and money laundering.
All colleagues complete Financial Crime Training within their induction period or within 30 days of All colleagues complete Financial Crime Training within their induction period or within 30 days of joining the Company and subsequently on an annual basis.
Any suspicion or knowledge of money joining the Company and subsequently on an annual basis.
Any suspicion or knowledge of money laundering fraud theft or misappropriation of Group assets finances intellectual property or confidential laundering fraud theft or misappropriation of Group assets finances intellectual property or confidential datainformation is reported through a governance datainformation is reported through a governance structure described in the Group Financial structure described in the Group Financial Crime policy.
Crime policy.
We are enhancing our antimoney laundering processes in line with this policy.
Where We are enhancing our antimoney laundering processes in line with this policy.
Where we experience financial crime or we have inadvertently subjected our customers to increased risk of we experience financial crime or we have inadvertently subjected our customers to increased risk of financial crime we have taken appropriate steps to address those risks for example registering financial crime we have taken appropriate steps to address those risks for example registering customers with CIFAS at our expense. customers with CIFAS at our expense.
GOVERNANCE RISK Risk of inappropriate governance Risk of inappropriate governance and oversight arrangements. and oversight arrangements.
We have a rigorous oversight framework focused on compliance independent assurance performance We have a rigorous oversight framework focused on compliance independent assurance performance and customer outcomes across both our inhouse operations and thirdparty partner network and customer outcomes across both our inhouse operations and thirdparty partner network with a continuous programme of reporting and reviews. with a continuous programme of reporting and reviews.
Governance and oversight are supported by the three lines of defence structure including a second Governance and oversight are supported by the three lines of defence structure including a second line risk and compliance function across the Group and risk committee structure at Group and line risk and compliance function across the Group and risk committee structure at Group and country level.
The committees provide oversight of the Groups processes and procedures monitoring country level.
The committees provide oversight of the Groups processes and procedures monitoring their effectiveness in fulfilling regulatory obligations and the management of risk that may result in their effectiveness in fulfilling regulatory obligations and the management of risk that may result in noncompliance andor poor outcomes for customers.
We are embedding these structures into our noncompliance and or poor outcomes for customers.
We are embedding these structures into our acquired businesses to deliver an effective and consistent approach across the organisation.
Risk acquired businesses to deliver an effective and consistent approach across the organisation.
Risk exposures are also managed and monitored against the boards risk appetite and the process by exposures are also managed and monitored against the boards risk appetite and the process by which we set and manage this is being enhanced across the Group. which we set and manage this is being enhanced across the Group.
REPORTING RISK Risk of inaccurateuntimely internal Risk of inaccurateuntimely internal and external reporting. and external reporting.
Alongside our governance framework sits a reporting calendar to ensure that reporting remains Alongside our governance framework sits a reporting calendar to ensure that reporting remains accurate up to date and is produced on time.
Specialist teams are responsible for different aspects accurate up to date and is produced on time.
Specialist teams are responsible for different aspects of internal and external reporting many of these sitting at Group level including Corporate of internal and external reporting many of these sitting at Group level including Corporate Communications Investor Relations Finance and Risk.
Financial reporting and regulatory returns are Communications Investor Relations Finance and Risk.
Financial reporting and regulatory returns are subject to high levels of focus and challenge and follow set governance and approval processes. subject to high levels of focus and challenge and follow set governance and approval processes. www. rrowglobalir.
Strategic report STATEMENT OF VIABILITY The directors have assessed the prospects and viability of the Group over a threeyear period of assessment.
The directors have given this matter due consideration through a review of forecast cash  ow models and scenarios and current cash availability The main considerations were as follows The main considerations were as follows The Group prepares annually a fiveyear plan as part of its corporate planning process The Group prepares annually a fiveyear plan as part of its corporate planning process which is aligned to the strategic goals approved by the board.
The plan is predicated on a which is aligned to the strategic goals approved by the board.
The plan is predicated on a detailed year one budget and extrapolated forecasts in outer years.
It is the first three detailed year one budget and extrapolated forecasts in outer years.
It is the first three years of the plan which command the greatest focus and have the greater certainty years of the plan which command the greatest focus and have the greater certainty over the forecasting assumptions used.
This is why the board has concluded that the over the forecasting assumptions used.
This is why the board has concluded that the viability statement should cover a period of three years. viability statement should cover a period of three years.
The Group is highly cash generative receiving weekly cash flows in collections from The Group is highly cash generative receiving weekly cash flows in collections from customers and has a low fixed cost base.
We have a long track record of predictable customers and has a low fixed cost base.
We have a long track record of predictable cash flows over many years.
The directors have reviewed the available headroom of the cash flows over many years.
The directors have reviewed the available headroom of the Group and confirmed that the Group has sufficient resources to meet future obligations Group and confirmed that the Group has sufficient resources to meet future obligations as they fall due. as they fall due.
The principal covenants of the revolving credit facility that the Group currently has in The principal covenants of the revolving credit facility that the Group currently has in place are loan to value LTV ratio of no more than 75% and a super senior loan to value place are loan to value LTV ratio of no more than 75% and a super senior loan to value SSLTV ratio of no more than 25% both tested quarterly.
The directors have reviewed SSLTV ratio of no more than 25% both tested quarterly.
The directors have reviewed the Groups financial projections covering the period of assessment and the projections the Groups financial projections covering the period of assessment and the projections show covenant compliance.
Furthermore based on the threeyear forecast and show covenant compliance.
Furthermore based on the threeyear forecast and funding plan the Group will continue to be in compliance. funding plan the Group will continue to be in compliance.
The directors have considered the Groups viability in detail over a threeyear period to The directors have considered the Groups viability in detail over a threeyear period to December 2020.
This assessment is in accordance with provision C.2.2 of the UK Corporate December 2020.
This assessment is in accordance with provision C.2.2 of the UK Corporate Governance Code.
It has been made taking into account the current position of the Governance Code.
It has been made taking into account the current position of the Group the corporate planning and budget process and the Groups principal risks as Group the corporate planning and budget process and the Groups principal risks as detailed in the strategic report on pages 38 to 42. detailed in the strategic report on pages 38 to 42.
As a matter of good practice a variety of stress tests are performed on the plan.
The tests As a matter of good practice a variety of stress tests are performed on the plan.
The tests selected consider the principal risks faced by the Group.
The principal risk modelled selected consider the principal risks faced by the Group.
The principal risk modelled within the stress tests is a reduction in collections which would reflect the impact of within the stress tests is a reduction in collections which would reflect the impact of either external macroeconomic factors or internal operational issues arising.
In the UK either external macroeconomic factors or internal operational issues arising.
In the UK we completed a specific exercise regarding macroeconomic stress to simulate the potential we completed a specific exercise regarding macroeconomic stress to simulate the potential impacts of any downturn in macroeconomic factors due to Brexit or otherwise.
In 2016 impacts of any downturn in macroeconomic factors due to Brexit or otherwise.
In 2016 we asked Jaywing Consulting to consider and challenge our analysis.
This has not been we asked Jaywing Consulting to consider and challenge our analysis.
This has not been repeated as its analysis remains valid and has helped inform some of our stress testing repeated as its analysis remains valid and has helped inform some of our stress testing performed this year. performed this year.
The directors have concluded that they have a reasonable expectation that the Group The directors have concluded that they have a reasonable expectation that the Group will be able to continue to operate and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the will be able to continue to operate and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the threeyear period of their detailed assessment. threeyear period of their detailed assessment.
Approval of strategic report The strategic report for the year ended 31 December 2017 has been approved by the The strategic report for the year ended 31 December 2017 has been approved by the board and was signed on its behalf by board and was signed on its behalf by Lee Rochford Group chief executive officer 1 March 2018 44 GOVERNANCE REPORT Arrow Global Group PLC  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 BOARD OF DIRECTORS Jonathan Bloomer MBE Nonexecutive Chairman
5 October 2013 Committee membership Nomination Chair and remuneration Skills and experience Jonathan has a wealth of experience in the nancial services industry and has signi cant board experience both as an executive and nonexecutive.
His previous positions include chief executive of Prudential Plc chairman of the employee bene t business of Jardine Lloyd Thompson Plc senior independent director of Hargreaves Lansdown Plc chairman of the audit committee of Autonomy Plc chairman of the Practitioner Panel of the FSA board membership of the Geneva Association and membership of the code committee of the Takeover Panel.
External appointments Jonathan is currently chairman of Shepherd Direct Ltd nonexecutive director of Morgan Stanley International and director of Change Real Estate Limited.
Contribution in 2017 Jonathan led the board through a signi cant period of growth and diversi cation in the Groups history highlights being the acquisition of Zenith in Italy and the Mars Capital companies in the UK and Republic of Ireland together with the continued evolution of the Companys asset management revenue stream.
As chair of the nomination committee Jonathan oversaw the recruitment of Paul Cooper as Group chief nancial o cer.
Lee Rochford Group chief executive o cer
3 January 2017 Committee membership Disclosure Chair Skills and experience Before joining the Company Lee was chief nancial o cer at Virgin Money between October 2013 and August 2015 seeing the group through its successful IPO and into life as a listed company.
Prior to this he held a number of roles at RBS between 2007 and 2013 culminating as managing director and head of the Financial Institutions Group.
Earlier in his career Lee was managing director of Wachovia Securities Principal Finance team managing director and head of European asset  nance at Credit Suisse and head of Northern European securitisation at BNP Paribas.
Lee has a degree in Philosophy Politics and Economics from Oxford University .
External appointments
Contribution in 2017 Lee has led the Group through a signi cant year of growth and  nancial performance in the Groups history highlights include revenue growth of 35.2% growth in underlying pro t after tax of 24.2% and underlying return on equity now standing at 32.9%.
Lee was instrumental in the development of the One Arrow programme which centred on investing in infrastructure and the Groups core capabilities for future growth and the expansion of the executive management team following the appointments of Paul Cooper Group chief nancial o cer Clodagh Gunnigle Group chief risk o cer and Dave Sutherland Group chief operating o cer.
Paul Cooper Group chief  nancial o cer
1 January 2018 Committee membership
Skills and experience Paul has over 20 years experience in nancial services roles both within the UK and overseas.
Paul joined the Company from leading global insurance business Sompo Canopius Group where he had been in a variety of senior executive roles since 2013.
Previously Paul was a partner at Ernst and Young LLP in the Financial Services division following  ve years as a Finance Director at the quoted insurer Hiscox.
Paul is a Chartered Accountant having trained at PwC.
External appointments
Contribution in 2017 Paul joined the business in January 2018.
Iain Cornish Nonexecutive director and senior independent director
15 October 2013 Iain became senior independent director on 4 June 2015 Committee membership Senior independent director  audit disclosure nomination remuneration and risk Chair Skills and experience Iain has a wealth of experience in the nancial services industry having spent over 20 years in senior leadership roles until 2011 at the Yorkshire Building Society including eight years as chief executive cer.
He was previously nonexecutive director of Vanquis Bank nonexecutive director of the Prudential Regulatory Authority chairman of the Practitioner Panel of the FSA and of the Building Societies Association and executive committee member of the Council of Mortgage Lenders.
External appointments Iain is currently nonexecutive chairman of Shawbrook Group Plc senior independent director and risk committee chairman at St James Place W ealth Management Plc and trustee and treasurer of Macmillan Cancer Support.
Contribution in 2017 As chair of the risk committee during the year Iain oversaw the strengthening and development of the Group s risk management framework to align with the growth scale diversity and complexity of the business.
Iain also led the committee through the oversight of the risks associated with the acquisition and integration activity in relation to Zenith in Italy and Mars Capital in the UK and Republic of Ireland.
Iain has continued to support the Chairman in his role as senior independent director and was involved in the recruitment of Paul Cooper as Group chief  nancial o cer.
Governance www. rrowglobalir.
Lan Tu Nonexecutive director
9 March 2015 Committee membership Remuneration Chair audit nomination and risk Skills and experience Lan has had over 10 years of experience in senior leadership roles within American Express until 2015.
Lan ran its Emerging Payment and Services business in Europe Middle East and Africa was the general manager for its UK and Nordics Merchant Services business and previously led its International Strategic Planning group.
Previous experience also includes 12 years at McKinsey and Company working primarily in the  nancial services sector.
External appointments Lan is chief strategy o cer of Standard Life Aberdeen PLC nonexecutive director of Kings College London and nonexecutive director of Maudsley Learning at Work.
Contribution in 2017 As chair of the remuneration committee Lan oversaw the remuneration proposals in respect of Rob Memmott stepping down as Group chief  nancial o cer and Paul Coopers appointment.
Lan has also been instrumental in leading the committee through the review of the Companys remuneration policy in the context of the increase in the Companys size and complexity and developments in best practice which is being put to shareholders for approval at the 2018 annual general meeting.
Maria Lus Albuquerque Nonexecutive director
7 March 2016 Committee membership Audit and risk Skills and experience Maria Lus was Portuguese Minister of State and Finance from July 2013 until November 2015 when there was a change of government in Portugal and Deputy Minister for Treasury from June 2011 to July 2013.
She had previously held a number of senior  nancetreasury positions in the Portuguese public sector including Head of Issuing and Markets at the Portuguese Treasury and Debt Management Agency and director of the department of  nancial management at REFER the state owned rail infrastructure company.
She is an economist who also lectured in Universidade Lusada of Lisbon from 1991 to 2006.
External appointments Maria Lus is a Member of the Portuguese Parliament having been reelected in the general election of 4 October 2015.
Contribution in 2017 Maria Lus brings a wealth of international and  nancial expertise to the board and throughout the year provided insight and challenge to the board on the Groups geographic expansion and diversi cation particularly in the context of European nancial stability and the Groups longterm funding strategy.
As a member of the risk committee Maria Lus was involved in the review of the risks associated with the acquisition and integration activity related to the Zenith acquisition in Italy and the Mars Capital acquisition in the UK and Republic of Ireland.
Andrew Fisher Nonexecutive director
9 December 2016 Committee membership Audit Chair remuneration risk and disclosure alternate Skills and experience Andrew a chartered accountant is currently the  nance director of Provident Financial plc having been appointed in 2006.
He has spent over 20 years as a nance director of major listed companies where he has accumulated broad international experience and a considerable depth of knowledge across a variety of consumer credit asset classes.
Prior to working in the nancial services industry he was a partner with Price Waterhouse LLP.
External appointments Finance director of Provident Financial plc.
Contribution in 2017 Andrew brings a wealth of international and  nancial sector knowledge and experience to the board and provides particular insight and challenge on the Groups longterm funding and strategy.
As chair of the audit committee Andrew has led the committee through the review of the integrity and e ectiveness of the nancial reporting process together with the going concern review and approval of the longterm viability statement for recommendation to the board.
Andrew also led the committee through the review of the Groups approach to the implementation of IFRS 9 a key piece of the committees work throughout the year.
Stewart Hamilton General counsel and company secretary
24 September 2013 Committee membership
Skills and experience Stewart has over 15 years experience as a solicitor in corporate and commercial law having joined the Company from Addleshaw Goddard in 2011.
Stewart quali ed as a solicitor with Linklaters in 2002 before working for Baker and McKenzie in London.
External appointments
GOVERNANCE REPORT Arrow Global Group PLC  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE REPORT The board is responsible for the longterm success of the Group its strategy values and governance.
Compliance statement This corporate governance report together with the reports This corporate governance report together with the reports of the audit committee risk committee nomination committee of the audit committee risk committee nomination committee and the directors remuneration report provides a description and the directors remuneration report provides a description of how the main principles of the UK Corporate Governance of how the main principles of the UK Corporate Governance Code published by the Financial Reporting Council FRC in April Code published by the Financial Reporting Council FRC in April 2016 the Code have been applied by the Company in 2017 .
2016 the Code have been applied by the Company in 2017 .
The Code is available on the FRC website at www. rc. ite The Code is available on the FRC website at www. rc.
During the year the Company was in compliance with the During the year the Company was in compliance with the relevant provisions of the Code and intends to continue to relevant provisions of the Code and intends to continue to comply with the requirements of the Code which sets out comply with the requirements of the Code which sets out standards of good practice in relation to board leadership standards of good practice in relation to board leadership and effectiveness remuneration accountability and relations and effectiveness remuneration accountability and relations with shareholders. with shareholders.
The board currently comprises seven members including The board currently comprises seven members including me as Chairman two executive directors Lee Rochford and me as Chairman two executive directors Lee Rochford and Paul Cooper and four independent nonexecutive directors Paul Cooper and four independent nonexecutive directors Iain Cornish Lan Tu Maria Lus Albuquerque and Andrew Fisher.
Iain Cornish Lan Tu Maria Lus Albuquerque and Andrew Fisher.
The board regarded me as Chairman as independent upon The board regarded me as Chairman as independent upon my appointment and considers that I continue to meet my appointment and considers that I continue to meet the independence criteria. the independence criteria.
As mentioned in my statement on pages 4 and 5 we As mentioned in my statement on pages 4 and 5 we announced in October 2017 that Rob Memmott would be announced in October 2017 that Rob Memmott would be stepping down as Group chief financial officer and would be stepping down as Group chief financial officer and would be replaced by Paul Cooper with effect from 1 January 2018. replaced by Paul Cooper with effect from 1 January 2018.
Iain Cornish is the Companys senior independent director.
Iain Cornish is the Companys senior independent director.
The board is satisfied that Iain is independent in character The board is satisfied that Iain is independent in character and judgement and has skills and experience that make him and judgement and has skills and experience that make him well suited to the role.
Where a company is outside the FTSE 350 well suited to the role.
Where a company is outside the FTSE 350 the Code recommends that the board of directors includes at the Code recommends that the board of directors includes at least two independent nonexecutive directors.
The Company least two independent nonexecutive directors.
The Company being outside the FTSE 350 currently has five independent being outside the FTSE 350 currently has five independent nonexecutive directors including me as Chairman and nonexecutive directors including me as Chairman and therefore complies with the recommendations of the Code. therefore complies with the recommendations of the Code.
Biographical details of all the directors are set on pages 44 Biographical details of all the directors are set on pages 44 and 45.
The board adopted the provision regarding the annual and 45.
The board adopted the provision regarding the annual reelection of all directors at the first annual general meeting reelection of all directors at the first annual general meeting in 2014 and intends to continue this at the 2018 annual general in 2014 and intends to continue this at the 2018 annual general meeting.
Paul Cooper will offer himself for election by the meeting.
Paul Cooper will offer himself for election by the shareholders for the first time at the 2018 annual general meeting. shareholders for the first time at the 2018 annual general meeting.
Shareholder bondholder and revolving credit facility provider engagement The board considers that active dialogue with its The board considers that active dialogue with its shareholders bondholders and revolving credit facility shareholders bondholders and revolving credit facility providers is vital to the success of the business.
Further providers is vital to the success of the business.
Further details regarding these engagements are set out on page 50. details regarding these engagements are set out on page 50.
Jonathan Bloomer Nonexecutive Chairman 1 March 2018 47 www. rrowglobalir.
Leadership
The board The board is responsible for the longterm success of the The board is responsible for the longterm success of the Company its strategy values and governance.
The board Company its strategy values and governance.
The board maintains a formal schedule of matters for consideration maintains a formal schedule of matters for consideration which include which include establishing longterm strategic objectives establishing longterm strategic objectives approving annual operating and capital budgets approving annual operating and capital budgets reviewing business performance and development reviewing business performance and development overseeing the Companys risk management and internal overseeing the Companys risk management and internal control systems control systems reviewing corporate governance arrangements reviewing corporate governance arrangements succession planning succession planning approving shareholder return policy approving shareholder return policy ensuring appropriate resources are in place to enable the ensuring appropriate resources are in place to enable the Company to meet its objectives Company to meet its objectives ensuring appropriate oversight of portfolio investments and ensuring appropriate oversight of portfolio investments and approval of external reporting. approval of external reporting.
Specific key considerations of the board in 2017 also included Specific key considerations of the board in 2017 also included the acquisition of Mars Capital in the UK and Republic of Ireland the acquisition of Mars Capital in the UK and Republic of Ireland the acquisition of Zenith in Italy the acquisition of Zenith in Italy Euro bond refinancing Euro bond refinancing RCF refinancing RCF refinancing the appointment of Group chief financial officer Paul Cooper the appointment of Group chief financial officer Paul Cooper European expansion considerations and European expansion considerations and investment in the One Arrow programme. investment in the One Arrow programme.
Chairman and Group chief executive officer The positions of the Chairman and Group chief executive The positions of the Chairman and Group chief executive officer are held by separate individuals and the board has officer are held by separate individuals and the board has clearly defined their responsibilities.
The Chairman is primarily clearly defined their responsibilities.
The Chairman is primarily responsible for the effective working of the board and responsible for the effective working of the board and ensuring that each director particularly the nonexecutive ensuring that each director particularly the nonexecutive directors is able to make an effective contribution.
The directors is able to make an effective contribution.
The
Group chief executive officer has responsibility for operational Group chief executive officer has responsibility for operational matters which includes the implementation of the Group matters which includes the implementation of the Group strategy and policies approved by the board. strategy and policies approved by the board.
Nonexecutive directors Nonexecutive directors are appointed for periods of three years Nonexecutive directors are appointed for periods of three years subject to shareholder approval.
Terms in excess of six years subject to shareholder approval.
Terms in excess of six years are subject to a more rigorous review.
The nonexecutive are subject to a more rigorous review.
The nonexecutive directors meet periodically without the executive directors present. directors meet periodically without the executive directors present.
Effectiveness
Time commitment The individual letters of appointment set out the expected The individual letters of appointment set out the expected time commitment for nonexecutive directors and are time commitment for nonexecutive directors and are available for inspection at our registered office.
Other available for inspection at our registered office.
Other
Undertakings are given that nonexecutive directors will have Undertakings are given that nonexecutive directors will have sufficient time to meet the requirements of the role.
Details sufficient time to meet the requirements of the role.
Details of the Chairmans and other directors commitments can be of the Chairmans and other directors commitments can be seen in the director biographies on pages 44 and 45. seen in the director biographies on pages 44 and 45.
Board activity The board discharges its responsibilities through an annual The board discharges its responsibilities through an annual programme of board and committee meetings which are programme of board and committee meetings which are held at the various operational sites of the Company.
The held at the various operational sites of the Company.
The board visited the Vesting offices in March 2017 and the board visited the Vesting offices in March 2017 and the Whitestar offices in September 2017.
Whitestar offices in September 2017 .
Board attendance The board held ten scheduled meetings in 2017 .
Details of The board held ten scheduled meetings in 2017.
Details of board attendance by all directors who held office during the board attendance by all directors who held office during the year are set out below year are set out below
Eligible to attend Attended Jonathan Bloomer 10 10 Lee Rochford appointed 3 January 2017 10 10 Rob Memmott Iain Cornish 10 10 Lan Tu 10 10 Maria Lus Albuquerque Andrew Fisher 10 10 T om Drury stepped down 3 January 2017 Rob Memmott and Maria Lus Albuquerque were unable to attend 1 Rob Memmott and Maria Lus Albuquerque were unable to attend certain board meetings due to prior commitments. certain board meetings due to prior commitments.
Tom Drury was invited by the Chairman to attend the January 2 Tom Drury was invited by the Chairman to attend the January meeting of the board. meeting of the board.
Ad hoc conference calls and meetings were also convened to Ad hoc conference calls and meetings were also convened to deal with specific matters which required attention between deal with specific matters which required attention between scheduled meetings. scheduled meetings.
Continued professional development undertaken during the year Training is offered to all new directors as necessary.
The Chairman Training is offered to all new directors as necessary.
The Chairman together with the Group chief executive officer and company together with the Group chief executive officer and company secretary ensures new directors receive a full formal and tailored secretary  ensures new directors receive a full formal and tailored induction upon joining the board including full briefing packs. induction upon joining the board including full briefing packs.
GOVERNANCE REPORT Arrow Global Group PLC  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE REPORT CONTINUED Effectiveness continued Continued professional development undertaken during the year continued As part of a tailored induction programme new directors receive As part of a tailored induction programme new directors receive a comprehensive induction pack which includes background a comprehensive induction pack which includes background information on the Company material on matters relating to information on the Company material on matters relating to the board and its committees and governancerelated information the board and its committees and governancerelated information including the duties and responsibilities of directors.
New including the duties and responsibilities of directors.
New directors meet with key advisors and members of the executive directors meet with key advisors and members of the executive team.
Visits to operational sites are arranged as well as meetings team.
Visits to operational sites are arranged as well as meetings with the external and internal auditors.
Ongoing training with the external and internal auditors.
Ongoing training was provided during the year for existing directors. was provided during the year for existing directors.
Major shareholders are welcome to meet newly appointed Major shareholders are welcome to meet newly appointed nonexecutive directors should they express a desire to do so. nonexecutive directors should they express a desire to do so.
Paul Cooper undertook a thorough induction process leading Paul Cooper undertook a thorough induction process leading up to his appointment on 1 January 2018 and throughout the up to his appointment on 1 January 2018 and throughout the handover period during January and February 2018 with handover period during January and February 2018 with Rob Memmott.
Rob Memmott.
Access to independent advice An approved procedure for all directors to take independent An approved procedure for all directors to take independent professional advice at the Companys expense is in place. professional advice at the Companys expense is in place.
The committees are provided with sufficient resources The committees are provided with sufficient resources including the ability to appoint external advisors when they including the ability to appoint external advisors when they deem it appropriate to call upon a particular resource.
All deem it appropriate to call upon a particular resource.
All directors have access to the advice and services of the company directors have access to the advice and services of the company secretary and are entitled to rely on the impartial and independent secretary and are entitled to rely on the impartial and independent nature of such advice and services.
The company secretary is nature of such advice and services.
The company secretary is responsible to the board for both the proper administration responsible to the board for both the proper administration of procedures and arrangements established by the board for of procedures and arrangements established by the board for the conduct of its own business and the Companys compliance the conduct of its own business and the Companys compliance with internal and external rules and regulations.
The board with internal and external rules and regulations.
The board receives agendas and supporting papers in advance of receives agendas and supporting papers in advance of board meetings. board meetings.
Evaluation of the board and committees The board undertook a process of selfevaluation of its The board undertook a process of selfevaluation of its performance during the year.
A questionnaire including the performance during the year.
A questionnaire including the main themes from the 2016 evaluation was issued to board main themes from the 2016 evaluation was issued to board members for review and completion and was subsequently members for review and completion and was subsequently submitted to the Chairman who has reviewed the responses submitted to the Chairman who has reviewed the responses and reported on the conclusions to the nomination committee and reported on the conclusions to the nomination committee and to the board.
A number of areas for further improvement and to the board.
A number of areas for further improvement were identified and are being acted upon including greater were identified and are being acted upon including greater engagement with external advisors from a training and engagement with external advisors from a training and insight perspective and increased focus on operational and insight perspective and increased focus on operational and regulatory challenges in light of the enlarged Group and asset regulatory challenges in light of the enlarged Group and asset class diversification.
None of the areas identified for further class diversification.
None of the areas identified for further improvement were considered material and overall board improvement were considered material and overall board members were satisfied with the performance of the board members were satisfied with the performance of the board during the year. during the year.
Meetings of the nonexecutive directors led by the Chairman Meetings of the nonexecutive directors led by the Chairman without the executive directors being present took place. without the executive directors being present took place.
Iain Cornish as senior independent director led the meeting Iain Cornish as senior independent director led the meeting of the nonexecutive directors without the Chairman being of the nonexecutive directors without the Chairman being present to appraise the Chairmans performance.
No actions present to appraise the Chairmans performance.
No actions were considered necessary as a result of these evaluations. were considered necessary as a result of these evaluations.
The board has confirmed that its performance as well as the The board has confirmed that its performance as well as the contribution of each of the executive and nonexecutive contribution of each of the executive and nonexecutive directors continues to be effective that they continue to directors continues to be effective that they continue to demonstrate commitment to their respective roles and that demonstrate commitment to their respective roles and that the board members respective skills complement one another the board members respective skills complement one another and enhance the overall operation of the board.
The board and enhance the overall operation of the board.
The board therefore recommends that shareholders approve the resolutions therefore recommends that shareholders approve the resolutions to be proposed at the 2018 annual general meeting in relation to be proposed at the 2018 annual general meeting in relation to the election and reelection of the directors. to the election and reelection of the directors.
Accountability
Adequacy of risk management and internal control systems The Code requires that the board should monitor the The Code requires that the board should monitor the Companys risk management and internal control systems Companys risk management and internal control systems and at least annually carry out a review of their effectiveness and at least annually carry out a review of their effectiveness and report on that review in the annual report.
The board and report on that review in the annual report.
The board complies with this Code provision in line with the guidance complies with this Code provision in line with the guidance published by the FRC Guidance on Risk Management published by the FRC Guidance on Risk Management Internal Control and Related Financial and Business Reporting Internal Control and Related Financial and Business Reporting September 2014.
In this context the board is responsible September 2014.
In this context the board is responsible for and monitors the Groups systems of internal controls for and monitors the Groups systems of internal controls which include financial operational and compliance which include financial operational and compliance controls and risk management systems.
The risk management controls and risk management systems.
The risk management framework is designed to identify and mitigate risks to an framework is designed to identify and mitigate risks to an acceptable level based on the Groups appetite for risk which acceptable level based on the Groups appetite for risk which takes into consideration the expectations of our shareholders. takes into consideration the expectations of our shareholders.
The board has approved an appropriate suite of policies on risk The board has approved an appropriate suite of policies on risk management and internal control and seeks regular assurance management and internal control and seeks regular assurance that the systems of internal control are effective in managing that the systems of internal control are effective in managing risks in line with its articulated risk appetite.
The Group has a risks in line with its articulated risk appetite.
The Group has a formal three lines of defence model with internal audit provided formal three lines of defence model with internal audit provided by Deloitte LLP together with inhouse internal audit functions. by Deloitte LLP together with inhouse internal audit functions.
During the year the board carried out a robust assessment of During the year the board carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Group including those that would the principal risks facing the Group including those that would threaten its business model future performance solvency or threaten its business model future performance solvency or liquidity.
These are documented on pages 38 to 42 of the liquidity.
These are documented on pages 38 to 42 of the strategic report. strategic report.
The following activities are considered to cover the most The following activities are considered to cover the most critical business processes and associated risks critical business processes and associated risks A disciplined underwriting process overseen by the board A disciplined underwriting process overseen by the board with delegated authority to the executive committee for with delegated authority to the executive committee for certain transactions based on the Groups defined risk certain transactions based on the Groups defined risk appetite.
This process ensures an objective rigorous and appetite.
This process ensures an objective rigorous and consistent approach to pricing and due diligence.
Additionally consistent approach to pricing and due diligence.
Additionally any transactions greater than 20 million in investment any transactions greater than 20 million in investment value or those that represent a new asset class are escalated value or those that represent a new asset class are escalated to the board for approval.
The processes and controls are to the board for approval.
The processes and controls are documented in a portfolio acquisition policy. documented in a portfolio acquisition policy.
A strong risk and compliance framework supported by the risk A strong risk and compliance framework supported by the risk management framework risk committees and maintenance management framework risk committees and maintenance of the Group country and departmental risk registers. of the Group country and departmental risk registers.
Regular monitoring of portfolio performance overseen Regular monitoring of portfolio performance overseen by the portfolio review committees which considers actual by the portfolio review committees which considers actual versus forecast results focusing on significant individual versus forecast results focusing on significant individual portfolio variances reforecasts cash flows on a sixmonthly portfolio variances reforecasts cash flows on a sixmonthly basis signs off the latest ERC forecast assesses the carrying basis signs off the latest ERC forecast assesses the carrying value of the portfolio assets and reviews revenue recognition. value of the portfolio assets and reviews revenue recognition.
Governance www. rrowglobalir.
Internal controls exist over all key processes of the Group Internal controls exist over all key processes of the Group that have an impact on business operations the treatment that have an impact on business operations the treatment of customers regulatory compliance the Groups of customers regulatory compliance the Groups reputation and the financial results. reputation and the financial results.
Comprehensive reporting to the audit and risk committees Comprehensive reporting to the audit and risk committees and the board on the above activities took place throughout and the board on the above activities took place throughout the year.
The audit committee carried out a review of the the year.
The audit committee carried out a review of the effectiveness of the Groups risk management and internal effectiveness of the Groups risk management and internal control systems including financial operational and control systems including financial operational and compliance controls.
In carrying out this review the compliance controls.
In carrying out this review the committee received a report from the Group chief risk officer committee received a report from the Group chief risk officer and the Group chief financial officer on the Groups internal and the Group chief financial officer on the Groups internal controls including financial operational and compliance controls including financial operational and compliance controls and risk management systems. controls and risk management systems.
The assessment for 2017 provided a broad assessment of risk The assessment for 2017 provided a broad assessment of risk management across the Group including the Groups subsidiaries management across the Group including the Groups subsidiaries in Portugal the Benelux countries and Italy.
For 2018 there in Portugal the Benelux countries and Italy.
For 2018 there will be oversight of the respective risk management and will be oversight of the respective risk management and internal control systems within the recently acquired internal control systems within the recently acquired Mars Capital companies.
Mars Capital companies.
No new or open highrisk observations were identified by No new or open highrisk observations were identified by the external auditor KPMG during the interim audit for 2017 . the external auditor KPMG during the interim audit for 2017 .
The risk management framework provides assurance and evidence The risk management framework provides assurance and evidence that the Groups risks are understood and are being appropriately that the Groups risks are understood and are being appropriately managed.
With continued growth in both new and existing managed.
With continued growth in both new and existing geographic territories and exposure to increasing levels geographic territories and exposure to increasing levels of client expectation and regulatory scrutiny the expected of client expectation and regulatory scrutiny the expected standards of risk management continue to increase. standards of risk management continue to increase.
The audit committee monitored the Groups risk management The audit committee monitored the Groups risk management and internal control systems and following a review of their and internal control systems and following a review of their effectiveness concluded that they were adequate.
There effectiveness concluded that they were adequate.
There were no material failings or weaknesses identified following the were no material failings or weaknesses identified following the committee review however the committee noted the need committee review however the committee noted the need to continue to develop and embed a consistent and robust to continue to develop and embed a consistent and robust approach across the Group for all categories of risk.
It was approach across the Group for all categories of risk.
It was further noted that as well as investment in secondline risk further noted that as well as investment in secondline risk resource across the Group the Companys culture is being resource across the Group the Companys culture is being matured to support effective risk management and embed matured to support effective risk management and embed the Companys values.
Based on the audit committees the Companys values.
Based on the audit committees recommendation the board concluded that overall the recommendation the board concluded that overall the Groups risk management and internal control systems Groups risk management and internal control systems were adequately effective. were adequately effective.
Nonaudit services provided by the external auditor The provision of nonaudit services by the external auditor is The provision of nonaudit services by the external auditor is monitored throughout the year any such work must be authorised monitored throughout the year any such work must be authorised in accordance with the Groups nonaudit services policy.
Further in accordance with the Groups nonaudit services policy.
Further detail of the nonaudit services policy is set out on page 55. detail of the nonaudit services policy is set out on page 55.
Nonaudit services performed by the external auditor during Nonaudit services performed by the external auditor during the year included mandatory work performed in relation to the the year included mandatory work performed in relation to the issuance of the 400 million senior secured floating rate notes issuance of the 400 million senior secured floating rate notes due 2025.
Additionally the external auditors performed due 2025.
Additionally the external auditors performed a a controls report for Vesting in its capacity as a service organisation controls report for Vesting in its capacity as a service organisation undertook monitoring work on a securitisation issue on undertook monitoring work on a securitisation issue on which a Group company acts as servicer and administration which a Group company acts as servicer and administration agent and undertook an audit for the demerger of certain agent and undertook an audit for the demerger of certain assets and liabilities from Vesting related to the coinvestment assets and liabilities from Vesting related to the coinvestment in the 1.7 billion portfolio of secured realestate assets sold by in the 1.7 billion portfolio of secured realestate assets sold by RNHB Hypotheekbank in the Netherlands.
The level of nonaudit RNHB Hypotheekbank in the Netherlands.
The level of nonaudit fees and audit related assurance services provided by the external fees and audit related assurance services provided by the external auditor for the year can be seen in note 10 on page 104. auditor for the year can be seen in note 10 on page 104.
The audit committee has concluded that the provision of The audit committee has concluded that the provision of nonaudit services to date has not compromised external nonaudit services to date has not compromised external auditor independence and objectivity. auditor independence and objectivity.
Internal audit function The audit committee was responsible for monitoring and The audit committee was responsible for monitoring and reviewing the effectiveness of internal audit activities in 2017. reviewing the effectiveness of internal audit activities in 2017 .
The formerly combined audit and risk committee approved The formerly combined audit and risk committee approved the appointment of an outsourced internal audit provider the appointment of an outsourced internal audit provider Deloitte LLP in October 2015 which has a Groupwide remit.
Deloitte LLP in October 2015 which has a Groupwide remit.
There are also inhouse internal audit teams at Whitestar There are also inhouse internal audit teams at Whitestar and Vesting. and Vesting.
Conflicts of interest Company policy requires that if a director becomes aware Company policy requires that if a director becomes aware that they have a direct or indirect interest in an existing or that they have a direct or indirect interest in an existing or proposed transaction with the Company they should notify proposed transaction with the Company they should notify the board at the next board meeting or by providing a written the board at the next board meeting or by providing a written declaration.
Directors have a continuing duty to update any declaration.
Directors have a continuing duty to update any changes in such interests.
See also the related party changes in such interests.
See also the related party transactions note 23. transactions note 23.
Approving significant transactions and investment decisions The business acquires nonperforming and noncore loan The business acquires nonperforming and noncore loan portfolios as part of its ordinary course of business.
The Group portfolios as part of its ordinary course of business.
The Group applies a multistage approach to its underwriting and pricing applies a multistage approach to its underwriting and pricing process with the aim of achieving attractive riskadjusted returns process with the aim of achieving attractive riskadjusted returns based on the Groups underwriting models analytical based on the Groups underwriting models analytical processes and servicing strategies. processes and servicing strategies.
The origination team reviews approximately 130 transactions The origination team reviews approximately 130 transactions per year with approximately 30 completed transactions. per year with approximately 30 completed transactions.
Transactions range from repeat transactions with creditors Transactions range from repeat transactions with creditors and asset classes familiar to the Group through to more complex and asset classes familiar to the Group through to more complex consortium trades with special purpose vehicle structures. consortium trades with special purpose vehicle structures.
An authority matrix sets out the delegated authority to the An authority matrix sets out the delegated authority to the investment committee and executive committee.
The board investment committee and executive committee.
The board retains authority for any new asset classes or geography complex retains authority for any new asset classes or geography complex deals over 10 million and any transaction over 20 million. deals over 10 million and any transaction over 20 million.
Based upon recent performance the board will be asked to Based upon recent performance the board will be asked to consider circa four to five transactions per annum.
In 2017 consider circa four to five transactions per annum.
In 2017 the board approved amongst others the acquisition of the the board approved amongst others the acquisition of the Mars Capital companies in the UK and Republic of Ireland.
Mars Capital companies in the UK and Republic of Ireland.
GOVERNANCE REPORT Arrow Global Group PLC  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE REPORT CONTINUED Accountability continued Bribery Act compliance The Company has antibribery and corruption policies and The Company has antibribery and corruption policies and standards available to its employees.
There is a summary of standards available to its employees.
There is a summary of the policy complying with the provisions of the UK Bribery Act the policy complying with the provisions of the UK Bribery Act available on the Companys website which is in line with available on the Companys website which is in line with Ministry of Justice MOJ Guidance on the Bribery Act 2010 Ministry of Justice MOJ Guidance on the Bribery Act 2010 MOJ Guidance.
The policy contains a gifts and hospitality MOJ Guidance.
The policy contains a gifts and hospitality procedure and prohibits facilitation payments.
Adequate and procedure and prohibits facilitation payments.
Adequate and regular training on the policy and the principles outlined regular training on the policy and the principles outlined therein is provided to staff and directors. therein is provided to staff and directors.
The Company considers it to have adequate procedures within The Company considers it to have adequate procedures within the meaning of the MOJ Guidance.
The Group chief risk the meaning of the MOJ Guidance.
The Group chief risk officer has primary and daytoday responsibility for officer has primary and daytoday responsibility for implementing this policy. implementing this policy.
Remuneration
In line with the Code and the Directors Remuneration In line with the Code and the Directors Remuneration Disclosure Regulations 2013 details on remuneration Disclosure Regulations 2013 details on remuneration including the annual report on remuneration and the including the annual report on remuneration and the directors remuneration policy to be approved at the 2018 directors remuneration policy to be approved at the 2018 annual general meeting can be seen on pages 60 to 78. annual general meeting can be seen on pages 60 to 78.
Relations with shareholders Dialogue with shareholders bondholders and revolving credit facility providers In 2017  the Chairman the Group chief executive officer and In 2017 the Chairman the Group chief executive officer and the Group chief financial officer hosted a dinner which all the Group chief financial officer hosted a dinner which all major shareholders were invited to attend. major shareholders were invited to attend.
Following meetings or telephone conversations with brokers Following meetings or telephone conversations with brokers the Chairman communicates to the entire board the views of the Chairman communicates to the entire board the views of shareholders bond holders and revolving credit facility providers shareholders bond holders and revolving credit facility providers key stakeholders.
The Group chief executive officer and the key stakeholders.
The Group chief executive officer and the Group chief financial officer regularly speak and meet with key Group chief financial officer regularly speak and meet with key stakeholders.
The Chairman is available to discuss governance stakeholders.
The Chairman is available to discuss governance and strategy with key stakeholders.
Nonexecutive directors and and strategy with key stakeholders.
Nonexecutive directors and the senior independent director have the opportunity to attend the senior independent director have the opportunity to attend meetings with key stakeholders and would attend if requested. meetings with key stakeholders and would attend if requested.
Following the announcement of the preliminary and interim Following the announcement of the preliminary and interim results and the executive directors presentations to analysts results and the executive directors presentations to analysts and shareholders the board receives a report on institutional and shareholders the board receives a report on institutional feedback prepared by the Companys advisors. feedback prepared by the Companys advisors.
The Group chief executive officer and the Group chief The Group chief executive officer and the Group chief financial officer also verbally report on their meetings with financial officer also verbally report on their meetings with shareholders.
Copies of analysts and brokers briefings are shareholders.
Copies of analysts and brokers briefings are circulated to the board. circulated to the board.
Annual general meeting The annual general meeting is an opportunity for all shareholders The annual general meeting is an opportunity for all shareholders to both vote on resolutions put forward and ask the board to both vote on resolutions put forward and ask the board any questions they may have.
See page 82 for information on any questions they may have.
See page 82 for information on the 2018 annual general meeting.
The notice of meeting and the 2018 annual general meeting.
The notice of meeting and annual report will be sent out at least 20 working days before the annual report will be sent out at least 20 working days before the meeting.
Separate votes will be held for each proposed meeting.
Separate votes will be held for each proposed resolution and a proxy count will be given in each case. resolution and a proxy count will be given in each case.
The proxy forms will provide a vote withheld option.
The proxy forms will provide a vote withheld option.
The chairs of the audit risk remuneration and nomination The chairs of the audit risk remuneration and nomination committees attend and are available to answer questions. committees attend and are available to answer questions.
Disclosure committee The disclosure committee is made up of Lee Rochford who chairs The disclosure committee is made up of Lee Rochford who chairs the committee Paul Cooper Iain Cornish and Stewart Hamilton. the committee Paul Cooper Iain Cornish and Stewart Hamilton.
The disclosure committee meets at such times as may be The disclosure committee meets at such times as may be necessary or appropriate. necessary or appropriate.
The disclosure committee is responsible for monitoring The disclosure committee is responsible for monitoring evaluating and enhancing disclosure controls and procedures evaluating and enhancing disclosure controls and procedures of the Group.
In particular responsibilities set out in the terms of the Group.
In particular responsibilities set out in the terms of reference include identification of inside information and of reference include identification of inside information and maintenance of insider lists the design implementation and maintenance of insider lists the design implementation and evaluation of disclosure procedures and the resolution of any evaluation of disclosure procedures and the resolution of any questions concerning the materiality of certain information. questions concerning the materiality of certain information.
The disclosure committee is also required to help the Company The disclosure committee is also required to help the Company and the Group to make timely and accurate disclosure of all and the Group to make timely and accurate disclosure of all information where disclosure is required to meet legal and information where disclosure is required to meet legal and regulatory obligations. regulatory obligations.
Audit committee Details regarding the audit committee and its responsibilities Details regarding the audit committee and its responsibilities can be seen on pages 51 to 55. can be seen on pages 51 to 55.
Risk committee Details regarding the risk committee and its responsibilities Details regarding the risk committee and its responsibilities can be seen on pages 56 to 57. can be seen on pages 56 to 57 .
Nomination committee Details regarding the nomination committee and its Details regarding the nomination committee and its responsibilities can be seen on pages 58 to 59. responsibilities can be seen on pages 58 to 59.
Remuneration committee Details regarding the remuneration committee and its Details regarding the remuneration committee and its responsibilities can be seen on pages 60 to 78. responsibilities can be seen on pages 60 to 78.
The terms of reference for the disclosure committee audit The terms of reference for the disclosure committee audit committee risk committee nomination committee and committee risk committee nomination committee and remuneration committee can be found on the Groups remuneration committee can be found on the Groups website www. rrowglobalir. et. website www. rrowglobalir. et.
This report was approved by the board and signed on its This report was approved by the board and signed on its behalf by behalf by Stewart Hamilton Company secretary 1 March 2018 51 www. rrowglobalir.
AUDIT COMMITTEE REPORT The committee continues to focus on those matters it considers to be important by virtue of their size complexity subjectivity or impact.
Dear Shareholder I am pleased to provide a report of the audit committees I am pleased to provide a report of the audit committees activities in 2017 . activities in 2017 .
As reported in the 2016 annual report the committee has As reported in the 2016 annual report the committee has operated independently from the risk committee since operated independently from the risk committee since 25 January 2017  which the board supported by the nomination 25 January 2017  which the board supported by the nomination committee considered to be appropriate in light of the Groups committee considered to be appropriate in light of the Groups increased geographic footprint the complex regulatory increased geographic footprint the complex regulatory environments in which the Group operates and the consequent environments in which the Group operates and the consequent impact on risk exposures.
The committee does however impact on risk exposures.
The committee does however continue to maintain close links with the risk committee with continue to maintain close links with the risk committee with the chair of each committee being a member of the other. the chair of each committee being a member of the other.
This crossmembership facilitates effective communication This crossmembership facilitates effective communication between both committees.
The committee also works with between both committees.
The committee also works with the remuneration committee to ensure that risk is appropriately the remuneration committee to ensure that risk is appropriately considered when setting the Groups remuneration policy. considered when setting the Groups remuneration policy.
I am also a member of the remuneration committee.
I am also a member of the remuneration committee.
The principal issues on which the committee focused in 2017 The principal issues on which the committee focused in 2017 are set out in this report.
The key areas of judgement and are set out in this report.
The key areas of judgement and estimation that the committee reviewed were in relation to estimation that the committee reviewed were in relation to the carrying value of purchased loan portfolios and loans the carrying value of purchased loan portfolios and loans and the fair value of intangible assets acquired as part of the and the fair value of intangible assets acquired as part of the acquisitions of Zenith and Mars Capital during the year.
A acquisitions of Zenith and Mars Capital during the year. monitor planning for the implementation of IFRS 9.
The monitor planning for the implementation of IFRS 9.
The committee received regular updates from management and committee received regular updates from management and has approved the detailed work undertaken to date ahead of has approved the detailed work undertaken to date ahead of implementation in 2018.
Management were supported by implementation in 2018.
Management were supported by external providers PwC in this work.
KPMG has reviewed external providers PwC in this work.
KPMG has reviewed and agreed the approach taken by management and has and agreed the approach taken by management and has provided assurance to the committee in relation to the provided assurance to the committee in relation to the IAS 8 disclosures in this regard.
More disclosures regarding IAS 8 disclosures in this regard.
More disclosures regarding this are set out on page 54. this are set out on page 54.
The committee reviewed the accounting with regards to the The committee reviewed the accounting with regards to the two corporate acquisitions completed in the year focusing two corporate acquisitions completed in the year focusing on the more judgmental areas of those transactions. on the more judgmental areas of those transactions.
During the year a review of the performance of the external During the year a review of the performance of the external auditor took place.
It was supplemented by the committee auditor took place.
It was supplemented by the committee and senior members of the Group finance team completing a and senior members of the Group finance team completing a questionnaire.
A summary of the key findings was reviewed questionnaire.
A summary of the key findings was reviewed by the committee in private without the external and internal by the committee in private without the external and internal auditors being present.
The committee was satisfied with the auditors being present.
The committee was satisfied with the effectiveness of the external audit process. effectiveness of the external audit process.
A review of the performance of the internal audit function A review of the performance of the internal audit function took place during the year.
Deloitte LLP who was appointed took place during the year.
Deloitte LLP who was appointed as the Groups internal auditor in 2015 had replaced the as the Groups internal auditor in 2015 had replaced the original internal audit provider in the UK and supplemented original internal audit provider in the UK and supplemented the inhouse internal audit teams that existed in our Portuguese the inhouse internal audit teams that existed in our Portuguese and Benelux businesses.
The committee concluded that Deloitte and Benelux businesses.
The committee concluded that Deloitte LLPs performance as internal auditors was satisfactory but a LLPs performance as internal auditors was satisfactory but a further review of the Groups entire internal audit function further review of the Groups entire internal audit function would take place in mid2018. would take place in mid2018.
In accordance with best practice and the nonaudit services In accordance with best practice and the nonaudit services policy the committee has continued to keep the provision of policy the committee has continued to keep the provision of nonaudit services under review.
Fees of 263000 were paid nonaudit services under review.
Fees of 263000 were paid to our external auditor for nonaudit services in the year. to our external auditor for nonaudit services in the year.
Further details of the work carried out can be seen on page 49.
Further details of the work carried out can be seen on page 49 .
We anticipate the ratio of the Groups nonaudit fees to audit We anticipate the ratio of the Groups nonaudit fees to audit fees to reduce in 2018 and to continue to be low in future fees to reduce in 2018 and to continue to be low in future reporting periods. reporting periods.
As part of the overall board evaluation review the committee As part of the overall board evaluation review the committee reviewed the findings in relation to its overall effectiveness. reviewed the findings in relation to its overall effectiveness.
A number of areas for further improvement were identified A number of areas for further improvement were identified and will be acted upon.
A common theme was that the and will be acted upon.
A common theme was that the anticipated improvements following the formal separation anticipated improvements following the formal separation of the audit and risk committees had been realised. of the audit and risk committees had been realised.
In relation to the financial statements the committee continues In relation to the financial statements the committee continues to focus on those matters it considers to be important by virtue to focus on those matters it considers to be important by virtue of their size complexity subjectivity or impact and these are of their size complexity subjectivity or impact and these are set out in this report. set out in this report.
Andrew Fisher Chair of the audit committee 1 March 2018 52 GOVERNANCE REPORT Arrow Global Group PLC  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 AUDIT COMMITTEE REPORT CONTINUED The committees responsibilities are set out in its terms of The committees responsibilities are set out in its terms of reference.
They include responsibility for external and reference.
They include responsibility for external and internal audit financial reporting and monitoring and internal audit financial reporting and monitoring and assessing the effectiveness of the Groups internal controls and assessing the effectiveness of the Groups internal controls and risk management systems.
The terms of reference also set out risk management systems.
The terms of reference also set out the authority of the committee to carry out its responsibilities. the authority of the committee to carry out its responsibilities.
The committee focuses particularly on compliance with The committee focuses particularly on compliance with accounting policies as well as monitoring and reviewing the accounting policies as well as monitoring and reviewing the Groups external and internal audit functions and reviewing and Groups external and internal audit functions and reviewing and recommending approval of the annual report and halfyear recommending approval of the annual report and halfyear statements to the board. statements to the board.
The committee met five times in 2017 at the appropriate The committee met five times in 2017 at the appropriate times in the financial reporting and audit cycle.
The attendance times in the financial reporting and audit cycle.
The attendance of our members is shown in the table opposite. of our members is shown in the table opposite.
During 2017  the committee also met separately with During 2017  the committee also met separately with representatives of the external auditor and the head of the representatives of the external auditor and the head of the internal audit function without any management present. internal audit function without any management present.
The Code recommends that for companies outside the FTSE The Code recommends that for companies outside the FTSE 350 the audit committee comprises at least two members 350 the audit committee comprises at least two members who are independent nonexecutive directors and includes who are independent nonexecutive directors and includes one member with recent and relevant financial experience. one member with recent and relevant financial experience.
The Code also requires the audit committee to have competence The Code also requires the audit committee to have competence relevant to the sector in which the Company operates.
In relevant to the sector in which the Company operates.
In addition the Disclosure Guidance and Transparency Rules addition the Disclosure Guidance and Transparency Rules DTR 7 .1.1 provide that at least one member of the audit DTR 7.1.1 provide that at least one member of the audit committee must have competence in accounting or auditing committee must have competence in accounting or auditing or both. or both.
For meetings held in 2017  the committee was comprised of For meetings held in 2017 the committee was comprised of the following members the following members Andrew Fisher as Chair Iain Cornish Lan Tu and Maria Lus Andrew Fisher as Chair Iain Cornish Lan Tu and Maria Lus
All are independent nonexecutive directors Albuquerque.
All are independent nonexecutive directors and therefore satisfy the Codes requirements.
Andrew Fisher and therefore satisfy the Codes requirements.
Andrew Fisher has recent and relevant financial experience as well as having has recent and relevant financial experience as well as having competence both in accounting and auditing gained as competence both in accounting and auditing gained as finance director of Provident Financial Plc.
Iain Cornish also finance director of Provident Financial Plc.
Iain Cornish also has recent and relevant experience having held senior positions has recent and relevant experience having held senior positions at Yorkshire Building Society until his retirement in 2011 as well at Yorkshire Building Society until his retirement in 2011 as well as a number of other nonexecutive directorships as outlined as a number of other nonexecutive directorships as outlined on page 44. on page 44.
Arrow Global has an experienced audit committee where all Arrow Global has an experienced audit committee where all four members have considerable expertise of the financial four members have considerable expertise of the financial services sector.
This can be seen from the biographies set out services sector.
This can be seen from the biographies set out on pages 44 to 45 and the Companys website.
The board on on pages 44 to 45 and the Companys website.
The board on the recommendation of the nomination committee which had the recommendation of the nomination committee which had carried out an assessment concluded that the audit committee carried out an assessment concluded that the audit committee had competence relevant to the sector in which the Company had competence relevant to the sector in which the Company operates.
The board based its decision on the experience of operates.
The board based its decision on the experience of the members of the audit committee and the practice at the members of the audit committee and the practice at other listed companies. other listed companies.
Committee members Eligible to attend Attended Andrew Fisher chair 5 5 Iain Cornish 5 5 Lan Tu 5 5 Maria Lus Albuquerque 5 5 Separation of audit and risk committees As stated in the audit committee chairmans statement on As stated in the audit committee chairmans statement on page 51 separate audit and risk committees were set up with page 51 separate audit and risk committees were set up with effect from 25 January 2017.
Each committee has its own effect from 25 January 2017.
Each committee has its own terms of reference which can be found on the Companys terms of reference which can be found on the Companys website at www. rrowglobalir. et website at www. rrowglobalir.
Governance www. rrowglobalir.
Work of the committee During the period under review the following work was carried out During the period under review the following work was carried out
Monitor the integrity and effectiveness of the financial reporting process including the halfyear and annual results Monitor the integrity and effectiveness of the financial reporting process including the halfyear and annual results related commentary and announcements and associated reports prepared by KPMG and make appropriate related commentary and announcements and associated reports prepared by KPMG and make appropriate recommendations to the board recommendations to the board Continuing appropriateness of and changes to accounting policies and the use of estimates and judgements as noted in Continuing appropriateness of and changes to accounting policies and the use of estimates and judgements as noted in the Groups report and accounts the Groups report and accounts Review key judgements and estimates included in preparation of the financial statements Review key judgements and estimates included in preparation of the financial statements Going concern review and approval of longerterm viability statement for recommendation to the board Going concern review and approval of longerterm viability statement for recommendation to the board Fair balanced and understandable concept in respect of the 2017 report and accounts Fair balanced and understandable concept in respect of the 2017 report and accounts Reviewed accounting in respect of the two corporate acquisitions completed in the year Reviewed accounting in respect of the two corporate acquisitions completed in the year Review and monitoring of IFRS 9 implementation plan and approval of methodologies and judgements Review and monitoring of IFRS 9 implementation plan and approval of methodologies and judgements External audit KPMGs annual external audit plan review and approval KPMGs annual external audit plan review and approval Effectiveness of the external audit process and reporting to the board on how the external auditor has discharged Effectiveness of the external audit process and reporting to the board on how the external auditor has discharged its responsibilities its responsibilities Regular meetings with the external auditor at planning and reporting stages with further private meetings held without Regular meetings with the external auditor at planning and reporting stages with further private meetings held without executive directors and management present executive directors and management present Changes to the regulatory framework in respect of external audit tendering and recommending reappointment of the Changes to the regulatory framework in respect of external audit tendering and recommending reappointment of the external auditor to the board external auditor to the board Consideration of management letters from external auditors and review of representation letters requested by the Consideration of management letters from external auditors and review of representation letters requested by the external auditor external auditor Impact of new accounting standards Impact of new accounting standards Reviewing policy on the supply of nonaudit services by the external auditor to avoid any threats to auditor objectivity and Reviewing policy on the supply of nonaudit services by the external auditor to avoid any threats to auditor objectivity and independence and ensuring compliance with this policy independence and ensuring compliance with this policy Approving the terms of engagement of the external auditor at the start of the audit and agreeing its remuneration for Approving the terms of engagement of the external auditor at the start of the audit and agreeing its remuneration for both audit and nonaudit services both audit and nonaudit services Risk management and internal controls Monitoring and effectiveness review of risk management and internal control systems including financial operational and Monitoring and effectiveness review of risk management and internal control systems including financial operational and compliance across the Group and approving the statements to be included in the annual report regarding compliance across the Group and approving the statements to be included in the annual report regarding such effectiveness such effectiveness Reviewing and approving the statements to be included in the annual report concerning the principal risks facing the Reviewing and approving the statements to be included in the annual report concerning the principal risks facing the Group and how they are being managed along with the assessment of the Companys prospects Group and how they are being managed along with the assessment of the Companys prospects Whistleblowing and prevention of bribery Reviewing Whistleblowing Policy Reviewing Whistleblowing Policy Reviewing procedures for preventing bribery and fraud Reviewing procedures for preventing bribery and fraud Internal audit Review of the Group internal audit charter which sets out the objectives accountability and independence authority Review of the Group internal audit charter which sets out the objectives accountability and independence authority responsibilities scope of work and standards and performance for internal audit responsibilities scope of work and standards and performance for internal audit Adequacy of the internal audit programme over the Groups processes and controls including coverage prioritisation Adequacy of the internal audit programme over the Groups processes and controls including coverage prioritisation and allocation of resource and allocation of resource Updates on the activities of internal audit including receipt of audit reports to gain and provide assurance that the Updates on the activities of internal audit including receipt of audit reports to gain and provide assurance that the control environment continued to operate effectively control environment continued to operate effectively Status reports on the implementation and followup of internal audit recommendations Status reports on the implementation and followup of internal audit recommendations Effectiveness of the internal audit function Effectiveness of the internal audit function
The effectiveness of the committee The effectiveness of the committee The committees terms of reference and work programme The committees terms of reference and work programme FRC and governance update FRC and governance update Group tax update Group tax update Reviewing current and future funding structures Reviewing current and future funding structures 54 GOVERNANCE REPORT Arrow Global Group PLC  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 AUDIT COMMITTEE REPORT CONTINUED Significant areas Significant areas considered by the committee and discussed Significant areas considered by the committee and discussed with the external auditor during the year were with the external auditor during the year were Estimation of future cash collections from purchased loan portfolios The estimation of remaining collections from debt portfolios The estimation of remaining collections from debt portfolios is complex and requires management to make significant is complex and requires management to make significant judgements in relation to expected life probability and judgements in relation to expected life probability and value of related cash flows for each loan.
The committee value of related cash flows for each loan.
The committee considered the value of the loan portfolio by reference to considered the value of the loan portfolio by reference to cash flow models.
Managements key assumptions were cash flow models.
Managements key assumptions were examined carefully by the committee including the profile examined carefully by the committee including the profile of expected future cash collection based on the Groups of expected future cash collection based on the Groups historical collection experience and changes in collection historical collection experience and changes in collection strategies.
The committee also reviewed and discussed with strategies.
The committee also reviewed and discussed with the external auditors their report on managements the external auditors their report on managements key assumptions. key assumptions.
Fair value of net assets acquired as part of business combinations During the year the Group acquired the entire issued share During the year the Group acquired the entire issued share capital of Zenith and Mars Capital.
Management used the capital of Zenith and Mars Capital.
Management used the acquisition method in considering the appropriate acquisition acquisition method in considering the appropriate acquisition accounting following the steps required by IFRS 3 revised accounting following the steps required by IFRS 3 revised Business Combinations to recognise assets acquired  Business Combinations to recognise assets acquired liabilities assumed and measure goodwill.
The determination liabilities assumed and measure goodwill.
The determination of the fair value of acquired net assets requires the exercise of the fair value of acquired net assets requires the exercise of management judgement particularly for those financial of management judgement particularly for those financial assets or liabilities for which there are no quoted prices assets or liabilities for which there are no quoted prices or assets such as acquired loan portfolios and customer or assets such as acquired loan portfolios and customer intangibles where valuations reflect estimates and timing intangibles where valuations reflect estimates and timing of future cash flows.
Different valuations would result in of future cash flows.
Different valuations would result in changes to the goodwill arising and to the postacquisition changes to the goodwill arising and to the postacquisition performance of the acquired entities.
The committee performance of the acquired entities.
The committee reviewed the appropriateness of managements fair value reviewed the appropriateness of managements fair value considerations and recognition of assets and liabilities on considerations and recognition of assets and liabilities on acquisition and approved managements methodology. acquisition and approved managements methodology.
Other areas considered by the committee Value of purchased loan portfolio assets and setting of the EIR On acquisition of purchased loan portfolios a short period of On acquisition of purchased loan portfolios a short period of time is required to determine the EIR due to the complexity time is required to determine the EIR due to the complexity of the loan portfolios acquired.
The committee considered of the loan portfolios acquired.
The committee considered the EIR of all portfolios acquired in the year and the the EIR of all portfolios acquired in the year and the judgements made by management relating to the expected judgements made by management relating to the expected life and related cash flows.
The committee together with the life and related cash flows.
The committee together with the external auditor considered the robustness of the EIRs which external auditor considered the robustness of the EIRs which were found to be acceptable.
The portfolios are reviewed by were found to be acceptable.
The portfolios are reviewed by management for any possible indications of impairment or management for any possible indications of impairment or enhancement at the statement of financial position date in enhancement at the statement of financial position date in accordance with IAS 39  Financial Instruments Recognition accordance with IAS 39  Financial Instruments Recognition and Measurement.
The committee together with the external and Measurement.
The committee together with the external auditor considered the value of the loan portfolios by auditor considered the value of the loan portfolios by reference to cash flow models. reference to cash flow models.
Goodwill impairment review The yearend balance sheet includes goodwill of 153 million.
The yearend balance sheet includes goodwill of 153 million.
The committee reviewed the carrying value of goodwill with The committee reviewed the carrying value of goodwill with reference to the values attributable to each cash generating reference to the values attributable to each cash generating unit the expected valueinuse based on projected cash unit the expected valueinuse based on projected cash flows and the key economic assumptions related to growth flows and the key economic assumptions related to growth rates and discount values.
The committee also considered rates and discount values.
The committee also considered the work undertaken by the external auditor in testing the the work undertaken by the external auditor in testing the projections.
The committee discussed the appropriateness of projections.
The committee discussed the appropriateness of the assumptions and challenged both the discount rates and the assumptions and challenged both the discount rates and the factors used to consider whether a reasonable change in the factors used to consider whether a reasonable change in assumptions may indicate impairment.
After discussion it assumptions may indicate impairment.
After discussion it was satisfied that the assumptions were reasonable and no was satisfied that the assumptions were reasonable and no impairment was required. impairment was required.
Accounting for material transactions The Group is increasingly making equity investments in The Group is increasingly making equity investments in addition to purchasing portfolios in different asset classes addition to purchasing portfolios in different asset classes and geographies which can lead to new and sometimes and geographies which can lead to new and sometimes complex transactions and accounting.
The buying process is complex transactions and accounting.
The buying process is a multistage approach.
The underwriting process includes a a multistage approach.
The underwriting process includes a fourstage approval or gate process before presentation of fourstage approval or gate process before presentation of the investment memorandum to the investment committee. the investment memorandum to the investment committee.
The investment committee then determines whether to The investment committee then determines whether to recommend the purchase to the board when material or recommend the purchase to the board when material or complex in advance of submission of a final bid.
For material complex in advance of submission of a final bid.
For material and complex transactions the finance team are involved and complex transactions the finance team are involved throughout the process and where appropriate accounting throughout the process and where appropriate accounting papers are produced and disclosed for discussions with the papers are produced and disclosed for discussions with the external auditor and approval by the audit committee. external auditor and approval by the audit committee.
The committee also received reports on the Groups The committee also received reports on the Groups preparations for and approach to IFRS 9 covering the preparations for and approach to IFRS 9 covering the classification and measurement of the loan portfolios and classification and measurement of the loan portfolios and determination of loan portfolio impairment provisions. determination of loan portfolio impairment provisions.
Internal control and risk management systems The committee is responsible for monitoring and reviewing The committee is responsible for monitoring and reviewing the effectiveness of the Groups internal control and risk the effectiveness of the Groups internal control and risk management systems.
Through monitoring the effectiveness management systems.
Through monitoring the effectiveness of its internal controls and risk management the committee of its internal controls and risk management the committee is able to maintain a good understanding of business is able to maintain a good understanding of business performance key judgemental areas and managements performance key judgemental areas and managements decisionmaking processes.
The committee considered the decisionmaking processes.
The committee considered the adequacy of managements response to matters raised and adequacy of managements response to matters raised and the implementation of recommendations made.
The the implementation of recommendations made.
The committee carried out the following in 2017 committee carried out the following in 2017 reviewed the framework and effectiveness of the Groups reviewed the framework and effectiveness of the Groups system of internal control and risk management including system of internal control and risk management including financial operational and compliance controls financial operational and compliance controls received regular updates from management on internal received regular updates from management on internal control improvements and requested that KPMG report on control improvements and requested that KPMG report on progress as part of their yearend work progress as part of their yearend work reviewed comprehensive reports from the external reviewed comprehensive reports from the external auditor KPMG of the results of their controls testing as auditor KPMG of the results of their controls testing as part of the external audit and part of the external audit and reported to the board on its evaluation of the operation of reported to the board on its evaluation of the operation of the Groups internal control and risk management system the Groups internal control and risk management system informed by reports from Deloitte LLP as internal auditor informed by reports from Deloitte LLP as internal auditor and KPMG as external auditor and KPMG as external auditor www. rrowglobalir.
External auditor The committee carried out the following in relation to the The committee carried out the following in relation to the external auditor external auditor considered and approved the proposed materiality and considered and approved the proposed materiality and audit plan prepared audit plan prepared considered the quality and effectiveness of the external considered the quality and effectiveness of the external audit process in light of the FRCs Guidance on Audit Quality audit process in light of the FRCs Guidance on Audit Quality Practice aid for audit committees May 2015.
The assessment  Practice aid for audit committees May 2015.
The assessment of this effectiveness was completed as part of an ongoing of this effectiveness was completed as part of an ongoing process of review throughout the year with the committee process of review throughout the year with the committee seeking assurances and understanding of the auditors seeking assurances and understanding of the auditors approach to the audit.
The committee considered the FRC approach to the audit.
The committee considered the FRC Audit Quality Review of KPMG and discussed the actions Audit Quality Review of KPMG and discussed the actions taken by KPMG in light of the recommendations.
A taken by KPMG in light of the recommendations. risks communication independence objectivity and reporting. risks communication independence objectivity and reporting.
A summary of the results of the questionnaire were A summary of the results of the questionnaire were discussed by the committee with the results communicated discussed by the committee with the results communicated by the chairman of the committee to the KPMG lead engagement by the chairman of the committee to the KPMG lead engagement partner and the findings presented to the board.
The committee partner and the findings presented to the board.
The committee were satisfied with KPMGs performance and there was nothing were satisfied with KPMGs performance and there was nothing of concern that would impact on the effectiveness of the of concern that would impact on the effectiveness of the external audit process external audit process reviewed the Groups policy on the provision of nonaudit reviewed the Groups policy on the provision of nonaudit services by the external auditor and services by the external auditor and having considered KPMGs independence compliance with having considered KPMGs independence compliance with regulatory and ethical standards and assessed its objectivity regulatory and ethical standards and assessed its objectivity the committee unanimously recommended to the board the committee unanimously recommended to the board that a resolution for the reappointment of KPMG LLP as that a resolution for the reappointment of KPMG LLP as the Groups external auditor be proposed to shareholders the Groups external auditor be proposed to shareholders at the 2018 annual general meeting. at the 2018 annual general meeting.
The external auditor KPMG was appointed in July 2014 The external auditor KPMG was appointed in July 2014 following a comprehensive and competitive tender.
The lead following a comprehensive and competitive tender.
The lead audit partner will rotate every five years to ensure independence. audit partner will rotate every five years to ensure independence.
The KPMG lead audit partner will not be rotated until July The KPMG lead audit partner will not be rotated until July 2019 in accordance with the FRCs Revised Ethical Standard 2019 in accordance with the FRCs Revised Ethical Standard 2016.
The external audit contract will be tendered at least 2016.
The external audit contract will be tendered at least every 10 years as prescribed by EU and UK legislation with a every 10 years as prescribed by EU and UK legislation with a change of auditor after 20 years. change of auditor after 20 years.
Both the committee and the external auditor have in place Both the committee and the external auditor have in place safeguards to avoid any compromise of the independence safeguards to avoid any compromise of the independence and objectivity of the external auditor.
The committee and objectivity of the external auditor.
The committee considers the independence of the external auditor annually considers the independence of the external auditor annually and the Group has a formal policy for the engagement of its and the Group has a formal policy for the engagement of its external auditor to supply nonaudit services.
The policy is external auditor to supply nonaudit services.
The policy is designed to ensure that neither the nature of the service to designed to ensure that neither the nature of the service to be provided nor the level of reliance placed on the services be provided nor the level of reliance placed on the services could impact the objectivity of the external auditors opinion could impact the objectivity of the external auditors opinion on the Groups financial statements. on the Groups financial statements.
The policy precludes the appointment of the external auditor The policy precludes the appointment of the external auditor to provide certain prohibited services as set out in the FRC to provide certain prohibited services as set out in the FRC Guidance on Audit Committees 2016 and the FRCs Revised Guidance on Audit Committees 2016 and the FRCs Revised Ethical Standard 2016 as well as setting out where certain Ethical Standard 2016 as well as setting out where certain types of nonaudit services for which the use of the external types of nonaudit services for which the use of the external auditor are preapproved.
New EU legislation on permitted auditor are preapproved.
New EU legislation on permitted nonaudit services came into effect from 17 June 2016 which nonaudit services came into effect from 17 June 2016 which introduced a permitted nonaudit services fee cap of 70% of the introduced a permitted nonaudit services fee cap of 70% of the average audit fee over a consecutive threeyear period.
This average audit fee over a consecutive threeyear period.
This cap will come into effect for the Group in the financial year cap will come into effect for the Group in the financial year ending 31 December 2020. ending 31 December 2020.
All appointments made in 2017 are in line with the Groups All appointments made in 2017 are in line with the Groups nonaudit fees policy. nonaudit fees policy.
Internal audit Following a comprehensive thorough and competitive Following a comprehensive thorough and competitive tender Deloitte LLP was appointed by the board in October tender Deloitte LLP was appointed by the board in October 2015 to provide an internal audit function to the Group.
2015 to provide an internal audit function to the Group.
In 2017 the committee carried out the following In 2017 the committee carried out the following continued to oversee the activities of the internal audit continued to oversee the activities of the internal audit function recognising that in the UK full FCA authorisation function recognising that in the UK full FCA authorisation brings with it an even higher expectation in terms of brings with it an even higher expectation in terms of customer outcomes and conduct risk customer outcomes and conduct risk reviewed and approved the internal audit plan which reviewed and approved the internal audit plan which defines the scope of work that internal audit function will defines the scope of work that internal audit function will carry out carry out reviewed results from audits performed having scrutiny reviewed results from audits performed having scrutiny over unsatisfactory audit findings and related action plans over unsatisfactory audit findings and related action plans reviewed open audit actions together with monitoring reviewed open audit actions together with monitoring progress against the actions progress against the actions reviewed the assurance map to ensure there is clear and reviewed the assurance map to ensure there is clear and comprehensive risk and assurance coverage and comprehensive risk and assurance coverage and met with the lead internal audit partner on four occasions. met with the lead internal audit partner on four occasions.
During the year the committee monitored progress of the During the year the committee monitored progress of the internal audit function against that plan ensuring that the internal audit function against that plan ensuring that the internal audit function had sufficient resource to carry out its internal audit function had sufficient resource to carry out its duties effectively.
A review of the internal audit function by duties effectively.
A review of the internal audit function by the committee will take place in 2018.
Reports on internal the committee will take place in 2018.
Reports on internal audit work have been received by the committee and where audit work have been received by the committee and where necessary appropriate actions have been recommended to necessary appropriate actions have been recommended to the board.
The results of this work together with the committees the board.
The results of this work together with the committees engagement with the management information of the Group engagement with the management information of the Group and the executive directors have enabled them to conclude and the executive directors have enabled them to conclude that the statements given on pages 48 and 49 of the corporate that the statements given on pages 48 and 49 of the corporate governance report relating to the Groups systems of internal governance report relating to the Groups systems of internal control and its management of risk are appropriate. control and its management of risk are appropriate.
Separation of audit and risk committees As stated in the audit committee chairs statement on page As stated in the audit committee chairs statement on page 51 separate audit and risk committees were set up with effect 51 separate audit and risk committees were set up with effect from 25 January 2017.
Each committee has its own terms of from 25 January 2017.
Each committee has its own terms of reference which can be found on the Companys website at reference which can be found on the Companys website at www. rrowglobalir. et www. rrowglobalir.
This report was approved by the board and signed on its This report was approved by the board and signed on its behalf by behalf by Andrew Fisher Chair of the audit committee 1 March 2018 56 GOVERNANCE REPORT Arrow Global Group PLC  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 RISK COMMITTEE REPORT The Group has made a substantial investment in strengthening and developing its risk management framework during the year.
Dear Shareholder I am pleased to provide a report of the risk committees I am pleased to provide a report of the risk committees activities in 2017. activities in 2017 .
As reported in the 2016 annual report the committee has As reported in the 2016 annual report the committee has operated independently from the audit committee since operated independently from the audit committee since 25 January 2017  which the board considered to be appropriate 25 January 2017  which the board considered to be appropriate in light of the Groups increased geographic footprint the in light of the Groups increased geographic footprint the complex regulatory environments in which the Group operates complex regulatory environments in which the Group operates and the consequent impact on risk exposures.
The committee and the consequent impact on risk exposures.
The committee does however continue to maintain close links with the audit does however continue to maintain close links with the audit committee with the chair of each committee being a member committee with the chair of each committee being a member of the other.
This crossmembership facilitates effective of the other.
This crossmembership facilitates effective communication between both committees.
The committee communication between both committees.
The committee also works with the remuneration committee to ensure that also works with the remuneration committee to ensure that risk risk is appropriately considered when setting the Groups is appropriately considered when setting the Groups remuneration remuneration policy.
I am also a member of the policy.
I am also a member of the remuneration committee. remuneration committee.
The Group has made a substantial investment in strengthening The Group has made a substantial investment in strengthening and developing its risk management framework during the and developing its risk management framework during the year in line with the growing scale diversity and complexity year in line with the growing scale diversity and complexity of the business.
This work has been led by Clodagh Gunnigle of the business.
This work has been led by Clodagh Gunnigle who was appointed as the Groups chief risk officer in May who was appointed as the Groups chief risk officer in May 2017 .
Clodagh joined us from GE Capital where she spent 2017.
Clodagh joined us from GE Capital where she spent over 15 years in various global risk and compliance roles.
She over 15 years in various global risk and compliance roles.
She is a qualified accountant and has experience in managing risk is a qualified accountant and has experience in managing risk across Europe but in particular in the UK Ireland Portugal the across Europe but in particular in the UK Ireland Portugal the Netherlands and Italy.
We are committed to high standards of Netherlands and Italy.
We are committed to high standards of risk management across all categories of risk and we will risk management across all categories of risk and we will continue our programme of investment in the risk management continue our programme of investment in the risk management framework in 2018 under the oversight of the committee. framework in 2018 under the oversight of the committee.
The committees agenda in respect of the financial year The committees agenda in respect of the financial year ended 31 December 2017 has once again been full.
In addition ended 31 December 2017 has once again been full.
In addition to its primary role of reviewing the Groups risk management to its primary role of reviewing the Groups risk management systems and assisting the board in its oversight of risk across systems and assisting the board in its oversight of risk across the Group the committee has overseen various activities the Group the committee has overseen various activities undertaken by management to further embed the systems of undertaken by management to further embed the systems of risk management across the enlarged Group.
The committee risk management across the enlarged Group.
The committee visited the Groups operations in the UK the Netherlands and visited the Groups operations in the UK the Netherlands and Portugal during the year and met with the local risk officers Portugal during the year and met with the local risk officers with further visits scheduled to take place in 2018 in addition with further visits scheduled to take place in 2018 in addition to visiting the Groups operations in Italy and Ireland. to visiting the Groups operations in Italy and Ireland.
The principal issues on which the committee focused in 2017 The principal issues on which the committee focused in 2017 are set out in the report.
As is to be expected given the expansion are set out in the report.
As is to be expected given the expansion and diversification of the Group the committee has focused and diversification of the Group the committee has focused on a wide range of issues.
However the committee is confident on a wide range of issues.
However the committee is confident that through the risk management and other governance that through the risk management and other governance processes which we have in place we have been able to processes which we have in place we have been able to identify and manage risks appropriately and the board receives identify and manage risks appropriately and the board receives accurate and timely reports on the risk environment which accurate and timely reports on the risk environment which allows us to oversee risks effectively. allows us to oversee risks effectively.
In April 2017 the Group received authorisation from the Bank In April 2017 the Group received authorisation from the Bank of Italy in respect of the acquisition of Zenith followed by of Italy in respect of the acquisition of Zenith followed by approval from the Financial Conduct Authority and the approval from the Financial Conduct Authority and the Central Bank of Ireland in November 2017 for the acquisition Central Bank of Ireland in November 2017 for the acquisition of the Mars Capital companies in the UK and Ireland.
The risk of the Mars Capital companies in the UK and Ireland.
The risk committee was actively involved in overseeing the due diligence committee was actively involved in overseeing the due diligence programmes in respect of these acquisitions and in ensuring programmes in respect of these acquisitions and in ensuring that the respective integration programmes include adequate that the respective integration programmes include adequate focus on the development of the local risk and control focus on the development of the local risk and control frameworks so that they will meet Group standards and are frameworks so that they will meet Group standards and are integrated effectively into the wider Group risk framework. integrated effectively into the wider Group risk framework.
As part of the overall board evaluation review the committee As part of the overall board evaluation review the committee reviewed the findings in relation to its own performance. reviewed the findings in relation to its own performance.
While confirming its overall effectiveness a number of areas While confirming its overall effectiveness a number of areas for further improvement were identified.
These related principally for further improvement were identified.
These related principally to the need to ensure that the committee is continuing to to the need to ensure that the committee is continuing to receive appropriate information aligned to the enhanced risk receive appropriate information aligned to the enhanced risk appetite framework in light of the expansion of the Group. appetite framework in light of the expansion of the Group.
These improvements are being addressed as part of the wider These improvements are being addressed as part of the wider risk framework development programme. risk framework development programme.
Iain Cornish Chair of the risk committee 1 March 2018 57 www. rrowglobalir.
The committees responsibilities and authority to carry The committees responsibilities and authority to carry out its responsibilities are set out in its terms of reference out its responsibilities are set out in its terms of reference which are published on the Groups investor which are published on the Groups investor relations website. relations website.
The committee is responsible for advising the board on the The committee is responsible for advising the board on the Groups overall risk appetite and strategy and for overseeing Groups overall risk appetite and strategy and for overseeing and advising the board on the current risk exposures of the and advising the board on the current risk exposures of the Group and the overall risk management approach.
As part of Group and the overall risk management approach.
As part of this the committee reviews the Groups risk assessment this the committee reviews the Groups risk assessment processes and methodology and its capability for identifying processes and methodology and its capability for identifying and managing risk.
In addition it considers material and managing risk.
In addition it considers material proposed transactions and reviews reports on significant proposed transactions and reviews reports on significant incidents and position against risk appetite. incidents and position against risk appetite.
The committee met six times in 2017.
The attendance of our The committee met six times in 2017.
The attendance of our members is shown in the table opposite.
For meetings held members is shown in the table opposite.
For meetings held in 2017  the committee comprised the following members in 2017 the committee comprised the following members Iain Cornish as Chair Lan Tu Maria Lus Albuquerque and Iain Cornish as Chair Lan Tu Maria Lus Albuquerque and Andrew Fisher.
All are independent nonexecutive directors.
Andrew Fisher.
All are independent nonexecutive directors.
Risk management
Updates on corporate risk assessment management activities including risk registers and the robustness Updates on corporate risk assessment management activities including risk registers and the robustness of assessment and mitigation of principal risks facing the Group of assessment and mitigation of principal risks facing the Group Advising the board on the current risk exposures of the Group and future risk strategy Advising the board on the current risk exposures of the Group and future risk strategy Approval of policies Approval of policies Consideration of specific risk exposures and associated mitigations including acquisitions legal Consideration of specific risk exposures and associated mitigations including acquisitions legal claims and litigation tax status and customer outcomes claims and litigation tax status and customer outcomes Review of regular reports from money laundering reporting officer including reports on protecting Review of regular reports from money laundering reporting officer including reports on protecting against fraud and other forms of financial crime against fraud and other forms of financial crime Review and challenge due diligence on risk issues relating to material transactions and strategic Review and challenge due diligence on risk issues relating to material transactions and strategic proposals that are subject to board approval proposals that are subject to board approval Review of regulatory risk Review of the regulatory landscape and oversight of the management of regulatory issues Review of the regulatory landscape and oversight of the management of regulatory issues Review of reports from management on the treatment of customers including complaints handling Review of reports from management on the treatment of customers including complaints handling vulnerable customers litigation and oversight of thirdparty servicers vulnerable customers litigation and oversight of thirdparty servicers Review of reports on compliance issues including oversight of compliance monitoring activity Review of reports on compliance issues including oversight of compliance monitoring activity and findings and findings Training on specific regulatory topics to support effectiveness of the committee including Training on specific regulatory topics to support effectiveness of the committee including forbearance the General Data Protection Regulation and the Senior Managers and Certification Regime forbearance the General Data Protection Regulation and the Senior Managers and Certification Regime Italian acquisition Oversight of the Zenith acquisition and integration activity Oversight of the Zenith acquisition and integration activity Consideration of the risks that exist in Italy and the Groups response to them Consideration of the risks that exist in Italy and the Groups response to them Mars Capital acquisition Oversight of the Mars Capital acquisition and integration activity Oversight of the Mars Capital acquisition and integration activity
Review of the effectiveness of the committee Review of the effectiveness of the committee Review of the committees terms of reference and work programme Review of the committees terms of reference and work programme Oversight of the development of the groupwide risk management framework Oversight of the development of the groupwide risk management framework Overview of committees activities for 2018 In 2018 the committee will focus on developing the group risk management framework across the enlarged Group in In 2018 the committee will focus on developing the group risk management framework across the enlarged Group in particular ensuring consistency of approach and developing the Groups risk appetite statements key risk indicators and the particular ensuring consistency of approach and developing the Groups risk appetite statements key risk indicators and the wider risk culture.
The committee will continue to closely monitor the regulatory environments in which the Group operates wider risk culture.
The committee will continue to closely monitor the regulatory environments in which the Group operates and will oversee the implementation of systems processes and procedures to meet the requirements of the General Data and will oversee the implementation of systems processes and procedures to meet the requirements of the General Data Protection Regulation.
Protection Regulation.
This report was approved by the board and signed on its behalf by This report was approved by the board and signed on its behalf by Iain Cornish Chair of the risk committee 1 March 2018 Committee members Eligible to attend Attended Iain Cornish Chair 6 6 Lan Tu Maria Lus Albuquerque 6 6 Andrew Fisher 6 6 Lan Tu was unable to attend a meeting due to a prior commitment.
Lan Tu was unable to attend a meeting due to a prior commitment.
Biographies of the members of the committee are set out on Biographies of the members of the committee are set out on pages 44 to 45. pages 44 to 45.
Work of the committee The committee has a schedule of standing items that it reviews The committee has a schedule of standing items that it reviews at each meeting and a work programme including training at each meeting and a work programme including training and deep dive sessions and also considers any specific and deep dive sessions and also considers any specific matters highlighted to the committee for consideration. matters highlighted to the committee for consideration.
The committees schedule is continuing to evolve in light The committees schedule is continuing to evolve in light of the Groups ongoing expansion and diversification. of the Groups ongoing expansion and diversification.
During the period under review the following work was During the period under review the following work was carried out carried out 58 GOVERNANCE REPORT Arrow Global Group PLC  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 NOMINATION COMMITTEE REPORT During the year the committee has overseen the appointment of Paul Cooper as our new Group chief  nancial o cer.
Dear Shareholder I am pleased to provide a report of the nomination I am pleased to provide a report of the nomination committees activities in 2017. committees activities in 2017.
The committee plays an important role in ensuring that the The committee plays an important role in ensuring that the Company is led by a board which is best placed to ensure the Company is led by a board which is best placed to ensure the longterm success of the Company and that the Company longterm success of the Company and that the Company operates effectively in the context of our strategic objectives. operates effectively in the context of our strategic objectives.
The committees primary focus this year was the identification The committees primary focus this year was the identification of potential candidates for the role of Group chief financial of potential candidates for the role of Group chief financial officer arising from the announcement that Rob Memmott officer arising from the announcement that Rob Memmott would be stepping down from this position.
I am very pleased would be stepping down from this position.
I am very pleased with the outcome of this process which resulted in the with the outcome of this process which resulted in the appointment of Paul Cooper as Group chief financial officer. appointment of Paul Cooper as Group chief financial officer.
Pauls appointment was announced on 18 October 2017 and Pauls appointment was announced on 18 October 2017 and he formally took up the position on 1 January 2018. he formally took up the position on 1 January 2018.
Further detail on the recruitment process for Pauls appointment Further detail on the recruitment process for Pauls appointment is set out on page 59. is set out on page 59.
The committee continues to monitor board and executive The committee continues to monitor board and executive management succession to ensure an appropriate balance of management succession to ensure an appropriate balance of skills and experience with due regard given to the benefits of skills and experience with due regard given to the benefits of diversity and that opportunities for talent progression are diversity and that opportunities for talent progression are identified and developed. identified and developed.
Diversity remains a key area of focus for the committee with Diversity remains a key area of focus for the committee with the composition of the board and capabilities of all directors the composition of the board and capabilities of all directors kept under review to ensure that board membership is kept under review to ensure that board membership is sufficiently diverse and reflects a broad range of skills sufficiently diverse and reflects a broad range of skills knowledge and experience to enable it to meet knowledge and experience to enable it to meet its responsibilities. its responsibilities.
Further information regarding the committees activities Further information regarding the committees activities during the year and its roles and responsibilities are set out during the year and its roles and responsibilities are set out in the remainder of this report. in the remainder of this report.
Committee membership and meetings I chair the nomination committee and I was regarded as I chair the nomination committee and I was regarded as independent on appointment.
The committee also comprises independent on appointment.
The committee also comprises two other independent nonexecutive directors Iain Cornish two other independent nonexecutive directors Iain Cornish and Lan Tu.
I will not chair the committee when it is dealing and Lan Tu.
I will not chair the committee when it is dealing with the matter of succession to the chairmanship.
The with the matter of succession to the chairmanship.
The committee is compliant with the provisions of the Code as committee is compliant with the provisions of the Code as the majority of the committee members are independent the majority of the committee members are independent nonexecutive directors. nonexecutive directors.
Biographies of the members of the committee are set out Biographies of the members of the committee are set out on pages 44 to 45. on pages 44 to 45.
The committee held three scheduled meetings during the The committee held three scheduled meetings during the year.
Details of attendance by all members who held office year.
Details of attendance by all members who held office during the year are set out below during the year are set out below Committee members Eligible to attend Attended Jonathan Bloomer Chair 3 3 Iain Cornish 3 3 Lan Tu 3 3
The committees responsibilities are set out in its terms The committees responsibilities are set out in its terms of reference.
They include responsibility for considering of reference.
They include responsibility for considering and making recommendations to the board in respect of and making recommendations to the board in respect of appointments to the board the board committees and the appointments to the board the board committees and the chairmanship of the board committees.
It is also responsible chairmanship of the board committees.
It is also responsible for keeping the structure size and composition of the board for keeping the structure size and composition of the board under regular review and for making recommendations to the under regular review and for making recommendations to the board with regard to any changes necessary.
Furthermore the board with regard to any changes necessary.
Furthermore the nomination committee is required to manage the process for nomination committee is required to manage the process for evaluating the performance of the board. evaluating the performance of the board.
The work of the committee in 2017 has included The work of the committee in 2017 has included the recruitment of Paul Cooper as Group chief the recruitment of Paul Cooper as Group chief financial officer financial officer reviewing the terms of reference of the committee reviewing the terms of reference of the committee continued monitoring of the structure size composition continued monitoring of the structure size composition and diversity of both the board and its committees and diversity of both the board and its committees considering the approach to the 2018 board and considering the approach to the 2018 board and committee performance evaluation and recommending committee performance evaluation and recommending that an externally facilitated revaluation be undertaken that an externally facilitated revaluation be undertaken in 2018 in 2018 reviewing the composition of the audit committee reviewing the composition of the audit committee recommending to the board that Lan Tu be invited to serve recommending to the board that Lan Tu be invited to serve an additional threeyear term with effect from 9 March an additional threeyear term with effect from 9 March 2018 and 2018 and recommending to the board the reelectionelection recommending to the board the reelectionelection of the entire board at the forthcoming annual of the entire board at the forthcoming annual general meeting. general meeting.
Governance www. rrowglobalir.
Recruitment of directors The appointment of Paul Cooper followed an extensive The appointment of Paul Cooper followed an extensive search and a rigorous selection process.
For the position the search and a rigorous selection process.
For the position the committee assessed the skills and experience required to fulfil committee assessed the skills and experience required to fulfil the role and a role description detailing the capabilities the role and a role description detailing the capabilities required for the appointment was prepared accordingly. required for the appointment was prepared accordingly.
The executive search firms Spencer Stuart and JCA Heidricks The executive search firms Spencer Stuart and JCA Heidricks were retained in relation to the appointment of Paul Cooper. were retained in relation to the appointment of Paul Cooper.
Neither firm has any other connection with the Company.
Neither firm has any other connection with the Company.
The recruitment process for the role of Group chief financial The recruitment process for the role of Group chief financial officer resulted in suitable candidates being shortlisted for officer resulted in suitable candidates being shortlisted for interview.
Interviews with candidates were conducted by interview.
Interviews with candidates were conducted by me and the executive and nonexecutive directors.
Each me and the executive and nonexecutive directors.
Each candidate also undertook an indepth assessment with candidate also undertook an indepth assessment with business psychologists.
A number of informal meetings business psychologists.
A number of informal meetings conference calls and discussions also took place between conference calls and discussions also took place between committee members search consultants and potential committee members search consultants and potential candidates throughout the recruitment process. candidates throughout the recruitment process.
The committee unanimously approved the recommendation The committee unanimously approved the recommendation of the appointment of Paul Cooper to the board and as the of the appointment of Paul Cooper to the board and as the Groups chief financial officer.
The board unanimously approved Groups chief financial officer.
The board unanimously approved Paul Coopers appointment which was announced on Paul Coopers appointment which was announced on 18 October 2017.
Paul formally joined the Company on 18 October 2017.
Paul formally joined the Company on 1 January 2018.
1 January 2018.
Audit committee composition As stated on page 52 the committee undertook a detailed As stated on page 52 the committee undertook a detailed review of the composition of the audit committee and concluded review of the composition of the audit committee and concluded that the composition of the audit committee was compliant that the composition of the audit committee was compliant with the relevant requirements of the Code and the Disclosure with the relevant requirements of the Code and the Disclosure Guidance and Transparency Rules throughout 2017.
Guidance and Transparency Rules throughout 2017 .
Further detail of the work of the audit committee is set out Further detail of the work of the audit committee is set out within its report on pages 51 to 55. within its report on pages 51 to 55.
Succession planning The committee has considered the recommendations The committee has considered the recommendations published by the FRC FRC Feedback Statement UK Board published by the FRC FRC Feedback Statement UK Board Succession Planning Discussion Paper May  and Succession Planning Discussion Paper May  and recognises the importance of strategic thoughtful and recognises the importance of strategic thoughtful and practical succession planning as a key driver in maximising practical succession planning as a key driver in maximising board effectiveness and as an important contributory factor board effectiveness and as an important contributory factor to the Companys longterm success.
The committee has taken to the Companys longterm success.
The committee has taken an active interest in talent management and acknowledges an active interest in talent management and acknowledges that internal candidates for senior management and board that internal candidates for senior management and board positions should be given a broader experience of the positions should be given a broader experience of the business with greater exposure to the board and boardroom business with greater exposure to the board and boardroom experience.
The committee supported the board in its initial experience.
The committee supported the board in its initial review of talent progression opportunities across the Groups review of talent progression opportunities across the Groups senior leadership team and will continue to work with the senior leadership team and will continue to work with the relevant internal parties and external executive search relevant internal parties and external executive search providers where appropriate to enhance the succession providers where appropriate to enhance the succession planning programme throughout 2018. planning programme throughout 2018.
Diversity
The board recognises the benefits that diversity can bring The board recognises the benefits that diversity can bring and seeks to recruit directors from different backgrounds with and seeks to recruit directors from different backgrounds with a range of experience perspectives personalities skills and a range of experience perspectives personalities skills and knowledge which is in line with the Companys equality knowledge which is in line with the Companys equality and diversity policy.
The board supports in principle the and diversity policy.
The board supports in principle the recommendations outlined in the HamptonAlexander recommendations outlined in the HamptonAlexander Review published in November 2016 and updated in 2017  Review published in November 2016 and updated in 2017 particularly in improving the representation of women both particularly in improving the representation of women both at board level and also below board level and in senior at board level and also below board level and in senior leadership positions.
The Company is a member of the leadership positions.
The Company is a member of the international womens network Women on Boards which international womens network Women on Boards which all senior female leaders have been invited to join. all senior female leaders have been invited to join.
A key policy statement of the Companys equality and diversity A key policy statement of the Companys equality and diversity policy is to promote equality of opportunity for all.
The policy is policy is to promote equality of opportunity for all.
The policy is applicable to all colleagues within the Group and is made available applicable to all colleagues within the Group and is made available to all colleagues.
Each colleague is responsible for upholding to all colleagues.
Each colleague is responsible for upholding the policy and the roles and responsibilities of the board the the policy and the roles and responsibilities of the board the executive committee the human resources department executive committee the human resources department management and colleagues are clearly defined. management and colleagues are clearly defined.
Both the committee and the board have a fundamental Both the committee and the board have a fundamental obligation to ensure that appointments are of the best obligation to ensure that appointments are of the best candidates who are selected on merit against objective candidates who are selected on merit against objective criteria.
Subject to this the availability of suitable candidates criteria.
Subject to this the availability of suitable candidates and compliance with the requirements of the Equality Act and compliance with the requirements of the Equality Act 2010 the board is committed to strengthening female 2010 the board is committed to strengthening female representation at board and senior management level. representation at board and senior management level.
It has not however set prescriptive targets as it does not It has not however set prescriptive targets as it does not believe these are in the best interests of either the Company believe these are in the best interests of either the Company or its shareholders.
Although the Company is currently or its shareholders.
Although the Company is currently outside the FTSE 350 the committee will keep under review outside the FTSE 350 the committee will keep under review the HamptonAlexander Review recommendations for the HamptonAlexander Review recommendations for female board representation in relation to FTSE 350listed female board representation in relation to FTSE 350listed companies as well as recommendations in relation to companies as well as recommendations in relation to improvements on underrepresentation on the Executive improvements on underrepresentation on the Executive committee and on the layer immediately below for committee and on the layer immediately below for such companies. such companies.
The board currently comprises two female nonexecutive The board currently comprises two female nonexecutive directors Lan Tu and Maria Lus Albuquerque who together directors Lan Tu and Maria Lus Albuquerque who together represent 29% 2016 29% female board membership represent 29% 2016 29% female board membership which is just below the 33% target recommended by the which is just below the 33% target recommended by the HamptonAlexander Review for FTSE 350listed companies.
HamptonAlexander Review for FTSE 350listed companies.
The executive committee comprises two female members The executive committee comprises two female members who represent 29% 2016 11% of the executive who represent 29% 2016 11% of the executive committees membership. committees membership.
Board evaluation Although the Company currently sits outside the FTSE 350 and Although the Company currently sits outside the FTSE 350 and is therefore not required to undertake an externally facilitated is therefore not required to undertake an externally facilitated board evaluation the committee recommended to the board board evaluation the committee recommended to the board that an externally facilitated review take place in 2018.
The that an externally facilitated review take place in 2018.
The board supported the recommendation it being recognised board supported the recommendation it being recognised that this would be the first externally facilitated review since that this would be the first externally facilitated review since the Companys IPO in 2013.
It is anticipated that the review the Companys IPO in 2013.
It is anticipated that the review will take place in mid2018. will take place in mid2018.
Effectiveness
In 2017 the committee carried out an evaluation of its In 2017 the committee carried out an evaluation of its effectiveness by way of questionnaire.
The questionnaire effectiveness by way of questionnaire.
The questionnaire focused on areas such as board composition and succession focused on areas such as board composition and succession planning.
Development areas to be actioned in 2017 include planning.
Development areas to be actioned in 2017 include continuing to closely monitor the structure size and continuing to closely monitor the structure size and composition of the board particularly in the context composition of the board particularly in the context of diversity and skillsets given the expansion and of diversity and skillsets given the expansion and diversification of the group and diversification of the group and continuing to enhance the succession continuing to enhance the succession planning programme. planning programme.
The board based on the outcome of the evaluation exercise The board based on the outcome of the evaluation exercise concluded that the committee was considered to be effective concluded that the committee was considered to be effective in fulfilling its role throughout 2017. in fulfilling its role throughout 2017.
This report was approved by the board and signed on its This report was approved by the board and signed on its behalf by behalf by Jonathan Bloomer Chair of the nomination committee 1 March 2018 60 GOVERNANCE REPORT Arrow Global Group PLC  Annual Report and Accounts 2017
DIRECTORS REMUNERATION REPORT
The directors remuneration continues to support the Companys strategic goals and encourages and rewards the right behaviours.
The report complies with the Large and Mediumsized The report complies with the Large and Mediumsized Companies and Groups Accounts and Reports Regulations Companies and Groups Accounts and Reports Regulations 2008 as amended the UK Corporate Governance Code 2008 as amended the UK Corporate Governance Code the Code and the Financial Conduct Authoritys Listing Rules. the Code and the Financial Conduct Authoritys Listing Rules.
This report is split into two sections the annual report on This report is split into two sections the annual report on remuneration which follows this statement and then the directors remuneration which follows this statement and then the directors remuneration policy for which shareholder approval will be remuneration policy for which shareholder approval will be sought at the 2018 annual general meeting.
The directors sought at the 2018 annual general meeting.
The directors remuneration report excluding the directors remuneration remuneration report excluding the directors remuneration policy will be subject to an advisory vote at the 2018 annual policy will be subject to an advisory vote at the 2018 annual general meeting.
The directors remuneration policy will be general meeting.
The directors remuneration policy will be subject to a binding vote at that meeting. subject to a binding vote at that meeting.
Annual statement On behalf of the board I am pleased to present our directors On behalf of the board I am pleased to present our directors remuneration report for the year ended 31 December 2017 . remuneration report for the year ended 31 December 2017 .
In accordance with the applicable legislation the Company is In accordance with the applicable legislation the Company is required to seek approval for a new directors remuneration required to seek approval for a new directors remuneration policy at the 2018 annual general meeting.
I have set out below policy at the 2018 annual general meeting.
I have set out below a summary of the approach that we have adopted in formulating a summary of the approach that we have adopted in formulating the new policy. the new policy.
Remuneration policy and link to strategy Our previous directors remuneration policy was approved at the Our previous directors remuneration policy was approved at the 2015 annual general meeting with 100% of the votes in favour of 2015 annual general meeting with 100% of the votes in favour of it.
During 2017 the remuneration committee the committee it.
During 2017 the remuneration committee the committee reviewed the policy approved in 2015 in the context of the increase reviewed the policy approved in 2015 in the context of the increase in the Companys size and complexity and developments in best in the Companys size and complexity and developments in best practice.
The increase in the size and complexity of the Group practice.
The increase in the size and complexity of the Group has seen its market capitalisation rise from approximately has seen its market capitalisation rise from approximately 420 million at the end of 2014 based on a threemonth average 420 million at the end of 2014 based on a threemonth average to 31 December 2014 to approximately 713 million based on a to 31 December 2014 to approximately 713 million based on a threemonth average to 31 December 2017 with an increase in threemonth average to 31 December 2017 with an increase in the number of employees to approximately 1500 compared with the number of employees to approximately 1500 compared with 157 at the end of 2014 and an increase in the number of countries 157 at the end of 2014 and an increase in the number of countries in which the Group operates from one to six.
The increases reflect in which the Group operates from one to six.
The increases reflect both the acquisitions undertaken since flotation including both the acquisitions undertaken since flotation including Whitestar Portugal in April 2015 Vesting Benelux in May 2016 Whitestar Portugal in April 2015 Vesting Benelux in May 2016 Zenith Italy in April 2017 and Mars Capital UK and Ireland in Zenith Italy in April 2017 and Mars Capital UK and Ireland in December 2017 as well as the continued execution of strategy December 2017 as well as the continued execution of strategy of diversifying by geography asset class and revenues. of diversifying by geography asset class and revenues.
The committees conclusion was that the overall structure of the directors The committees conclusion was that the overall structure of the directors remuneration continues to support the Companys strategic goals and remuneration continues to support the Companys strategic goals and encourages and rewards the right behaviours.
Accordingly we concluded encourages and rewards the right behaviours.
Accordingly we concluded that a radical overhaul of the policy was not required.
However changes that a radical overhaul of the policy was not required.
However changes have been made to the policy as follows which include increases to the have been made to the policy as follows which include increases to the variable pay maxima recognising that the current maxima were set at variable pay maxima recognising that the current maxima were set at flotation since when the Group has grown significantly flotation since when the Group has grown significantly
The 2015 policy permitted pension contributions The 2015 policy permitted pension contributions or cash allowance of up to 18% of basic salary although or cash allowance of up to 18% of basic salary although in practice a 15% of salary limit was applied.
The committee in practice a 15% of salary limit was applied.
The committee has capped the maximum in the new policy at 15% of has capped the maximum in the new policy at 15% of basic salary. basic salary.
Annual bonus We have increased the maximum bonus opportunity We have increased the maximum bonus opportunity to 140% of salary from 125% of salary.
That increased to 140% of salary from 125% of salary.
That increased opportunity will apply for Lee Rochford for 2018 but opportunity will apply for Lee Rochford for 2018 but Paul Coopers opportunity for 2018 will remain at 125% Paul Coopers opportunity for 2018 will remain at 125% of salary. of salary.
Our previous practice has been to defer for three years Our previous practice has been to defer for three years 33% of any bonus earned.
Where a bonus opportunity in 33% of any bonus earned.
Where a bonus opportunity in excess of 125% is offered including therefore Lee Rochfords excess of 125% is offered including therefore Lee Rochfords bonus opportunity for 2018 the deferral arrangements bonus opportunity for 2018 the deferral arrangements will be adjusted such that any bonus above that which will be adjusted such that any bonus above that which would have been earned for an opportunity of 125% of would have been earned for an opportunity of 125% of salary will be deferred into shares.
Subject to approval salary will be deferred into shares.
Subject to approval of the new directors remuneration policy 40% of any of the new directors remuneration policy 40% of any bonus earned by Lee Rochford for 2018 will be deferred bonus earned by Lee Rochford for 2018 will be deferred into shares.
This means that any additional bonus earned into shares.
This means that any additional bonus earned as a result of increasing his opportunity to 140% will be as a result of increasing his opportunity to 140% will be delivered in shares rather than cash. delivered in shares rather than cash.
LTIP
No change is proposed to the policy maximum of 200% of No change is proposed to the policy maximum of 200% of salary.
Awards for 2018 will remain at 150% of salary in line salary.
Awards for 2018 will remain at 150% of salary in line with our previous practice.
Subject to the continued strong with our previous practice.
Subject to the continued strong performance of the Group with effect from 2019  we propose performance of the Group with effect from 2019  we propose to increase the award level to 200% of salary for Lee Rochford to increase the award level to 200% of salary for Lee Rochford and 175% for Paul Cooper.
In advance of implementing and 175% for Paul Cooper.
In advance of implementing any increase we will review the level of stretch in the any increase we will review the level of stretch in the performance targets to ensure that they are commensurate performance targets to ensure that they are commensurate with any increased opportunity.
Our intention is that the with any increased opportunity.
Our intention is that the amount that is paid for threshold performance as a amount that is paid for threshold performance as a percentage of salary will not be increased.
This will percentage of salary will not be increased.
This will ensure executives do not receive more for delivering ensure executives do not receive more for delivering threshold performance notwithstanding the proposed threshold performance notwithstanding the proposed increase in the LTIP maximum in 2019. increase in the LTIP maximum in 2019.
Reflecting best practice LTIP awards granted from 2019 Reflecting best practice LTIP awards granted from 2019 onwards will be subject to an additional twoyear onwards will be subject to an additional twoyear holding period. holding period.
Shareholding guidelines In line with best practice we have formally incorporated In line with best practice we have formally incorporated our shareholding guidelines within the policy and have our shareholding guidelines within the policy and have increased the guidelines to 200% of salary for all increased the guidelines to 200% of salary for all executive directors with effect from 1 January 2018. executive directors with effect from 1 January 2018.
Other changes Other amendments have been made to the policy to aid Other amendments have been made to the policy to aid its administration to reflect the changes referred to its administration to reflect the changes referred to above and to reflect changes in practice since the policy above and to reflect changes in practice since the policy was last approved. was last approved.
At the end of this statement we have summarised how key aspects of our At the end of this statement we have summarised how key aspects of our directors remuneration policy relate to our overall corporate strategy. directors remuneration policy relate to our overall corporate strategy.
Governance www. rrowglobalir.
Performance and variable pay outcomes for the year ended 31 December 2017 As described in the strategic report the Company continues As described in the strategic report the Company continues to perform strongly delivering profitable earnings growth to perform strongly delivering profitable earnings growth and strong progress against our strategy of diversifying by and strong progress against our strategy of diversifying by geography asset class and revenue stream while driving geography asset class and revenue stream while driving strong returns on investment as summarised below strong returns on investment as summarised below
Increased by 24.1% to 56.6 million
Increased to 32.4p representing growth of 24.1% Underlying ROE 32.9% ROE delivered
The executive directors and their teams have successfully integrated the Zenith acquisition overlaying continued growth from attractive organic investments.
Integration with the Mars Capital business in UK and Ireland following completion of its acquisition will form an important programme of work in 2018.
Taking into account the performance achieved during the Taking into account the performance achieved during the year the executive directors have earned annual bonuses year the executive directors have earned annual bonuses as follows as follows Lee Rochford 451563 and Lee Rochford 451563 and Rob Memmott 289366.
Rob Memmott 289366.
Further rationale for these payments can be found on pages Further rationale for these payments can be found on pages Recognising that Rob Memmott was employed for the whole Recognising that Rob Memmott was employed for the whole of 2017  the committee has awarded him a bonus based on of 2017  the committee has awarded him a bonus based on the achievement of the applicable performance conditions. the achievement of the applicable performance conditions.
As with Lee Rochford 33% of that bonus will be delivered in As with Lee Rochford 33% of that bonus will be delivered in the form of deferred shares further information is set out the form of deferred shares further information is set out on page 64. on page 64.
The LTIP awards granted in June 2015 are scheduled to vest in The LTIP awards granted in June 2015 are scheduled to vest in June 2018 based on performance to 31 December 2017 June 2018 based on performance to 31 December 2017 assessed against earnings per share EPS as regards 50% of assessed against earnings per share EPS as regards 50% of each award return on equity ROE as regards 25% of each each award return on equity ROE as regards 25% of each award and total shareholder return TSR as regards 25% of award and total shareholder return TSR as regards 25% of each award.
Since Rob Memmott was employed for the whole each award.
Since Rob Memmott was employed for the whole of the threeyear performance period the committee permitted of the threeyear performance period the committee permitted him to retain the benefit of this award subject to the satisfaction him to retain the benefit of this award subject to the satisfaction of the performance conditions.
Following an assessment of of the performance conditions.
Following an assessment of these performance conditions by the committee the awards these performance conditions by the committee the awards will vest as to 100%.
Further details can be found on page 66. will vest as to 100%.
Further details can be found on page 66.
Before approving the level of variable remuneration for 2017  Before approving the level of variable remuneration for 2017 the remuneration committee sought the views of the Group the remuneration committee sought the views of the Group chief risk officer and the risk committee chair on the chief risk officer and the risk committee chair on the effectiveness of the executives management of conduct and effectiveness of the executives management of conduct and risk during the year. risk during the year.
Base salary increases for 2017 As outlined in our remuneration report last year Lee Rochfords As outlined in our remuneration report last year Lee Rochfords salary was set at 425000 on his appointment and Rob Memmotts salary was set at 425000 on his appointment and Rob Memmott s salary was increased to 319300 with effect from 1 March 2017  salary was increased to 319300 with effect from 1 March 2017 a 3% increase in line with increases awarded to the wider workforce. a 3% increase in line with increases awarded to the wider workforce.
Executive director changes Group chief executive officer Lee Rochford was appointed as Group chief executive officer Lee Rochford was appointed as Group chief executive officer and executive director with effect from 3 January 2017.
At that and executive director with effect from 3 January 2017.
At that time Tom Drury stepped down from the board leaving the time Tom Drury stepped down from the board leaving the business on 28 February 2017.
Remuneration arrangements in business on 28 February 2017.
Remuneration arrangements in relation to Lee joining and Tom leaving the business were described relation to Lee joining and T om leaving the business were described in the 2016 directors remuneration report.
Where applicable in the 2016 directors remuneration report.
Where applicable further information is included in this years annual report further information is included in this years annual report on remuneration. on remuneration.
Group chief financial officer As announced on 18 October 2017  Rob Memmott stepped As announced on 18 October 2017  Rob Memmott stepped down as Group chief financial officer and as a director of down as Group chief financial officer and as a director of the Company on 1 January 2018 and left the business on the Company on 1 January 2018 and left the business on 28 February 2018.
Paul Cooper joined the Company as 28 February 2018.
Paul Cooper joined the Company as Group chief financial officer on 1 January 2018.
Group chief financial officer on 1 January 2018.
In summary the remuneration arrangements in respect In summary the remuneration arrangements in respect of Robs departure which are in line with the shareholder of Robs departure which are in line with the shareholder approved directors remuneration policy are approved directors remuneration policy are Rob will be entitled to a bonus for 2017 and to his 2015 LTIP Rob will be entitled to a bonus for 2017 and to his 2015 LTIP award subject to the performance conditions recognising award subject to the performance conditions recognising that he was in service for the whole of the applicable that he was in service for the whole of the applicable performance periods performance periods Robs 2016 and 2017 LTIP awards have lapsed and Robs 2016 and 2017 LTIP awards have lapsed and Rob has retained his existing deferred share awards which Rob has retained his existing deferred share awards which will vest on the originally anticipated dates recognising his will vest on the originally anticipated dates recognising his contribution over the applicable bonus periods and that contribution over the applicable bonus periods and that the awards were not subject to further the awards were not subject to further performance conditions. performance conditions.
The remuneration arrangements for Paul Cooper which are The remuneration arrangements for Paul Cooper which are in line with the shareholder approved directors remuneration in line with the shareholder approved directors remuneration policy are described on pages 70 and 71.
Paul Coopers base policy are described on pages 70 and 71.
Paul Coopers base salary of 365000 was determined with regard to the size of salary of 365000 was determined with regard to the size of the role internal relativities and affordability and in line with the the role internal relativities and affordability and in line with the overarching principle of not paying more than is necessary to overarching principle of not paying more than is necessary to secure senior executives of the appropriate calibre to execute secure senior executives of the appropriate calibre to execute the strategy.
Paul Coopers annual bonus and LTIP opportunity the strategy.
Paul Coopers annual bonus and LTIP opportunity for 2018 will be 125% of salary and 150% of salary respectively for 2018 will be 125% of salary and 150% of salary respectively in line with the arrangements that applied for executive in line with the arrangements that applied for executive directors in 2017. directors in 2017.
We agreed to compensate Paul Cooper for awards he forfeited We agreed to compensate Paul Cooper for awards he forfeited as a result of his resignation from his former employer and as a result of his resignation from his former employer and details of the awards are set out on pages 70 and 71. details of the awards are set out on pages 70 and 71.
Committee evaluation As part of the overall board evaluation review the committee As part of the overall board evaluation review the committee reviewed the findings in relation to its overall effectiveness. reviewed the findings in relation to its overall effectiveness.
A small number of areas for further improvement were identified A small number of areas for further improvement were identified and will be acted upon.
None were considered material and and will be acted upon.
None were considered material and overall committee members were satisfied with the overall committee members were satisfied with the performance of the committee during the year. performance of the committee during the year.
Overall given the Groups performance I am comfortable Overall given the Groups performance I am comfortable that the amounts earned by our executive directors are that the amounts earned by our executive directors are appropriate.
The following pages describe in further detail appropriate.
The following pages describe in further detail how we have implemented our remuneration policy in respect how we have implemented our remuneration policy in respect of 2017  together with our plans for 2018. of 2017  together with our plans for 2018.
We consulted with shareholders in advance of finalisation of We consulted with shareholders in advance of finalisation of the new policy and were pleased with both the level of the new policy and were pleased with both the level of engagement and the positive feedback received. engagement and the positive feedback received.
Lan Tu Chair of the remuneration committee 1 March 2018 62 GOVERNANCE REPORT Arrow Global Group PLC  Annual Report and Accounts 2017
DIRECTORS REMUNERATION REPORT CONTINUED
Our executive directors remuneration at a glance We take a disciplined approach to the implementation of our remuneration policy to ensure that our remuneration framework We take a disciplined approach to the implementation of our remuneration policy to ensure that our remuneration framework rewards the right behaviours and supports the strategic goals of the Group.
We have set out below an overview of how our approach rewards the right behaviours and supports the strategic goals of the Group.
We have set out below an overview of how our approach to remuneration supports the strategic objectives of the business. to remuneration supports the strategic objectives of the business.
Annual bonus performance metrics We balance profit growth with other key financial and nonfinancial targets and specific personal We balance profit growth with other key financial and nonfinancial targets and specific personal objectives linked to our strategic goals of protecting and enhancing our marketleading position objectives linked to our strategic goals of protecting and enhancing our marketleading position diversifying the business delivering strong riskadjusted investment returns and developing our diversifying the business delivering strong riskadjusted investment returns and developing our customer proposition. customer proposition.
We ensure that the strategic goals are specific measurable and fairly assessed.
We ensure that the strategic goals are specific measurable and fairly assessed.
Annual bonus deferral A proportion of any annual bonus is deferred into shares to ensure that executive directors consider A proportion of any annual bonus is deferred into shares to ensure that executive directors consider the longerterm impact of decisions and the sustainability of the business.
In connection with the the longerterm impact of decisions and the sustainability of the business.
In connection with the increase in Lee Rochfords annual bonus opportunity we have increased the deferral as described in increase in Lee Rochfords annual bonus opportunity we have increased the deferral as described in the statement from the committee chair on page 60. the statement from the committee chair on page 60.
LTIP
The LTIP is designed to encourage behaviours which facilitate the delivery of sustainable growth of The LTIP is designed to encourage behaviours which facilitate the delivery of sustainable growth of the business whilst delivering value to stakeholders and promoting the longterm success of the the business whilst delivering value to stakeholders and promoting the longterm success of the
For 2017 and 2018 Group.
For 2017 and 2018 50% is based on underlying basic EPS aligned to the Companys strategy to deliver earnings growth 50% is based on underlying basic EPS aligned to the Companys strategy to deliver earnings growth 25% is based on underlying ROE which is a key driver of shareholder value and reflects the 25% is based on underlying ROE which is a key driver of shareholder value and reflects the importance of purchasing debt of a suitable quality with an appropriate return and importance of purchasing debt of a suitable quality with an appropriate return and 25% is based on TSR maintaining a link to share price performance and assessing our performance 25% is based on TSR maintaining a link to share price performance and assessing our performance to that of peers namely TSR currently relative to the constituents of the FTSE 350 Index excluding to that of peers namely TSR currently relative to the constituents of the FTSE 350 Index excluding investment trusts. investment trusts.
Risk
Variable remuneration targets are set at levels which reward high performance but which do not Variable remuneration targets are set at levels which reward high performance but which do not encourage inappropriate business risk. encourage inappropriate business risk.
Annual bonus payments determined by reference to the performance measures are subject to a Annual bonus payments determined by reference to the performance measures are subject to a review of the executives management of conduct and risk during the year.
The vesting of LTIP review of the executives management of conduct and risk during the year.
The vesting of LTIP awards is subject to a further underpin based on an assessment of risk management throughout the awards is subject to a further underpin based on an assessment of risk management throughout the performance period. performance period.
All annual bonus and LTIP awards are subject to both malus and clawback provisions.
All annual bonus and LTIP awards are subject to both malus and clawback provisions.
Shareholding requirements Shareholding guidelines apply to all executive directors to align their longterm interests with those Shareholding guidelines apply to all executive directors to align their longterm interests with those of shareholders. of shareholders.
These guidelines require each executive director to acquire shares with a value equal to 200% of These guidelines require each executive director to acquire shares with a value equal to 200% of salary and have been formally incorporated in the new policy in line with best practice. salary and have been formally incorporated in the new policy in line with best practice.
Governance www. rrowglobalir.
Annual report on remuneration Directors remuneration audited information Details of the executive directors remuneration are as follows Details of the executive directors remuneration are as follows Salary and fees Taxable benefits
Longterm incentives
Total compensation teltelteltel 2016
Lee Rochford 424 NA 2 NA 452 NA NA NA 64 NA 942 NA Rob Memmott 318 306 3 tel458 46 46 1348 1108 Former director Tom Drury NA 389 NA 4 NA 389 NA 581 NA 58 NA 1421 Total 742 695 5 tel1039 110 104 2290 2529 1 Private medical and dental cover.
1 Private medical and dental cover.
Performancerelated bonus is the value of the bonus earned in respect of the year including the value of the deferred shares.
Further information in 2 Performancerelated bonus is the value of the bonus earned in respect of the year including the value of the deferred shares.
Further information in relation to the performance conditions applied for 2017 is provided on pages 64 to 66. relation to the performance conditions applied for 2017 is provided on pages 64 to 66.
Longterm incentives reflect the value of the awards vesting by reference to performance where the performance period ended in the relevant year.
Longterm incentives reflect the value of the awards vesting by reference to performance where the performance period ended in the relevant year.
In the 2016 directors remuneration report the value of the LTIPs scheduled to vest in March 2017 was calculated in accordance with the applicable In the 2016 directors remuneration report the value of the LTIPs scheduled to vest in March 2017 was calculated in accordance with the applicable regulations by reference to the average share price over the threemonth period ending 31 December 2016 2.9468.
In the table above these values regulations by reference to the average share price over the threemonth period ending 31 December 2016 2.9468.
In the table above these values have been restated to reflect the share price on 10 March 2017 the last dealing day before the date of vesting on 11 March 2017 3.2415. have been restated to reflect the share price on 10 March 2017 the last dealing day before the date of vesting on 11 March 2017 3.2415.
The value of the LTIP for 2017 reflects the LTIPs scheduled to vest in June 2018 based on performance over the three years to 31 December 2017 .
The value of the LTIP for 2017 reflects the LTIPs scheduled to vest in June 2018 based on performance over the three years to 31 December 2017 .
In accordance with the applicable regulations the value is calculated as the number of shares that are expected to vest multiplied by the average share In accordance with the applicable regulations the value is calculated as the number of shares that are expected to vest multiplied by the average share price over the threemonth period ending 31 December 2017 4.0687 plus the value of dividends to be paid to Rob Memmott in respect of the period price over the threemonth period ending 31 December 2017 4.0687 plus the value of dividends to be paid to Rob Memmott in respect of the period from grant to vesting 31516.
The LTIP award granted to Rob Memmott included a tax advantaged option over 11400 shares at a per share exercise from grant to vesting 31516.
The LTIP award granted to Rob Memmott included a tax advantaged option over 11400 shares at a per share exercise price of 2.6315 per share.
The option was subject to the same performance conditions as applied to the LTIP award.
If the tax advantaged option is price of 2.6315 per share.
The option was subject to the same performance conditions as applied to the LTIP award.
If the tax advantaged option is exercised at a gain the number of shares that may be acquired under the LTIP is reduced at exercise by the same value to ensure that the total pretax exercised at a gain the number of shares that may be acquired under the LTIP is reduced at exercise by the same value to ensure that the total pretax value of the original LTIP award is not increased by the grant of the tax advantaged option accordingly the tax advantaged option is ignored when value of the original LTIP award is not increased by the grant of the tax advantaged option accordingly the tax advantaged option is ignored when calculating the single figure value.
Further information is provided on page 61. calculating the single figure value.
Further information is provided on page 61.
Each executive received a monthly cash allowance of 15% of salary in lieu of participation in a pension arrangement.
The cash allowance is not included 4 Each executive received a monthly cash allowance of 15% of salary in lieu of participation in a pension arrangement.
The cash allowance is not included in the annual bonus or LTIP allocation. in the annual bonus or LTIP allocation.
5 Lee Rochford was appointed as Group chief executive officer on 3 January 2017 .
5 Lee Rochford was appointed as Group chief executive officer on 3 January 2017 .
6 Tom Drury stepped down from the board on 3 January 2017.
Payments made to him in 2017 are described on page 69.
6 Tom Drury stepped down from the board on 3 January 2017.
Payments made to him in 2017 are described on page 69.
7 Tom Drurys LTIP award granted in 2015 lapsed on 28 February 2017.
7 Tom Drurys LTIP award granted in 2015 lapsed on 28 February 2017.
GOVERNANCE REPORT Arrow Global Group PLC  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Additional disclosures to the single figure table 2017 annual bonuses audited information For 2017  executive directors were eligible for an annual performancerelated bonus of up to 125% of salary subject to meeting For 2017 executive directors were eligible for an annual performancerelated bonus of up to 125% of salary subject to meeting stretching performance targets.
To encourage behaviours that facilitate continued profitable growth and future development stretching performance targets.
To encourage behaviours that facilitate continued profitable growth and future development of the business the 2017 annual bonus was based on the following of the business the 2017 annual bonus was based on the following 50% of the bonus was based on Group underlying profit for the year attributable to equity shareholders financial element and 50% of the bonus was based on Group underlying profit for the year attributable to equity shareholders financial element and 50% was based on a balanced range of financial strategic personal and other key Group objectives strategic business 50% was based on a balanced range of financial strategic personal and other key Group objectives strategic business personal objectives. personal objectives.
The bonus payouts for 2017 are detailed in the table below.
Further details on how the elements of the bonuses have been The bonus payouts for 2017 are detailed in the table below.
Further details on how the elements of the bonuses have been earned are shown below earned are shown below
Strategic businesspersonal objectives outturn Total bonus outturn
Overall
Monetary outturn for strategic business personal objectives element % of salary % of maximum opportunity Lee Rochford 199219 Above and beyond 95% 252344 106% 85% 451563 Rob Memmott 149672 Exceeds expectations 70% 139694 91% 73% 289366 For both Lee Rochford and Rob Memmott 33% of the bonus earned will be deferred into shares for a period of three years.
For both Lee Rochford and Rob Memmott 33% of the bonus earned will be deferred into shares for a period of three years.
Financial element  outturn The financial element of the 2017 annual bonus was based on achieving underlying profit for the year attributable to equity The financial element of the 2017 annual bonus was based on achieving underlying profit for the year attributable to equity shareholders in accordance with the schedule below. shareholders in accordance with the schedule below.
The committee reviewed the vesting schedule for the financial element of the bonus for the executive directors.
Taking into The committee reviewed the vesting schedule for the financial element of the bonus for the executive directors.
Taking into account the level of stretch built into achieving an underlying profit for the year of 56.6 million which represents yearonyear account the level of stretch built into achieving an underlying profit for the year of 56.6 million which represents yearonyear growth of 24.1% on prior year underlying profit of 45.6 million the committee determined that 75% of the financial element growth of 24.1% on prior year underlying profit of 45.6 million the committee determined that 75% of the financial element would vest for achieving this stretching target. would vest for achieving this stretching target.
Threshold
Stretch Target
Actual
Performance level 52.26m 56.6m 59.33m 56.6m Vesting % of financial element 20% 75% 100% 75% 1 Straightline vesting between the points.
1 Straightline vesting between the points.
2 This is underlying profit for the year attributable to equity shareholders.
2 This is underlying profit for the year attributable to equity shareholders.
Strategic businesspersonal objectives element  outturn This element of the bonus was measured on achievement of clear personal objectives and targets which supported the This element of the bonus was measured on achievement of clear personal objectives and targets which supported the strategic objectives of the business. strategic objectives of the business.
The following factors were considered in the round by the committee in determining the executive directors level of performance The following factors were considered in the round by the committee in determining the executive directors level of performance in 2017 and outturn of the strategic businesspersonal objectives element in 2017 and outturn of the strategic businesspersonal objectives element the relative importance and impact of each of the objectives the relative importance and impact of each of the objectives performance against the objectives taking into account external market influences over the course of 2017 and performance against the objectives taking into account external market influences over the course of 2017 and the views of the Group chief risk officer and the risk committee chair on the effectiveness of the executives management of the views of the Group chief risk officer and the risk committee chair on the effectiveness of the executives management of conduct and risk during the year. conduct and risk during the year.
The objectives targets and relevant achievements are summarised opposite.
The objectives targets and relevant achievements are summarised opposite.
DIRECTORS REMUNERATION REPORT CONTINUED 65 www. rrowglobalir.
Strategic businesspersonal objectives element  outturn continued Objective Achievements
Maintain credit rating of at least BB to maintain Maintain credit rating of at least BB to maintain weighted average cost of debt weighted average cost of debt Ba3 rating upgrade from Moodys confirmed in February 2017.
Ba3 rating upgrade from Moodys confirmed in February 2017.
400 million bond issue in March 2017 was the best execution in our 400 million bond issue in March 2017 was the best execution in our sector and reduced the weighted average cost of debt to below 4%. sector and reduced the weighted average cost of debt to below 4%.
Progressive dividend policy to budget Progressive dividend policy to budget   Total 11.3p dividend for 2017 proposed which is at the top end of our Total 11.3p dividend for 2017 proposed which is at the top end of our guided payout ratio and a 24.2% uplift on 2016. guided payout ratio and a 24.2% uplift on 2016.
High teens underlying basic EPS growth High teens underlying basic EPS growth   Underlying basic EPS continues to perform well and grew by 24.1% Underlying basic EPS continues to perform well and grew by 24.1% in 2017. in 2017.
Deliver underlying ROE in excess of 25% Deliver underlying ROE in excess of 25%   Underlying ROE similarly performed well and delivered 32.9% in 2017.
Underlying ROE similarly performed well and delivered 32.9% in 2017.
Build asset management revenue in line with Build asset management revenue in line with strategic objective strategic objective Asset management revenues were ahead of budget and 53.5% up on 2016.
Asset management revenues were ahead of budget and 53.5% up on 2016.
Deliver against our collection targets Deliver against our collection targets   Collections were ahead of target.
Collections were ahead of target.
Management of cost base according to budget Management of cost base according to budget   A strong improvement in cost and projected cost profile.
A strong improvement in cost and projected cost profile.
Market
Develop capability in secured and unsecured assets Develop capability in secured and unsecured assets in all our core markets in all our core markets Significant progress in all geographies via organic and inorganic Significant progress in all geographies via organic and inorganic growth.
Examples include RNHB in the Netherlands and the Mars growth.
Examples include RNHB in the Netherlands and the Mars Capital acquisitions in the UK and Ireland.
Capital acquisitions in the UK and Ireland.
Build further presence in Western Europe and Build further presence in Western Europe and continue collaboration with credit funds in line continue collaboration with credit funds in line with strategy with strategy Italy represents a significant market opportunity for the Group Italy represents a significant market opportunity for the Group following the Zenith acquisition in April 2017.
Entry into the Irish following the Zenith acquisition in April 2017.
Entry into the Irish secured market was a key step.
Collaboration and expansion of secured market was a key step.
Collaboration and expansion of relationships with credit funds has continued in 2017. relationships with credit funds has continued in 2017.
Invest in line with Group purchasing target and Invest in line with Group purchasing target and target gross money multiple target gross money multiple Group purchasing target achieved which was broadly in line with returns Group purchasing target achieved which was broadly in line with returns hurdles reflecting the diversified asset base and highquality books hurdles reflecting the diversified asset base and highquality books of debt acquired. of debt acquired.
Develop coherent Brand architecture Develop coherent Brand architecture   The successful roll out of the One Arrow programme underpinned The successful roll out of the One Arrow programme underpinned by common purpose and values across the Group has had a by common purpose and values across the Group has had a meaningful impact both internally and externally. meaningful impact both internally and externally.
Regulatorsociety
Continue to develop effective relationships with Continue to develop effective relationships with regulatory bodies regulatory bodies We are fully regulated in all our markets.
We are fully regulated in all our markets.
Continue to build out a Europewide risk Continue to build out a Europewide risk management framework  to include financial management framework  to include financial risk analysis risk analysis Substantial investment in strengthening and developing the risk Substantial investment in strengthening and developing the risk management framework has been undertaken during the year in line management framework has been undertaken during the year in line with the growing scale diversity and complexity of the business.
The with the growing scale diversity and complexity of the business.
The
Group risk function has been strengthened during the year and a new Group risk function has been strengthened during the year and a new Group CRO appointed.
The Group risk team are delivering on the Group Group CRO appointed.
The Group risk team are delivering on the Group risk plan that will continue to evolve and mature the enterprisewide risk plan that will continue to evolve and mature the enterprisewide risk management framework and culture across the Group. risk management framework and culture across the Group.
Continue to develop the Groups CSR agenda with Continue to develop the Groups CSR agenda with focus on financial education relationships with focus on financial education relationships with debt charities and the promotion of the financial debt charities and the promotion of the financial health and rehabilitation of customers leading to health and rehabilitation of customers leading to better financial futures being built through work in better financial futures being built through work in the community the community 2017 saw the formation of a working group of CSR champions drawn 2017 saw the formation of a working group of CSR champions drawn from across the Group.
Examples of work done in the community from across the Group.
Examples of work done in the community include volunteering in the UK to deliver financial education workshops include volunteering in the UK to deliver financial education workshops in schools alongside the Young Enterprise charity and similar in the in schools alongside the Young Enterprise charity and similar in the Netherlands alongside the Stichting LEF a foundation that strives to Netherlands alongside the Stichting LEF a foundation that strives to reduce debt problems in society by increasing financial awareness reduce debt problems in society by increasing financial awareness amongst young people. amongst young people.
Customer
Successful execution of IT and change programme Successful execution of IT and change programme across all countries across all countries Strong progress was made towards year end to achieve key wins Strong progress was made towards year end to achieve key wins across various Group IT projects. across various Group IT projects.
Execute on plans for operational excellence Execute on plans for operational excellence   A large organisation design exercise took place in 2017 part of which A large organisation design exercise took place in 2017 part of which includes a focus on strengthening operational performance including includes a focus on strengthening operational performance including the creation of a new dedicated Portfolio team.
Longer term the the creation of a new dedicated Portfolio team.
Longer term the recruitment of a Group COO is designed to address operational recruitment of a Group COO is designed to address operational improvements sharing best practices and a focus on improved improvements sharing best practices and a focus on improved customer outcomes. customer outcomes.
GOVERNANCE REPORT Arrow Global Group PLC  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic businesspersonal objectives element  outturn continued
DIRECTORS REMUNERATION REPORT CONTINUED
Objective Achievements Customer continued Continue to develop and build market leading Continue to develop and build market leading digital strategy digital strategy Good progress is being made across the Group in extending our Good progress is being made across the Group in extending our digital footprint.
In the UK the major development was the digital footprint.
In the UK the major development was the development for Erudio of the application to enable deferment development for Erudio of the application to enable deferment online.
Ongoing IT change programmes across the Group are online.
Ongoing IT change programmes across the Group are also expected to deliver further improvement in 2018. also expected to deliver further improvement in 2018.
Improve the quality of our databases and maximise Improve the quality of our databases and maximise use of performance data in each country use of performance data in each country There has been data source expansion in all our geographies.
There has been data source expansion in all our geographies.
The new organisation design combining analytics and portfolio The new organisation design combining analytics and portfolio management is showing early signs of progress. management is showing early signs of progress.
People
Identify centres of excellence and build capability Identify centres of excellence and build capability across the group through effective across the group through effective organisation design organisation design A new organisation design was introduced in 2017 as mentioned A new organisation design was introduced in 2017 as mentioned above.
Key strategic hires were made during the year including a above.
Key strategic hires were made during the year including a new Group CFO Group COO and Group CRO who are continuing new Group CFO Group COO and Group CRO who are continuing to build capability in their respective functions with new talent to build capability in their respective functions with new talent introduced into every country management team. introduced into every country management team.
Talent strategy to attract retain and develop with Talent strategy to attract retain and develop with attention on keyearly talent and gender attention on keyearly talent and gender In 2017 we launched a top talent development programme In 2017 we launched a top talent development programme Succeeding Together with participants drawn from across the Succeeding Together with participants drawn from across the
We also launched our Women in Management agenda setting Group.
We also launched our Women in Management agenda setting a target of 30% female representation in leadership roles by the end a target of 30% female representation in leadership roles by the end of 2020 which has seen progress across the management levels. of 2020 which has seen progress across the management levels.
Communicate and embed group purpose Communicate and embed group purpose building better financial futures building better financial futures The Group Purpose and Values were launched across all geographies The Group Purpose and Values were launched across all geographies in Q4 2017. in Q4 2017.
Embed group values across all geographies  Embed group values across all geographies group recognition scheme group recognition scheme In terms of embedding the Group colleague recognition scheme In terms of embedding the Group colleague recognition scheme awarded by reference to the Values  is now operational across all  awarded by reference to the Values  is now operational across all countries in the Group. countries in the Group.
Employee engagement levels of at least national Employee engagement levels of at least national benchmark across the group benchmark across the group Group Values and recognition schemes have been communicated Group Values and recognition schemes have been communicated to all parts of the Group.
A Group wide engagement survey was to all parts of the Group.
A Group wide engagement survey was undertaken in December 2017.
The results show areas where undertaken in December 2017 .
The results show areas where improvements have been made with several areas of focus for 2018. improvements have been made with several areas of focus for 2018.
LTIPs vesting by reference to performance in 2017 audited information LTIP awards were granted on 15 June 2015 which are due to vest on 15 June 2018.
The performance conditions LTIP awards were granted on 15 June 2015 which are due to vest on 15 June 2018.
The performance conditions performance achieved and vesting outcomes are summarised below performance achieved and vesting outcomes are summarised below Performance condition Targets
Actual performance
Underlying basic EPS growth per annum 50% of the award 10% 20% 25% 100% Underlying basic EPS Base year  17p 2017  32.4p Annual growth of 23.8% 100% Underlying ROE threeyear average 25% of the award 20% 26% 25% 100% 29.5% 100%
25% of the award Median upper quartile 25% 100%
100% Overall LTIP 2015 vesting 100% 1 Relative to the TSR of the constituents of the FTSE 350 excluding Investment Trusts.
1 Relative to the TSR of the constituents of the FTSE 350 excluding Investment Trusts.
Director
Shares subject to award
Vested value Rob Memmott 162454 162454 692493 In the single figure table above in accordance with the applicable regulations the value is calculated as the number of shares that are expected to 1 In the single figure table above in accordance with the applicable regulations the value is calculated as the number of shares that are expected to vest multiplied by the average share price over the threemonth period ending 31 December 2017 4.0687 plus the value of dividends to be paid to vest multiplied by the average share price over the threemonth period ending 31 December 2017 4.0687 plus the value of dividends to be paid to Rob Memmott in respect of the period from grant to vesting 31516.
The LTIP award granted to Rob Memmott included a taxadvantaged option over Rob Memmott in respect of the period from grant to vesting 31516.
The LTIP award granted to Rob Memmott included a taxadvantaged option over 11400 shares at a per share exercise price of 2.6315 per share.
The option was subject to the same performance conditions as applied to the LTIP award.
11400 shares at a per share exercise price of 2.6315 per share.
The option was subject to the same performance conditions as applied to the LTIP award.
If the taxadvantaged option is exercised at a gain the number of shares that may be acquired under the LTIP is reduced at exercise by the same value to If the taxadvantaged option is exercised at a gain the number of shares that may be acquired under the LTIP is reduced at exercise by the same value to ensure that the total pretax value of the original LTIP award is not increased by the grant of the taxadvantaged option accordingly the taxadvantaged ensure that the total pretax value of the original LTIP award is not increased by the grant of the taxadvantaged option accordingly the taxadvantaged option is ignored when calculating the single figure value. option is ignored when calculating the single figure value.
Governance www. rrowglobalir.
Nonexecutive directors remuneration audited information Details of the nonexecutive directors remuneration are as follows Details of the nonexecutive directors remuneration are as follows Salary and fees Taxable benefits
Vesting remuneration
Total compensation teltelteltel 2016
Jonathan Bloomer 170 160         170 160 Iain Cornish 75 60         75 60 Maria Lus
Andrew Fisher Former director Robin Phipps NA 44 NA  NA  NA  NA  NA 44 1 Maria Lus Albuquerque was appointed to the board on 7 March 2016.
1 Maria Lus Albuquerque was appointed to the board on 7 March 2016.
2 Andrew Fisher was appointed to the board on 9 December 2016.
2 Andrew Fisher was appointed to the board on 9 December 2016.
3 Robin Phipps stepped down from the board on 27 October 2016.
3 Robin Phipps stepped down from the board on 27 October 2016.
2017 LTIP awards audited information The table below outlines LTIP awards made to executive directors during 2017 The table below outlines LTIP awards made to executive directors during 2017 Date of grant Participant Basis of award Number of shares Face value of award Performance period 31 March 2017 Lee Rochford 150% of salary 184248 637498 1 January 2017 to 31 December 2019 31 March 2017 Rob Memmott 150% of salary 138424 478947 1 January 2017 to 31 December 2019 Based on the average closing middle market quotation price during the five business days ending on the business day before the award date being 3.46.
Based on the average closing middle market quotation price during the five business days ending on the business day before the award date being 3.46.
Lee Rochford was also granted a tax advantaged option over 8670 shares at a per share exercise price of 3.46.
The option is subject to the same 2 Lee Rochford was also granted a tax advantaged option over 8670 shares at a per share exercise price of 3.46.
The option is subject to the same performance conditions as apply to the LTIP award.
If the tax advantaged option is exercised at a gain the number of shares that may be acquired performance conditions as apply to the LTIP award.
If the tax advantaged option is exercised at a gain the number of shares that may be acquired under the LTIP is reduced at exercise by the same value to ensure that the total pretax value of the original LTIP award is not increased by the grant of under the LTIP is reduced at exercise by the same value to ensure that the total pretax value of the original LTIP award is not increased by the grant of the tax advantaged option. the tax advantaged option.
3 Rob Memmotts award lapsed on 28 February 2018 when he left the business.
3 Rob Memmotts award lapsed on 28 February 2018 when he left the business.
The performance conditions attaching to the 2017 LTIP awards are the same as for the awards granted in 2016.
The performance conditions attaching to the 2017 LTIP awards are the same as for the awards granted in 2016.
Measure and alignment with strategy and shareholder value creation
Growth in underlying basic EPS 50% Threshold
10% per annum 20% per annum 25% 100% Underlying ROE threeyear average 25% Threshold
20% 26% 25% 100% TSR relative to FTSE 350 excluding investment trusts 25% Threshold
Median
Upper quartile 25% 100% In each case performance will be measured over three years with straightline vesting between each point.
In each case performance will be measured over three years with straightline vesting between each point.
GOVERNANCE REPORT Arrow Global Group PLC  Annual Report and Accounts 2017
DIRECTORS REMUNERATION REPORT CONTINUED
Directors shareholdings audited information The committee encourages share ownership by the executive directors in order to align their interests with those of shareholders.
It does The committee encourages share ownership by the executive directors in order to align their interests with those of shareholders.
It does this by ensuring that a significant proportion of remuneration is delivered in shares as well as being subject to performance conditions. this by ensuring that a significant proportion of remuneration is delivered in shares as well as being subject to performance conditions.
The shareholding requirement for executive directors was increased in March 2015 from 100% to 150% of salary and 150% to 200% for the The shareholding requirement for executive directors was increased in March 2015 from 100% to 150% of salary and 150% to 200% for the Group chief executive officer.
Subject to the approval of the new directors remuneration policy at the 2018 annual general meeting the Group chief executive officer.
Subject to the approval of the new directors remuneration policy at the 2018 annual general meeting the guideline will increase to 200% of salary for all executive directors.
The actual shareholdings of our executive directors in office at the end of guideline will increase to 200% of salary for all executive directors.
The actual shareholdings of our executive directors in office at the end of 2017 are 186% of salary for Lee Rochford and 2910% of salary for Rob Memmott.
2017 are 186% of salary for Lee Rochford and 2910% of salary for Rob Memmott.
Paul Cooper has already taken a significant step towards satisfaction of the guideline acquiring 64697 shares on 6 December 2017 meaning Paul Cooper has already taken a significant step towards satisfaction of the guideline acquiring 64697 shares on 6 December 2017  meaning that his holding for the purposes of the guidelines was 70% of his starting salary based on the closing share price at 31 December 2017. that his holding for the purposes of the guidelines was 70% of his starting salary based on the closing share price at 31 December 2017. a.
Executive directors  share ownership Director Shares owned Shares owned  value 000 % of salary Lee Rochford 199738 792460 186 Rob Memmott 2342020 9291964 2910 1 Based on the closing share price on 31 December 2017 of 3.9675.
1 Based on the closing share price on 31 December 2017 of 3.9675.
2 Based on the salary applying from 1 March 2017.
2 Based on the salary applying from 1 March 2017. b.
Executive directors  share plan interests Director Plan
Number of shares at 1 January 2017
Lapsed during the year
Number of shares at 31 December 2017 Status
Lee Rochford LTIP 31 March 2017 184248   184248 Unvested subject to performance condition 1 January 2017 31 December 2019
580   580 Unvested NA Rob Memmott LTIP 11 March 2014 157004  21918 135086  Exercised 1 January 2014 31 December 2016 LTIP 15 June 2015 162454    162454 Unvested 1 January 2015 31 December 2017 LTIP 8 April 2016 174304    174304 Unvested subject to performance condition 1 January 2016 31 December 2018 LTIP 31 March 2017  138424   138424 Unvested subject to performance condition 1 January 2017 31 December 2019 DSBP 9 April 2015 13170    13170 Unvested
DSBP 8 April 2016 28373    28373 Unvested
DSBP 31 March 2017  28257   28257 Unvested
SIP 30 December 218    218 Vested
On the same day Lee Rochford was granted a tax advantaged option subject to the same performance conditions over 8670 shares at an exercise price of 3.46 per 1 On the same day Lee Rochford was granted a tax advantaged option subject to the same performance conditions over 8670 shares at an exercise price of 3.46 per share on the basis that if the tax advantaged option is exercised at a gain the number of shares that may be acquired under the LTIP is reduced at exercise by the same share on the basis that if the tax advantaged option is exercised at a gain the number of shares that may be acquired under the LTIP is reduced at exercise by the same value to ensure that the total pretax value of the original LTIP award is not increased by the grant of the tax advantaged option. value to ensure that the total pretax value of the original LTIP award is not increased by the grant of the tax advantaged option.
Pursuant to a regular monthly instruction Equiniti Share Plans Trustees Limited acquires Partnership shares using a fixed contribution from Lee Rochfords gross salary.
Pursuant to a regular monthly instruction Equiniti Share Plans Trustees Limited acquires Partnership shares using a fixed contribution from Lee Rochfords gross salary.
The Company gives Lee Rochford one matching share for each Partnership share bought on his behalf.
The matching shares are subject to a threeyear The Company gives Lee Rochford one matching share for each Partnership share bought on his behalf.
The matching shares are subject to a threeyear forfeiture period.
156 shares have been allocated to Lee Rochford under the SIP post year end. forfeiture period.
156 shares have been allocated to Lee Rochford under the SIP post year end.
On the same day Rob Memmott was granted a tax advantaged option subject to the same performance conditions over 11400 shares at an exercise price of 2.6315 3 On the same day Rob Memmott was granted a tax advantaged option subject to the same performance conditions over 11400 shares at an exercise price of 2.6315 per share on the basis that if the tax advantaged option is exercised at a gain the number of shares that may be acquired under the LTIP is reduced at exercise by the per share on the basis that if the tax advantaged option is exercised at a gain the number of shares that may be acquired under the LTIP is reduced at exercise by the same value to ensure that the total pretax value of the original LTIP award is not increased by the grant of the tax advantaged option. same value to ensure that the total pretax value of the original LTIP award is not increased by the grant of the tax advantaged option.
This award is scheduled to vest on 15 June 2018.
This award is scheduled to vest on 15 June 2018.
5 These awards lapsed on 28 February 2018.
5 These awards lapsed on 28 February 2018.
6 This award is scheduled to vest on 9 April 2018.
6 This award is scheduled to vest on 9 April 2018.
7 This award is scheduled to vest on 8 April 2019.
7 This award is scheduled to vest on 8 April 2019.
8 This award is scheduled to vest on 31 March 2020.
8 This award is scheduled to vest on 31 March 2020.
9 This award vested on 30 December 2017 .
9 This award vested on 30 December 2017 .
Governance www. rrowglobalir.
Directors shareholdings audited information continued c.
Nonexecutive directors  share ownership Nonexecutive directors Shares owned Jonathan Bloomer 30896 Iain Cornish Lan Tu 23309 Maria Lus Albuquerque Andrew Fisher There were no changes in the interests of executive or nonexecutive directors between 31 December 2017 and 1 March 2018 There were no changes in the interests of executive or nonexecutive directors between 31 December 2017 and 1 March 2018 other than the SIP allocation to Lee Rochford under his monthly allocation for January and February 2018 as referred to on other than the SIP allocation to Lee Rochford under his monthly allocation for January and February 2018 as referred to on page 68. page 68.
Payments to past directors and payments for loss of office audited information Tom Drury stepped down from the board on 3 January 2017 and left the business on 28 February 2017.
His remuneration Tom Drury stepped down from the board on 3 January 2017 and left the business on 28 February 2017.
His remuneration between 3 January and 28 February was 75837 consisting of salary benefits and cash allowance in lieu of pension between 3 January and 28 February was 75837 consisting of salary benefits and cash allowance in lieu of pension contributions.
Tom Drurys bonus for 2016 was disclosed in the 2016 Directors remuneration report along with the vesting contributions.
Tom Drurys bonus for 2016 was disclosed in the 2016 Directors remuneration report along with the vesting of his 2014 LTIP award which vested on 11 March 2017. of his 2014 LTIP award which vested on 11 March 2017.
TSR performance The graph below shows TSR performance of the Company from IPO to 31 December 2017 compared with the FTSE SmallCap index.
The graph below shows TSR performance of the Company from IPO to 31 December 2017 compared with the FTSE SmallCap index.
Throughout the year ended 31 December 2017  the Company has been a constituent member of the FTSE SmallCap index and Throughout the year ended 31 December 2017  the Company has been a constituent member of the FTSE SmallCap index and therefore the committee has selected this index for comparison purposes in this report. therefore the committee has selected this index for comparison purposes in this report.
26tel18tel100 8 October 31 December 31 December 31 December 31 December Arrow Global Group PLC FTSE SmallCap excluding investment trust Chief executive officer disclosures a.
Previous chief executive officer CEO remuneration The table below sets out the total pay of the chief executive officer since the IPO on 11 October 2013.
The Company was only The table below sets out the total pay of the chief executive officer since the IPO on 11 October 2013.
The Company was only established shortly before the IPO and therefore information prior to this does not exist. established shortly before the IPO and therefore information prior to this does not exist.
CEO single figure CEO bonus as a % of maximum CEO LTIP vesting as a % of maximum 2017 Lee Rochford 942 85.0 NA 2016 Tom Drury 1421 2015 Tom Drury 722 70.3 2014 Tom Drury 631 62.5 2013 Tom Drury 154 80.0 1 Lee Rochford became Group chief executive officer in 2017 and did not hold an LTIP which was capable of vesting by reference to performance in that year.
1 Lee Rochford became Group chief executive officer in 2017 and did not hold an LTIP which was capable of vesting by reference to performance in that year.
In the 2016 directors remuneration report this value included the value of the LTIP scheduled to vest in March 2017 calculated in accordance with the 2 In the 2016 directors remuneration report this value included the value of the LTIP scheduled to vest in March 2017 calculated in accordance with the applicable regulations by reference to the average share price over the threemonth period ending 31 December 2016 2.9468.
In the table above applicable regulations by reference to the average share price over the threemonth period ending 31 December 2016 2.9468.
In the table above this value has been restated to reflect the share price on 10 March 2017  the last dealing day before the date of vesting on 11 March 2017 3.2415. this value has been restated to reflect the share price on 10 March 2017  the last dealing day before the date of vesting on 11 March 2017 3.2415.
GOVERNANCE REPORT Arrow Global Group PLC  Annual Report and Accounts 2017
DIRECTORS REMUNERATION REPORT CONTINUED
Chief executive officer disclosures continued b.
Percentage change in chief executive officer remuneration The table below shows how the percentage change in the chief executive officers salary taxable benefits and annual bonus The table below shows how the percentage change in the chief executive officers salary taxable benefits and annual bonus payout between 2016 and 2017 compared with the percentage change in the average of each of those components for the payout between 2016 and 2017 compared with the percentage change in the average of each of those components for the workforce as a whole. workforce as a whole.
Chief executive officer 9% 42% 16% Workforce 10%4%6% Relative importance of spend on pay The table below illustrates the relative importance of spend on pay compared with distributions to shareholders The table below illustrates the relative importance of spend on pay compared with distributions to shareholders Total employee remuneration Shareholder distributions 2017 42954 16797 2016 30649 14123 Difference 12305 2674 1 For total employee remuneration please see note 11. in the notes to the financial statements.
1 For total employee remuneration please see note 11. in the notes to the financial statements.
Service agreements and letters of appointment The service agreements of our executive directors and the letters of appointment of our nonexecutive directors are as The service agreements of our executive directors and the letters of appointment of our nonexecutive directors are as summarised below summarised below
Date of service agreement letter of appointment Expiry Notice period Lee Rochford 6 December 2016 NA 12 months Paul Cooper 18 October 2017 NA 12 months Jonathan Bloomer 7 October 2013 8 October 2016  1 month Iain Cornish 5 October 2013 8 October 2016  1 month Lan Tu 2 March 2015 9 March 2018  1 month Maria Lus Albuquerque 7 March 2016 7 March 2019  1 month Andrew Fisher 9 December 2016 9 December 2019  1 month Subject to reelection at the 2018 AGM.
Subject to reelection at the 2018 AGM.
Implementation of remuneration policy in 2018 Details of Paul Coopers remuneration arrangements which are effective from 1 January 2018 are as follows Details of Paul Coopers remuneration arrangements which are effective from 1 January 2018 are as follows Service contract Notice period of 12 months.
Salary 365000 per annum.
Bonus Up to 125% of base salary subject to meeting performance targets.
50% of the bonus is based on financial targets.
50% of the bonus is based upon a range of strategic and personal objectives.
33% of any bonus earned is deferred into shares for a threeyear period.
LTIP Nilcost option subject to the discretion of the committee equivalent to 150% of base salary in respect of 2018.
Shareholding Required to acquire a shareholding equivalent to 200% of salary.
Until the requirement has been met Paul Cooper must retain 50% of all vested LTIP and deferred bonus awards net of tax.
Pension Contribution of up to 15% of salary.
Buyout awards The Company agreed to compensate Paul Cooper for awards he forfeited as a result of his resignation from his former employer.
A summary of the awards is set out overleaf.
Governance www. rrowglobalir.
Implementation of remuneration policy in 2018 continued The awards are subject to continued employment to the vesting date and malusclawback provisions consistent with the The awards are subject to continued employment to the vesting date and malusclawback provisions consistent with the Companys ordinary variable remuneration arrangements and to a specific clawback provision if Paul Cooper gives notice before 1 Companys ordinary variable remuneration arrangements and to a specific clawback provision if Paul Cooper gives notice before 1 January 2020 a summary of the awards is set out below.
The vesting dates reflect the vestingpayment dates of the awards January 2020 a summary of the awards is set out below.
The vesting dates reflect the vestingpayment dates of the awards forfeited by Paul Cooper. forfeited by Paul Cooper.
Bought out award Value of bought out award and approach to buy out.
Form of buyout award
2017 cash bonus 142000 142000 This is the value of the 2017 bonus that Paul Cooper forfeited.
This is the value of the 2017 bonus that Paul Cooper forfeited.
Although the bonus would have been paid in cash we Although the bonus would have been paid in cash we agreed with Paul Cooper to buy it out with Company shares agreed with Paul Cooper to buy it out with Company shares to strengthen alignment with shareholders and reflect future to strengthen alignment with shareholders and reflect future Group performance.
Group performance.
Share award over 36178 shares 50% April 2018 50% April 2019 2016 LTIP award 500249 500249 The forfeited 2016 LTIP was valued based on its accrued value The forfeited 2016 LTIP was valued based on its accrued value as at the date Paul Cooper agreed to join.
We agreed with as at the date Paul Cooper agreed to join.
We agreed with Paul Cooper that the buyout award would be delivered in Paul Cooper that the buyout award would be delivered in Company shares to strengthen alignment with shareholders and Company shares to strengthen alignment with shareholders and reflect future Group performance. reflect future Group performance.
Share award over 127451 shares 25% April 2019 55% April 2020 20% April 2021 The number of shares subject to each share award has been calculated by reference to the market value of a share on 2 January 2018 3.925 1 The number of shares subject to each share award has been calculated by reference to the market value of a share on 2 January 2018 3.925 the date on which Paul Cooper joined the Company. the date on which Paul Cooper joined the Company.
Subject to where relevant the approval of the new directors remuneration policy at the 2018 annual general meeting Subject to where relevant the approval of the new directors remuneration policy at the 2018 annual general meeting the approach to directors remuneration will be as follows the approach to directors remuneration will be as follows a Base salaries Lee Rochfords salary for 2018 has been increased to 437 750 with effect from 1 March 2018 a 3% increase which is in line with Lee Rochfords salary for 2018 has been increased to 437750 with effect from 1 March 2018 a 3% increase which is in line with the average increase across the wider workforce.
As noted above Paul Coopers salary for 2018 has been set at 365000. the average increase across the wider workforce.
As noted above Paul Coopers salary for 2018 has been set at 365000.
Subject to the approval of the new directors remuneration policy Lee Rochfords bonus opportunity for 2018 will be 140% Subject to the approval of the new directors remuneration policy Lee Rochfords bonus opportunity for 2018 will be 140% of salary.
Paul Coopers bonus opportunity will be 125% of salary.
As for 2017 the 2018 annual bonus will be based on of salary.
Paul Coopers bonus opportunity will be 125% of salary.
As for 2017  the 2018 annual bonus will be based on underlying profit for the year attributable to equity shareholders as regards 50% of the opportunity and underlying profit for the year attributable to equity shareholders as regards 50% of the opportunity and an assessment against a balanced range of financial strategic and other key Group objectives as regards 50% an assessment against a balanced range of financial strategic and other key Group objectives as regards 50% of the opportunity. of the opportunity.
The directors consider the targets under the annual bonus plan to be commercially sensitive because they provide the Groups The directors consider the targets under the annual bonus plan to be commercially sensitive because they provide the Groups competitors with insight into the Groups business plans expectations and strategic actions.
However the committee will competitors with insight into the Groups business plans expectations and strategic actions.
However the committee will continue to disclose how the bonus payout delivered relates to performance against the targets on a retrospective basis. continue to disclose how the bonus payout delivered relates to performance against the targets on a retrospective basis.
33% of any bonus earned by Paul Cooper for 2018 will be deferred into shares.
Subject to the approval of the new directors 33% of any bonus earned by Paul Cooper for 2018 will be deferred into shares.
Subject to the approval of the new directors remuneration policy 40% of any bonus earned by Lee Rochford will be deferred into shares recognising the remuneration policy 40% of any bonus earned by Lee Rochford will be deferred into shares recognising the additional opportunity. additional opportunity.
The maximum LTIP opportunity for 2018 will remain at 150% of salary.
The maximum LTIP opportunity for 2018 will remain at 150% of salary.
The 2018 LTIP awards will be subject to the same performance conditions being underlying EPS growth underlying ROE and The 2018 LTIP awards will be subject to the same performance conditions being underlying EPS growth underlying ROE and relative TSR performance with the same weightings and vesting schedules as apply to the 2017 LTIP awards as referred to on relative TSR performance with the same weightings and vesting schedules as apply to the 2017 LTIP awards as referred to on page 67  save that the maximum vesting level target for underlying ROE will increase from 26% to 30%.
Each performance page 67  save that the maximum vesting level target for underlying ROE will increase from 26% to 30%.
Each performance condition will be measured over a threeyear performance period from 2018 to 2020. condition will be measured over a threeyear performance period from 2018 to 2020.
GOVERNANCE REPORT Arrow Global Group PLC  Annual Report and Accounts 2017
DIRECTORS REMUNERATION REPORT CONTINUED
The remuneration committee Throughout the year the committee consisted of Lan Tu as chair Iain Cornish and Andrew Fisher each of whom is an independent Throughout the year the committee consisted of Lan Tu as chair Iain Cornish and Andrew Fisher each of whom is an independent nonexecutive director.
In addition the Company Chairman Jonathan Bloomer who was considered independent on appointment nonexecutive director.
In addition the Company Chairman Jonathan Bloomer who was considered independent on appointment is a member of the committee. is a member of the committee.
The committee held three scheduled meetings during the year.
Details of attendance by all members who held office during the year are set The committee held three scheduled meetings during the year.
Details of attendance by all members who held office during the year are set out below out below Committee members Eligible to attend Attended Lan Tu 33 Jonathan Bloomer 33 Iain Cornish 33 Andrew Fisher 33 The terms of reference of the committee are on the Company website at www. rrowglobalir. et.
The terms of reference of the committee are on the Company website at www. rrowglobalir. et.
Advisor
During the year the committee was assisted in its work by Deloitte LLP which was appointed as advisor in July 2014 following a During the year the committee was assisted in its work by Deloitte LLP which was appointed as advisor in July 2014 following a comprehensive competitive tender.
Deloitte LLP is a member of the Remuneration Consultants Group and as such voluntarily operates comprehensive competitive tender.
Deloitte LLP is a member of the Remuneration Consultants Group and as such voluntarily operates under that Groups Code of Conduct in relation to executive remuneration consulting in the UK.
The total fees paid to Deloitte LLP for under that Groups Code of Conduct in relation to executive remuneration consulting in the UK.
The total fees paid to Deloitte LLP for providing remuneration advice were 27 000 for the year ended 31 December 2017 .
Deloitte LLP also provided internal audit services and advice providing remuneration advice were 27 000 for the year ended 31 December 2017 .
Deloitte LLP also provided internal audit services and advice in relation to taxation during the year. in relation to taxation during the year.
The committee will assess from time to time whether the appointment of Deloitte LLP remains appropriate or should be put out to tender.
The committee will assess from time to time whether the appointment of Deloitte LLP remains appropriate or should be put out to tender.
The Group chief executive officer has also attended committee meetings to provide advice and respond to specific questions but is not in The Group chief executive officer has also attended committee meetings to provide advice and respond to specific questions but is not in attendance when his own remuneration is discussed.
The Company secretary acts as secretary to the committee. attendance when his own remuneration is discussed.
The Company secretary acts as secretary to the committee.
Statement of shareholder voting At the 2015 AGM the directors remuneration policy was approved by shareholders with the following votes At the 2015 AGM the directors remuneration policy was approved by shareholders with the following votes % of votes for % of votes against Number of votes withheld At the 2017 AGM the annual report on remuneration was approved by shareholders with the following votes At the 2017 AGM the annual report on remuneration was approved by shareholders with the following votes % of votes for % of votes against Number of votes withheld Remuneration policy This part of the directors remuneration report sets out the directors remuneration policy which subject to shareholder approval at the This part of the directors remuneration report sets out the directors remuneration policy which subject to shareholder approval at the 2018 annual general meeting shall take binding effect from the close of that meeting.
2018 annual general meeting shall take binding effect from the close of that meeting.
Shareholders last approved the Companys directors remuneration policy at the 2015 annual general meeting with 100% of votes cast in Shareholders last approved the Companys directors remuneration policy at the 2015 annual general meeting with 100% of votes cast in favour of it.
That policy took effect from the close of the 2015 annual general meeting.
In accordance with the applicable legislation the favour of it.
That policy took effect from the close of the 2015 annual general meeting.
In accordance with the applicable legislation the Company is required to seek approval for a new policy at the 2018 annual general meeting.
During the course of 2017 the committee has Company is required to seek approval for a new policy at the 2018 annual general meeting.
During the course of 2017 the committee has reviewed the policy approved in 2015 in the context of the increase in the Companys size and complexity and developments in best reviewed the policy approved in 2015 in the context of the increase in the Companys size and complexity and developments in best practice.
While the committee did not conclude that a radical overhaul of the policy was required changes have been made and these are practice.
While the committee did not conclude that a radical overhaul of the policy was required changes have been made and these are described in the annual statement from the chair of the committee on pages 60 and 61. described in the annual statement from the chair of the committee on pages 60 and 61.
Consideration of remuneration of employees generally When determining the remuneration arrangements for executive directors the committee takes into consideration as a matter of course When determining the remuneration arrangements for executive directors the committee takes into consideration as a matter of course the pay and conditions of employees throughout the Group.
In particular the committee is kept informed of salary increases for the general the pay and conditions of employees throughout the Group.
In particular the committee is kept informed of salary increases for the general employee population the overall spend on annual bonus and participation levels in the annual bonus and share plans. employee population the overall spend on annual bonus and participation levels in the annual bonus and share plans.
No consultation with employees takes place in relation to determining the directors remuneration policy although the Group has various No consultation with employees takes place in relation to determining the directors remuneration policy although the Group has various ways of engaging with its employees collectively as teams and one to one and the board receives updates and feedback on ways of engaging with its employees collectively as teams and one to one and the board receives updates and feedback on employee engagement. employee engagement.
Consideration of shareholder views The committee is committed to an open and transparent dialogue with shareholders on the issues of executive remuneration.
Where The committee is committed to an open and transparent dialogue with shareholders on the issues of executive remuneration.
Where appropriate the committee will actively engage with shareholders and shareholder representative bodies seeking views which may be appropriate the committee will actively engage with shareholders and shareholder representative bodies seeking views which may be taken into account when making any decisions about changes to directors remuneration policy.
The committee chair is available to answer taken into account when making any decisions about changes to directors remuneration policy.
The committee chair is available to answer questions at the annual general meeting.
The committee chair consulted with shareholders in respect of the new directors remuneration questions at the annual general meeting.
The committee chair consulted with shareholders in respect of the new directors remuneration policy and the final policy has been determined having regard to feedback received. policy and the final policy has been determined having regard to feedback received.
Governance www. rrowglobalir.
Remuneration structure  executive directors The following table sets out the elements which are included in the remuneration package for executive directors and explains how each The following table sets out the elements which are included in the remuneration package for executive directors and explains how each element of the package operates element of the package operates Element and link to business strategy Operation Applicable performance measures and maximum opportunity Salary Salary Provides core Provides core remuneration for the remuneration for the role at a level to role at a level to recruit and retain recruit and retain executive directors executive directors with the required skills with the required skills and experience. and experience.
Positioned within a broad range around the midmarket Positioned within a broad range around the midmarket level for the role. level for the role.
Paid monthly and ordinarily reviewed annually.
Paid monthly and ordinarily reviewed annually.
Base salaries are ordinarily reviewed annually Base salaries are ordinarily reviewed annually though not necessarily increased having regard though not necessarily increased having regard to market conditions and other relevant factors to market conditions and other relevant factors such as pay increases for the Groups employees such as pay increases for the Groups employees internal relativities and individual performance. internal relativities and individual performance.
The maximum annual salary increase will not The maximum annual salary increase will not normally exceed the average increase which normally exceed the average increase which applies across the wider workforce in applies across the wider workforce in percentage of salary terms.
Larger increases percentage of salary terms.
Larger increases may be awarded in certain circumstances may be awarded in certain circumstances including but not limited to including but not limited to increase in scope or responsibilities of increase in scope or responsibilities of the role the role to apply salary progression for a newly to apply salary progression for a newly appointed director and appointed director and significant market movement. significant market movement.
Such increases may be implemented over such Such increases may be implemented over such period as the committee deems appropriate. period as the committee deems appropriate.
Benefits Benefits Provide a competitive Provide a competitive benefits package at a benefits package at a level to recruit and level to recruit and retain executive retain executive directors with the directors with the required skills required skills and experience. and experience.
Typically comprises private medical and dental cover Typically comprises private medical and dental cover life insurance and permanent health insurance. life insurance and permanent health insurance.
Reviewed from time to time to ensure market competitive Reviewed from time to time to ensure market competitive and meet operational needs of the business.
Benefits may be and meet operational needs of the business.
Benefits may be extended in certain circumstances such as extended in certain circumstances such as relocation expenses. relocation expenses.
Access to flexible benefits on same basis as the Access to flexible benefits on same basis as the wider workforce. wider workforce.
None.
None.
The cost of providing benefits is borne by the The cost of providing benefits is borne by the Group and varies from time to time.
Group and varies from time to time.
Pension Pension Provides a competitive Provides a competitive level of longterm level of longterm retirement saving retirement saving for executives. for executives.
Contribution to a defined contribution pension arrangement Contribution to a defined contribution pension arrangement or monthly cash allowance in lieu of pension or a or monthly cash allowance in lieu of pension or a combination of contribution and cash allowance. combination of contribution and cash allowance.
15% of basic salary.
15% of basic salary.
Annual bonus Annual bonus Rewards the Rewards the achievement of achievement of annual objectives annual objectives whilst encouraging a whilst encouraging a longterm focus longterm focus through the use of through the use of deferred shares deferred shares awarded as nilcost awarded as nilcost share options share options conditional awards or conditional awards or restricted shares. restricted shares.
Performance targets set annually.
Performance targets set annually.
Payouts determined by the committee following the end of Payouts determined by the committee following the end of the performance period. the performance period.
Up to 50% of the bonus earned is deferred into shares for up Up to 50% of the bonus earned is deferred into shares for up to three years subject ordinarily to continued employment to three years subject ordinarily to continued employment during the vesting period.
Deferred share awards may be during the vesting period.
Deferred share awards may be settled in cash at the election of the committee. settled in cash at the election of the committee.
The committee may make a dividend equivalent payment to The committee may make a dividend equivalent payment to reflect dividends that would have been paid over the period reflect dividends that would have been paid over the period to vesting on shares that vest and which may assume the to vesting on shares that vest and which may assume the reinvestment of the dividend equivalents.
The payment may reinvestment of the dividend equivalents.
The payment may be in the form of additional shares or a cash payment equal be in the form of additional shares or a cash payment equal to the value of those additional shares. to the value of those additional shares.
Malus and clawback provisions apply as described below Malus and clawback provisions apply as described below this table. this table.
Maximum bonus opportunity of 140% of annual Maximum bonus opportunity of 140% of annual base salary per year.
However for 2018 Paul base salary per year.
However for 2018 Paul Coopers bonus opportunity will be at the level of Coopers bonus opportunity will be at the level of 125% of salary.
125% of salary.
Split between financial and strategicpersonal Split between financial and strategicpersonal performance measures in support of performance measures in support of business strategy. business strategy.
Bonus for achieving threshold financial Bonus for achieving threshold financial performance target is up to 20% of the maximum performance target is up to 20% of the maximum opportunity for that element. opportunity for that element.
Vesting of the bonus in respect of strategic or Vesting of the bonus in respect of strategic or personal measures will be between 0% and 100% personal measures will be between 0% and 100% based on the committees assessment of the extent based on the committees assessment of the extent to which the measure has been achieved. to which the measure has been achieved.
GOVERNANCE REPORT Arrow Global Group PLC  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Element and link to business strategy Operation Applicable performance measures and maximum opportunity LTIP LTIP Rewards the Rewards the achievement achievement of longterm of longterm objectives promotes objectives promotes retention and aligns retention and aligns interests of executives interests of executives with those of with those of shareholders. shareholders.
Nilcost share options conditional awards or restricted Nilcost share options conditional awards or restricted shares can be awarded.
Share awards can be settled in cash shares can be awarded.
Share awards can be settled in cash at the election of the committee. at the election of the committee.
Threeyear vesting period subject to Threeyear vesting period subject to 0performance conditions.
0performance conditions.
Awards granted from 2019 onwards will be subject to an Awards granted from 2019 onwards will be subject to an additional twoyear holding period following the end of the additional twoyear holding period following the end of the performance period and will only be released to the performance period and will only be released to the participant following the end of that period.
The holding participant following the end of that period.
The holding period may be implemented so that the participant is not period may be implemented so that the participant is not entitled to acquire shares until the end of it.
Alternatively entitled to acquire shares until the end of it.
Alternatively it may be implemented on the basis that shares can be it may be implemented on the basis that shares can be acquired following the vesting of the award but that other acquired following the vesting of the award but that other than as regards sales to cover tax liabilities and any exercise than as regards sales to cover tax liabilities and any exercise price the participant is not able to dispose of shares price the participant is not able to dispose of shares acquired until the end of the holding period. acquired until the end of the holding period.
The committee may at its discretion structure awards The committee may at its discretion structure awards as qualifying LTIP awards consisting of both an HMRC as qualifying LTIP awards consisting of both an HMRC taxqualifying option and an LTIP award.
Qualifying LTIP taxqualifying option and an LTIP award.
Qualifying LTIP awards enable the participant and the Company to benefit awards enable the participant and the Company to benefit from taxadvantaged treatment in respect of part of the award from taxadvantaged treatment in respect of part of the award without increasing the pretax value delivered to participants. without increasing the pretax value delivered to participants.
The qualifying LTIP awards will be structured as a taxqualifying The qualifying LTIP awards will be structured as a taxqualifying option and an LTIP award with the vesting of the LTIP award option and an LTIP award with the vesting of the LTIP award scaled back to take account of any gain made on the scaled back to take account of any gain made on the exercise of the taxadvantaged option. exercise of the taxadvantaged option.
The committee may make a dividend equivalent payment to The committee may make a dividend equivalent payment to reflect dividends that would have been paid on shares that vest reflect dividends that would have been paid on shares that vest over the period to vesting and over any holding period.
This over the period to vesting and over any holding period.
This payment may assume the reinvestment of the dividend payment may assume the reinvestment of the dividend equivalents.
The payment may be in the form of additional shares equivalents.
The payment may be in the form of additional shares or a cash payment equal to the value of those additional shares. or a cash payment equal to the value of those additional shares.
Malus and clawback provisions apply as described below Malus and clawback provisions apply as described below this table. this table.
Maximum award of 200% of annual base salary Maximum award of 200% of annual base salary per year.
For 2018 awards will be at the level 150% per year.
For 2018 awards will be at the level 150% of annual base salary. of annual base salary.
Tax qualifying options may be granted.
Shares Tax qualifying options may be granted.
Shares subject to a tax qualifying option granted as part subject to a tax qualifying option granted as part of a qualifying LTIP award are not taken into of a qualifying LTIP award are not taken into account for the purposes of the individual limits account for the purposes of the individual limits because as referred to in the operation column because as referred to in the operation column the LTIP award will be scaled back to reflect the the LTIP award will be scaled back to reflect the gain made on the exercise of the tax gain made on the exercise of the tax advantaged option. advantaged option.
Performance targets based on financial Performance targets based on financial measures such as EPS growth ROE and TSR. measures such as EPS growth ROE and TSR.
25% of award vests for threshold performance 25% of award vests for threshold performance rising to 100% for maximum performance. rising to 100% for maximum performance.
Share incentive Share incentive plan SIP plan SIP Promotes alignment Promotes alignment with shareholders with shareholders across Groups entire across Groups entire employee base. employee base.
In the UK a tax qualifying plan permitting the award of free In the UK a tax qualifying plan permitting the award of free partnership or matching shares.
Dividends paid on plan partnership or matching shares.
Dividends paid on plan shares may be delivered in the form of additional shares may be delivered in the form of additional dividend shares. dividend shares.
Operated on a broadly equivalent basis for employees Operated on a broadly equivalent basis for employees including if relevant any executive directors including if relevant any executive directors outside the UK. outside the UK.
Minimum threeyear vesting period.
Minimum threeyear vesting period.
Open to all employees generally.
Open to all employees generally.
No performance targets.
No performance targets.
Under the UK plan maximum awards and Under the UK plan maximum awards and matching share ratio reflect the limits in the matching share ratio reflect the limits in the applicable tax legislation from time to time as at applicable tax legislation from time to time as at the date of approval of this policy in any year up the date of approval of this policy in any year up to 3600 free share award up to 1800 to 3600 free share award up to 1800 partnership share acquisition and a matching partnership share acquisition and a matching share ratio of up to 21 based on partnership share ratio of up to 21 based on partnership shares acquired in each case. shares acquired in each case.
Broadly equivalent limits apply under the plan for Broadly equivalent limits apply under the plan for employees outside the UK. employees outside the UK.
Save as you earn Save as you earn plan sharesave plan sharesave Promotes further Promotes further alignment with alignment with shareholders across shareholders across Groups entire Groups entire employee base. employee base.
The Group may consider the implementation of a The Group may consider the implementation of a sharesave in the future to complement the SIP. sharesave in the future to complement the SIP.
In the event that a sharesave is introduced the executive In the event that a sharesave is introduced the executive directors will be eligible to participate in the sharesave on directors will be eligible to participate in the sharesave on the same terms as other eligible employees. the same terms as other eligible employees.
There would be no performance targets under There would be no performance targets under the sharesave. the sharesave.
The limits will reflect those in the applicable tax The limits will reflect those in the applicable tax legislation from time to time as at the date of legislation from time to time as at the date of approval of this policy a participant may save up to approval of this policy a participant may save up to 500 per month over three or five years to 500 per month over three or five years to exercise an option granted with an exercise price exercise an option granted with an exercise price at a discount of up to 20% to the value of a share at a discount of up to 20% to the value of a share when invited to participate. when invited to participate.
DIRECTORS REMUNERATION REPORT CONTINUED
Remuneration structure  executive directors continued 75 www. rrowglobalir.
Notes to the policy table Annual bonus  performance metrics The annual bonus is assessed against both financial The annual bonus is assessed against both financial performance measures and a balanced range of specific performance measures and a balanced range of specific strategic personal and other key Group objectives determined strategic personal and other key Group objectives determined by the committee.
This incentivises executives to focus on by the committee.
This incentivises executives to focus on delivering the key financial goals of the Company as well as delivering the key financial goals of the Company as well as specific strategic objectives which are aligned to delivering the specific strategic objectives which are aligned to delivering the overall business strategy and to encourage behaviours which overall business strategy and to encourage behaviours which facilitate profitable growth and the future development of facilitate profitable growth and the future development of the business. the business.
The precise choice of measures and the weightings between The precise choice of measures and the weightings between them will be reviewed by the committee year on year. them will be reviewed by the committee year on year.
Performance targets will be set at the beginning of each year Performance targets will be set at the beginning of each year and bonus payouts are determined by the committee after the and bonus payouts are determined by the committee after the end of the performance period based on performance end of the performance period based on performance against targets. against targets.
LTIP awards  performance metrics Performance is based on financial performance targets such Performance is based on financial performance targets such as EPS growth return on equity and total shareholder return as EPS growth return on equity and total shareholder return measured over three years. measured over three years.
The committee will review these performance conditions when The committee will review these performance conditions when determining LTIP awards in each year in order to reflect determining LTIP awards in each year in order to reflect changes in the outlook of the sector and the Group and to changes in the outlook of the sector and the Group and to ensure that the measures remain appropriate and that the ensure that the measures remain appropriate and that the targets remain challenging. targets remain challenging.
Performance measures are set in line with the key drivers of Performance measures are set in line with the key drivers of sustainable performance.
Targets are set by the committee sustainable performance.
Targets are set by the committee at the start of the performance period taking into account at the start of the performance period taking into account external advice on market and best practice.
Performance is external advice on market and best practice.
Performance is assessed at the end of the relevant period to determine the assessed at the end of the relevant period to determine the extent to which awards may vest.
The committee also monitors extent to which awards may vest.
The committee also monitors progress against targets throughout the period. progress against targets throughout the period.
Adjusting performance measures and operation of share plans The committee retains the ability to adjust or set different The committee retains the ability to adjust or set different performance measures if events occur such as a change in performance measures if events occur such as a change in strategy a material acquisition andor a divestment of a Group strategy a material acquisition andor a divestment of a Group business or a change in prevailing market conditions which business or a change in prevailing market conditions which cause the committee to determine that the measures are no cause the committee to determine that the measures are no longer appropriate and that amendment is required so that the longer appropriate and that amendment is required so that the original purpose of the performance measures is achieved. original purpose of the performance measures is achieved.
Awards may be adjusted in the event of a variation of capital Awards may be adjusted in the event of a variation of capital demerger special dividend or other transaction which will demerger special dividend or other transaction which will materially affect the value of shares. materially affect the value of shares.
The committee may exercise operational and administrative The committee may exercise operational and administrative discretions under the relevant plan rules as set out in discretions under the relevant plan rules as set out in those rules. those rules.
Malus and clawback All cash bonuses paid are subject to potential malus and All cash bonuses paid are subject to potential malus and clawback at the committees discretion for a period of three clawback at the committees discretion for a period of three years from the date of payment where there are exceptional years from the date of payment where there are exceptional circumstances such as a material misstatement of the circumstances such as a material misstatement of the published results of the Group any error in the calculation published results of the Group any error in the calculation of any performance condition linked to the calculation of a of any performance condition linked to the calculation of a bonus material risk failure or gross misconduct.
The bonus material risk failure or gross misconduct.
The committee will also operate malus and clawback if there is a committee will also operate malus and clawback if there is a major regulatory issue including significant regulatory risk major regulatory issue including significant regulatory risk failure.
In any of the above clawback circumstances the failure.
In any of the above clawback circumstances the committee has discretion to operate malus provisions on committee has discretion to operate malus provisions on sharebased incentive plans other than any HM Revenue and sharebased incentive plans other than any HM Revenue and Customs qualifying plans operated by the Group instead of Customs qualifying plans operated by the Group instead of pursuing clawback on the cash bonuses. pursuing clawback on the cash bonuses.
The LTIP and deferred bonus awards are subject to malus The LTIP and deferred bonus awards are subject to malus provisions such that at the discretion of the committee provisions such that at the discretion of the committee unvested awards may lapse where there has been a material unvested awards may lapse where there has been a material inaccuracy or misleading results or there has been a loss to the inaccuracy or misleading results or there has been a loss to the Groups business which could have been reasonably risk Groups business which could have been reasonably risk managed by the participant.
In addition malus may take place managed by the participant.
In addition malus may take place where there is conduct capability or performance of a where there is conduct capability or performance of a participant which would make the operation of malus participant which would make the operation of malus appropriate or where the committee deems there to be appropriate or where the committee deems there to be exceptional circumstances which appear relevant.
The exceptional circumstances which appear relevant.
The committee will operate malus if there is a major regulatory committee will operate malus if there is a major regulatory issue including significant regulatory risk failure. issue including significant regulatory risk failure.
The LTIP and deferred bonus include a clawback facility where The LTIP and deferred bonus include a clawback facility where at the discretion of the committee during a threeyear period at the discretion of the committee during a threeyear period post vesting shares acquired may be forfeited or unexercised post vesting shares acquired may be forfeited or unexercised awards may lapse where there has been a material inaccuracy awards may lapse where there has been a material inaccuracy or misleading results or there has been a loss to the Groups or misleading results or there has been a loss to the Groups business which could have been reasonably risk managed by business which could have been reasonably risk managed by the participant.
In addition clawback may take place where the participant.
In addition clawback may take place where there is conduct capability or performance of a participant there is conduct capability or performance of a participant which would make such transfer appropriate or where the which would make such transfer appropriate or where the committee deems there to be exceptional circumstances committee deems there to be exceptional circumstances which make such a forfeiture or lapse appropriate.
The which make such a forfeiture or lapse appropriate.
The committee will operate clawback if there is a major regulatory committee will operate clawback if there is a major regulatory issue including significant regulatory risk failure.
In any of the issue including significant regulatory risk failure.
In any of the above circumstances in place of pursuing clawback on the LTIP above circumstances in place of pursuing clawback on the LTIP and deferred bonus the committee has discretion to operate and deferred bonus the committee has discretion to operate malus provisions on share based incentive plans other than malus provisions on share based incentive plans other than any HM Revenue and Customs qualifying plans operated by any HM Revenue and Customs qualifying plans operated by the Group. the Group.
Clawback will apply to HM Revenue and Customs qualifying plans Clawback will apply to HM Revenue and Customs qualifying plans to the extent permitted by HM Revenue and Customs. to the extent permitted by HM Revenue and Customs.
Shareholding guidelines To align the interests of executive directors with those of To align the interests of executive directors with those of shareholders the committee has adopted formal shareholding shareholders the committee has adopted formal shareholding guidelines.
Each executive director is required to acquire guidelines.
Each executive director is required to acquire shares with a value equal to 200% of salary.
Until such time as shares with a value equal to 200% of salary.
Until such time as the required holding has been achieved the director must the required holding has been achieved the director must retain 50% of all shares acquired under the LTIP or deferred retain 50% of all shares acquired under the LTIP or deferred bonus arrangements in each case net of tax.
Shares subject to bonus arrangements in each case net of tax.
Shares subject to awards which have vested but not been released i.
LTIP awards which have vested but not been released i.
LTIP awards which are subject to a holding period or which are awards which are subject to a holding period or which are exercisable but have not been exercised count towards the exercisable but have not been exercised count towards the guidelines on a net of assumed tax basis. guidelines on a net of assumed tax basis.
GOVERNANCE REPORT Arrow Global Group PLC  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Differences between remuneration policy for executive directors and employees generally The remuneration policy applied to the most senior executives in the Group is similar to the policy for the executive directors The remuneration policy applied to the most senior executives in the Group is similar to the policy for the executive directors in that a significant element of remuneration is dependent on Group and individual performance.
The key principles for the in that a significant element of remuneration is dependent on Group and individual performance.
The key principles for the remuneration policy are applied consistently across the Group below executive director level taking into account seniority and remuneration policy are applied consistently across the Group below executive director level taking into account seniority and local market practice. local market practice.
Illustration of the application of the remuneration policy Maximum In line with expectations
28% 35% 37% 25% 36% 39% 100% Total remuneration 000 Lee Rochford Maximum In line with expectations
30% 32% 38% 26% 33% 41% 100% Total remuneration 000 Paul Cooper Fixed pay Annual bonus Longterm incentives Fixed pay Annual bonus Longterm incentives The charts above illustrate the total remuneration in line with the remuneration policy that could arise for each executive The charts above illustrate the total remuneration in line with the remuneration policy that could arise for each executive director under three different performance levels. director under three different performance levels.
The figures are calculated as follows The figures are calculated as follows Fixed pay is basic salary and pension benefits as at 1 March 2018 plus the assumed value of benefits based on Fixed pay is basic salary and pension benefits as at 1 March 2018 plus the assumed value of benefits based on the 2017 benefits figure in the case of Lee Rochford and the 2017 benefits figure in the case of Lee Rochford and the 2017 benefits figure for the Companys former Chief financial officer in the case of Paul Cooper. the 2017 benefits figure for the Companys former Chief financial officer in the case of Paul Cooper.
Annual bonus includes any deferred bonus based on the maximum potential award 140% of salary for Lee Rochford and Annual bonus includes any deferred bonus based on the maximum potential award 140% of salary for Lee Rochford and 125% of salary for Paul Cooper.
125% of salary for Paul Cooper.
Longterm incentives represents the potential value of the LTIP based on the maximum potential award for 2018 of 150% of salary.
Longterm incentives represents the potential value of the LTIP based on the maximum potential award for 2018 of 150% of salary.
In line with expectations is the level required to deliver a stretch bonus target which for the purposes of the above illustrations In line with expectations is the level required to deliver a stretch bonus target which for the purposes of the above illustrations is 75% of the maximum annual bonus 105% of salary in the case of Lee Rochford and 93.75% of salary in the case of Paul Cooper is 75% of the maximum annual bonus 105% of salary in the case of Lee Rochford and 93.75% of salary in the case of Paul Cooper and 50% of the maximum LTIP 75% of salary in the case of each executive director. and 50% of the maximum LTIP 75% of salary in the case of each executive director.
Maximum performance would result in the maximum annual bonus 140% of salary in the case of Lee Rochford and 125% Maximum performance would result in the maximum annual bonus 140% of salary in the case of Lee Rochford and 125% of salary in the case of Paul Cooper and full vesting of the LTIP 150% of salary in the case of each executive director. of salary in the case of Paul Cooper and full vesting of the LTIP 150% of salary in the case of each executive director.
The chart relating to Paul Cooper does not include the buyout award granted to him as referred to on page 71.
The chart relating to Paul Cooper does not include the buyout award granted to him as referred to on page 71.
DIRECTORS REMUNERATION REPORT CONTINUED 77 www. rrowglobalir.
Discretion
The committee retains discretion to grant variable performance remuneration outside of the approved policy where this discretion is The committee retains discretion to grant variable performance remuneration outside of the approved policy where this discretion is required to comply with applicable legislation or regulation.
However that discretion would not be exercised in a manner that would required to comply with applicable legislation or regulation.
However that discretion would not be exercised in a manner that would exceed the maximum opportunity noted in the policy table and the committee will endeavour to consult with shareholders ahead of exceed the maximum opportunity noted in the policy table and the committee will endeavour to consult with shareholders ahead of such exercise as well as clearly disclosing and explaining the details in the annual report. such exercise as well as clearly disclosing and explaining the details in the annual report.
Executive director service contracts Each executive director has been appointed under a service contract which is terminable on 12 months notice by either the Company or the Each executive director has been appointed under a service contract which is terminable on 12 months notice by either the Company or the director.
Contracts are available for inspection at the Companys registered office.
Contracts may be terminated immediately with payments director.
Contracts are available for inspection at the Companys registered office.
Contracts may be terminated immediately with payments in lieu of notice being paid in phased instalments and reduced by amounts earned from alternative remunerative positions obtained during in lieu of notice being paid in phased instalments and reduced by amounts earned from alternative remunerative positions obtained during the notice period that would otherwise have applied. the notice period that would otherwise have applied.
Termination policy Notice periodpay in lieu Rolling contracts with 12month notice periods.
Rolling contracts with 12month notice periods.
Payment in lieu of notice at Group discretion  monthly instalments with appropriate reductions for Payment in lieu of notice at Group discretion  monthly instalments with appropriate reductions for mitigation.
Payment calculated by reference to base salary and the cost to the Group of providing mitigation.
Payment calculated by reference to base salary and the cost to the Group of providing contractual benefits including pension contributionscash in lieu of pension contributions but contractual benefits including pension contributionscash in lieu of pension contributions but excludes bonus.
As an alternative to making a payment in respect of the costs of providing benefits excludes bonus.
As an alternative to making a payment in respect of the costs of providing benefits the committee may continue to provide the benefits for the duration of the notice period that would the committee may continue to provide the benefits for the duration of the notice period that would otherwise have applied. otherwise have applied.
Longterm incentives Unvested awards Lapse on cessation of employment unless good leaver circumstances ill health injury disability Lapse on cessation of employment unless good leaver circumstances ill health injury disability retirement transfer of employing company or undertaking redundancy or at the discretion of retirement transfer of employing company or undertaking redundancy or at the discretion of the committee. the committee.
If good leaver generally award to vest on normal vesting date following application of performance If good leaver generally award to vest on normal vesting date following application of performance targets and subject to a prorata reduction for proportion of vesting period elapsed.
Where targets and subject to a prorata reduction for proportion of vesting period elapsed.
Where applicable the award will generally remain subject to the originally anticipated holding period. applicable the award will generally remain subject to the originally anticipated holding period.
The committee retains discretion in appropriate circumstances to vest awards sooner to vary or The committee retains discretion in appropriate circumstances to vest awards sooner to vary or disapply the prorata reduction andor to vary or disapply the holding period. disapply the prorata reduction andor to vary or disapply the holding period.
Unreleased awards i.
Awards generally subsist although will lapsebe forfeited in the event of cessation due to Awards generally subsist although will lapsebe forfeited in the event of cessation due to summary dismissal. summary dismissal.
Awards which subsist will generally remain subject to the originally anticipated holding period Awards which subsist will generally remain subject to the originally anticipated holding period although the committee retains discretion in appropriate circumstances to vary or disapply the although the committee retains discretion in appropriate circumstances to vary or disapply the holding period. holding period.
Annual bonus This will be reviewed on an individual basis and the decision whether or not to award a bonus in full This will be reviewed on an individual basis and the decision whether or not to award a bonus in full or in part will be dependent upon a number of factors including the circumstances of the executive or in part will be dependent upon a number of factors including the circumstances of the executive directors departure and his or her contribution to the business during the bonus period in question. directors departure and his or her contribution to the business during the bonus period in question.
Any bonus payment would typically be prorated for time in service to termination and paid at the Any bonus payment would typically be prorated for time in service to termination and paid at the usual time although the Committee retains discretion to pay the bonus earlier in appropriate circumstances. usual time although the Committee retains discretion to pay the bonus earlier in appropriate circumstances.
Any bonus earned for the year of departure or preceding year may be paid wholly in cash Any bonus earned for the year of departure or preceding year may be paid wholly in cash with no deferral into shares. with no deferral into shares.
Deferred share bonus awards Lapse on cessation of employment unless good leaver.
Lapse on cessation of employment unless good leaver.
If good leaver generally vest on normal vesting date unless exceptional circumstances considered.
If good leaver generally vest on normal vesting date unless exceptional circumstances considered.
Where deemed suitable the committee reserves the right to agree additional exit payments where they are in the best interests of the Where deemed suitable the committee reserves the right to agree additional exit payments where they are in the best interests of the Group and shareholders and are made in good faith in discharge of an existing legal obligation or by way of damages for breach of such an Group and shareholders and are made in good faith in discharge of an existing legal obligation or by way of damages for breach of such an obligation or by way of settlement of any claim arising in connection with the cessation of a directors office or employment.
Any discretion obligation or by way of settlement of any claim arising in connection with the cessation of a directors office or employment.
Any discretion exercised by the committee would be reported to shareholders in the subsequent annual report.
The Group in any settlement agreement exercised by the committee would be reported to shareholders in the subsequent annual report.
The Group in any settlement agreement recording the terms of the termination may include provisions as to outplacement counselling the payment of the directors reasonable recording the terms of the termination may include provisions as to outplacement counselling the payment of the directors reasonable legal costs up to an agreed amount and other reasonable payments of a similar nature. legal costs up to an agreed amount and other reasonable payments of a similar nature.
If a buyout or other recruitment award is made the leaver provisions would be determined at or before the date of the award.
If a buyout or other recruitment award is made the leaver provisions would be determined at or before the date of the award.
Nonexecutive directors receive no payments for loss of office.
Nonexecutive directors receive no payments for loss of office.
GOVERNANCE REPORT Arrow Global Group PLC  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Approach to recruitment remuneration Where a new executive director is appointed the principles outlined above in relation to the structure components and maximum Where a new executive director is appointed the principles outlined above in relation to the structure components and maximum opportunities of the existing executive directors remuneration package and service contract terms will also apply to any newly appointed opportunities of the existing executive directors remuneration package and service contract terms will also apply to any newly appointed director although the committee retains discretion to vary the performance measures performance period vesting period deferral period director although the committee retains discretion to vary the performance measures performance period vesting period deferral period and holding period of the annual bonus and LTIP if the committee determines that the circumstances of the recruitment merit such an and holding period of the annual bonus and LTIP if the committee determines that the circumstances of the recruitment merit such an alteration.
Salaries for new hires will be set to reflect their skills and experience the Groups intended pay positioning and the market rate alteration.
Salaries for new hires will be set to reflect their skills and experience the Groups intended pay positioning and the market rate for the role.
Existing incentive arrangements will be used where possible and guaranteed bonuses will not be offered.
The level of pay will for the role.
Existing incentive arrangements will be used where possible and guaranteed bonuses will not be offered.
The level of pay will be what is necessary to recruit the new executive director. be what is necessary to recruit the new executive director.
The committee will have the discretion to determine additional remuneration which constitutes compensation for the forfeiture of awards The committee will have the discretion to determine additional remuneration which constitutes compensation for the forfeiture of awards under variable remuneration arrangements with any previous employer.
The committee will determine the terms of any such buyout under variable remuneration arrangements with any previous employer.
The committee will determine the terms of any such buyout award having regard to the terms of the forfeited award e. any performance conditions to which that award was subject its time horizon award having regard to the terms of the forfeited award e. and expected value.
The committee may also make payments in respect of relocation or similar expenses.
Similarly the committee will and expected value.
The committee may also make payments in respect of relocation or similar expenses.
Similarly the committee will have discretion to retain existing contractual arrangements for employees who are internally promoted to board level.
In addition in have discretion to retain existing contractual arrangements for employees who are internally promoted to board level.
In addition in exceptional circumstances the committee reserves the right to grant additional remuneration which it feels is appropriate taking into exceptional circumstances the committee reserves the right to grant additional remuneration which it feels is appropriate taking into account the specific circumstances of the individual in order to facilitate such recruitment provided that the total variable pay excluding account the specific circumstances of the individual in order to facilitate such recruitment provided that the total variable pay excluding any buyout awards for the first year will not exceed 400% of salary i. an additional 60% of salary above maximum in the policy table. any buyout awards for the first year will not exceed 400% of salary i. an additional 60% of salary above maximum in the policy table.
Fees for newly appointed nonexecutive directors will be determined in line with the policy set out below.
Fees for newly appointed nonexecutive directors will be determined in line with the policy set out below.
Components and structure of remuneration  nonexecutive directors The board reviews nonexecutive directors fees periodically in light of fees payable in comparable companies and the importance attached The board reviews nonexecutive directors fees periodically in light of fees payable in comparable companies and the importance attached to the retention and attraction of high calibre individuals as nonexecutive directors.
This table sets out the elements which are included in the to the retention and attraction of high calibre individuals as nonexecutive directors.
This table sets out the elements which are included in the remuneration package for nonexecutive directors and explains how they operate remuneration package for nonexecutive directors and explains how they operate Element and purpose Operation and link to business strategy Maximum opportunity Fees Fees To attract and retain high To attract and retain high calibre nonexecutive calibre nonexecutive directors by offering directors by offering competitive fees. competitive fees.
Benefits Benefits Nonexecutive directors may Nonexecutive directors may be eligible for benefits such as be eligible for benefits such as the use of secretarial support the use of secretarial support travel costs or other benefits. travel costs or other benefits.
A base fee is paid for holding the office of non A base fee is paid for holding the office of non executive director or Chairman. executive director or Chairman.
Additional fees may be paid to reflect extra Additional fees may be paid to reflect extra responsibilities such as committee chair or SID. responsibilities such as committee chair or SID.
With the agreement of the chairman of the Group With the agreement of the chairman of the Group nonexecutive directors can carry out specific project nonexecutive directors can carry out specific project work for the Group on fees to be agreed. work for the Group on fees to be agreed.
Benefits are provided that are appropriate to the Benefits are provided that are appropriate to the performance of the role. performance of the role.
Fees are reviewed periodically to comparable Fees are reviewed periodically to comparable companies pay. companies pay.
If benefits are provided to nonexecutive If benefits are provided to nonexecutive directors they are provided at an directors they are provided at an appropriate level taking into account appropriate level taking into account the individual circumstances. the individual circumstances.
Nonexecutive directors letters of appointment The terms of appointment of independent nonexecutive directors including the Chairman are contained in letters of appointment rather The terms of appointment of independent nonexecutive directors including the Chairman are contained in letters of appointment rather than under service contracts.
The duration of the appointment is usually three years and it is anticipated that the period will be extended than under service contracts.
The duration of the appointment is usually three years and it is anticipated that the period will be extended for a second term of three years with the agreement of the board and the nonexecutive director although a reappointment is for a second term of three years with the agreement of the board and the nonexecutive director although a reappointment is not automatic. not automatic.
Either party may terminate on one months written notice.
The reappointment of all nonexecutive directors is subject to election by the Either party may terminate on one months written notice.
The reappointment of all nonexecutive directors is subject to election by the Groups shareholders at the first annual general meeting and reelection at any subsequent annual general meeting where they are due Groups shareholders at the first annual general meeting and reelection at any subsequent annual general meeting where they are due for reelection. for reelection.
Legacy remuneration arrangements The committee reserves the right to make any remuneration payments andor payments for loss of office including exercising any The committee reserves the right to make any remuneration payments and or payments for loss of office including exercising any discretions available to it in connection with such payments notwithstanding that they are not in line with the policy set out above where discretions available to it in connection with such payments notwithstanding that they are not in line with the policy set out above where the terms of the payment were agreed the terms of the payment were agreed before the policy set out above came into effect provided if relevant that the terms of the payment were consistent with the before the policy set out above came into effect provided if relevant that the terms of the payment were consistent with the shareholderapproved directors remuneration policy in force at the time they were agreed or shareholderapproved directors remuneration policy in force at the time they were agreed or at a time when the relevant individual was not a director of the Company and in the opinion of the committee the payment was not in at a time when the relevant individual was not a director of the Company and in the opinion of the committee the payment was not in consideration for the individual becoming a director of the Company. consideration for the individual becoming a director of the Company.
For these purposes payments includes the committee satisfying awards of variable remuneration and in relation to an award over shares For these purposes payments includes the committee satisfying awards of variable remuneration and in relation to an award over shares the terms of the payment are agreed at the time the award is granted. the terms of the payment are agreed at the time the award is granted.
This report was approved by the board and signed on its behalf by This report was approved by the board and signed on its behalf by Lan Tu Chair of the remuneration committee 1 March 2018 DIRECTORS REMUNERATION REPORT CONTINUED 79 www. rrowglobalir.
REPORT OF THE DIRECTORS The directors present their annual report on the affairs of the The directors present their annual report on the affairs of the Group together with the financial statements and auditors Group together with the financial statements and auditors report for the year ended 31 December 2017 .
The corporate report for the year ended 31 December 2017.
The corporate governance report set out on page 46 to 50 forms part of this governance report set out on page 46 to 50 forms part of this report.
The Companys principal subsidiaries are listed in report.
The Companys principal subsidiaries are listed in note 24. note 24.
The following information is set out in the strategic report The following information is set out in the strategic report on pages 3 to 42 on pages 3 to 42 particulars of post balance sheet events of the Company particulars of post balance sheet events of the Company and its subsidiaries and and its subsidiaries and indication of likely future developments in the business indication of likely future developments in the business of the Company and its subsidiaries. of the Company and its subsidiaries.
Results and going concern The Groups results are discussed in the Strategic report The Groups results are discussed in the Strategic report starting on page 3 including the Chairmans statement starting on page 3 including the Chairmans statement Group chief executive officers review and Group chief Group chief executive officers review and Group chief financial officers review on pages 4 16 and 20 respectively financial officers review on pages 4 16 and 20 respectively which are incorporated into this report by reference. which are incorporated into this report by reference.
Consideration of going concern can be seen on page 43.
Consideration of going concern can be seen on page 43.
After making their assessment the directors are satisfied After making their assessment the directors are satisfied that the Company and the Group have adequate resources that the Company and the Group have adequate resources to continue to operate as a going concern for a period in to continue to operate as a going concern for a period in excess of 12 months.
Thus they continue to adopt the excess of 12 months.
Thus they continue to adopt the going concern basis of accounting in preparing the going concern basis of accounting in preparing the annual financial statements. annual financial statements.
Fair balanced and understandable As required by the UK Corporate Governance Code 2016 As required by the UK Corporate Governance Code 2016 Edition the Code the directors confirm that they consider Edition the Code the directors confirm that they consider that this annual report and accounts taken as a whole is fair that this annual report and accounts taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Groups position and necessary for shareholders to assess the Groups position and performance business model and strategy. performance business model and strategy.
The board came to this view following a rigorous review The board came to this view following a rigorous review process throughout the production schedule.
The annual process throughout the production schedule.
The annual report is drafted by appropriate members of the reporting report is drafted by appropriate members of the reporting and leadership teams and is managed by the investor relations and leadership teams and is managed by the investor relations coordinator to ensure consistency.
A series of planned coordinator to ensure consistency.
A series of planned reviews are undertaken by the reporting team leadership reviews are undertaken by the reporting team leadership team and directors in advance of final consideration by the board. team and directors in advance of final consideration by the board.
The annual report is also reviewed by the audit committee.
The annual report is also reviewed by the audit committee.
Dividends
The directors recommend the payment of a final dividend The directors recommend the payment of a final dividend of 8.1p per ordinary share for the financial year ended of 8.1p per ordinary share for the financial year ended 31 December 2017 2016 6.4p to be paid assuming shareholder 31 December 2017 2016 6.4p to be paid assuming shareholder approval is obtained on 6 July 2018 to ordinary shareholders approval is obtained on 6 July 2018 to ordinary shareholders on the register on 1 June 2018.
The exdividend date for the on the register on 1 June 2018.
The exdividend date for the final dividend is 31 May 2018 and the DRIP election date is final dividend is 31 May 2018 and the DRIP election date is 15 June 2018.
The recommended final dividend together with 15 June 2018.
The recommended final dividend together with the interim dividend of 3.2p per share 2016 2.7p paid on the interim dividend of 3.2p per share 2016 2.7p paid on 3 October 2017 brings the total dividend declared and 3 October 2017 brings the total dividend declared and proposed for the year to 11.3p per share 2016 9.1p. proposed for the year to 11.3p per share 2016 9.1p.
The Company held 47.3 million distributable reserves at The Company held 47 .3 million distributable reserves at 31 December 2017 sufficient to pay the dividend.
31 December 2017  sufficient to pay the dividend.
Share capital As at 31 December 2017  the Company had 175266624 ordinary As at 31 December 2017  the Company had 175266624 ordinary shares in issue of one class with a nominal value of 1p each. shares in issue of one class with a nominal value of 1p each.
Full details of the share capital of the Company are set out in Full details of the share capital of the Company are set out in note 21 to the Group financial statements on page 112.
The note 21 to the Group financial statements on page 112.
The information in note 21 is incorporated by reference and forms information in note 21 is incorporated by reference and forms part of this directors report.
On a show of hands at a general part of this directors report.
On a show of hands at a general meeting of the Company each member present in person or meeting of the Company each member present in person or by proxy and entitled to vote shall have one vote and on a by proxy and entitled to vote shall have one vote and on a poll every member shall have one vote for every ordinary poll every member shall have one vote for every ordinary share held.
There are no issued shares in the Company with share held.
There are no issued shares in the Company with special rights with regard to control of the Company. special rights with regard to control of the Company.
Purchase of own shares At the 2017 annual general meeting shareholders authorised At the 2017 annual general meeting shareholders authorised the Company to make market purchases of up to 17526662 the Company to make market purchases of up to 17526662 ordinary shares representing 10% of the issued share capital ordinary shares representing 10% of the issued share capital at that time and to allot up to an aggregate nominal amount at that time and to allot up to an aggregate nominal amount of 1168444.16.
These authorities expire at the 2018 annual of 1168444.16.
These authorities expire at the 2018 annual general meeting.
During the year ended 31 December 2017 general meeting.
During the year ended 31 December 2017 no shares were repurchased.
Resolutions to renew these no shares were repurchased.
Resolutions to renew these authorities will be proposed at the 2018 annual authorities will be proposed at the 2018 annual general meeting. general meeting.
The Company announced on 16 February 2017 that 4 million The Company announced on 16 February 2017 that 4 million ordinary shares in the Company had been admitted to the ordinary shares in the Company had been admitted to the Official List by way of block listing.
The shares will be allotted Official List by way of block listing.
The shares will be allotted from time to time in accordance with the vesting of certain from time to time in accordance with the vesting of certain employee awards. employee awards.
The Company operates an independent employee benefit The Company operates an independent employee benefit trust for future benefit to employees of the Group.
Estera Trust trust for future benefit to employees of the Group.
Estera Trust Jersey Limited is the trustee of the Arrow Global Group 2016 Jersey Limited is the trustee of the Arrow Global Group 2016 Employee Benefit Trust the Estera Trust.
On 9 March 2018 Employee Benefit Trust the Estera Trust.
On 9 March 2018 827 598 shares were allotted by the Company to the Estera Trust 827 598 shares were allotted by the Company to the Estera Trust which was announced by RNS announcement on 10 March 2017 . which was announced by RNS announcement on 10 March 2017 .
RNS announcements will be made in accordance with the RNS announcements will be made in accordance with the Disclosure Guidance and Transparency Rules when future Disclosure Guidance and Transparency Rules when future allotments occur. allotments occur.
During the financial year the Estera Trust transferred shares During the financial year the Estera Trust transferred shares to LTIP participants and also to the trustee of the Arrow to LTIP participants and also to the trustee of the Arrow Global Share Incentive Plan the SIP to satisfy awards of Global Share Incentive Plan the SIP to satisfy awards of shares to participating employees under the SIP. shares to participating employees under the SIP.
As at 31 December 2017 the Estera Trust held 257337 ordinary As at 31 December 2017 the Estera Trust held 257 337 ordinary shares 2016 66277 shares representing 0.15% 2016 0.04% shares 2016 66277 shares representing 0.15% 2016 0.04% of the Companys issued share capital.
The Trust deed contains of the Companys issued share capital.
The Trust deed contains a dividend waiver provision in relation to these shares.
During a dividend waiver provision in relation to these shares.
During the year the Estera Trust purchased 415000 shares for future the year the Estera Trust purchased 415000 shares for future benefit to employees of the Group. benefit to employees of the Group.
Transfer of securities There are no restrictions on the transfer of shares limitations There are no restrictions on the transfer of shares limitations on the holding of shares or requirements to obtain prior on the holding of shares or requirements to obtain prior approval of the Company or of other holders of securities approval of the Company or of other holders of securities in the Company to a transfer of shares. in the Company to a transfer of shares.
The board may decline to register a transfer of any share The board may decline to register a transfer of any share which is not fully paid.
Registration of a transfer of an which is not fully paid.
Registration of a transfer of an uncertificated uncertificated share may be refused in the circumstances set out share may be refused in the circumstances set out in the uncertificated in the uncertificated securities rules as defined in the articles securities rules as defined in the articles of association and where in the case of a transfer to joint of association and where in the case of a transfer to joint holders the number of joint holders to whom the uncertificated holders the number of joint holders to whom the uncertificated share is to be transferred exceeds four. share is to be transferred exceeds four.
GOVERNANCE REPORT Arrow Global Group PLC  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Transfer of securities continued The board may decline to register a transfer of a certificated share unless the instrument of transfer i is duly stamped or The board may decline to register a transfer of a certificated share unless the instrument of transfer i is duly stamped or certified or otherwise shown to the satisfaction of the board to be exempt from stamp duty and is accompanied by the relevant certified or otherwise shown to the satisfaction of the board to be exempt from stamp duty and is accompanied by the relevant share certificate and such other evidence of the right to transfer as the board may reasonably require ii is in respect of only share certificate and such other evidence of the right to transfer as the board may reasonably require ii is in respect of only one class of share and iii if joint transferees is in favour of not more than four such transferees. one class of share and iii if joint transferees is in favour of not more than four such transferees.
Further the board may decline to register a transfer of a certificated share where the transfer is requested by a person with Further the board may decline to register a transfer of a certificated share where the transfer is requested by a person with more than a 0.25% interest in the issued share capital of the Company excluding treasury shares if such a person has been more than a 0.25% interest in the issued share capital of the Company excluding treasury shares if such a person has been served with a restriction notice after failure to provide the Company with information concerning interests in those shares served with a restriction notice after failure to provide the Company with information concerning interests in those shares required to be provided under the Companies Act 2006 unless the transfer is shown to the board to be pursuant to an arms required to be provided under the Companies Act 2006 unless the transfer is shown to the board to be pursuant to an arms length sale as defined in the articles of association. length sale as defined in the articles of association.
The articles of association also contain certain restrictions on transfer which are designed to ensure that the assets of the The articles of association also contain certain restrictions on transfer which are designed to ensure that the assets of the Company are not deemed to constitute plan assets within the meaning of the Plan Asset Regulations as defined in the articles Company are not deemed to constitute plan assets within the meaning of the Plan Asset Regulations as defined in the articles of association because the directors have been advised that this could result in the Company becoming subject to certain of association because the directors have been advised that this could result in the Company becoming subject to certain onerous obligations under US law.
Accordingly the articles of association provide that the board may refuse to register a transfer onerous obligations under US law.
Accordingly the articles of association provide that the board may refuse to register a transfer of shares or compulsorily require the transfer of shares where a transfer of shares or continued holding of shares would of shares or compulsorily require the transfer of shares where a transfer of shares or continued holding of shares would cause or is likely to cause i the assets of the Company to be considered plan assets under the Plan Asset Regulations or ii cause or is likely to cause i the assets of the Company to be considered plan assets under the Plan Asset Regulations or ii the Company to suffer any pecuniary disadvantage including any excise tax penalties or liabilities under ERISA or the IR Code the Company to suffer any pecuniary disadvantage including any excise tax penalties or liabilities under ERISA or the IR Code each as defined in the articles of association. each as defined in the articles of association.
No shares carry any special rights with regard to control of the Company and there are no restrictions on voting rights except No shares carry any special rights with regard to control of the Company and there are no restrictions on voting rights except that a shareholder has no right to vote in respect of a share unless all sums due in respect of that share are fully paid.
There are that a shareholder has no right to vote in respect of a share unless all sums due in respect of that share are fully paid.
There are no known agreements between holders of securities that may result in restrictions on the transfer of securities or voting rights no known agreements between holders of securities that may result in restrictions on the transfer of securities or voting rights and no known arrangements under which financial rights are held by a person other than the holders of the shares. and no known arrangements under which financial rights are held by a person other than the holders of the shares.
Substantial shareholdings As at 31 December 2017  the Company had been notified under Rule 5 of the Disclosure Guidance and Transparency Rules of As at 31 December 2017 the Company had been notified under Rule 5 of the Disclosure Guidance and Transparency Rules of the Financial Conduct Authority of the following holdings of voting rights in its shares the Financial Conduct Authority of the following holdings of voting rights in its shares
No. of ordinary sharesvoting rights notified % of ordinary share capital voting rights notified Jupiter Asset Management Limited 27101097 15.46 Schroders Plc 17477696 9.97 Kairos Investment Management Limited 5249949 3.01 The following changes to the above voting rights have been notified to the Company under Rule 5 of the Disclosure Guidance The following changes to the above voting rights have been notified to the Company under Rule 5 of the Disclosure Guidance and Transparency Rules from 1 January 2018 up until 1 March 2018 and Transparency Rules from 1 January 2018 up until 1 March 2018
No. of ordinary sharesvoting rights notified % of ordinary share capital voting rights notified Jupiter Asset Management Limited 27659939 15.78
The directors who served during the financial year were as follows The directors who served during the financial year were as follows Director Position Service in the year ended 31 December 2017 Jonathan Bloomer Chairman Served throughout the year Lee Rochford Group chief executive officer Appointed 3 January 2017 Rob Memmott Group chief financial officer Served throughout the year stepped down 31 December 2017 Iain Cornish Senior independent nonexecutive director Served throughout the year Lan Tu Independent nonexecutive director Served throughout the year Maria Lus Albuquerque Independent nonexecutive director Served throughout the year Andrew Fisher Independent nonexecutive director Served throughout the year Tom Drury Former Group chief executive officer Stepped down 3 January 2017 Biographical details of the directors of the Company during the year and to the date of this report can be seen on pages 44 and Biographical details of the directors of the Company during the year and to the date of this report can be seen on pages 44 and With effect from 3 January 2017  Lee Rochford replaced Tom Drury as Group chief executive officer and as an executive director 45.
With effect from 3 January 2017  Lee Rochford replaced Tom Drury as Group chief executive officer and as an executive director of the Company.
Rob Memmott stepped down as Group chief financial officer and as executive director on 31 December 2017 of the Company.
Rob Memmott stepped down as Group chief financial officer and as executive director on 31 December 2017 and was replaced by Paul Cooper with effect from 1 January 2018. and was replaced by Paul Cooper with effect from 1 January 2018.
REPORT OF THE DIRECTORS CONTINUED 81 www. rrowglobalir.
Directors continued Further details relating to board and committee composition Further details relating to board and committee composition are disclosed in the corporate governance report and are disclosed in the corporate governance report and committee reports on pages 46 to 78. committee reports on pages 46 to 78.
The directors are aware of the retirement by rotation provisions The directors are aware of the retirement by rotation provisions in the Code that apply to FTSE 350 companies and have adopted in the Code that apply to FTSE 350 companies and have adopted these provisions.
Paul Cooper offers himself for election by these provisions.
Paul Cooper offers himself for election by shareholders for the first time at the 2018 annual general shareholders for the first time at the 2018 annual general meeting.
All other directors will offer themselves for meeting.
All other directors will offer themselves for reelection at the 2018 annual general meeting. reelection at the 2018 annual general meeting.
Directors interests The directors interests in the share capital of the Company The directors interests in the share capital of the Company at 31 December 2017 are set out on pages 68 and 69. at 31 December 2017 are set out on pages 68 and 69.
Directors indemnities During the financial year ended 31 December 2017 and up to During the financial year ended 31 December 2017 and up to the date of this directors report the Company has maintained the date of this directors report the Company has maintained appropriate liability insurance for its directors and officers. appropriate liability insurance for its directors and officers.
The Company has granted indemnities to each of its directors The Company has granted indemnities to each of its directors on terms consistent with the applicable statutory provisions. on terms consistent with the applicable statutory provisions.
Qualifying thirdparty indemnity provisions for the purposes Qualifying thirdparty indemnity provisions for the purposes of section 234 of the Companies Act 2006 were accordingly of section 234 of the Companies Act 2006 were accordingly in force during the course of the year and remain in force at in force during the course of the year and remain in force at the date of this report. the date of this report.
Interim report Current regulations permit the Company not to send copies Current regulations permit the Company not to send copies of its interim reports to shareholders.
Furthermore the 2017 of its interim reports to shareholders.
Furthermore the 2017 interim results will not be sent to shareholders.
Interim results interim results will not be sent to shareholders.
Interim results and other information about the Company will be available and other information about the Company will be available on the Companys website at www. rrowglobalir. et. on the Companys website at www. rrowglobalir. et.
Electronic and website communication with shareholders The Companys articles of association permit electronic The Companys articles of association permit electronic communication with shareholders as provided in the Companies communication with shareholders as provided in the Companies Act 2006.
The Company obtained authority from its shareholders Act 2006.
The Company obtained authority from its shareholders at the 2014 annual general meeting to implement electronic at the 2014 annual general meeting to implement electronic communication.
It is intended that the 2017 annual report communication.
It is intended that the 2017 annual report and notice of annual general meeting 2018 will be distributed and notice of annual general meeting 2018 will be distributed electronically again and via the Companys website to electronically again and via the Companys website to shareholders who have consented or deemed to have shareholders who have consented or deemed to have consented.
Shareholders who have requested shareholder consented.
Shareholders who have requested shareholder information in hard copy form will continue to receive this. information in hard copy form will continue to receive this.
Employee consultation The Group places considerable value on the involvement of The Group places considerable value on the involvement of its employees and uses a number of ways to engage with the its employees and uses a number of ways to engage with the team on matters that impact them and the performance of team on matters that impact them and the performance of the Group.
These include regular Companywide update the Group.
These include regular Companywide update meetings and email communication use of the employee meetings and email communication use of the employee engagement forum the distribution of a weekly newsletter engagement forum the distribution of a weekly newsletter focus group meetings annual employee surveys and regular focus group meetings annual employee surveys and regular Companywide business update meetings and workshops.
Companywide business update meetings and workshops.
Our people managers carry out monthly onetoone meetings Our people managers carry out monthly onetoone meetings with their direct reports and the senior management team has with their direct reports and the senior management team has an opendoor policy which allows all employees to discuss an opendoor policy which allows all employees to discuss any concerns or new initiatives. any concerns or new initiatives.
Employees are encouraged to be involved in the Companys Employees are encouraged to be involved in the Companys performance via the SIP the detail of which is set out at note 29 . performance via the SIP the detail of which is set out at note 29 .
The Group also has a whistleblowing policy and employees The Group also has a whistleblowing policy and employees are made aware of this at induction and through regular are made aware of this at induction and through regular ongoing refresher training. ongoing refresher training.
Disabled persons The Company adopts a consistent nondiscriminatory The Company adopts a consistent nondiscriminatory approach to all applicants with due regard to their skills and approach to all applicants with due regard to their skills and abilities.
In the event of an employee becoming disabled every abilities.
In the event of an employee becoming disabled every effort is made to ensure that their employment within the effort is made to ensure that their employment within the Company continues and that appropriate training is arranged Company continues and that appropriate training is arranged where necessary.
It is the policy of the Company that training where necessary.
It is the policy of the Company that training career development and promotion of disabled persons should career development and promotion of disabled persons should as far as possible be identical to that of other employees. as far as possible be identical to that of other employees.
Environmental policy Due to the nature of its business activities the Groups Due to the nature of its business activities the Groups environmental impact is considered minimal.
An environmental environmental impact is considered minimal.
An environmental policy is in place to increase employee awareness of environmental policy is in place to increase employee awareness of environmental issues and complies with all relevant regulatory requirements. issues and complies with all relevant regulatory requirements.
The Groups environmental impacts are through resource use The Groups environmental impacts are through resource use and business travel.
Key areas of the policy addressing the and business travel.
Key areas of the policy addressing the business environmental impact are as follows business environmental impact are as follows minimising paper usage and the purchase of recycled minimising paper usage and the purchase of recycled paper and packaging where possible paper and packaging where possible energy efficient office products energy efficient office products recycling office waste recycling office waste increased use of video and conference calls and Skype increased use of video and conference calls and Skype for business facilities for business facilities supporting cycling to work through a cycle to work supporting cycling to work through a cycle to work scheme and scheme and travel should only be booked for essential travel should only be booked for essential business reasons. business reasons.
Carbon reporting  methodology We have followed the requirements of the GHG Protocol We have followed the requirements of the GHG Protocol Corporate Accounting and Reporting Standard revised edition Corporate Accounting and Reporting Standard revised edition and the Carbon Trust conversion factors to measure and report and the Carbon Trust conversion factors to measure and report greenhouse gas emissions as well as the disclosure requirements greenhouse gas emissions as well as the disclosure requirements in Part 7 of the Companies Act 2006 Strategic report and in Part 7 of the Companies Act 2006 Strategic report and Directors report Regulations 2013.
Directors report Regulations 2013.
The financial control method which captures the sources The financial control method which captures the sources that fall within our consolidated financial statements has that fall within our consolidated financial statements has been used.
Although we operate an outsourced model working been used.
Although we operate an outsourced model working with partners these partners do not work exclusively for the with partners these partners do not work exclusively for the Group and therefore it is not deemed appropriate to include Group and therefore it is not deemed appropriate to include emissions outside of the Group consolidated financial statements. emissions outside of the Group consolidated financial statements.
GOVERNANCE REPORT Arrow Global Group PLC  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Carbon reporting  methodology continued The reporting period aligns to the financial period i. the year ended 31 December 2017 and the Groups carbon reporting The reporting period aligns to the financial period i.
Scope Type Reportable items 1 Direct emissions by the Company Air conditioning and refrigerated leaks 2 Indirect energy consumed but not owned by the Company Electricity usage 3 Other indirect emissions not included in scope 2 Business travel Considered under the screening method with an estimated 5% leakage.
Considered under the screening method with an estimated 5% leakage.
Activities that the Group was responsible for led to 2127 .3 tonnes of annual CO Activities that the Group was responsible for led to 2127 .3 tonnes of annual CO emissions in 2017 2016 1621.8 tonnes emissions in 2017 2016 1621.8 tonnes as documented below as documented below
C0 emissions tonnes per annum 2017
2 1194.4 715.9 Total scope 1 and 2 1633.0 1204.2 Total 2127.3 1621.8 Tonne of CO per employee using average number of employees for the year 1.5 1.4 CO CO emissions have increased during the year due to the acquisition of Zenith a fullyear inclusion of Vesting and the agreed emissions have increased during the year due to the acquisition of Zenith a fullyear inclusion of Vesting and the agreed purchase of Mars Capital.
Whilst we consider our carbon emissions to still be relatively low with the Group expanding globally purchase of Mars Capital.
Whilst we consider our carbon emissions to still be relatively low with the Group expanding globally the main area we can control is business travel and we will continue to make employees aware of environmental impacts. the main area we can control is business travel and we will continue to make employees aware of environmental impacts.
Branches outside of the UK As detailed on pages 28 to 32 of the strategic report the Group operates in various offices and branches in the UK As detailed on pages 28 to 32 of the strategic report the Group operates in various offices and branches in the UK and overseas. and overseas.
Risk management
Please refer to the strategic report on pages 38 to 42.
Please refer to the strategic report on pages 38 to 42.
Statement of disclosure of information to the auditor Each of the persons who is a director at the date of approval of the financial statements confirms that Each of the persons who is a director at the date of approval of the financial statements confirms that so far as the director is aware there is no relevant audit information of which the Companys auditor is unaware and so far as the director is aware there is no relevant audit information of which the Companys auditor is unaware and the director has taken all steps heshe ought to have taken as a director to make himselfherself aware of any relevant audit the director has taken all steps heshe ought to have taken as a director to make himselfherself aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that the Companys auditor is aware of that information. information and to establish that the Companys auditor is aware of that information.
This confirmation is given and should be interpreted in accordance with the provisions of section 418 of the Companies Act 2006.
This confirmation is given and should be interpreted in accordance with the provisions of section 418 of the Companies Act 2006.
Auditor
KPMG LLP has indicated its willingness to accept reappointment as auditor of the Company.
Resolutions to reappoint KPMG LLP KPMG LLP has indicated its willingness to accept reappointment as auditor of the Company.
Resolutions to reappoint KPMG LLP as independent auditor to the Company and to authorise the directors to determine its remuneration will be proposed at the as independent auditor to the Company and to authorise the directors to determine its remuneration will be proposed at the forthcoming annual general meeting. forthcoming annual general meeting.
Annual general meeting The forthcoming annual general meeting of the Company will take place at the Midland Hotel Peter Street Manchester M60 The forthcoming annual general meeting of the Company will take place at the Midland Hotel Peter Street Manchester M60 2DS on Tuesday 22 May 2018 at 2.30pm.
Notice of the annual general meeting of the Company which includes the business to be 2DS on Tuesday 22 May 2018 at 2.30pm.
Notice of the annual general meeting of the Company which includes the business to be transacted and resolutions to be considered at the meeting appears in the document accompanying this annual report transacted and resolutions to be considered at the meeting appears in the document accompanying this annual report and accounts. and accounts.
This report was approved by the board and signed on its behalf by This report was approved by the board and signed on its behalf by Stewart Hamilton Company secretary 1 March 2018 REPORT OF THE DIRECTORS CONTINUED 83 www. rrowglobalir.
DIRECTORS RESPONSIBILITIES STATEMENT The directors are responsible for preparing the annual report The directors are responsible for preparing the annual report and the Group and Company financial statements in and the Group and Company financial statements in accordance with applicable law and regulations. accordance with applicable law and regulations.
Company law requires the directors to prepare Group and Company law requires the directors to prepare Group and parent company financial statements for each financial year. parent company financial statements for each financial year.
Under that law they are required to prepare the Group Under that law they are required to prepare the Group financial statements in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by financial statements in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the EU and applicable law and have elected to prepare the the EU and applicable law and have elected to prepare the parent company financial statements on the same basis. parent company financial statements on the same basis.
Under company law the directors must not approve the Under company law the directors must not approve the financial statements unless they are satisfied that they give financial statements unless they are satisfied that they give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Group and a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Group and parent company and of their profit or loss for that period. parent company and of their profit or loss for that period.
In preparing each of the Group and parent company financial In preparing each of the Group and parent company financial statements the directors are required to statements the directors are required to select suitable accounting policies and then apply select suitable accounting policies and then apply them consistently them consistently make judgements and estimates that are reasonable make judgements and estimates that are reasonable relevant and prudent relevant and prudent state whether they have been prepared in accordance state whether they have been prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the EU with IFRSs as adopted by the EU assess the Group and parent companys ability to continue assess the Group and parent companys ability to continue as a going concern disclosing as applicable matters related as a going concern disclosing as applicable matters related to going concern and to going concern and use the going concern basis of accounting unless they use the going concern basis of accounting unless they either intend to liquidate the Group or the parent either intend to liquidate the Group or the parent company or to cease operations or have no realistic company or to cease operations or have no realistic alternative but to do so. alternative but to do so.
The directors are responsible for keeping adequate The directors are responsible for keeping adequate accounting records that are sufficient to show and explain accounting records that are sufficient to show and explain the parent companys transactions and disclose with the parent companys transactions and disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the financial position of the reasonable accuracy at any time the financial position of the parent company and enable them to ensure that its financial parent company and enable them to ensure that its financial statements comply with the Companies Act 2006.
They are statements comply with the Companies Act 2006.
They are responsible for such internal control as they determine is responsible for such internal control as they determine is necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement whether due to that are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error and have general responsibility for taking such fraud or error and have general responsibility for taking such steps as are reasonably open to them to safeguard the assets steps as are reasonably open to them to safeguard the assets of the Group and to prevent and detect fraud and of the Group and to prevent and detect fraud and other irregularities. other irregularities.
Under applicable law and regulations the directors are also Under applicable law and regulations the directors are also responsible for preparing a strategic report directors report responsible for preparing a strategic report directors report directors remuneration report and corporate governance directors remuneration report and corporate governance statement that complies with that law and those regulations. statement that complies with that law and those regulations.
The directors are responsible for the maintenance and The directors are responsible for the maintenance and integrity of the corporate and financial information included integrity of the corporate and financial information included on the Companys website.
Legislation in the UK governing on the Companys website.
Legislation in the UK governing the preparation and dissemination of financial statements the preparation and dissemination of financial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions. may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
Responsibility statement We confirm that to the best of our knowledge We confirm that to the best of our knowledge the financial statements prepared in accordance with IFRS the financial statements prepared in accordance with IFRS give a true and fair view of the assets liabilities financial give a true and fair view of the assets liabilities financial position and profit or loss of the Company and the position and profit or loss of the Company and the undertakings included in the consolidation taken as undertakings included in the consolidation taken as a whole and a whole and the strategic report includes a fair review of the the strategic report includes a fair review of the development and performance of the business and the development and performance of the business and the position of the Company and the undertakings included position of the Company and the undertakings included in the consolidation taken as a whole together with a in the consolidation taken as a whole together with a description of the principal risks and uncertainties that description of the principal risks and uncertainties that they face. they face.
We consider the annual report and accounts taken as a We consider the annual report and accounts taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Groups information necessary for shareholders to assess the Groups position and performance business model and strategy. position and performance business model and strategy.
By order of the board By order of the board Paul Cooper Group chief financial officer 1 March 2018 Lee Rochford Group chief executive officer 1 March 2018 1.
Our opinion is unmodified We have audited the financial statements of Arrow Global Group PLC the Company for the year ended 31 December 2017 which comprise the Consolidated Statement of profit and loss and other comprehensive income Consolidated and Parent Company Statements of financial position Consolidated and Parent Company Statements of changes in equity Consolidated and Parent Company Statements of cash flows and the related notes including the accounting policies in note 3.
In our opinion the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the Groups and of the parent Companys affairs as at 31 December 2017 and of the Groups profit for the year then ended the Group financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as adopted by the European Union IFRSs as adopted by the EU the parent Company financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the EU and as applied in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006 and the financial statements have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006 and as regards the Group financial statements Article 4 of the IAS
Basis for opinion We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing UK ISAs UK and applicable law.
Our responsibilities are described below.
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is a sufficient and appropriate basis for our opinion.
Our audit opinion is consistent with our report to the audit committee.
Independent
auditors report
We were appointed as auditor by the directors on 2 July 2014.
The period of total uninterrupted engagement is the 4 years ended 31 December 2017.
We have fulfilled our ethical responsibilities under and we remain independent of the Group in accordance with UK ethical requirements including the FRC Ethical Standard as applied to listed public interest entities.
No nonaudit services prohibited by that standard were provided.
Overview
Materiality group financial statements as a whole 2.8m 20161.9m 4.4% 2016 3.5% of normalised profit before tax Coverage 100% 2016100% of group profit before tax Risks of material misstatement vs 2016 Recurring risks Estimation of future cash collections from purchased loan portfolios and loan notes
Fair value of net assets acquired as part of business combinations Recurring risks Recoverability of parent companys investment in subsidiaries and intra group debtor balance due from Group entities Key audit matters our assessment of risks of material misstatement Key audit matters are those matters that in our professional judgment were of most significance in the audit of the financial statements and include the most significant assessed risks of material misstatement whether or not due to fraud identified by us including those which had the greatest effect on the overall audit strategy the allocation of resources in the audit and directing the efforts of the engagement team.
We summarise below the key audit matters unchanged from 2016 in decreasing order of audit significance in arriving at our audit opinion above together with our key audit procedures to address those matters and as required for public interest entities our results from those procedures.
These matters were addressed and our results are based on procedures undertaken in the context of and solely for the purpose of our audit of the financial statements as a whole and in forming our opinion thereon and consequently are incidental to that opinion and we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters.
Key audit matter The risk Our response Carrying value of purchased loan portfolios and loan notes 951.5 million 2016 804.1million Refer to page 54 Audit Committee Report page 100 accounting policy and page 109 financial disclosures.
Forecastbased valuation The Groups estimate of the future cash collections from the loan portfolios and the loan notes is the key variable in determining the Effective Interest Rate EIR of loan portfolios any subsequent revenue adjustments and the fair value of loan notes.
Given the nature of the Groups debt portfolios and loan notes the estimation of the future cash collections requires significant judgement.
The Group uses cash flow forecasting models to calculate an initial estimate of future collections.
The assumptions used in the models include the value probability and timing of expected future cash flows for each type of asset class within a portfolio or at a portfolio level.
These estimates are subject to ongoing review by the Group to assess reasonableness comparing actual performance against previous forecasts.
Estimates of future cash flows are impacted by the Groups approach to managing the portfolios e. of specialist collectors.
Where the Directors believe changes in the approach to managing the portfolios may lead to changes in these estimates these are factored into the Groups future cash collection forecasts.
Due to the level of subjectivity inherent in the assumptions used in the cash flow forecasting models this is a key judgement area for our audit.
Our procedures included Control observation We assessed the design and operating effectiveness of controls over data used in the cash flow forecasting models including monitoring of debt servicer collections reconciliations of cash collections per the system to supporting documentation and general IT controls over the collection systems driving the estimated future cash flows Control design We assessed the design and implementation of approval controls such as the portfolio review committee that covers the outputs of the models and manual adjustments to obtain evidence that these have been authorised by appropriate personnel Our sector experience We assessed the modelled cash flows by portfolio to identify those portfolios where more judgement has been exercised for example due to changes in approach by the Directors to managing the portfolios andor we consider greater risk existed for example due to underoverperformance against historic forecasts.
We also inspected the code used in the primary statistical cash flow model to consider in conjunction with our testing on the forecast cash flows whether there is risk of model error.
Taking into account these risk factors on a sample basis we critically assessed the cash flow forecasts and any manual adjustments made by the Group with reference to actual historic collections performance and our understanding of the Group and industry through benchmarked performance and methodology analysis and Historical comparisons On a sample basis we critically assessed the assumptions in the cash flow forecasts including the impact of the use of collection strategies such as litigation and any manual adjustments made by the Group with reference to our understanding of the current and past performance of the Groups portfolios including recent cash collections.
Our results We found the resulting carrying value of purchased loan portfolios and loan notes to be acceptable 2016 acceptable.
Fair value of net assets acquired as part of business combinations 7.8 million Refer to page 54 Audit Committee Report page 97 accounting policy and page 131 financial disclosures.
Forecastbased valuation During the year ended 31 December 2017 the Group acquired Zenith Services S.
Italy and five Mars Capital entities in the UK and Ireland with the assets and liabilities purchased being accounted for at fair value at the date of acquisition.
Our procedures included Our sector experience We challenged the completeness of the acquired net assets and associated assumptions with reference to our business understanding of the acquired entities and testing of the Directors assessments.
We challenged the assumptions including value probability and timing of cash flows made in calculating the fair value assigned to the acquired intangibles with reference to the business plan existing customer contracts and actual performance achieved.
Key audit matters our assessment of risks of material misstatement cont.
Key audit matter The risk Our response Fair value of net assets acquired as part of business combinations cont.
Forecastbased valuation cont.
The Group prepared the acquisition balance sheets based on estimates of the fair value of assets and liabilities acquired.
In particular the Group prepared discounted cash flow models to arrive at its estimates of the acquired intangible assets including customer relationships.
This required it to exercise judgement in determining the expected cash flows from the assets and the discount rates to be applied.
Our procedures included cont.
Benchmarking assumptions We assessed whether the discount rate used in calculating the fair value of the customer relationship intangible reflected market conditions based on our knowledge of the industry and country of acquisition.
Sensitivity analysis We performed sensitivity analysis on the Groups key assumptions being the forecast cash flows and discount rate applied to help us assess their reasonableness and identify areas of potential additional focus Assessing transparency We assessed the adequacy of the Groups disclosures about the degree of estimation involved in arriving at the fair value.
Our results We found the fair value of the acquired net assets to be acceptable.
Recoverability of parent companys investment in subsidiaries and intragroup debtor balance due from Group entities 395.9 million 2016 388.3m Refer to page 97 accounting policy and page 116 financial disclosures.
Low risk high value The carrying amount of the parent companys investments in subsidiaries and intragroup debtor balance due from group entities represents 100% 2016 100% of the companys total assets.
Their recoverability is not at high risk of significant misstatement or subject to significant judgement.
However due to their materiality in the context of the parent company financial statements this is considered to be the area that had the greatest effect on our overall parent company audit.
Our procedures included Tests of detail We compared the carrying amount of the investments representing 100% 2016 100% of the total investment balance with the relevant subsidiaries draft balance sheets to identify whether their net assets being an approximation of their minimum recoverable amount were in excess of their carrying amount and assessing whether those subsidiaries have historically been profitmaking.
Tests of detail We assessed 100% of group debtors to identify with reference to the relevant debtors draft balance sheets whether they have a positive net asset value and therefore coverage of the debt owed as well as assessing whether those debtor companies have historically been profit making.
Assessing subsidiary audits We assessed the work we performed on those subsidiaries and their profits and net assets and considered the results of that work.
Our sector experience For the investments where the carrying amount exceeded the net asset value we compared the carrying amount of the investment with the expected value of the business based on the expected cash flows of the underlying subsidiaries.
Our results We found the Groups assessment of the recoverability of the parent companys investment in subsidiaries and intragroup debtor balance to be acceptable 2016 acceptable.
86 Normalised profit before tax 63.2m 2016 54.4m Group Materiality 2.8m 2016 1.9m Whole financial statements materiality 2016 1.9m Range of materiality at 6 components 1.4m2.2m 2016 1.4m Misstatements reported to the audit committee 2016 0.1m Profit before tax Group materiality Our application of materiality and an overview of the scope of our audit Materiality for the Group financial statements as a whole was set at 2.8 million 2016 1.9 million determined with reference to a benchmark of Group profit before taxation normalised to exclude 27.3 million expense in relation to the Groups bond refinance and 14.7 million gain on disposal of associate set out on pages 104 and 116 respectively in order to reduce volatility in the benchmark.
The group team performed procedures on the items excluded from normalised group profit before tax.
The materiality represents 4.4% 20163.5% of the Groups reported profit before taxation as normalised.
Materiality for the parent company financial statements as a whole was set at 1.4m 2016 1m determined with reference to a benchmark of company total assets of which it represents 0.4% 2016 0.3%.
We report to the audit committee any corrected or uncorrected identified misstatements exceeding 140000 2016 95000 in addition to other identified misstatements that warranted reporting on qualitative grounds.
How we scoped our audit Audits for group reporting purposes were performed on all six 2016 four reporting components which were Group holding company UK operating and nonoperating subsidiaries The Portuguese operating and nonoperating subsidiaries The Benelux operating and nonoperating subsidiaries which include entities in Netherlands and Belgium The Italian operating and nonoperating entities which include Zenith Services S.
The Mars Capital operating and nonoperating entities in the UK and Ireland.
The components scoped in for Group reporting purposes accounted for 100% of Group revenue 100% of Group profit before tax and 100% of Group total assets 2016 100%.
The audit of the Portuguese Benelux and Italian components was performed by component audit teams in Portugal Netherlands Belgium and Italy.
The audit of the Group holding company UK operating and nonoperating subsidiaries the acquired Mars Capital subsidiaries and consolidation was performed by the Group audit team.
The Group audit team instructed the component auditors as to the significant areas to be covered including the relevant risks detailed above and the information to be reported back.
The
Group audit team approved the component materiality range of between 1.4 million and 2.2 million 2016 1.0 million having regard to the size and risk profile of the components.
The Group audit team managed and coordinated the component auditors in the following ways During the audit the Group audit team held regular telephone calls and facetoface discussions with the component audit teams to challenge audit risks and audit strategy.
Through the calls and meetings the findings and observations reported to the Group audit team were discussed in more detail and any further work required by the Group audit team was then performed by the component auditors.
In addition the Group audit team participated in the audit close out meetings of the component teams to ensure all material issues affecting the Group were identified and communicated back to Arrow Global Group Plc.
We challenged and reviewed audit approaches to revenue and cash collections.
We have nothing to report on going concern We are required to report to you if we have anything material to add or draw attention to in relation to the directors statement in note 3 to the financial statements on the use of the going concern basis of accounting with no material uncertainties that may cast significant doubt over the Group and Companys use of that basis for a period of at least twelve months from the date of approval of the financial statements or if the related statement under the Listing Rules set out on page 79 is materially inconsistent with our audit knowledge.
We have nothing to report in these respects.
We have nothing to report on the other information in the Annual Report The directors are responsible for the other information presented in the Annual Report together with the financial statements.
Our opinion on the financial statements does not cover the other information and accordingly we do not express an audit opinion or except as explicitly stated below any form of assurance conclusion thereon.
Our responsibility is to read the other information and in doing so consider whether based on our financial statements audit work the information therein is materially misstated or inconsistent with the financial statements or our audit knowledge.
Based solely on that work we have not identified material misstatements in the other information.
Strategic report and directors report Based solely on our work on the other information we have not identified material misstatements in the strategic report and the directors report in our opinion the information given in those reports for the financial year is consistent with the financial statements and in our opinion those reports have been prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 2006.
Directors remuneration report In our opinion the part of the Directors Remuneration Report to be audited has been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 2006.
Disclosures of principal risks and longerterm viability Based on the knowledge we acquired during our financial statements audit we have nothing material to add or draw attention to in relation to the directors confirmation in the statement of viability on page 43 that they have carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Group including those that would threaten its business model future performance solvency and liquidity the Principal Risks disclosures describing these risks and explaining how they are being managed and mitigated and the directors explanation in the statement of viability of how they have assessed the prospects of the Group over what period they have done so and why they considered that period to be appropriate and their statement as to whether they have a reasonable expectation that the Group will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the period of their assessment including any related disclosures drawing attention to any necessary qualifications or assumptions.
Under the Listing Rules we are required to review the statement of viability.
We have nothing to report in this respect.
Corporate governance disclosures We are required to report to you if we have identified material inconsistencies between the knowledge we acquired during our financial statements audit and the directors statement that they consider that the annual report and financial statements taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Groups position and performance business model and strategy or the section of the annual report describing the work of the Audit Committee does not appropriately address matters communicated by us to the Audit Committee or We are required to report to you if the Corporate
Governance Statement
Corporate Governance Code specified by the Listing Rules for our review.
We have nothing to report in these respects.
88 Based solely on our work on the other information described above in our opinion the Corporate Governance Statement has been prepared in accordance with relevant rules of the Disclosure Guidance and Transparency Rules of the Financial Conduct Authority.
We have nothing to report on the other matters on which we are required to report by exception Under the Companies Act 2006 we are required to report to you if in our opinion adequate accounting records have not been kept by the parent Company or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or the parent Company financial statements and the part of the Directors Remuneration Report to be audited are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns or certain disclosures of directors remuneration specified by law are not made or we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit.
We have nothing to report in these respects.
Respective responsibilities Directors responsibilities As explained more fully in their statement set out on page 83 the directors are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements including being satisfied that they give a true and fair view such internal control as they determine is necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error assessing the Group and parent Companys ability to continue as a going concern disclosing as applicable matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless they either intend to liquidate the Group or the parent Company or to cease operations or have no realistic alternative but to do so.
Auditors responsibilities Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or other irregularities see below or error and to issue our opinion in an auditors report.
Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance but does not guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with ISAs UK will always detect a material misstatement when it exists.
Misstatements can arise from fraud other irregularities or error and are considered material if individually or in aggregate they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of the financial statements.
A fuller description of our responsibilities is provided on the FRCs website at www. rc. iteauditorsresponsibilities.
Irregularities  ability to detect We identified areas of laws and regulations that could reasonably be expected to have a material effect on the financial statements from our sector experience through discussion with the directors and other management as required by auditing standards and from inspection of the Groups regulatory correspondence.
We had regard to laws and regulations in areas that directly affect the financial statements including financial reporting including related company legislation and taxation legislation.
We considered the extent of compliance with those laws and regulations as part of our procedures on the related financial statements items.
In addition we considered the impact of laws and regulations and certain aspects of company legislation recognising the financial and regulated nature of the Groups activities.
With the exception of any known or possible noncompliance and as required by auditing standards our work in respect of these was limited to enquiry of the directors and other management and inspection of regulatory correspondence.
We considered the effect of any known or possible noncompliance in these areas as part of our procedures on the related financial statements items.
We communicated identified laws and regulations throughout our team and remained alert to any indications of noncompliance throughout the audit.
As with any audit there remained a higher risk of non detection of noncompliance with relevant laws and regulations as these may involve collusion forgery intentional omissions misrepresentations or the override of internal controls.
The purpose of our audit work and to whom we owe our responsibilities This report is made solely to the Companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006.
Our audit work has been undertaken so that we might state to the Companys members those matters we are required to state to them in an auditors report and for no other purpose.
To the fullest extent permitted by law we do not accept or assume responsibility to anyone other than the Company and the Companys members as a body for our audit work for this report or for the opinions we have formed.
Richard Gabbertas Senior Statutory Auditor for and on behalf of KPMG LLP Statutory Auditor Chartered Accountants One St Peters Square
M2 3AE 1 March 2018 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Arrow Global Group PLC  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF PROFIT OR LOSS and OTHER COMPREHENSIVE INCOME FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017
Continuing operations Total revenue 5 319015 235930 Operating expenses Collection activity costs 118468 70261 Other operating expenses 11 94603 70637 Total operating expenses 213071 140898 Operating profit 105944 95032 Finance income 8 9 813 Finance costs 9 71669 66841 Share of profit in associate net of tax 24 1578 2363 Gain on sale of associate 24 14697 Profit before tax 50559 31367 Taxation charge on ordinary activities 12 10644 5061 Profit after tax 7 39915 26306 Other comprehensive income Items that are or may be reclassified subsequently to profit or loss FX translation difference arising on revaluation of foreign operations 2431 5954 Movement on hedging reserve 289 670 Items that will not be reclassified to profit or loss Remeasurements of the defined benefit liability 25 10 Total comprehensive income 42610 32920 Profit after tax attributable to Owners of the Company 39871 26305 Noncontrolling interest 44 1 39915 26306 Basic EPS  13 0.23 0.15 Diluted EPS  13 0.22 0.15 91 Financial statements www. rrowglobalir.
CONSOLIDATED and PARENT COMPANY STATEMENT OF FINANCIAL POSITION AS AT 31 DECEMBER 2017 Assets Note
Group
Company
Company
Noncurrent assets Goodwill 14 152779 128081 Other intangible assets 15 43493 39144 Property plant and equipment 16 10168 3584 Investment in subsidiary undertakings 24   307500 307500 Investment in associate 24  10371 Deferred tax asset 20 7780 3692 Total noncurrent assets 214220 184872 307500 307500 Current assets Cash and cash equivalents 35943 23203 9 8 Trade and other receivables 18 56885 35484 88544 80906 Purchased loan portfolios 17 900769 782792 Loan notes 17 50698 21315 Total current assets 1044295 862794 88553 80914 Total assets 1258515 1047666 396053 388414
Share capital 21 1753 1744 1753 1744 Share premium 21 347436 347436 347436 347436 Retained earnings 118710 92327 47333 37509 Hedging reserve 343 632 Other reserves 272408 273484 3291 1936 Total equity attributable to shareholders 195148 167391 393231 384753 Noncontrolling interest 173 Total equity 195321 167391 393231 384753
Noncurrent liabilities Senior secured notes 30 763740 681158 Trade and other payables 19 16569 Deferred tax liability 20 21940 14859 Defined benefit liability 25  1721 Total noncurrent liabilities 802249 697738 Current liabilities Trade and other payables 19 81790 76261 1405 2966 Derivative liability 27 2865 1433 Current tax liability 4528 5469 1417 695 Revolving credit facility 30 153036 74169 Bank overdrafts 30 1332 7698 Other borrowings 30 10724 12077 Senior secured notes 30 6670 5430 Total current liabilities 260945 182537 2822 3661 Total liabilities 1063194 880275 2822 3661 Total equity and liabilities 1258515 1047666 396053 388414 Approved by the board of directors on 1 March 2018 signed and authorised for issue on its behalf by Paul Cooper Lee Rochford Group chief financial officer Group chief executive officer Company number  92 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Arrow Global Group PLC  Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Ordinary
Share premium
Hedging reserve Own share reserve
Merger reserve
Non controlling interest
Balance at 1 January 2016 1744 347436 76916 1302 1936 541 276961 145356  145356 Profit after tax   26305     26305 1 26306 Exchange differences      5954  5954 20 5974 Net fair value losses  cash flow hedges    827    827  827 Tax on hedged items    157    157  157 Remeasurements of the defined benefit liability   10     10  10 Total comprehensive income for the year   26295 670  5954  32919 21 32940 Sharebased payments  3239 3239  3239 Dividend paid  14123  14123  14123 Noncontrolling interest on acquisition   394 394 Settlement of noncontrolling interest  415 415 Balance at 31 December 2016 1744 347436 92327 632 1936 5413 276961 167391  167391 Profit after tax  39871 39871 44 39915 Exchange differences  4301 4301 4301 Recycled to profit after tax      1870  1870  1870 Net fair value losses  cash flow hedges    348    348  348 Tax on hedged items    59    59  59 Remeasurements of the defined benefit liability  25  25  25 Total comprehensive income for the year 39846 289 243142566 4442610 Sharebased payments  3334 3334  3334 Shares issued 9 9  9 Repurchase of own shares  1355   1355  1355 Dividend paid 16797 16797 16797 Dividend paid by NCI  58 58 Noncontrolling interest on acquisition  187 187 Balance at 31 December 2017 1753 347436 118710 343 3291 7844 276961 195148 173 195321 1 Other reserves total 272408000 deficit 2016 273484000 deficit.
Company
Ordinary
Share premium
Own share reserve
Balance at 1 January 2016 1744 347436 25513 1936 372757 Profit after tax 22880 22880 Total comprehensive income for the year   22880  22880 Sharebased payments   3239  3239 Dividend paid  14123  14123 Balance at 31 December 2016 1744 347436 37509 1936 384753 Profit after tax 23287 23287 Total comprehensive income for the year 23287 23287 Shares issued 9 9 Repurchase of own shares  1355 Sharebased payments   3334  3334 Dividend paid 16797 16797 Balance at 31 December 2017 1753 347436 47333 3291 393231 Translation reserve The translation reserve comprises all foreign currency differences arising from the translation of the financial statements of foreign operations.
Merger reserve The merger reserve represents the reserve generated upon consolidation of the Group following the Group reconstruction as part of the IPO where Arrow Global became the parent company.
Own share reserve The own share reserve comprises the cost of the Companys ordinary shares held by the Group.
At 31 December 2017 the Company held 257337 ordinary shares of 1p each held in an employee benefit trust.
This represents 0.15% of the Company share capital at 31 December 2017.
CONSOLIDATED and PARENT COMPANY STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 93 Financial statements www. rrowglobalir.
Note
Group
Group
Company
Company
Net cash used ingenerated by operating activities 35 27478 26217 18144 14115 Investing activities Purchase of property plant and equipment 4885 525 Purchase of intangible assets 9112 7412 Proceeds from disposal of intangible assets and property plant and equipment 1319 643 Dividends received from associate 7233 6820 Additional investment in associate  1305 Disposal of associate 18143 Acquisition of subsidiaries net of cash acquired 8201 62465 Acquisition of subsidiary deferred consideration 8888 14998 Net cash used in investing activities 4391 79242 Financing activities Net proceeds from additional loans 66327 12193 Proceeds from senior notes net of fees 340546 169712 Redemption of senior notes 290867 Early repayment of bond 17631 8664 Repayment of interest on senior notes 31119 36915 Repurchase of own shares 1355  1355 Issue of share capital 9  9 Bank interest received 9 Receipt of loan notes  938 Bank and other similar fees paid 4274 4389 Payment of dividends 16855 14123 16797 14123 Payment of deferred interest 610 1071 Settlement of noncontrolling interest  415 Net cash flow generated byused in financing activities 44180 117266 18143 14123 Net increasedecrease in cash and cash equivalents 12311 11807 1 8 Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of year 23203 10183 8 16 Effect of exchange rates on cash and cash equivalents 429 1213 Cash and cash equivalents at end of year 35943 23203 9 8 CONSOLIDATED and PARENT COMPANY STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 94 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Arrow Global Group PLC  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 General information Arrow Global Group PLC is a company incorporated in England and Wales and is the ultimate parent company of the Group.
The address of the registered office is presented on the inside back cover.
The financial statements are presented in Pounds Sterling and rounded to the nearest thousand.
The Companys subsidiaries both direct and indirect at this date are listed in note 24.
The Groups principal activity is to identify acquire and manage secured and unsecured defaulted loan portfolios from financial institutions such as banks and credit card companies as well as retail chains student loans motor credit telecommunication firms and utility companies.
The Groups and the Companys financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 have been prepared in accordance with IFRS as adopted for use in the EU and therefore comply with Article 4 of the EU IFRS Regulation.
The accounting policies have been applied consistently in the current and prior periods.
As permitted by section 408 of the Companies Act 2006 a separate income statement and related notes of the Company have not been presented in this annual report and accounts.
Accounting standards New standards The following new standards and interpretations are mandatory for the year beginning 1 January 2017 Disclosure Initiative Amendments to IAS 7 Recognition of Deferred Tax Assets for Unrealised Losses Amendments to IAS 12 and Annual Improvements to IFRSs 20142016 Cycle  various standards Amendments to IFRS 12.
During 2017 these new standards and interpretations had an insignificant effect on the consolidated financial statements of the Group apart from including changes in liabilities arising from financing activities including both cash and noncash changes as a result of amendments to IAS 7.
Standards issued but not yet effective A number of new standards are effective for annual periods beginning after 1 January 2018 and earlier application is permitted however the Group has not early adopted the new or amended standards in preparing these consolidated financial statements.
The following standards are expected to have a significant impact on the Groups financial statements in the period of initial application a.
Estimated impact of the adoption of IFRS 9 and IFRS 15 The Group is required to adopt IFRS 9 Financial Instruments and IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers from 1 January 2018.
The Group has assessed the estimated impact that the initial application of IFRS 9 see b. and IFRS 15 see c. will have on its consolidated financial statements. b.
IFRS 9 Financial Instruments IFRS 9 is effective from 1 January 2018 and the Group has adopted it from that date.
As a result there is no impact arising from this standard on the accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017.
The standard is the new standard for recognising and measuring financial assets and liabilities.
It replaces the existing standard IAS 39 Financial Instruments Recognition and Measurement and covers three main areas classification and measurement impairment and hedging.
The Group is not obliged to restate comparatives on the initial adoption of IFRS 9.
Differences in the carrying amounts of financial assets and financial liabilities resulting from the adoption of IFRS 9 will generally be recognised in retained earnings and reserves as at 1 January 2018.
This assessment is preliminary because not all transition work has been finalised therefore the actual impact may change because assumptions and judgements are subject to change until finalisation of the financial statements for the year ending 31 December 2018 the Group is still refining its models and methodology for expected credit loss calculation ECL calculation and the governance and implementation of internal controls required for implementation are in the process of refinement and finalisation.
The following is a summary of some of the more significant items that are likely to be important in understanding the impact of the implementation of IFRS 9 on the Group i.
Classification and measurement The Standard introduces new requirements to determine the measurement basis of financial assets and liabilities.
IFRS 9 includes three principal classification categories for financial assets measured at amortised cost fair value through other comprehensive income and fair value through the profit or loss.
It eliminates the existing IAS 39 categories of held to maturity loans and receivables and available for sale.
A financial asset is measured at amortised cost if it meets both of the following conditions and is not designated as at fair value through profit or loss it is held within a business model whose objective is to hold assets to collect contractual cash flows and its contractual terms give rise on specified dates to cash flows that are solely payments of principal and interest SPPI on the principal amount outstanding.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 95 Financial statements www. rrowglobalir.
Accounting standards continued Standards issued but not yet effective continued b.
IFRS 9 Financial instruments continued i.
Classification and measurement continued A financial asset is measured at fair value through other comprehensive income only if it meets both of the following conditions and is not designated as at fair value through profit or loss it is held within a business model whose objective is achieved by both collecting contractual cash flows and selling financial assets and its contractual terms give rise on specified dates to cash flows that are solely payments of principal and interest on the principal amount outstanding.
All financial assets not classified as measured at amortised cost or fair value through other comprehensive income as described above are measured at fair value through the profit or loss. recognition.
The Groups business models are required to be assessed based on the way the business is managed and information is provided to management.
IFRS 9 largely retains the existing requirements in IAS 39 for the classification of financial liabilities.
For the Group the impact of this standard is largely in relation to purchased loan portfolios and loan notes involving the cash flow characteristics of assets and the business models under which they are managed.
Accordingly the basis of measurement for the Groups portfolios and loan notes may change.
It is not expected that there will be a transition effect on cash and cash equivalents or trade and other receivables and other current and noncurrent receivables.
The Group has considered the business model objective for each category of financial assets for the Group this is largely the Groups portfolios and loan notes requiring a designation by portfolio.
For the vast majority of assets the objective is to hold the asset to collect the contractual cash flows.
The Group has also made an assessment of the cash flow characteristics of its financial assets to conclude if these are solely payment of principal and interest in order to assess whether the assets can be recognised at amortised cost or fair value through profit or loss under IFRS 9.
As a result of these assessments it has been concluded there will not be a material change to the classification and measurement of the Groups financial assets and the vast majority will continue to be accounted for as at amortised cost.
There will be a small number of purchased loan portfolios and loan notes with an estimated carrying value of approximately 60 million that may be reclassified to being accounted for as at fair value through profit or loss as a result of the Groups assessment of the cash flow characteristics. ii.
Impairment
IFRS 9 replaces the incurred loss impairment model of IAS 39 with a forwardlooking expected credit loss ECL model.
This has the effect of recognising impairment of purchased loan portfolio and loan notes earlier than at present.
The estimation of ECLs requires considerable judgement since they should include an assessment of forwardlooking economic assumptions which are determined on a probabilityweighted basis based on reasonable and supportable forecasts.
The Group will leverage off its existing cash flow models to inform these ECLs.
The key concepts for IFRS 9 in relation to impairment provisioning include the following categories no significant increase in credit risk since origination Performing or a significant increase in credit risk has occurred since origination Underperforming or credit impaired such that losses are incurred Credit impaired or the asset is considered purchased or originated credit impaired on initial recognition POCI.
Due to the characteristics of the Groups purchased loan portfolios they will all be classified as POCI as the assets are considered purchased originated credit impaired.
ECL is not recognised on initial recognition.
Instead lifetime ECL is incorporated into the calculation of effective interest rate.
Any changes in lifetime ECL after initial recognition are recognised in profit or loss.
ECL calculation for POCI assets is always based on an ECL over the expected life of the asset.
IFRS 9 requires an unbiased and probability weighted estimate of credit losses by evaluation of a range of possible outcomes that incorporates forecasts of future economic conditions.
Measurement of ECLs at each reporting period should reflect reasonable and supportable information at the reporting date about past events current conditions and forecasts of future economic conditions.
In determining ECLs the Group has considered three economic scenarios including assumptions on unemployment GDP and CPI and weighted these according to their likely occurrence.
The scenarios include a central scenario based on the current economic environment an upside scenario and a downside scenario.
The estimation and application of this forwardlooking information will require significant judgement and be subject to appropriate internal governance and scrutiny.
Based on 31 December 2017 data and current implementation status we estimate that the adoption of IFRS 9 will lead to a reduction in shareholders equity of approximately 17 million before tax 14 million after tax relating to a reduction in expected cash flows on the purchased loan portfolios and loan notes as a result of the application of the probability weighted economic scenarios being incorporated in the lifetime ECL.
This results in a reduction of this amount in purchased loan portfolios shown in the statement of financial position and an increase in deferred tax assets of 3 million.
This impact is driven by the impairment requirements of IFRS 9.
We continue to refine and monitor certain aspects of our impairment process which may change the actual impact on adoption. iii.
Hedge Accounting IFRS 9 also incorporates new hedge accounting rules that intend to align hedge accounting with risk management practices.
IFRS 9 includes an accounting policy choice to defer the adoption of IFRS 9 hedge accounting and to continue with IAS 39 hedge accounting.
The Group has decided to exercise this accounting policy choice.
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED Arrow Global Group PLC  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounting standards continued Standards issued but not yet effective continued c.
IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers IFRS 15 is effective from 1 January 2018 and the Group has adopted it from that date.
As a result there is no impact arising from this standard on the accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017.
IFRS 15 establishes a comprehensive framework for determining whether how much and when revenue is recognised.
It replaces existing revenue recognition guidance including IAS 18 Revenue IAS 11 Construction Contracts and IFRIC 13 Customer Loyalty Programmes.
The standard introduces a fivestep approach to recognising revenue Identify the contracts with a customer Identify the performance obligations in the contracts Determine the transaction price Allocate transaction price to performance obligations Recognise revenue when or as the entity satisfies each performance obligation The Groups asset management revenue is within the scope of IFRS The Group recognises asset management revenue on portfolios managed for third parties.
The key contract obligations include debt collection servicing and master servicing.
The nature of the compensation for debt collection services and subsequent revenue recognised is contingency collection fees which are received either as a fixed fee or as a percentage of collections or a percentage of the outstanding portfolio asset value.
The nature of the compensation for master servicing is an agreed upon fee for the provision of various services that are available on demand.
The Group has considered the revenue recognition policies in the context of the requirements of IFRS 15.
As a result of the assessment it has been concluded there will not be a material change resulting from the implementation of IFRS 15.
The following is a summary of some of the more significant considerations that are important in understanding the impact of the implementation of IFRS 15 on the Group i.
Asset management revenue  debt collection servicing Under IFRS 15 revenue will be recognised over time with the relevant measure of progress against performance obligations being time due to these services being on demand for when customers require them.
Based on the Groups assessment and analysis carried out to date current revenue recognition policies are consistent with this approach.
Therefore the Group does not expect the application of IFRS 15 to result in significant differences in the revenue recognition for these services. ii.
Asset management revenue  master servicing Under IFRS 15 revenue will be recognised over time with the relevant measure of progress against performance obligations being time due to these services being on demand for when customers require them.
Based on the Groups assessment current revenue recognition policies are consistent with this approach.
Therefore the Group does not expect the application of IFRS 15 to result in significant differences in the revenue recognition for these services. iii.
Transition
The Group plans to adopt IFRS 15 using the cumulative effect method with the effect of initially applying this standard recognised at the date of initial application i.
1 January 2018.
As a result the Group will not apply the requirements of IFRS 15 to the comparative period presented. d.
Other standards The following new and revised standards and interpretations have been issued but are not yet endorsed or effective for these financial statements and have not been early adopted IFRS 16 Leases IFRS 2 amendments Classification and measurement of sharebased payment transactions IFRS 10 and IAS 28 amendments Sale or contribution of assets between an investor and its associate or joint venture The Group is assessing the potential impact on its consolidated financial statements resulting from the new and revised standards and interpretations.
So far the Group does not expect any signi f ic a n t im p a c t .
In relation to leases IFRS 16 introduces a single onbalance sheet lease accounting model for lessees.
A lessee recognises a rightofuse asset representing its right to use the underlying asset and a lease liability representing its obligation to make lease payments.
The standard is effective for annual periods beginning on or after 1 January 2019.
The Group has completed an initial assessment of the potential impact on its consolidated financial statements but has not yet completed its detailed assessment.
So far the most significant impact identified is that the Group will recognise new assets and liabilities for its operating leases of office buildings.
Financial statements www. rrowglobalir.
Significant accounting policies Basis of preparation The financial statements have been prepared in accordance with IFRS adopted by the European Union and the Group financial statements also comply with EU IAS Regulation.
The financial statements of the Group have been prepared under the historical cost convention other than the fair value of derivative contracts and certain loan notes and the amortised cost value of portfolio assets.
Basis of consolidation The consolidated financial statements incorporate the financial statements of the Company and entities controlled by the Company its subsidiaries made up to 31 December 2017 and comparative period.
Control is achieved where the Company is exposed or has rights to variable returns from its involvement with its investee entity and has the ability to affect these returns through its power over the investee entity.
The results of subsidiaries acquired or disposed of during the year are included in the consolidated statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income from the effective date of acquisition or up to the effective date of disposal as appropriate.
Where necessary adjustments are made to the financial statements of subsidiaries to bring the accounting policies used in line with those used by the
All intraGroup transactions balances income and expenses are eliminated on consolidation.
Also see the accounting policy shares held in an employee benefit trust EBT.
Going concern The directors have undertaken a thorough review of forecast cash flow models and scenarios for a period in excess of 12 months from the date of approval of these accounts.
Following this review and in the light of current cash availability economic conditions and information available about future risks and uncertainties they have concluded that it is appropriate to prepare the Group financial statements on a going concern basis.
Business combinations The acquisition of subsidiaries is accounted for using the acquisition method.
The cost of the acquisition is measured at the aggregate of the fair values at the date of exchange of assets given liabilities incurred or assumed and equity instruments issued by the Group in exchange for control of the acquiree.
The acquirees identifiable assets liabilities and contingent liabilities that meet the conditions for recognition under IFRS 3  Business Combinations are recognised at their fair value at the acquisition date except that of deferred tax assets or liabilities and liabilities or assets related to employee benefit arrangements that are recognised and measured in accordance with IAS 12 Income Taxes and IAS 19 Employee Benefits respectively.
IFRS 3 allows a measurement period of up to one year after acquisition to reflect any new information obtained about facts and circumstances that were made available to the Group at the acquisition date.
Goodwill
Goodwill arising on a business combination is measured as the excess of the sum of the consideration transferred the amount of any noncontrolling interest in the acquiree and the fair value of the acquirers previously held equity interest if any in the entity over the net of the acquisition date amounts of the identifiable assets acquired and the liabilities assumed.
If after reassessment the Groups interest in the net fair value of the acquirees identifiable assets liabilities and contingent liabilities exceeds the cost of the business combination the excess is recognised immediately in profit or loss.
Goodwill is not amortised but is tested for impairment on an annual basis or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that it might be impaired e. respective acquired entityCGU is significantly below expectations.
Determining whether goodwill is impaired requires an estimation of the value in use of the CGUs to which goodwill has been allocated.
Calculation of the value in use requires an estimate of the amount and timing of future cash flows expected to arise from the CGU which are discounted by an appropriate discount rate to calculate a present value of the future cash flows.
The discount rate applied is the Groups weighted average cost of capital with an adjustment to reflect the specific risk characteristics of the CGU.
This calculation inherently involves a number of judgments in that cash flow forecasts are prepared for periods that are beyond the normal requirement of management reporting and the appropriate discount rate relevant to the CGU is an estimate.
Sensitivities have been considered in note 14.
On a business combination. calculated based on actual performance and forecasts at that date.
On disposal of a subsidiary the goodwill attributable to that subsidiary is included when calculating the profit or loss on disposal.
Associates
Associates are those entities in which the Group has significant influence but not control over the financial and operating policies.
Significant influence is presumed to exist when the Group holds between 20% and 50% of the voting power of another entity or can demonstrate significant influence or evidence through a number of aspects such as representation on the board of directors participation in policy making and decisions material transactions between the entity and investee interchange of managerial personnel or provision of essential technical information.
Associates are accounted for using the equity method and are initially recognised at cost.
The consolidated financial statements include the Groups share of the total comprehensive income and equity movements of the associate from the date that significant influence commences until the date that it ceases.
Revenue recognition and effective interest rate method EIR Income from purchased loan portfolios Income from purchased loan portfolios represents the yield from acquired portfolio investments.
Purchased loan portfolios are financial instruments that are accounted for under IAS 39 and recognised at fair value at the purchase date that equals the price paid.
They are subsequently measured at amortised cost using the EIR method.
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED Arrow Global Group PLC  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Significant accounting policies continued Revenue recognition and effective interest rate method EIR Income from purchased loan portfolios continued The EIR method is a method of calculating the amortised cost of a purchased loan portfolio and of allocating interest income over the expected life of the portfolio.
The EIR is the rate that exactly discounts 84 months of estimated future cash receipts of the purchased portfolio asset to the net carrying amount at initial recognition i. the price paid to acquire the asset.
Upward revaluations writeups are increases to carrying values discounted at the EIR rate of the acquired debt portfolios as a result of reassessments to their estimated future cash flows and are recognised in the income from purchased loan portfolios line within revenue.
Any subsequent reversals to writeups are also recorded in this line.
If these reversals writedowns exceed any previously recognised cumulative writeups i. statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income.
Unallocated cash is held as a liability in the statement of financial position until it is reconciled.
Unallocated cash is held as liability until all reasonable steps have been taken to show that it has been extinguished only being released to the consolidated statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income at this point.
Where the Group acquires purchased loan portfolios via forward flow agreements being contracted multiple future purchases there is no difference in accounting treatment from that described above.
Recognition of loan notes as portfolios When the Group purchases loan notes in entities that in turn have legal ownership of underlying loan portfolios the Group has assessed the substance of the loan notes under the criteria set out in IAS 39 to determine whether to account for the underlying portfolio loan assets or to recognise an investment in the loan note asset in the entity that has issued the loan notes.
The decision is based on whether the circumstances meet the requirements of IAS 39 paragraph 19 which deems that the Group would recognise its proportionate share of the asset on balance sheet as portfolio loan assets where the following criteria are met the loan note issuing entity has no obligation to pay amounts to the Group unless it collects equivalent amounts from the original asset the loan note issuing entity is prohibited by the terms of the transfer contract from selling or pledging the original asset other than as security to the Group for the obligation to pay them cash flows and the loan note issuing entity has an obligation to remit any cash flows it collects on behalf of the Group without material delay.
Essentially where the risks and rewards of the loan portfolio assets sit with the Group rather than the issuer of the loan notes it is appropriate for the entity issuing the loan notes to derecognise the underlying asset and the Group to recognise their proportionate share.
If these criteria are met the Group recognises its appropriate share of the underlying loan portfolios and if criteria are not met then the Group recognises an investment in the loan notes.
Impairment of purchased loan portfolios and loan notes The portfolios are reviewed for indications of impairment at the statement of financial position date such as variances to historical cash curves in accordance with IAS 39.
This is considered on a portfolio basis.
Where portfolios exhibit objective evidence of impairment an adjustment being the difference between the current carrying value and the net present value of future estimated cash flows is recorded to the carrying value of the portfolio.
Objective evidence of impairment is considered to be where the carrying value is less than the original purchase price less revenue recognised.
Revenue on assets under management The Group receives asset management revenue on portfolios managed for third parties in the UK Ireland Portugal Italy the Netherlands and Belgium.
In accordance with IAS 18 the Company recognises revenue on its managed services contracts when the right to receive such revenue is reasonably assured and can be measured reliably.
The nature of the revenue is contingency collection fees which are received either as a fixed fee or as a percentage of collections or the outstanding portfolio asset value calculated at the contractually agreed period which is usually monthly.
The
Group also receives master servicing fees which are recognised over time on measure of progress against performance obligations as the services are on demand when customers require them.
Interest income from secured loan notes The Group has entered into lending arrangements with third parties to provide capital to purchase nonperforming consumer debt portfolios see note 17.
Interest income is recognised throughout the year using the EIR which is the rate that exactly discounts estimated future cash receipts through the expected life.
Retirement benefit costs Payments to defined contribution retirement schemes are charged as the employees provide services to the Group.
The Group has for the period covered by these financial statements made contributions to defined contribution plans to provide pension benefits for employees upon retirement.
A number of employees of Vesting Finance were entitled to pension benefits that the company had insured through a contract with an insurance company.
The arrangement met the definition of a defined benefit plan and the insurance policy represented qualifying plan assets of the scheme.
In the current year Vesting Finance agreed a compensation plan for employees for the change of their defined benefit pension scheme into a defined contribution scheme.
Accordingly a settlement has been processed and there is no plan liability at 31 December 2017 note 25.
The Groups net obligation in respect of the defined benefit plan was calculated by estimating the amount of future benefit that employees have earned in the current and prior periods discounting that amount and deducting the fair value of plan assets from the insurance policy.
Financial statements www. rrowglobalir.
Significant accounting policies continued Retirement benefit costs continued The calculation of the defined benefit obligation was performed at acquisition and then annually by a qualified actuary.
When the calculation results in a potential asset for the Group the recognised asset is limited to the present value of economic benefits in the form of any future refunds from the plan or reductions in future contributions to the plan.
To calculate the present value of future economic benefits consideration is given to the applicable minimum funding requirements.
Remeasurements of the net defined benefit liability which comprise actuarial gains and losses the return on plan assets excluding interest and the effect of the ceiling if any excluding interest are recognised immediately through other comprehensive income.
The Group determines the net interest expense on the net defined liability for the period by applying the discount rate used to measure the defined benefit obligation at acquisition or the beginning of the annual period to the net defined benefit liability during the period as a result of contributions and benefit payments.
Net interest expense and other expenses related to the defined benefit pension plan are recognised in profit or loss.
When the benefits of the plan are changed or when the plan is curtailed the resulting change in benefit that relates to past service or the gain or loss on curtailment is recognised immediately in the statement of comprehensive income.
The Group recognises gains and losses in the settlement of a defined benefit plan when the settlement occurs.
Foreign currency translation The individual financial statements of each Group company are presented in the currency of the primary economic environment in which it operates its functional currency.
For the purpose of the consolidated financial statements the results and financial position of each Group company are expressed in pounds Sterling which is the functional currency of the Company and the presentation currency for the consolidated financial statements.
In preparing the financial statements of the individual companies transactions in currencies other than the entitys functional currency foreign currencies are recognised at the rates of exchange prevailing on the dates of the transactions.
At each statement of financial position date monetary assets and liabilities that are denominated in foreign currencies are retranslated at the rates prevailing on the date.
Nonmonetary items carried at fair value that are denominated in foreign currencies are translated at the rates prevailing on the date when the fair value was determined.
Nonmonetary items that are measured in terms of historical cost in a foreign currency are not retranslated.
Exchange differences are recognised in profit or loss in the year in which they arise except for exchange differences on transactions entered into to hedge certain foreign currency risks.
For the purpose of presenting the consolidated financial statements the assets and liabilities of the Groups foreign operations are translated at exchange rates prevailing on the statement of financial position date.
Income and expense items are translated at the average exchange rates for the year unless exchange rates fluctuate significantly during that year in which case the exchange rates at the date of transactions are used.
Exchange differences arising if any are recognised in the other comprehensive income.
Leases
Assets leased are classified as finance leases if the lease agreements transfer substantially all the risks and rewards of ownerships to the lessee but not necessarily legal title.
The leased asset is initially measured at an amount equal to the lower of its fair value and the present value of the minimum lease payments.
Subsequent to initial recognition the asset is accounted for in accordance with the accounting policy applicable to that asset.
All other leases are classified as operating leases.
Minimum lease payments made under finance leases are apportioned between the finance expense and the reduction of the outstanding liability.
The finance expense is allocated to each period during the lease term so as to produce a constant periodic rate of interest on the remaining balance of the liability.
Operating lease payments are recognised as an expense on a straightline basis over the lease term except where another systematic basis is more representative of the time pattern in which economic benefits from the leased asset are consumed.
Taxation
Income tax expense represents the sum of the tax currently payable and deferred tax.
Current tax Current taxation including UK corporation tax and foreign tax is based on the taxable profit for the year and is provided at amounts expected to be paid or recovered using the tax rates and laws that have been enacted or substantively enacted at each reporting date.
Taxable profit differs from the net profit as reported in the statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income because it excludes items of income or expense that are taxable or deductible in other years and it further excludes items that are never taxable or deductible.
Current taxation is charged or credited in the statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income except when it relates to items charged or credited to equity in which case the corporation taxation is also dealt with in equity.
Deferred tax Deferred taxation is the tax expected to be payable or recoverable on differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities in the financial statements and the corresponding tax bases used in the computation of taxable profit.
Deferred tax liabilities are provided using the liability method on all taxable temporary differences at each reporting date.
Such assets and liabilities are not recognised if the temporary difference arises from goodwill or from the initial recognition other than in a business combination of other assets and liabilities in a transaction that affects neither the taxable profit nor the accounting profit.
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED Arrow Global Group PLC  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Significant accounting policies continued Taxation continued Deferred tax continued Deferred taxation liabilities are recognised for taxable temporary differences arising on investments in subsidiaries and interests in joint ventures except where the Group is able to control the reversal of the temporary difference and it is probable that the temporary difference will not reverse in the foreseeable future.
Deferred taxation is measured at the average tax rates that are expected to apply in the years in which the temporary timing differences are expected to reverse based on tax rates and laws that have been enacted or substantively enacted at each reporting date.
The carrying amount of deferred taxation assets is reviewed at each reporting date and reduced to the extent that it is no longer probable that sufficient taxable profits will be available to allow all or part of the asset to be recovered.
Deferred taxation is charged or credited in the statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income except when it relates to items charged or credited to equity in which case the deferred taxation is also dealt with in equity.
Sharebased payment transactions Sharebased payments transactions in which the Group receives goods or services as consideration for its own equity instruments are accounted for as equity settled sharebased payments.
The grant date fair value of the sharebased payment granted to employees is recognised as an employee expense with a corresponding increase in equity over the period that the employee becomes unconditionally entitled to the awards.
The fair value of the options granted is measured using an option valuation model taking into account the terms and conditions upon which the options were granted.
The amount recognised as an expense is adjusted to reflect the actual number of awards for which the related service and nonmarket vesting conditions are expected to be met such that the amount ultimately recognised as an expense is based on the number of awards that do meet the related service and nonmarket performance conditions at the vesting date.
For sharebased payments with nonvesting conditions the grant date fair value of the sharebased payment is measured to reflect such conditions and there is no trueup for differences between expected and actual outcomes.
Where the Company grants rights to its equity instruments to employees of its subsidiaries the costs are recharged to the subsidiary in line with the requirements of IFRS 2 Sharebased payments.
Shares held in an employee benefit trust EBT Transactions of the Company sponsored EBT are treated as being those of the Company and are therefore reflected in these financial statements.
Property plant and equipment and other intangibles Property plant and equipment and other intangibles as discussed below are stated at cost less accumulated depreciation and accumulated impairment losses.
Depreciation is recognised so as to write off the cost or valuation of assets less their residual values over their useful lives using the straightline method on the following basis Furniture five years Computer equipment three years Leasehold improvements five years Software licences shorter of contractual life and useful economic life IT platform useful economic life The estimated useful lives residual values and depreciation method are reviewed at each year end with the effect of any changes in estimate accounted for on a prospective basis.
The gain or loss arising on the disposal or retirement of an item of property plant and equipment and other intangibles is determined as the difference between the sales proceeds and the carrying amount of the asset and is recognised in the consolidated statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income.
Acquired licences such as software licences are capitalised at cost and amortised over the shorter of contractual life and useful economic life.
Financial instruments Financial assets and financial liabilities are recognised in the Groups statement of financial position when the Group becomes a party to the contractual provisions of the instrument.
Purchased loan portfolios and secured loan notes measured at amortised cost The Groups purchased loan portfolios and secured loan notes are nonderivative financial assets with fixed or determinable payments that are not quoted in an active market.
Under IAS 39 such assets are classified as loans and receivables and are measured at amortised cost using the EIR method less any impairment.
Purchased loan portfolios are acquired at a deep discount and as a result the estimated future cash flows reflect the likely credit losses within each portfolio.
The portfolio investments are initially recorded at their fair value being their acquisition price and are subsequently measured at amortised cost using the EIR method.
The portfolio asset is analysed as current in the statement of financial position as part of the Groups normal operating cycle.
As part of the Groups litigation strategy to recover customer balances the Group incurs legal costs.
Where these are considered recoverable these are included within the estimated forecasts of future cash flows within the purchased loan portfolios balance.
Loan notes measured at fair value The Groups loan notes measured at fair value are nonderivative financial assets.
The loan notes are designated at fair value through profit or loss as they are managed on a fair value basis.
The loan notes are initially recorded at their fair value being their acquisition price and are subsequently measured at fair value using a discounted cash flow model.
Financial statements www. rrowglobalir.
Significant accounting policies continued Fair value measurements The fair value of financial instruments is determined in accordance with IFRS 13 and IAS 39 in the manner described in note 27.
Derecognition of financial assets The Group derecognises a financial asset when the contractual rights to the cash flows from the financial asset expire or it transfers the rights to receive the contractual cash flows in a transaction in which substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership of the financial asset are transferred or in which the Group neither transfers nor retains substantially all of the risks and rewards of ownership and it does not retain control of the financial asset.
On derecognition of a financial asset the difference between the carrying amount of the asset or the carrying amount allocated to the portion of the asset derecognised and the sum of i the consideration received including any new asset obtained less any new liability assumed and ii any cumulative gain or loss that had been recognised in the OCI is recognised in the statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income.
Any interest in transferred financial assets that qualify for derecognition that is created or retained by the Group is recognised as a separate asset or liability.
Provisions
Provisions are recognised when the Group has a present obligation legal or constructive as a result of a past event and it is probable that the Group will be required to settle that obligation.
Provisions are measured at the directors best estimate of the consideration required to settle that obligation at the date of the consolidated statement of financial position and are discounted to present value where the effect is material.
Financial liabilities and equity instruments Debt and equity instruments are classified as either financial liabilities such as loan notes or as equity in accordance with the substance of the contractual arrangement and in conjunction with the application of IFRS.
Financial liabilities are held at amortised cost using the EIR method.
The EIR is calculated by estimating the cash flows arising from the contractual terms of the instrument over its expected life.
Transaction costs are included within the EIR and deducted from the initial carrying value of the debt instrument.
The Group derecognises financial liabilities when the Groups obligations are discharged cancelled or they expire.
Derivative financial instruments The Group uses derivative financial instruments principally interest rate swaps and forward currency contracts to manage the interest rate and currency risks arising from the Groups underlying business operations.
No transactions of a speculative nature are undertaken.
All derivative financial instruments are assessed against the hedge accounting criteria set out in IAS 39.
The majority of the Groups derivatives are cash flow hedges of highly probable forecast transactions and meet the hedge accounting requirements of IAS Derivatives are initially recognised at the fair value on the date a derivative contract is entered into and are subsequently remeasured at each reporting date at their fair value.
Where derivatives do not qualify for hedge accounting movements in their fair value are recognised immediately within the profit or loss.
For derivatives that are designated as cash flow hedges and where the hedge accounting criteria are met the effective portion of changes in the fair value is recognised in other comprehensive income.
The gain or loss relating to the ineffective portion is recognised immediately in profit or loss as part of finance costs.
Amounts accumulated in equity are recognised in profit or loss when the income or expense on the hedged item is recognised in profit or loss.
The Group discontinues hedge accounting when it is evident from testing that a derivative is not or has ceased to be highly effective as a hedge or the derivative expires or is sold terminated or exercised or the underlying hedged item matures or is sold or repaired.
Borrowings
Borrowings are recognised initially at fair value being their issue proceeds net of any transaction costs incurred.
Borrowings are stated subsequently at amortised cost any difference between proceeds net of transaction costs and the redemption value is recognised in the statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income over the expected life of the borrowings using the EIR.
Borrowings are classified as current liabilities unless the Group has an unconditional right to defer settlement of the liability for at least 12 months after the statement of financial position date.
Cash and cash equivalents Cash and cash equivalents comprise demand deposits and other shortterm highly liquid investments that are readily convertible to a known amount of cash and are subject to an insignificant risk of change in value.
Cash and cash equivalents are carried at amortised cost in the statement of financial position.
Legal transaction fees Legal transaction fees associated with the purchase of portfolios are allocated to the purchase price of the portfolio and included within the EIR applied against the asset value.
Operating expenses Operating expenses relate to administration and costs associated with collection activities.
All operating costs are accounted for on an accruals basis.
Other reserves Other reserves include the own share reserve the translation reserve and the merger reserve.
These reserves are further explained in the consolidated statement of changes in equity on page 92.
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED Arrow Global Group PLC  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Critical accounting judgments and estimates In the application of the Groups accounting policies which are described in note 3 the Directors are required to make judgments estimates and assumptions about the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources.
The estimates and associated assumptions are based on historical experience and other factors that are considered to be relevant.
Actual results may differ from these estimates.
The estimates and underlying assumptions are reviewed on an ongoing basis.
Revisions to accounting estimates are recognised in the year in which the estimate is revised. a.
Fair value of net assets acquired as part of business combinations The Group capitalises goodwill on the acquisition of entities as discussed in the significant accounting policies.
Goodwill is the excess of the consideration paid over the fair value of its net assets therefore the fair value of assets acquired directly impacts the amount of goodwill recognised on acquisition.
The determination of the fair value of acquired net assets requires the exercise of management judgment particularly for those financial assets or liabilities for which there are no quoted prices or assets such as acquired loan portfolios and customer intangibles where valuations reflect estimates and timing of future cash flows.
Different valuations would result in changes to the goodwill arising and to the postacquisition performance of the acquired entities.
Further detail on the valuation of acquired loan portfolios is given in section b. below. b.
Carrying value and EIR of purchased loan portfolios and loan notes The carrying value of purchased loan portfolios is 900.8 million and loan notes is 50.7 million at 31 December 2017.
These carrying values are based on 84month cash flow forecasts that are prepared for each portfolio.
These forecasts are generated using statistical models incorporating a number of factors including predictions of probability to pay which is informed by customer and account level data credit agency data and our historical experience with accounts which have similar key attributes.
A further key model input is previous payments made by a customer.
Additionally estimates are made of the movement of accounts from nonpaying to paying and viceversa either through breakdown of the account or settlement pay down of the balances due.
In relation to nonpaying accounts assumptions will be made as to which operational strategy is the most appropriate to move the account to paying status this may include placing these accounts into litigation.
Operational factors that may impact future estimated cash flows are also considered such as improved collections processes and systems.
Management also review the model on a portfolio basis to take into account external factors which have impacted historical or will impact future performance and where necessary portfolios are calibrated to take into account these known factors.
The assumptions and estimates made are specific to the particular characteristics of each portfolio.
The ERCs created from the ERC forecasting models are regularly benchmarked at a portfolio level against actuals this informs the decision as to whether a writeup or writedown may be required.
An impairment is only recognised if the writedowns exceed any previously recognised cumulative writeups and revenue recognised.
The estimated future cash flows generated by the above process are the key estimatejudgment in these financial statements.
Flexing the expected future gross cash flows by 11% would impact the closing carrying value of the purchased loan portfolios as at 31 December 2017 by  8845000 2016  7044000.
Flexing the expected future gross cash flows by 33% would impact the closing carrying value of the purchased loan portfolios as at 31 December 2017 by  26534000 2016  21131000.
Revenue
Income from purchased loan portfolios 239575 188914 Profit on portfolio sales 1329 701 Income from loan notes 1715 Fair value gain on loan notes designated at FVTPL note 17 5298 Total revenue from portfolios and loan notes 247917 189615 Income from asset management 71098 46315 Total revenue 319015 235930 103 Financial statements www. rrowglobalir.
Segmental reporting The Group represents a single reportable segment.
The Group head office is in the UK with subsidiaries also based in wider Europe.
Management has concluded that discrete financial information is not available because no measure of segment profit or loss by service line is supplied to the chief operating decision maker.
The chief operating decision maker does not have sufficient information to assess performance and make resource allocation decisions by product and due to the nature of the Groups activities considers geography to be inappropriate.
Total revenue 319015 235930 Collection activity costs 118468 70261 Other operating expenses 94603 70637 Operating profit 105944 95032 Finance income 9 813 Finance costs 71669 66841 Share of profit in associate 1578 2363 Gain on sale of associate 14697 Profit before tax 50559 31367 Taxation 10644 5061 Profit after tax 39915 26306 Purchased loan portfolios 900769 782792 Investments in associate  10371 Statement of financial position Total segment assets 1250735 1043974 Total segment liabilities 1041254 865416 Segment net assets 209481 178558 Unallocated assets which comprise deferred tax balances 7780 3692 Unallocated liabilities which comprise deferred tax balances 21940 14859 Consolidated net assets 195321 167391 Geographical information
Foreign entities
Total
Total revenue 212134 118295 11414 319015 Noncurrent assets 203701 10519  214220 Geographical information
Foreign entities
Total
Total revenue 179703 66289 10062 235930 Noncurrent assets 150599 34273  184872 Profit after tax Profit after tax has been arrived at after chargingcrediting Note Net foreign exchange gains 611 1510 Operating leases  properties 2531 2102 Depreciation and amortisation 15 16 11729 8658 Staff costs 11.
42954 30649 104 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED Arrow Global Group PLC  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Finance income Bank interest 9 7 Deferred consideration adjustment  806 Finance costs Interest and similar charges on bank loans 6047 5370 Interest on senior secured notes 34616 39968 Interest rate swap and forward exchange contract hedge costs 2095 2778 Other interest 1562 731 Bond refinancing costs 27349 17994 Total finance costs 71669 66841 In 2017 Bond refinancing costs comprised 27349000 incurred on the early redemption of the 335 million notes due 2021 of which 17631000 was a cash cost related to the call premium and cancellation of interest rate hedging linked to the 2021 Notes.
The remaining 9718000 was due to a noncash writeoff of related transaction fees in connection with the 2021 Notes.
In 2016 Bond refinancing costs comprised 15026000 incurred on the early redemption of the 220 million notes due 2020 of which 8664000 was a cash cost related to the call premium and 6362000 a noncash cost related to the writeoff of previous transaction fees.
Also in 2016 upon the cancellation of the previous revolving credit facility 2968000 noncash costs were incurred relating to the writeoff of previous transaction fees.
Auditors remuneration The analysis of auditor remuneration is as follows Fees payable for audit services  Company 65 65 Fees payable for audit services  subsidiaries 820 663 Total fees payable for audit services 885 728 Fees payable for auditrelated assurance services  Company 52 59 Total fees payable for auditrelated assurance services 52 59 Fees payable for other assurance services 211 310 Total fees payable for nonaudit services 263 369 Total fees payable 1148 1097 Staff costs and other operating expenses a.
Other operating expenses
Staff costs 11.
42954 30649 Other staff related costs 7255 4071 Premises 7353 4678 IT 9213 7033 Depreciation and amortisation 11729 8658 Net foreign exchange gains 611 1510 Other operating expenses 16710 17058 Total other operating expenses 94603 70637 In 2017 7240000 of the other staff related costs relates to temporary labour recruitment and training 2016 3700000.
Financial statements www. rrowglobalir.
Staff costs and other operating expenses continued b.
Staff costs Wages bonuses and salaries 33352 23778 Pension costs see note 25 2154 809 Social security costs 3674 3001 Sharebased payments 3334 3061 Staff restructuring 440 42954 30649 The total directors personnel remuneration including nonexecutive directors during the year was 2720000 2016 2790000 and including 110000 in relation to pension costs 2016 104000.
See the remuneration report for more disclosure of directors remuneration.
The average monthly number of employees including executive directors are analysed below 2017 2016 Collections 784 672 Data and analytics 86 49 Finance pricing and legal 211 145 IT and change 139 111 Management 34 18 Risk 44 39 Support services 166 101 1464 1135
The Groups activities are predominantly UK based.
The analysis below therefore uses the UK rate of corporation tax.
The effective tax rate for the year ended 31 December 2017 is higher than the standard rate of corporation tax in the UK at 19.25% 2016 20.00%.
The differences are as follows Profit before tax 50559 31367 Tax charge at standard UK corporation tax rate 9733 6273 Utilisation of tax losses previously unrecognised  2754 Adjustment in respect of prior years 724 46 Expenses not deductible for tax purposes 454 1391 Share in profit in associate reported net of tax 304 472 Differences in corporate tax rates 186 329 Differences on hedging arrangements Differing overseas tax rates 1327 1259 Movements in unrecognised deferred tax 572 469 Chargeable gains 544 208 Tax charge 10644 5061 Effective tax rate relating to continuing operations 21.1% 16.1% Standard UK corporation rate for the year 19.25% 20.0% Effective tax rate higherlower than standard UK corporation rate for the year Higher Lower 106 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED Arrow Global Group PLC  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Tax continued Tax charge for the year consists of Current tax charge UK and foreign corporation tax based on profit after tax 8947 7055 Adjustment in respect of prior years 825 2871 Total current tax charge 8122 4184 Deferred tax charge Origination and reversal of temporary differences 2806 1234 Adjustment in respect of prior years 102 441 Movement in deferred tax previously not recognised 572 469 Differences in tax rates 186 329 Total tax charge 10644 5061 In the current year the tax charge is inflated by an increase in expenses not deductible for tax purposes largely due to current year subsidiary acquisition costs a higher level of taxable income from overseas countries with higher tax rates and a chargeable gain.
This is offset by the recognition through deferred tax of a previously unrecognised deferred tax asset in relation to prior year losses along with profits of an associate accounted for net of tax.
Deferred tax The Group has not recognised a deferred tax asset in respect of 11455000 2016 14335000 of tax losses carried forward due to uncertainties over the future utilisation of the losses including the future profitability of the relevant subsidiaries.
These losses may be available for offset against future profits and have no expiry date.
The Finance Act 2016 which was substantively enacted in September 2016 included provisions to reduce the rate of UK corporation tax from 20% to 19% from 1 April 2017 and 17% from 1 April 2020.
Deferred taxation is measured at the tax rates that are expected to apply in the periods in which the temporary timing differences are expected to reverse based on tax rates and laws that have been enacted or substantively enacted at the statement of financial position date.
Accordingly deferred tax balances have generally been calculated using a rate of 17% in these accounts apart from balances on overseas companies that are recognised at the relevant rate applicable in the appropriate jurisdictions.
Earnings per share EPS Profit after tax attributable to shareholders 39871 26305 Weighted average ordinary shares 174768 174373 Potential exercise of share options 4344 4041 Weighted average ordinary shares diluted 179112 178414 Basic earnings per share  0.23 0.15 Diluted earnings per share  0.22 0.15 Refer to table of alternative performance measures on page 21 for details of underlying earnings per share.
Goodwill
Cost
At 1 January 2016 81799 Goodwill on acquisition of subsidiary 40371 Exchange rate differences 8220 At 31 December 2016 130390 Goodwill on acquisition of subsidiary 20911 Exchange rate differences 3787 At 31 December 2017 155088 Amortisation and impairment At 31 December 2016 and 31 December 2017 2309 Net book value At 31 December 2017 152779 At 31 December 2016 128081 107 Financial statements www. rrowglobalir.
Goodwill continued Goodwill acquired in a business combination is allocated at acquisition to the CGUs that are expected to benefit from that business combination.
The carrying amount of goodwill has been allocated to six aggregated CGUs on the basis that these represent the lowest level at which goodwill is monitored for internal management purposes and are not larger than the single operating segment defined under IFRS 8 Operating Segments.
In relation to goodwill the six CGUs identified are Benelux comprising all the Group companies acquired in the Vesting acquisition Capquest group comprising all group companies acquired in the Capquest acquisition Portugal comprising of all the Group companies acquired in the Whitestar Gesphone and Redrock acquisitions Arrow Global Receivables Management Limited AGRML Zenith Service S.
Zenith and Mars Capital Acquisition Limited Mars Capital.
The Benelux Capquest Portugal Zenith and Mars Capital CGUs represent the cash flows generated principally from collections on acquired purchased loan portfolios and management of thirdparty debt and the AGRML CGU represents the cash flows generated principally from collections on purchased loan portfolios.
For the purposes of impairment testing goodwill is allocated to the Groups CGUs as follows Benelux 42614 40921 Capquest 45608 45608 Portugal 41225 39584 AGRML 1968 1968 Zenith 10525 Mars Capital 10839 152779 128081 An impairment review was carried out at 31 December 2017 that resulted in no impairment to goodwill.
The goodwill was assessed to be appropriately stated.
The Group tests goodwill annually for impairment or more frequently if there are indications that goodwill might be impaired.
The recoverable amount of the CGUs is determined as the higher of fair value less cost to sell and value in use.
The key assumptions for the value in use calculations are those regarding the discount rate and forecast cash collections net of direct collection costs and allowable forecast synergies.
Management estimates discount rates using pretax rates that reflect current market assessments of the time value of money and the risks specific to the CGUs.
The starting point for determining the discount rates for each CGU was to use the Groups weighted average cost of capital WACC and adjust this for specific factors for each of the CGUs to derive a market participants rate.
The factors took into account the risks inherent in each of the CGUs such as currency regulatory and economic risks and the different operations in the CGUs were also considered.
As a result of applying the various risk factors noted above to the Groups WACC a market participant rate of 6.11% 2016 6.09% was determined for the AGRML and Capquest CGUs a rate of 8.50% 2016 6.84% was determined for the Portuguese CGU a rate of 6.00% 2016 6.34% was determined for the Benelux CGU and a rate of 6.57% 2016 NA for the Italian CGU.
The Group prepares cash flow forecasts derived from the most recent financial budgets approved by management for the next five years and extrapolates cash flows into perpetuity.
The forecasts assume growth rates in collection activity which in turn drive the forecast collections and cost figures.
These assumptions are in keeping with the directors expectations of future growth.
Appropriate tax rates are applied to the cash flow forecasts for each CGU.
The Group has conducted a sensitivity analysis on the impairment test of the CGUs carrying value.
The CGUs would become impaired based on an unlevered posttax cash flow noted below or based on an increase in the discount rate noted below.
Impairment in each CGU would happen with A cash flow reduction of A discount rate increase of Capquest 19% 3% Portugal 6% 1% AGRML 3% 1% Benelux 37% 4% Zenith 55% 20% 108 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED Arrow Global Group PLC  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Intangible assets
Contractual rights
Software licences
Cost
At 1 January 2016 3721 2579 14988 4409 25697 Assets acquired on acquisition of a subsidiary 14257  1297 1241 16795 Exchange differences 179tel2777 Additions  5365 2047 7412 Disposals 639   639 At 31 December 2016 19773 2345 21807 8117 52042 Assets acquired on acquisition of a subsidiary 5010  444 74 5528 Exchange differences 347 Additions 16 6738 2358 9112 Reclassifications   873 873 Disposals  1514  53 1567 At 31 December 2017 25686 944 30001 9831 66462 Accumulated amortisation At 1 January tel1790 2635 5054 Exchange differences Amortisation charge for the year 2836 172 2048 2342 7398 At 31 December 2016 3274 469 3903 5252 12898 Exchange differences Amortisation charge for the year 4540 245 2746 2282 9813 Reclassifications   674 674 Disposals 248   248 At 31 December 2017 7998 485 7347 7139 22969 Carrying amount At 31 December 2017 17688 459 22654 2692 43493 At 31 December 2016 16499 1876 17904 2865 39144 109 Financial statements www. rrowglobalir.
Property plant and equipment Land and
Leasehold improvements
Furniture
Vehicles
Total property plant and equipment
At 1 January 2016  2769 1743 1082 44 5638 Assets acquired on acquisition of a subsidiary   388 195  583 Exchange differences Additions  123 249 153  525 Disposals  72 247 18 18 355 At 31 December 2016  3007 2381 1479 41 6908 Assets acquired on acquisition of a subsidiary 2 3249 Exchange differences Additions 6 3402 955 522  4885 Reclassifications  2 2 Disposals   8  40 48 At 31 December 2017 3114 6517 3621 2079 7 15338 Accumulated depreciation At 1 January 2016  989 Exchange differences Disposal  72 202 18 18 310 Charge for the year  260 At 31 December 2016  1080 1545 672 27 3324 Exchange differences 3 92 42 14 3 30 Disposal  40 40 Reclassifications  2 2 Charge for the year 60 1916 At 31 December 2017 63 2020 2081 1005 1 5170 Carrying amount At 31 December 2017 3051 4497 1540 1074 6 10168 At 31 December 2016  1584 The Group leases a property under a finance lease which was held within Zenith at the date of acquisition see note 32 a.
At 31 December 2017 the net carrying amount was 3051000 2016 nil.
Financial assets Expected falling due after 1 year Purchased loan portfolios 713358 595352 Loan notes 44755 17763 758113 613115 Expected falling due within 1 year Purchased loan portfolios 187411 187440 Loan notes 5943 3552 193354 190992 Total 951467 804107 Purchased loan portfolios The Group recognises income from purchased loan portfolios in accordance with IAS 39.
At 31 December 2017 the carrying amount of the purchased loan portfolio asset was 900769000 2016 782792000.
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED Arrow Global Group PLC  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial assets continued Purchased loan portfolios continued The movements in purchased loan portfolio assets were as follows As at the year brought forward 782792 609793 Portfolios acquired during the year 195579 224640 Purchased loan portfolios to be resold  23519 Portfolios acquired through acquisition of a subsidiary  35343 Collections in the year 333567 285960 Income from purchased loan portfolios 239575 188914 Exchange gain on purchased loan portfolios 15535 32880 Profit on disposal of purchased loan portfolios 1329 701 Purchase price adjustment relating to prior year 474 900769 782792 There was no impairment recognised in respect of purchased loan portfolios or loan notes in 2017 2016 nil.
The movements in loan notes were as follows As at the year brought forward 21315 Loan notes acquisition expenditure 30155 21315 Changes in fair value 5298 Collections in the year 8643 Income from loan notes 1715 Exchange gain on loan notes 858 50698 21315 See note 27 for an analysis of those loan notes measured as fair value through the income statement.
Trade and other receivables
Group
Company
Company
Trade receivables 49297 26041 Other receivables 4355 5720 Due from subsidiary undertakings   88430 80794 Prepayments 3233 3723 114 112 56885 35484 88544 80906 Trade and other payables
Group
Group
Company
Company
Trade payables 19634 13536  14 Deferred consideration on acquisition of subsidiary 6618 9230 Deferred consideration on purchased loan portfolios 10830 26171 Taxation and social security 152 121 Due to subsidiary undertaking   1405 2952 Other liabilities and accruals 44556 27203 81790 76261 1405 2966 Vesting Finance vacated an office building in December 2017 as part of its office consolidation.
The property has an unexpired lease term of 6 years and a provision of 1169000 is included in trade and other payables at 31 December 2017.
It has been assumed that sublease rental income of 656000 will be received to reduce the overall gross liability.
Financial statements www. rrowglobalir.
Trade and other payables continued
Group
Group
Company
Company
Trade payables 3509 Deferred consideration on acquisition of subsidiary 8581 Deferred consideration on purchased loan portfolios 4479
The employees in the Zenith business are part of a statutory indemnity scheme compulsory by law that entitles them to deferred pay typically at the end of their employment the Trattamento di fine rapport TFR.
A liability is recognised to reflect that the indemnity will be paid in the future when the employees leave employment.
As at 31 December 2017 the estimated liability is 715000 635000 and is included within noncurrent trade and other payables on the statement of financial position.
The liability is calculated by an independent expert through an actuarial valuation the key assumptions used are detailed below 2017 2016 Discount rate 1.3% 1.6% Annual inflation rate 1.5% 1.0% Wage inflation 3.5% 3.0% Probability of leaving employment for reasons other than retirement employees aged 1860 10.0% per annum 15.0% per annum Deferred tax 2017 2016
Liabilities
Total
Assets
Liabilities
Total
Fixed assets 303  303 404  404 IFRS transitional adjustments 1748 1748 2052 2052 Share schemes 1225  1225 1129  1129 Hedging reserve 70  70 129  129 Chargeable gains  425 425 Losses 5432  5432 1561  1561 Fair value adjustment on acquisition of subsidiaries 750 20192 19442 469 12382 11913 7780 21940 14160 3692 14859 11167 The following table reconciles from the 2016 to the 2017 net deferred tax position 1 January
Movements to goodwill Recognised in statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income
Foreign exchange 31 December Fixed assets 404   101 303 IFRS transitional adjustments 2052   304   1748 Share schemes 1129   109 205  1225 Hedging reserve 129  59  70 Chargeable gains 425   425 Losses 1561   3771  100 5432 Other temporary differences 115 810 155 378  48 750 Fair value adjustment on acquisition of subsidiaries 12028 1114  6429  621 20192 11167 304 155 2576 205 473 14160 112 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED Arrow Global Group PLC  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Share capital Issued fully paid and authorised 175266624 2016 174439026 ordinary shares of 1p each 1753 1744 1753 1744 Offset by own shares 3 1 1750 1743 Total consideration for the shares was 349189000 2016 349180000 giving rise to a share premium of 347436000 2016 347436000.
41680000 was raised as part of the IPO net of 8420000 of IPO costs which were netted against the share premium account in accordance with the Companies Act 2006 section 610.
The Companys ordinary shares carry the right to receive dividends and distributions paid by the Company.
The shareholders have the right to receive notice of and to attend and vote at all general meetings of the Company.
Operating leases At the statement of financial position date the Group had outstanding commitments for future minimum lease payments under non cancellable operating leases which fall due as follows Less than 1 year 3688 2469 15 years 12780 5620 5 years 8297 561 24765 8650 Related party transactions
Related party balances as at each year end were as follows
Total
As at 31 December 2017 and 2016
Remuneration for directors has been disclosed in note 11 along with the statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income charges in the year and in the remuneration report.
The statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income charges for other balances are disclosed in note 7.
Summary of transactions Key management defined as permanent members of the executive committee received the following compensation during the year.
Remuneration
Salaries and performancerelated bonus 4555 4080 Pensionrelated benefits 222 184 4777 4264 Nonexecutive director Iain Cornish was appointed Chairman of Shawbrook Group Plc during 2015.
Shawbrook was part of the consortium of our revolving credit facility lenders up until July 2016.
There have been no related party transactions with Shawbrook during this period.
Company
Related party balances as at each year end were as follows Arrow Global Group Holdings
Arrow Global
Arrow Global Finance Plc Arrow Global One Limited
Debt Recovery
Vesting Finance
B.
Total
As at 31 December 2017 Due from subsidiary undertakings  88390  40 88430 Due to subsidiary undertakings 1358 50  1408 1358 50  88390  40 87022 113 Financial statements www. rrowglobalir.
Related party transactions continued Company continued Arrow Global Group Holdings
Arrow Global
Arrow Global Finance Plc Arrow Global One Limited
Debt Recovery
Vesting Finance
B.
Total
As at 31 December 2016 Due from subsidiary undertakings    80587 167 40 80794 Due to subsidiary undertakings 1367 1585  2952 1367 1585  80587 167 40 77842 Balances relate to intercompany loans that are repayable on demand and are therefore held as current liabilities or assets.
No other transactions occurred between the related parties excluding those disclosed above.
During the year there were no other related party transactions other than discussed above.
Investments in subsidiaries and associate Details of the Companys subsidiaries at 31 December 2017 are as follows
Place of incorporation or registration and operation Registered office Proportion of ordinary shares ownership %
Parent company Arrow Global Holdings Limited AGHL UK  England and Wales Belvedere 12 Booth Street Manchester M2 4AW 100 Trading AGIHL Arrow Global Accounts Management Limited UK  England and Wales Belvedere 12 Booth Street Manchester M2 4AW 100 Trading AGL Arrow Global Europe Limited UK  England and Wales Belvedere 12 Booth Street Manchester M2 4AW 100 Trading AGIHL Arrow Global Finance Plc UK  England and Wales Belvedere 12 Booth Street Manchester M2 4AW 100 Trading AGIHL Arrow Global Guernsey Limited UK  England and Wales Belvedere 12 Booth Street Manchester M2 4AW 100 Dormant AGHL Arrow Global Investments Holdings Limited AGIHL UK  England and Wales Belvedere 12 Booth Street Manchester M2 4AW 100 Trading AGGHL Arrow Global Legh Limited UK  England and Wales Belvedere 12 Booth Street Manchester M2 4AW 100 Dormant AGHL Arrow Global Limited AGL UK  England and Wales Belvedere 12 Booth Street Manchester M2 4AW 100 Trading AGHL Arrow Global Luna Limited UK  England and Wales Belvedere 12 Booth Street Manchester M2 4AW 100 Trading AGHL Arrow Global Management Limited UK  England and Wales Belvedere 12 Booth Street Manchester M2 4AW 100 Dormant AGHL Arrow Global Massey Limited UK  England and Wales Belvedere 12 Booth Street Manchester M2 4AW 100 Dormant AGHL Arrow Global One Limited AGOL UK  England and Wales Belvedere 12 Booth Street Manchester M2 4AW 100 Trading AGGP Arrow Global Portugal Limited UK  England and Wales Belvedere 12 Booth Street Manchester M2 4AW 100 Trading AGHL Arrow Global Portugal Investments Limited UK  England and Wales Belvedere 12 Booth Street Manchester M2 4AW 100 Trading AGL Arrow Global Receivables Management Limited UK  England and Wales Belvedere 12 Booth Street Manchester M2 4AW 100 Trading AGHL Capquest Asset Management Limited UK  England and Wales Belvedere 12 Booth Street Manchester M2 4AW 100 Dormant CGL Capquest Debt Recovery Limited CDRL UK  England and Wales Belvedere 12 Booth Street Manchester M2 4AW 100 Trading CGL Capquest Debt Recovery Services Limited UK  England and Wales Belvedere 12 Booth Street Manchester M2 4AW 100 Dormant CGL Capquest Group Limited CGL UK  England and Wales Belvedere 12 Booth Street Manchester M2 4AW 100 Trading QNL 114 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED Arrow Global Group PLC  Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Place of incorporation or registration and operation Registered office Proportion of ordinary shares ownership %
Parent company Capquest Investments Limited UK  England and Wales Belvedere 12 Booth Street Manchester M2 4AW 100 Trading CGL Capquest Investments 2 Limited UK  England and Wales Belvedere 12 Booth Street Manchester M2 4AW 100 Dormant CGL Capquest Limited UK  England and Wales Belvedere 12 Booth Street Manchester M2 4AW 100 Dormant CGL Capquest Mortgage Servicing Limited UK  England and Wales Belvedere 12 Booth Street Manchester M2 4AW 100 Trading CGL Capquest UK Limited UK  England and Wales Belvedere 12 Booth Street Manchester M2 4AW 100 Dormant CGL Care Debt Management Limited UK  England and Wales Belvedere 12 Booth Street Manchester M2 4AW 100 Dormant CGL Data Verification Services Limited UK  England and Wales Belvedere 12 Booth Street Manchester M2 4AW 100 Dormant CGL Erudio Customer Management Limited UK  England and Wales Belvedere 12 Booth Street Manchester M2 4AW 100 Dormant AGHL Quest Bidco Limited QBL UK  England and Wales Belvedere 12 Booth Street Manchester M2 4AW 100 Trading QTL Quest Newco Limited QNL UK  England and Wales Belvedere 12 Booth Street Manchester M2 4AW 100 Trading QBL Quest Topco Limited QTL UK  England and Wales Belvedere 12 Booth Street Manchester M2 4AW 100 Trading AGIHL Mars Acquisition Limited MAL UK  England and Wales Belvedere 12 Booth Street Manchester M2 4AW 100 Trading AGIHL Mars Capital Management Limited UK  England and Wales Ashcombe House 5 The Crescent Leatherhead Surrey KT22 8DY 100 Trading MAL Mars Capital Finance Limited UK  England and Wales Ashcombe House 5 The Crescent Leatherhead Surrey KT22 8DY 100 Trading MAL Mars Capital Management Ireland DAC Republic of Ireland Ashcombe House 5 The Crescent Leatherhead Surrey KT22 8DY 100 Trading MAL Mars Capital Finance Ireland DAC Republic of Ireland Grand Canal House 1 Grand Canal Street Upper Dublin 4 D04Y7R5 100 Trading MAL Arrow Global Debt Limited AGDL Guernsey First Floor Albert House South Esplanade St Peter Port Guernsey 100 Dormant AGGHL Arrow Global Guernsey Limited Guernsey First Floor Albert House South Esplanade St Peter Port Guernsey 100 Dormant AGIHL Arrow Global Guernsey Holdings Limited AGGHL Guernsey First Floor Albert House South Esplanade St Peter Port Guernsey 100 Trading AGOL Arrow Global Guernsey Management Limited Guernsey First Floor Albert House South Esplanade St Peter Port Guernsey 100 Dormant AGDL Arrow Global Investments Holdings Italia S.
AGIHIS
Italy Via Tortona n.25 20144 Milan Italy 100 Trading AGIHL Zenith Service S.
ZSS Italy Via Guidubaldo del Monte No 61  00197 Rome Italy 100 Trading AGIHIS Structured Finance Management  Italy S.
Italy Via Alessandro Pestalozza No 12  20131 Milan Italy 50 Trading ZSS Strzala Sp. z o.
Poland Al.
Jerozolimskie nr 148 02326 Warszawa 100 Dormant AGHL
24 Investments in subsidiaries and associate continued 115 Financial statements www. rrowglobalir.
Name
Place of incorporation or registration and operation Registered office Proportion of ordinary shares ownership %
Parent company Capquest Debt Recovery S.
1 Tyger Waterfront Carl Cronje Drive Bellville Western Cape 7530 South Africa 100 Dormant CDRL AGHL Portugal Investments Holdings S.
AGHLPIH
Portugal Av.
1 andar Lisbon Portugal 100 Trading AGIHL Gesphone  Servios de Tratamento e Acquisio de Dvidas S.
Portugal Edifcio Dom Sebastio Rua Quinta do Quint n 6 Quinta da Fonte Oeiras Portugal 100 Trading AGIHL Redrock Capital Partners S.
Portugal Edifcio Q54 D.
Jos Rua Quinta do Quint n1 Piso 0 Fraco B Quinta da Fonte Oeiras Portugal 100 Trading AGHLPIH Sandalgreen Assets S.
Portugal Edifcio Dom Sebastio Quinta do Quint n 6 Quinta da Fonte Oeiras Portugal 100 Trading AGHLPIH Whitestar Asset Solutions S.
Portugal Edifcio Dom Sebastio Rua Quinta do Quint n 6 Quinta da Fonte Oeiras Portugal 100 Trading AGHLPIH Hefesto STC S.
Portugal Edifcio Dom Sebastio Rua Quinta do Quint n 6 Quinta da Fonte Oeiras Portugal 100 Trading AGHLPIH Amstelveste Vastgoed B.
3811 LP Amersfoort the Netherlands 100 Trading AGIHBVFS Arrow Global Investments Holdings Benelux
AGIHB the Netherlands Van Asch van Wijckstraat 55F 3811 LP Amersfoort the Netherlands 100 Trading AGIHL Focum Groep B.
FG the Netherlands Van Asch van Wijckstraat 55F 3811 LP Amersfoort the Netherlands 100 Trading AGIHB Focum Solutions B.
3811 LP Amersfoort the Netherlands 100 Trading FG Fiditon Holding B.
FH the Netherlands Van Asch van Wijckstraat 55F 3811 LP Amersfoort the Netherlands 100 Trading AGIHB Focum Commerce B.
3811 LP Amersfoort the Netherlands 100 Trading FG Focum Finance B.
3811 LP Amersfoort the Netherlands 100 Trading FG Incassobureau Fiditon B.
Amsterdam the Netherlands 100 Trading FH Universum Inkasso B.
UI the Netherlands Louis Armstrongweg 54 1311RK Almere the Netherlands 100 Non
AGIHB
Vesting Finance Detachering B.
3811 LP Amersfoort the Netherlands 100 Trading VFH Vesting Finance Holding B.
VFH the Netherlands Van Asch van Wijckstraat 55F 3811 LP Amersfoort the Netherlands 100 Trading AGIHB Vesting Finance Incasso B.
3811 LP Amersfoort the Netherlands 100 Trading VFH 24 Investments in subsidiaries and associate continued 116 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED Arrow Global Group PLC  Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Place of incorporation or registration and operation Registered office Proportion of ordinary shares ownership %
Parent company Vesting Finance Servicing B.
VFS the Netherlands Naritaweg 199207 1043 CB Amsterdam the Netherlands 100 Trading AGIHB Arrow Global Benelux Holdings B.
AGBH the Netherlands Naritaweg 199207 1043 CB Amsterdam the Netherlands 100 Trading AGIHB Spark Hypotheken B.
Amsterdam the Netherlands 100 Trading AGLH KU88 B.
Amsterdam the Netherlands 100 Trading AGLH Arrow Global Luxembourg Holdings S.
AGLH
Luxembourg 5 rue Guillaume Kroll L 1882 Luxembourg 100 Trading AGBH Principal Residential Operating Platform Evaluating Receivables 1 S.
Luxembourg 5 rue Guillaume Kroll L 1882 Luxembourg 100 Trading AGLH Focum Belgium BVBA Belgium Bellevue 13 9050 Gent Belgium 100 Trading AGIHBVFN Vesting Finance N.
VFN Belgium Bellevue 13 9050 Gent Belgium 100 Trading AGIHBUI All subsidiaries are included in the Group consolidation.
Company investment in subsidiaries Arrow Global One Limited
At 31 December 2016 and 31 December 2017 307500 307500 The investments in subsidiaries are all stated at cost less accumulated impairment.
The 15% interest in the Companys associate Promontoria MCS Holding SAS MCS was sold on 18 October 2017.
The Group had acquired an indirect 15% economic interest in MCS through a participation agreement on 15 December 2014.
The terms of the participation agreement meant that the Group demonstrated significant influence over the MCS group.
The associate was accounted for using the equity method.
Summarised below is a reconciliation of the movements in the carrying value of the Groups interest in MCS during the year until the date of disposal Interest in the net assets of the associate as at 1 January 2017 10371 Foreign exchange differences 497 Share of profit in associate during the year 1578 Dividends received from associate 7233 Interest in the net assets of the associate as at 18 October 2017 5213 The sale generated a gain on sale which was calculated as follows Interest in the net assets of the associate as at 18 October 2017 5213 Proceeds 18143 Foreign exchange gain 1870 Disposal costs 103 Gain on disposal 14697 Defined benefit liability Net defined benefit liability  1721 A number of employees of Vesting Finance were entitled to pension benefits that the company had insured through a contract with an insurance company.
The arrangement met the definition of a defined benefit plan.
In the year under review Vesting Finance agreed on a compensation plan for employees for the change of their defined benefit pension scheme into a defined contribution scheme.
The change became effective during the reporting period and has been processed as a settlement which resulted in the derecognition of the defined benefit obligations from the balance sheet 31 December 2017 nil 31 December 2016 1721000.
24 Investments in subsidiaries and associate continued 117 Financial statements www. rrowglobalir.
Defined benefit liability continued The following table shows the movement in the plan from the date of acquisition until 31 December 2016
Fair value of plan assets Net defined benefit liability Balance at 1 January 2016 4223 2753 1470 Included in profit or loss Net service cost 289  289 Interest expense 58  58 Interest cost income 41 41 Administration costs 22 Included in OCI Actuarial loss gain arising from Demographic assumptions 29  29 Financial assumptions 128  128 Return on plan assets excluding interest income  92 92 Asset management costs 9 9 Premium correction 65 65 Exchange differences 35tel380 132
Contributions paid by the employee 13 13 Contributions paid by the employer  209 209 Benefits paid 1 1 Balance at 31 December 2016 5094 3373 1721 Represented by Net defined benefit liability 5094 3373 1721 Risks arising from financial instruments
Risk management
Treasury related risks The board approves treasury policies and the treasury function manages the daytoday operations.
The board delegates certain responsibilities to the treasury and tax committee.
The treasury and tax committee which is chaired by the chief financial officer is empowered to take decisions within that delegated authority.
Treasury activities and compliance with treasury policies are reported to the board on a regular basis and are subject to periodic independent reviews and audits both internal and external.
Treasury policies are designed to manage the main financial risks faced by the Group in relation to funding and liquidity risks counterparty credit risk and market risks being interest rate risk and foreign currency risk.
This is to ensure the Group is properly funded that financial counterparties are of appropriate credit quality and that interest rate and currency risk is managed within set limits.
Policies also set out the specific instruments that can be used for risk management.
The treasury function enters into derivative transactions principally interest rate swaps currency swaps and forward currency contracts.
The purpose of these transactions is to manage the interest rate and currency risks arising from the Groups business operations.
No transactions of a speculative nature are undertaken and written options may only be used when matched by purchased options.
No written options were entered into during 2017 2016 nil.
Liquidity risk Liquidity risk is the risk that the Group will encounter difficulty in meeting obligations associated with its financial liabilities that are settled by cash or another financial asset.
The Group is subject to the risk that it will not have sufficient borrowing facilities to fund its existing business and its future plans for growth.
The treasury policy adopted by the Group serves to reduce this risk by setting a specific policy parameter that there are sufficient committed debt facilities to cover forecast borrowings plus operational headroom plus appropriate stress testing for the next 18 months on a rolling basis.
Further the aim is to ensure that there is a balanced refinancing profile with phased maturity dates diversification of debt funding sources and no overreliance on a single or small group of lenders.
At 31 December 2017 the Groups senior secured notes and revolving credit facility had an average period to maturity of 6.1 years 2016 5.8 years.
Total undrawn facilities as at 31 December 2017 were 60575000 2016 103721000.
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED Arrow Global Group PLC  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Risks arising from financial instruments continued Risk management continued Liquidity risk continued The treasury function monitors cash through daily reporting the management accounts and periodic review meetings.
Management has well established models used to predict collectability of cash receipts and this represents a key performance indicator of the business.
The Group has a low fixed cost base is highly cash generative with weekly cash receipts and portfolio purchases except forward flows are discretionary which helps to mitigate liquidity risk.
The table below includes both interest and principal cash flows payable over the contractual life of the nonderivative financial liabilities.
Group
As at 31 December 2017 Within 1 year 12 years 35 years More than 5 years
Amounts due to Noninterest bearing Trade and other payables 81790 4999 10450 1120 98359 Interest bearing 400 million secured senior note 2.875% plus 3 month EURIBOR 10352 10439 39598 390616 451005 230 million secured senior note 4.75% plus 3 month EURIBOR 9835 9884 34425 208318 262462 220 million secured senior note 5.125% 11275 11275 33825 239261 295636 Nonrecourse facility 4560 4805   9365 Finance lease 171 171 514 1377 2233 Bank overdrafts 1332    1332 Revolving credit facility 5997 6730 172361  185088 Total 125312 48303 291173 840692 1305480 1 Reflects all drawings at 31 December 2017 being held to the facility maturity date of 30 March 2022.
Group
As at 31 December 2016
1 year 12 years 35 years More than 5 years
Amounts due to Noninterest bearing Trade and other payables 76261 76261 Interest bearing 335 million secured senior notes 5.25% plus 3 month EURIBOR 14280 14280 326113  354673 230 million secured senior notes 4.75% plus 3 month EURIBOR 9444 9444 28358 208647 255893 220 million secured senior notes 5.125% 11275 11275 33825 250536 306911 Nonrecourse facility 6268 2769 3691  12728 Bank overdrafts 7698 7698 Revolving credit facility 78231 1733 4476  84440 Total 203457 39501 396463 459183 1098604
As at 31 December 2017
1 year years years More than 5 years
Amounts due to Noninterest bearing Trade and other payables 1405 1405
As at 31 December 2016 Within 1 year 12 years 35 years More than 5 years
Amounts due to Noninterest bearing Trade and other payables 2528    2528 119 Financial statements www. rrowglobalir.
Risks arising from financial instruments continued Risk management continued Liquidity risk continued The analysis above includes the contractual cash flow for borrowings and the total amount of interest payable over the life of the loan.
Where borrowings are subject to a floating rate an estimate of interest payable is taken.
The rate is derived from interest rate yield curves at the statement of financial position date.
In addition to the above the Group has entered in to certain forward flow agreements to which it has committed to pay 2506000 2016 12309000 over the next five years.
The following analysis shows the gross nondiscounted contractual cash flows in respect of foreign currency contract derivative assets and liabilities and interest rate swap derivative liabilities which are all designated as cash flow hedges 2017 2016
Inflow
Outflow
Inflow
Not later than one month 46644 46361 39518 39660 Later than one month and not later than six months 74450 72139 126594 124755 Later than six months and not later than one year 55072 54343 26583 25567 Later than one year and not later than two years 34telLater than two years and not later than five years 176508 173063 193177 190719 When the amount payable or receivable is not fixed the amount disclosed has been determined with reference to the projected interest rates as illustrated by the interest rate yield curves existing at the statement of financial position date.
The above table shows the gross cash flows receivable and payable on our derivative financial instruments.
Our derivative financial instruments are held across a number of counterparties the largest net cash flow exposure to a single counterparty at 31 December 2017 is 1.2 million 2016 1.0 million.
A maturity analysis of the Groups receivables and borrowing facilities as at 31 December 2017 is presented below As at 31 December 2017 Purchased loan portfolio % of total
Less than one year 187411 20.8 168080 17.6 Later than one year 713358 79.2 785750 82.4 As at 31 December 2016
Borrowing % of total Less than one year 187440 23.9 107560 13.4 Later than one year 595352 76.1 696290 86.6 782792 100.0 803850 100.0 This demonstrates the headroom on the Groups borrowings at 31 December 2017 in comparison to the current purchased loan portfolios estimated collections over an 84month period.
The value of purchased loan portfolio shown above is discounted to net present value.
The equivalent undiscounted ERC at 31 December 2017 is 1462 million 2016 1339 million.
Market risk Market risk is defined as the risk that the fair value of future cash flows of a financial instrument will fluctuate because of changes in market prices.
Market risk principally comprises interest rate risk and currency risk considered further below.
Interest rate risk The Group has an exposure to interest rate risk arising on changes in interest rates on its borrowings principally on the floating rate senior secured notes and therefore seeks to limit this exposure.
This is achieved by the use of techniques to fix interest rate costs including fixed rate funding predominantly longerterm bond funding forward currency contracts used for nonfunctional currency funding bank borrowing loan draw down periods and interest rate hedging instruments.
These techniques are used to hedge the interest rate costs on a proportion of borrowings over a certain period of time.
Most hedging is for up to three years.
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED Arrow Global Group PLC  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Risks arising from financial instruments continued Interest rate risk continued Exposure to interest rate risk The interest rate profile of the Groups interestbearing financial instruments as reported to the management of the Group is as follows Fixed rate instruments Financial liabilities 220.0 220.0 Variable rate instruments Financial assets 35.9 23.2 Financial liabilities 715.1 558.6 Effect of interest rate swaps 399.5 285.6 Net Variable Rate 279.7 249.8 If interest rates across all countries of operation increased by 50 basis points this would have the following impact Increase in fair value of derivatives taken to equity 1048 2570 Reduction in profit before taxation 874 656 This sensitivity analysis is based on the following assumptions the change in market interest rates occurs in all countries where the Group has borrowings andor derivative financial instruments where financial liabilities are subject to fixed interest rates or have their interest rate fixed by hedging instruments it is assumed that there is no impact from a change in interest rates and changes in market interest rates affect the fair value of derivative financial instruments.
Currency risk The Group is subject to three types of currency risk cash flow exposure net asset exposure and income statement exposure.
Cash flow exposure The Group is subject to currency risk in respect of future cash flows which are denominated in foreign currency.
The policy of the Group is to hedge a large proportion of this currency risk in respect of cash flows which are expected to arise in the following 12 months.
Where cash flow hedges have been entered into they are designated as cash flow hedges on specific future transactions.
Net asset exposure A proportion of the Groups net assets are denominated in Euro.
The statement of financial position is reported in Sterling and this means that there is a risk that a fluctuation in foreign exchange rates will have an impact on the net assets of the Group.
The Group aims to minimise the value of net assets denominated in Euro by funding portfolio assets with Euro denominated borrowings where possible.
Income statement exposure As with net assets a proportion of the Groups profit is denominated in Euro but translated into Sterling for reporting purposes.
The result for the period is translated into Sterling at the average exchange rate.
A risk therefore arises that a fluctuation in the exchange rate relative to the Euro will have an impact on the consolidated result for the period.
If foreign exchange rates had been 10% stronger than Sterling than those at the statement of financial position date and all other variables were held constant the Groups net assets and net profit for each significant denomination of currency would increasedecrease as follows Equity and net assets
Euro EUR 6728 3506 6728 3506 Net profit
Euro EUR 2932 2328 2932 2328 The above assumes that there is no impact on retained earnings or equity arising from those items which are naturally hedged where the currency asset is exactly equal to the currency liability.
Financial statements www. rrowglobalir.
Risks arising from financial instruments continued Currency risk continued Income statement exposure continued If foreign exchange rates had been 10% weaker than Sterling at the statement of financial position date and all other variables were held constant the Groups net assets and net profit for each significant denomination of currency would increasedecrease as follows Equity and net assets
Euro EUR 5505 2869 5505 2869 Net profit
Euro EUR 2399 1904 2399 1904 The above assumes that there is no impact on retained earnings or equity arising from those items which are naturally hedged where the currency asset is exactly equal to the currency liability.
Credit risk The Groups principal activity is the acquisition and management of underperforming consumer debt portfolios.
This includes purchased loan portfolios and loan notes.
Most portfolios by their nature are impaired at acquisition and the Group continually monitors cash collections that in turn inform the ERCs on which the portfolio statement of financial position value is calculated.
The ongoing risk is managed through a portfolio valuation process including modelling current expectations of recoverability based on historical information on debt types also factoring in recoveries from collateral held on the secured portfolios.
Further details of the forecasting process are given in note 4 b.
A pricing gateway process is in place which includes at least two members of the executive board as well as other key members from appropriate areas of the business.
The Group also monitors its exposure to geographic concentration of assets.
This process is in place to scrutinise all aspects of a portfolio acquisition from reputational and regulatory risk through to the financial assumptions and maximum bid price.
All purchased loan portfolios are measured at amortised cost using the EIR method.
As part of the regular monitoring process the future cash flows in the ERCs are updated with writeups or writedowns as a result of changes to the estimated cash flows discounted at the EIR rate.
An impairment is only recognised if the writedowns exceed any previously recognised cumulative writeups and revenue recognised.
Loan notes are measured at amortised cost or fair value through the profit or loss.
They are measured at fair value if the Group manages them as such.
The Groups most significant credit risk exposure is to debt portfolios.
At 31 December 2017 the carrying value by geography is Portugal 299.1 257.6 Netherlands 95.5 81.0 Italy 32.1 Additionally the Group has credit risk exposure on loan notes of 50698000 at 31 December 2017 2016 21315000.
We constructed our own proprietary data repository in 2005 and have added additional historic data on credit performance in the markets in which we operate.
It now has tens of millions of records.
This is used to inform our collections strategies and to help establish affordable repayment plans and settlements with our customers across all geographies.
As part of credit risk the Group is subject to counterparty risk in respect of the cash and cash equivalents held on deposit with banks and foreign currency and derivative financial instruments.
Counterparty risk with debt sellers is managed through warranties.
The Group generally deposits cash and undertakes currency and derivative transactions with highly rated banks with strict limits on the level of exposure to any one institution.
Institutions with lower credit ratings can only be used with board approval.
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED Arrow Global Group PLC  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Risks arising from financial instruments continued Credit risk continued No collateral or credit enhancements are held in respect of any financial derivatives.
The maximum exposure to counterparty risk is as follows Cash and cash equivalents 35943 23203 35943 23203 The table represents a worstcase scenario of the counterparty risk that the Group is exposed to.
The 31 December 2017 balance is spread across a number of counterparties with the top 5 accounting for 58% of the total 2016 70%.
The maximum exposure to one counterparty is 7.1 million 2016 9.9 million.
The key risks and uncertainties faced by the Group are managed within an established risk management framework.
The Groups daytoday working capital is funded by its cash and cash equivalents.
Capital risk management The Group is subject to the risk that its capital structure will not be sufficient to support the growth of the business.
The Group is currently not required to hold regulatory capital.
The Group aims to maintain appropriate capital to ensure that it has a strong statement of financial position but at the same time is providing a good return on equity to its shareholders.
The Groups longterm aim is to ensure that the capital structure results in an optimal ratio of debt and equity finance.
The Groups overall strategy remains unchanged from 2009.
The capital structure of the Group consists of debt cash and cash equivalents and equity.
Management reviews the capital structure on an ongoing basis.
As part of this review management considers the cost of capital and the risks associated with each class of capital.
The Groups position as at 31 December 2017 was Ordinary share capital and premium 349189 349180 Other reserves 154041 181789 Total equity and reserves 195148 167391 Financial instruments Fair value estimation The fair values of financial assets and financial liabilities that are traded in active markets are based on quoted market prices or dealer price quotations.
For all other financial instruments the Group determines fair values using other valuation techniques.
For financial instruments that trade infrequently and have little price transparency fair value is less objective and requires varying degrees of judgment depending on liquidity concentration uncertainty of market factors pricing assumptions and other risks affecting the specific instrument.
Valuation models The Group measures fair values using the following fair value hierarchy which reflects the significance of the inputs used in making the measurements.
Level 1 inputs that are quoted market prices unadjusted in active markets for identical instruments.
Level 2 inputs other than quoted market prices within level 1 that are observable either directly i. as prices or indirectly i. derived from prices.
This category includes instruments valued using quoted market prices in active markets for similar instruments quoted prices for identical or similar instruments in markets that are considered less than active or other valuation techniques in which all significant inputs are directly or indirectly observable from market data.
Level 3 inputs that are unobservable.
This category includes all instruments for which the valuation technique includes inputs not based on observable data and the unobservable inputs have a significant effect on the instruments valuation.
This category includes instruments that are valued based on quoted prices for similar instruments for which significant unobservable adjustments or assumptions are required to reflect differences between the instruments.
The objective of valuation techniques is to arrive at a fair value measurement that reflects the price that would be received to sell the asset or paid to transfer the liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date.
Valuation techniques include net present value and discounted cash flow models using prices from observable current market transactions and dealer quotes for similar instruments and unobservable inputs such as historic performance data and the Proprietary Collections Bureau output.
The purchased loan portfolios fair value is calculated using our 84month ERC through our own inhouse models.
Derivative financial instruments are initially recognised and subsequently measured at fair value.
The fair values of derivative instruments are calculated using quoted prices.
Foreign currency forward contracts are measured using quoted forward exchange rates and yield curves derived from quoted interest rates matching maturities of the contracts.
Interest rate swaps are measured at the present value of future cash flows estimated and discounted based on the applicable yield curves derived from quoted interest rates.
Borrowings are initially measured at fair value and are subsequently held at amortised cost.
Financial statements www. rrowglobalir.
Financial instruments continued Financial instruments measured at fair value  fair value hierarchy The following table analyses financial instruments measured at fair value at the reporting date by the level in the fair value hierarchy into which the fair value measurement is categorised.
The amounts are based on the values recognised in the statement of financial position.
Liabilities
Foreign currency contracts 2543 187 Interest rate swaps 322 1246 2865 1433 Level 3
Loan notes 30889 21315 30889 21315 There have been no transfers in or out of level 2 or level 3.
The fair value of derivative financial instruments has been calculated by discounting expected future cash flows using interest rate yield curves and forward foreign exchange rates prevailing at 31 December 2017.
Reconciliation of Level 3 fair values As at the year brought forward 21315 Loan notes acquisition expenditure 11058 21315 Changes in fair value 5298 Collections in the year 8464 Income from loan notes 710 Exchange gain on loan notes 972 30889 21315 The fair value of loan notes has been calculated by using a discounted cash flow model.
The three main influencing factors in calculating this are estimated future cash flows derived from management forecasts the application of an appropriate exit multiple and discounting using a rate appropriate to the investment and the anticipated rate of return.
The most significant loan note accounted for at fair value has a carrying value of 20.8 million at 31 December 2017.
A  3% movement in estimated future cash flows used in the 31 December 2017 cash flow model would result in a change of the fair value of  0.6 million.
The Company did not hold any financial instruments at fair value 2016 none.
Financial instruments not measured at fair value  fair value hierarchy The following table analyses financial instruments not measured at fair value at the reporting date by the level in the fair value hierarchy into which the measurement is categorised.
The amounts are based on the values recognised in the statement of financial position.
All of the Groups financial instruments not measured at fair value fall into hierarchy level 3.
Level 3
Purchased loan portfolios 900769 782792 Loan notes 19809 Total assets 920578 782792 There have been no transfers in or out of level 3.
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED Arrow Global Group PLC  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial instruments continued Financial instruments not measured at fair value  fair value hierarchy continued The statement of financial position value of the Groups purchased loan portfolios and loan notes not measured at fair value is derived from discounted cash flows generated by an 84month ERC model.
The inputs to the ERC model are historical portfolio collection performance data.
This
ERC model is updated with the core collections experience to date on a monthly basis.
Estimates of cash flows that determine the EIR are based on the Groups collection history with respect to portfolios comprising similar attributes and characteristics such as date of purchase original credit grantor type of receivable customer payment histories customer location and the time since the original charge off.
Management believes the purchase price is the best indicator of fair value at acquisition.
Following acquisition it is considered that given the nature of the loan portfolios largely comprising nonperforming loans the information available and our forecasting models the best estimate of the fair value of the purchased loan portfolios is their carrying value.
The Group has an established control framework covering the measurement of purchased loan portfolio values.
This includes regular monitoring of portfolio performance overseen by the portfolio review committee which considers actual versus forecast results at an individual portfolio level reforecasts cash flows on a semiannual basis reviews actual against forecast gross money multiple signs off the latest ERC forecast assesses the carrying value of the portfolio assets and reviews revenue recognition.
A reconciliation of the opening to closing balances for the period of the purchased loan portfolios and loan notes can be seen in note 17.
The Company did not hold any other financial instruments not measured at fair value for which a fair value needs to be calculated 2016 none.
Cash flow hedges The Group uses foreign currency contracts cash flow hedges to hedge foreign currency cash flows that are highly probable to occur within 12 months of the statement of financial position date and interest rate swaps cash flow hedges to hedge those interest cash flows that are expected to occur during the period to September 2019.
The effect on the statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income will also be within these periods.
An amount of 348000 has been charged to equity for the Group in the period in respect of cash flow hedges 2016 827000.
All hedge relationships have been effective in the year and are expected to maintain effectiveness.
No charge has been made to the Companys equity.
The Group has interest rate swaps in place for a notional amount of 399534000 2016 571243000.
In 2017 these interest rate swaps covered current borrowings being the floating rate Euro notes.
Interest rate swaps in place at the statement of financial position date are designated and are effective under IAS39 as cash flow hedges and their fair value has been recognised in the hedging reserve.
All interest rate swaps are categorised as highly effective so no charge has been made to the statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income in the year 2016 a credit of 297000.
The weighted average interest rate and period to maturity of the Group interest rate swaps were as follows Interest rate swaps at December
Maturity date Fair value
Maturity date Fair value Euro 0.07% Mar 2019 322 0.04% Jun 2018 1246 The Company did not hold any interest rate swaps at 31 December 2017 31 December 2016 nil.
Forward foreign exchange contracts It is the policy of the Group to enter into forward foreign exchange contracts to cover specific foreign currency payments and receipts and exposure to currency rate fluctuations.
The total notional amount of outstanding foreign currency contracts that the Group is committed to at 31 December 2017 is 127800000 2016 186600000.
These comprise foreign currency contracts to sell sterling for a total notional of 127800000 2016 186600000.
These contracts have maturity dates to October 2018.
These contracts have been designated and are effective as cash flow hedges under IAS 39 and accordingly the fair value thereof has been deferred in equity and fair value will be recycled to the statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income in October 2018.
As at 31 December 2017 the aggregate amount of net gainloss under forward foreign exchange contracts that have been recognised in the consolidated statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income relating to the exposure on these anticipated future transactions is nil 2016 nil gain.
During the year 1804000 2016 1680000 was recycled from equity to the statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income as a result of maturity of the short dated foreign exchange swaps during the year.
The Company did not hold any foreign exchanges swaps at 31 December 2017 31 December 2016 nil.
Financial statements www. rrowglobalir.
Financial assets and financial liabilities Financial assets Purchased loan portfolios 900769 782792 Loan notes 50698 21315 Cash and cash equivalents 35943 23203 Other receivables 56885 35484 1044295 862794 Financial liabilities Senior secured notes excluding fees 779347 701720 Revolving credit facility excluding fees 155757 76925 Bank overdrafts excluding fees 1332 7698 Other borrowings 8908 12077 Senior secured note interest 6670 5430 Finance lease 1816 Derivative liabilities 2865 1433 Trade and other payables 98359 76261 Current tax liabilities 4528 5469 1059582 887013 Fair values of financial assets and liabilities The fair value and carrying value of the financial assets and liabilities of the Group are set out below Fair value Book value Fair value Book value Purchased loan portfolios 900769 900769 782792 782792 Loan notes 50698 50698 21315 21315 Cash and cash equivalents 35943 35943 23203 23203 Other receivables 56885 56885 35484 35484 1044295 1044295 862794 862794 Fair value Book value Fair value Book value Senior secured notes excluding fees 784166 779347 724065 701720 Revolving credit facility excluding fees 155757 155757 76925 76925 Bank overdrafts excluding fees 1332 1332 7698 7 698 Other borrowings 8908 8908 12077 12077 Senior secured note interest 6670 6670 5430 5430 Finance lease 1816 1816 Derivative liabilities 2865 2865 1433 1433 Trade and other payables 98359 98359 76261 76261 Current tax liabilities 4528 4528 5469 5469 1064401 1059582 909358 887013 The carrying value of the bank borrowings is deemed to be a good approximation of their fair value.
Bank borrowings can be repaid within six months if the Group decides not to roll over for further periods up to the contractual repayment date.
The impact of discounting is therefore negligible.
The fair value of the senior secured notes has been calculated by reference to broker quotes that are based on observable market inputs and therefore would be included as level 2 in the fair value hierarchy table should the liability have been held at fair value.
Derivative financial instruments are held at fair value which is equal to the expected future cash flows arising as a result of the derivative transaction.
For other financial assets and liabilities which are all shortterm in nature the carrying value is a reasonable approximation of fair value.
For the Group there is no difference between the carrying value and fair value of financial assets and financial liabilities.
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED Arrow Global Group PLC  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Sharebased payments  Group and Company Share incentive plan SIP In 2017 and previously April 2016 2015 and 2014 the Group offered to all UK employees the opportunity to participate in a SIP where the Company gives the participating employees one matching share for each partnership share acquired on behalf of the employee using the participating employees gross salaries.
The shares vest at the end of three years on a rolling basis as they are purchased with employees required to stay in employment for the vesting period to receive the shares.
On 30 December 2014 the Group provided eligible employees with a free share award worth 500 with a grant date price per share of 2.29 as part of the Arrow Global Group SIP.
The free shares vest at the end of three years with employees required to stay in employment to receive the shares.
Upon listing in October 2013 the Group provided eligible employees with a oneoff award of free shares worth up to 3000 with a grant price per share of 2.425 as part of the Arrow Global Group SIP.
The value of SIP shares awarded was dependent on a linear scale of length of service.
The free shares vested during the previous year with restrictions attached to these shares ceasing to have effect from vesting date.
Longterm incentive plan LTIP LTIP Awards 2015 2016 and 2017 On 31 March 2017 8 April 2016 and 19 May 2016 nilcost share options were granted to eligible employees based on a maximum of 150% of base salary.
Conditional awards were also granted to eligible Dutch employees on 31 March 2017 and 19 May 2016.
The LTIP awards vest at the end of three years being 31 March 2020 and 8 April 2019 respectively subject to the achievement of performance conditions.
On the same dates taxqualifying options were granted as part of the LTIP awards CSOP options to eligible UK employees.
Each CSOP option is subject to the same performance targets as apply to the nilcost option part of the awards.
If a CSOP option is exercised at a gain the number of shares that may be delivered under the above associated nilcost option under the LTIP will be reduced at exercise by the same value to ensure that the total pretax value of the original LTIP award delivered to the participant is not increased by the grant of the CSOP option.
On the 30 June 2015 and 15 June 2015 further awards of nilcost share options were granted to eligible employees which vest on 15 June 2018 subject to the achievement of the same performance conditions set out below.
CSOP options were granted to eligible UK employees on 15 June 2015.
For each eligible employee 50% of the LTIP awards are subject to underlying basic EPS growth criteria and vest as follows Performance condition Percentage vesting Less than 10% EPS growth per annum 0% 10% EPS growth per annum over the vesting period threshold performance 25% 20% EPS growth per annum over the vesting period maximum performance 100% Between 10% and 20% EPS growth per annum over the vesting period Between the threshold performance and maximum performance on a straightline basis For each eligible employee 25% of the LTIP awards are subject to total shareholder return criteria being share price growth plus the value of dividend.
The Group is compared against the FTSE 350 Index with the LTIP awards vesting as follows Performance condition Percentage vesting Below median ranking 0% Median ranking top 50% threshold performance 25% Upper quartile ranking top 25% maximum performance 100% Between top 50% and top 25% ranking Between the threshold performance and maximum performance on a straightline basis For each eligible employee 25% of the LTIP awards are subject to ROE criteria and vests as follows Performance condition Percentage vesting Less than 20% average ROE over the three performance years 0% 20% average ROE growth over the three performance years threshold performance 25% 26% average ROE growth over the three performance years maximum performance 100% Between 20% and 26% average ROE growth over the three performance years Between the threshold performance and maximum performance on a straightline basis 127 Financial statements www. rrowglobalir.
Sharebased payments  Group and Company continued Longterm incentive plan LTIP continued LTIP Awards 2014 On 11 March 2014 nilcost share options were granted to eligible employees based on a maximum of 150% of base salary.
The LTIP awards vest at the end of three years subject to the achievement of performance conditions.
These vested on 11 March 2017 at a level of 86.04%.
For each eligible employee 75% of the LTIP awards are subject to underlying basic EPS growth criteria and vest as follows Performance condition Percentage vesting Less than 10% EPS growth per annum 0% 10% EPS growth per annum over the vesting period threshold performance 25% 20% EPS growth per annum over the vesting period maximum performance 100% Between 10% and 20% EPS growth per annum over the vesting period Between the threshold performance and maximum performance on a straightline basis For each eligible employee 25% of the LTIP awards are subject to total shareholder return criteria being share price growth plus the value of dividend.
The Group is compared against the FTSE 350 Index with the LTIP awards vesting as follows Performance condition Percentage vesting Below median ranking 0% Median ranking top 50% threshold performance 25% Upper quartile ranking top 25% maximum performance 100% Between top 50% and top 25% ranking Between the threshold performance and maximum performance on a straightline basis Further nilcost share option LTIP awards were made on 30 May 2014 and 8 December 2014 both of which vest at the same time as the 11 March 2014 LTIP awards and have the same criteria for vesting.
A conditional LTIP award was made on 30 May 2014.
This award vested during the year with restrictions attached to these shares ceasing to have effect from vesting date.
Restricted share awards Restricted share awards were made on 31 March 2017 19 May 2016 and 15 June 2015.
These awards vest on 31 March 2019 and 1 May 2018 respectively subject to continuity of employment.
The awards made on 15 June 2015 vested on 11 May 2017.
Deferred share bonus plan DSBP Up to 50% of the bonus earned by the executive directors is deferred into shares for up to three years via the DSBP subject to continued employment during the vesting period.
DSBP awards were made on 31 March 2017 8 April 2016 and 9 April 2015.
See page 61 for details of the bonus delivered in the form of deferred shares for the financial year 2017.
The deferred shared granted on 9 April 2015 will vest on 9 April 2018.
Awards granted to Tom Drury on 8 April 2016 and 31 March 2017 vest on 31 December 2018.
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED Arrow Global Group PLC  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Sharebased payments  Group and Company continued Grant information The terms and conditions of the grant are as follows Method of settlement accounting Number of instruments Vesting period Contractual life of options Grant dateemployees entitled Equity settled award  SIP Equity 81298 3 years 31 October 2016 Equity settled award  SIP Equity 90252 3 years 30 December 2017 Equity settled award  LTIP Equity 1478751 2.33 years 11 March 2017 Equity settled award  LTIP Equity 88202 2 years 30 May 2016 Equity settled award  SIP Equity 16676 3 years rolling 30 May 2017 Equity settled award  LTIP Equity 1483532 3 years 15 June 2018 Equity settled award  LTIP Equity 32739 3 years 15 June 2018 Equity settled award  restricted Equity 266008 2 years 1 May 2017 Equity settled award  SIP Equity 55003 3 years rolling May  June 2018 Equity settled award  LTIP Equity 1563299 3 years 8 April 2019 Equity settled award  LTIP Equity 176053 2.9 years 8 April 2019 Equity settled award  restricted Equity 272638 2 years 1 May 2018 Equity settled award  SIP Equity 73261 3 years rolling April 2019 Equity settled award  DSBP Equity 44183 3 years 9 April 2018 Equity settled award  DSBP Equity 77739 3 years 8 April 2019 Equity settled award  LTIP Equity 1430117 3 years 31 March 2020 Equity settled award  LTIP Equity 74052 3 years 31 March 2020 Equity settled award  restricted Equity 202312 2 years 31 March 2019 Equity settled award  SIP Equity 50106 3 years rolling May  June 2020 Equity settled award  DSBP Equity 65374 3 years 31 March 2020 The following table shows the weighted average exercise prices WAEP and number of options movements during the year.
2017 2016
Number of options WAEP Number of options Outstanding at the beginning of the year 2.57 4296354 2.52 2801622 Granted during the year 3.48 1821961 2.64 2207173 Forfeited during the year 3.00 819078 2.60 663702 Exercised during the year 2.47 1090533 2.33 48739 Expired during the year 2.46 132609 Outstanding at 31 December 2.90 4076095 2.57 4296354 Exercisable at 31 December 2.29 197851 2.05 29731 The weighted average share price at the date of exercise of share options exercised during the year was 3.44 2016 2.92.
The share options outstanding at 31 December 2017 have a weighted average contractual life of 1.2 years 2016 1.3 years.
The weighted average fair value of options granted during the year was 3.21 2016 2.28.
The majority of options granted to date are nilcost options 2016 nilcost options.
The fair value of equity settled sharebased payments has been estimated as at date of grant using the BlackScholes model.
The inputs to the models used to determine the valuations fell within the following ranges 2017 2016
Expected life of options years 3 3 Share prices at date of grant 3.46 2.57 LTIP and restricted awards Expected life of options years 23 23 Share prices at date of grant 3.464.06 2.572.67 Expected share price volatility % 30.72%31.09% 31.85% Risk free interest rate % 0.24% 0.19% 129 Financial statements www. rrowglobalir.
Sharebased payments  Group and Company continued Grant information continued The total expenses recognised for the year arising from sharebased payments are as follows Equity settled sharebased payment expense spread across vesting period 3334 3061 Total equity settled sharebased payment expense recognised in the statement of comprehensive income 3334 3061 The Company holds the obligation to settle the share options however the benefit arises in the subsidiaries Arrow Global Limited AGL and Capquest Debt Recovery Limited CDRL with the charge in the statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income recharged to AGL CDRL and the Dutch employee holding company.
Please see the directors remuneration report for further information about directors share options.
Borrowings and facilities Borrowing at amortised cost Senior secured notes net of transaction fees of 15607000 2016 20562000 763740 681158 Revolving credit facility net of transaction fees of 2721000 2016 2756000 153036 74169 Senior secured notes interest 6670 5430 Bank overdrafts 1332 7698 Finance lease 1816 Nonrecourse facility 8908 12077 935502 780532 Total borrowings Amount due for settlement within 12 months 165360 87297 Amount due for settlement after 12 months 770142 693235 Senior secured notes On 30 March 2017 the Group issued 400 million senior secured floating rate notes due 2025 the 2025 Notes at a coupon of EURIBOR 2.875% per annum with EURIBOR being not less than 0%.
Interest is paid quarterly in arrears.
The 2025 Notes can be redeemed in full or in part on or after 1 April 2019 at the Groups option.
Prior to 1 April 2019 the Group may redeem at its option some or all of the 2025 Notes at a redemption price equal to 100% of the principal amount thereof plus accrued and unpaid interest if any plus an applicable makewhole premium.
The proceeds from the 2025 Notes were used to redeem the existing 335 million 2021 Notes pay the early redemption and transaction fees payable in respect of the 335 million 2021 Notes and repay drawings under the RCF.
On 1 September 2016 the Group issued 220 million senior secured notes at a fixed rate of 5.125% due 2024 the 2024 Sterling Senior Notes.
Interest
The 2024 Sterling Senior Notes can be redeemed in full or in part on or after 15 September 2019 at the Groups option.
Prior to 15 September 2019 the Group may redeem at its option some or all of the 2024 Sterling Senior Notes at a redemption price equal to 100% of the principal amount thereof plus accrued and unpaid interest if any plus an applicable makewhole premium.
On 1 September 2016 upon issuance of the 2024 Sterling Senior Notes the Group redeemed the 220 million senior secured notes due 2020 the 2020 Sterling Senior Notes which were issued in January 2013.
Upon redemption of the 2020 Sterling Senior Notes the Group incurred costs of 15.0 million details of which are included within finance costs see note 9.
On 14 April 2016 the Group issued 230 million senior secured notes due 2023 at a floating rate of 4.75% over threemonth EURIBOR the 2023 Euro Senior Notes.
Interest is paid quarterly in arrears.
The 2023 Euro Senior Notes can be redeemed in full or in part on or after 1 May 2019 at the Groups option.
Prior to 1 May 2019 the Group may redeem at its option some or all of the 2023 Euro Senior Notes at a redemption price equal to 100% of the principal amount thereof plus accrued and unpaid interest if any plus an applicable makewhole premium.
The Euro senior notes and Sterling senior notes are secured by substantially all of the assets of the Group.
Revolving credit facility On 24 February 2017 the commitments under the RCF were increased from 180 million to 215 million.
Upon the redemption of the 335 million 2021 Notes on 30 March 2017 the maturity of the facility was extended to 31 March 2022.
On 8 January 2018 the RCF was increased by 40 million and maturity extended to January 2023.
The margin on the RCF was also reduced to 2.5%.
On 21 July 2016 the Group entered into a new 180 million revolving credit facility the revolving credit facility with The Royal Bank of Scotland Plc acting as security agent for a syndicate of participating financial institutions.
The revolving credit facility has a margin of 2.75% and a committed term to 31 July 2021.
The Group is required to pay a commitment fee at a rate of 35% of the margin per annum on the undrawn portion of each lenders commitment.
The revolving credit facility is secured by the same assets as the 2021 Euro Senior Notes 2023 Euro Senior Notes and 2024 Sterling Senior Notes and ranks super senior to these.
The assets that are secured are those of the Arrow Global Guernsey Holdings Limited group.
On 24 February 2017 the commitments under the revolving credit facility were increased from 180 million to 215 million.
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED Arrow Global Group PLC  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Borrowings and facilities continued Revolving credit facility continued On 21 July 2016 the Group cancelled its existing revolving credit facility the Original Revolving Credit Facility.
Upon cancellation the Group incurred costs of 3.0 million these costs are included within finance costs see note 9.
Under the Original Revolving Credit Facility the Group was required to pay a commitment fee at a rate of 40% of the applicable margin per annum on the undrawn portion of each lenders commitment.
Finance lease liabilities Due to the acquisition of Zenith Service S. the Groups liabilities now include a finance lease in relation to a property.
This is payable as follows Future minimum lease payments Interest Present value of minimum lease payment Less than one year 171  57  114 Between one and five years 685  192  493 More than five years 1377  168  1209 Total payable 2233  417  1816 Reconciliation of movements of liabilities to cash flows arising from financing activities
Senior secured notes interest
Other
Total liabilities relating to cash flow from financing activity Interest rate swap liabilities and forward exchange contracts
Balance at 31 December 2016 681158 5430 74169 29258 790015 1433 791448 Changes from financing cash flows Net proceeds from additional loans   77384 11057 66327  66327 Proceeds from senior notes net of fees 340546    340546  340546 Redemption of senior notes 290867    290867  290867 Early repayment of bond 17631    17631  17631 Repayment of interest on senior notes  31119   31119  31119 Payment of deferred interest    610 610  610 Bank and other similar fees paid    4274 4274  4274 Total changes from financing cash flows 32048 31119 77384 15941 62372  62372 Changes arising from obtaining or losing control of subsidiaries or other businesses    16500 16500  16500 The effect of changes in foreign exchange rates 21207 101 1410 1069 23787 694 23093 Changes in fair value  349 349 Other changes
Interest expense on senior secured notes  32258   32258  32258 Amortisation of capitalised transaction fees Bond 2358 2358 2358 Interest on senior secured notes 2358 32258   34616  34616 Interest expense and similar charges on bank loans    5289 5289  5289 Amortisation of capitalised transaction fees RCF   758  758  758 Interest and similar charges on bank loans   758 5289 6047  6047 Bond refinancing costs 26969 26969 380 27349 Interest rate swap and forward exchange contract hedge costs  2095 2095 Other interest including interest on finance lease    1562 1562  1562 Capitalised transaction fees   686  686  686 Acquisition of subsidiary deferred consideration    8888 8888  8888 Total liabilityrelated other changes 29327 32258 72 2037 59620 2475 62095 Balance at 31 December 2017 763740 6670 153035 28849 952294 2865 955159 131 Financial statements www. rrowglobalir.
Borrowings and facilities continued Other borrowings Other borrowings 10724 12077 Bank overdrafts 1332 7698 Other liabilities relating to cash flow from financing activity 16793 9483 28849 29258
Dividends paid of 16797000 have been included in these financial statements being the 2016 final dividend of 6.4p per share and the 2017 interim dividend of 3.2p per share.
A final dividend for 2017 has been proposed of 8.1p per share taking the total declared and proposed dividends for the year ended 31 December 2017 to 11.3p being 35% of underlying profit after tax.
The proposed final dividend is subject to approval at the annual general meeting and has therefore not been included as a liability in these financial statements.
The 2017 interim dividend was declared at 50% of the 2016 final dividend with the subsequent final dividend being proposed based on the underlying profit after tax for the year.
The exdividend date for the final dividend is 31 May 2018 with a record date of 1 June 2018 and a payment date of 6 July 2018.
Shareholders will have the opportunity to elect to reinvest their cash dividend and purchase existing shares in the Company through a dividend reinvestment plan DRIP with an election date of 15 June 2018.
Acquisition of subsidiary undertaking Current year acquisitions a.
Zenith Service S.
On 28 April 2017 the Group acquired 100% of the ordinary share capital of Zenith Service S.
Zenith.
Zenith has a similar principal activity to that of the Group and is a leading master servicer in the Italian structured finance market and provider of various structuring and securitisation services.
The Group paid cash consideration of 11327000 9630000 together with deferred consideration of 7551200 6420000.
Deferred consideration is payable on the oneyear anniversary of the transaction and has been included at its fair value leading to an overall consideration of 18588000 15803000.
Effect of the acquisition The acquisition had the following effect on the Groups assets and liabilities
Intangible assets 2517 Property plant and equipment 3087 Deferred tax asset 965 Cash and cash equivalents 4555 Other receivables 3803 Trade and other payables 7610 Deferred tax liability 672 Current tax liability 727 Minority interest 187 Goodwill on acquisition
Cash 9630 Deferred consideration 6173 Cash impact of acquisition in the period Cash consideration 9630 Cash and cash equivalents acquired 4555 5075 132 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED Arrow Global Group PLC  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Acquisition of subsidiary undertaking continued Current year acquisitions continued a.
Zenith Service S.
An intangible asset of 2872000 2442000 has been recognised at acquisition being the fair value after appropriate discounting of expected cash flows arising from contractual customer relationships.
Goodwill of 11847000 10072000 was created as a result of this acquisition.
The primary reasons for the acquisition were to enter the Italian market via the acquisition of an existing wellestablished company and to create scale and servicing capabilities across multiple asset classes.
Trade and other payables in the acquired entity include a finance lease liability of 2054000 1746000 in relation to a property.
In the period from acquisition to 31 December 2017 Zenith contributed revenue of 8681000 and profit after tax of 1055000 to the consolidated results for the period.
If the acquisition had occurred on 1 January 2017 Group total revenue would have been an estimated 331942000 and profit after tax would have been an estimated 41498000.
The minority interest relating to a noncontrolling interest in Zeniths subsidiary Structured Finance Management  Italy S.
SFM was recorded as the noncontrolling partys proportionate interest in the fair value of the identifiable assets of SFM at the acquisition date. b.
Hefesto
On 31 March 2017 the Group acquired 100% of the ordinary share capital of Hefesto STC.
Hefesto is a regulated Portuguese special purpose vehicle for the securitisation of loans and receivables.
Whitestar acts as servicer and administrator of Hefesto.
The Group paid cash consideration of 743000 636000 which was equal to the fair value of the net assets acquired.
The assets and liabilities acquired comprised 1880000 1608000 of cash 1181000 1010000 of trade and other liabilities and 44000 38000 of other receivables.
These figures are after fair value adjustments totalling 66000 56000. c.
Mars Capital On 30 November 2017 the Group acquired 100% of the ordinary share capital of Mars Capital Finance Limited Mars Capital.
Mars Capital is the leading UK and Irish mortgage servicing business and will strengthen the Groups asset management capabilities and reinforce its leading position in the UK while providing strategic entry into Ireland.
The Group will pay 4178000 in cash together with deferred cash consideration of 10000000.
The deferred consideration is payable on the fouryear anniversary of the transaction.
There is an amount of the deferred consideration contingent on the timing of the commencement of a new servicing contract.
The deferred consideration has been included at its fair value 8581000 taking into account managements best estimate of the contingent amount payable.
This gives an overall consideration of 12759000.
Effect of the acquisition The acquisition had the following effect on the Groups assets and liabilities
Intangible assets 3011 Property plant and equipment 162 Cash and cash equivalents 80 Other receivables 3214 Trade and other payables 3937 Deferred tax liability 462 Current tax liability 148 Goodwill on acquisition 10839
Cash 4178 Deferred consideration 8581 Cash impact of acquisition in the period Cash consideration 4178 Cash and cash equivalents acquired 80 An intangible asset of 2568000 has been recognised at acquisition being the fair value after appropriate discounting of expected cash flows arising from contractual customer relationships.
Goodwill of 10839000 was created as a result of this acquisition.
The primary reasons for the acquisition were to enter the Irish market which offers significant debt purchasing and servicing potential via the acquisition of an existing wellestablished company whilst enhancing the Groups asset management capabilities.
Financial statements www. rrowglobalir.
Acquisition of subsidiary undertaking continued Current year acquisitions continued c.
Mars Capital continued In the period from acquisition to 31 December 2017 Mars Capital contributed revenue of 696000 and profit after tax of 79000 to the consolidated results for the period.
If the acquisition had occurred on 1 January 2017 Group total revenue would have been an estimated 327315000 and profit after tax would have been an estimated 41915000.
Prior year acquisitions a.
InVesting
On 4 May 2016 the Group acquired 100% of the ordinary share capital of InVesting B.
Benelux B.
InVesting has a similar principal activity to that of the Group and is a leading consumer debt purchaser and thirdparty collections provider with operations both in the Netherlands and Belgium.
The Group paid cash consideration of 76964000 60649000 and contingent consideration of 270000 213000 with an additional requirement to repay outstanding loans and other costs of 12280000 9677000.
The contingent consideration was paid on the oneyear anniversary of the transaction and was included at its fair value at the amount contractually agreed.
The contingent consideration was based on the previous shareholders fulfilling their service responsibilities for 12 months postacquisition management deemed this to be highly probable at the previous reporting date.
Included within the opening net assets are debt liabilities of 18412000 comprising an overdraft with a facility limit of 20 million drawn at the acquisition date to the value 11084000 8735000 and an intercompany loan of 12280000 9677000 from an entity of the previous
Further to this an intercompany loan of 12280000 9677000 was created between Arrow Global Investments Holdings Limited and InVesting.
Goodwill of 47995000 37821000 was created as a result of this acquisition.
The primary reasons for the acquisition were to create scale and servicing capability across multiple asset classes and to create a market leader within the Benelux market.
In the period from acquisition to 31 December 2016 InVesting contributed revenue of 40580000 and profit of 7729000 to the consolidated results for the period.
If the acquisition had occurred on the first day of 1 January 2016 Group total revenue would have been an estimated 250538000 and profit after tax would have been an estimated 27531000.
Effect of the acquisition The acquisition had the following effect on the Groups assets and liabilities
Purchased loan portfolios 35343 Other intangible assets 16388 Property plant and equipment 582 Deferred tax asset 3210 Other receivables 10775 Cash and cash equivalents 696 Trade and other payables 23924 Defined benefit liability 1470 Bank overdraft 8735 Deferred tax liability 9276 Current tax liability 154 Minority interest 394 Goodwill on acquisition 37821
Cash 60649 Contingent consideration 213 Goodwill of 5410000 previously recognised in InVesting is not an identifiable asset when applying acquisition accounting and therefore was written off through fair value adjustments accordingly.
Purchased loan portfolios had a fair value at acquisition of 35343000.
The fair value has been assessed using a methodology consistent with the Groups other purchased loan portfolios as described in note 4.
An intangible asset of 13850000 was recognised at acquisition being the fair value of expected cash flows over a sevenyear period arising from contractual and noncontractual customer relationships discounted appropriately. portfolios and the sellers balance sheet carrying value.
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED Arrow Global Group PLC  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Acquisition of subsidiary undertaking continued Prior year acquisitions continued a.
InVesting continued A fair value adjustment of 400000 arose to reduce the deferred tax asset reflecting the uncertainty over the amounts and timing of historical tax losses.
Other receivables in the acquired entities comprise gross contracted amounts of 3675000.
The minority interest was recorded at fair value at the acquisition date. b.
Redrock
On 29 February 2016 the Group acquired 100% of the ordinary share capital of Redrock Capital Partners S. together with deferred consideration of 454000 357 000 being a total consideration of 3654000 2872000.
The deferred consideration is payable on the oneyear anniversary of the transaction and has been included at its fair value.
Redrock has a similar principal activity to that of the Group being the management and servicing of nonperforming debt portfolios on behalf of thirdparty clients and the Group in Portugal.
Goodwill of 3244000 2550000 was created as a result of this acquisition.
The primary reasons for the acquisition which make up the goodwill were to enable further synergy gains within the Portuguese CGU from a combination of lower servicing costs and more control over owned loan portfolios.
This also allows focus on low valuation collections.
In the period from acquisition to 31 December 2016 Redrock contributed revenue of 268000 and loss of 386000 to the consolidated results for the period.
If the acquisition had occurred on 1 January 2016 Group total revenue would have been 235959000 and profit after tax would have been 26325000.
Effect of the acquisition The acquisition had the following effect on the Groups assets and liabilities
Other intangible assets 407 Deferred tax asset 28 Other receivables 417 Cash and cash equivalents 3 Trade and other payables 399 Deferred tax liability 134 Goodwill on acquisition 2550
Cash 2515 Deferred consideration 357 An intangible asset of 407000 was recognised at acquisition being the fair value of expected cash flows over a sevenyear period arising from contractual and noncontractual customer relationships discounted appropriately.
A deferred tax liability has been recognised with respect to the customer intangible asset.
The fair value of plant property and equipment in Redrock was assessed to be nil following the relocation of the Redrock office.
Other receivables in the acquired entity comprise gross contracted amounts of 315000.
There are no provisions for overdue amounts.
Measurement period Whilst the Group believes the acquisition accounting fair value adjustments to be complete IFRS 3 allows a measurement period of up to one year after acquisition to reflect any new information obtained about facts and circumstances that were made available to the Group at the acquisition date.
If any additional material changes are required within this measurement period these will be reflected in the 2018 half year results of the Group.
Commitments
In December 2017 the Group entered into three binding contracts to buy purchased loan portfolios and loan notes for 57000000.
Adjustments may be made to both the purchase price and the makeup of the portfolios and loan notes being acquired by agreement between both parties this is estimated to have a maximum potential impact on the purchase price of  1.0 million.
As payment has not been made and title has not yet passed the portfolios and loan notes and associated purchase price liability have not been recognised within the financial reporting period.
Financial statements www. rrowglobalir.
Events occurring after the reporting period The Group announced on 1 March that it has agreed terms for two acquisitions which strengthen the Groups investment and asset management capabilities and reinforce its growing presence in Italy.
The first is for 100% of Parr Credit S.
Parr a leading Romebased servicer of Italian nonperforming loans for an equity value of 20 million.
There are no regulatory required approvals for the transaction and the acquisition will complete on 1 March.
The second is for Europa Investimenti S.
Europa a leading originator and manager of Italian distressed debt investments for an equity value of 62 million.
This equity value includes the Group making an equity injection of 11.5m.
While the core Europa business is not regulated due to Europa owning a 74% stake in an Italian real estate fund management company Vegagest SGR S. control approval by the Bank of Italy and is expected to complete in mid2018.
The acquisitions will be funded in cash from existing Group resources.
Notes to the cash flow statement Cash flows from operating activities
Year ended 31 December
Year ended 31 December
Year ended 31 December
Year ended 31 December Profit before tax 50559 31367 23944 23601 Adjusted for Collections in the year 342210 285960 Income from purchased loan portfolios and loan notes 241290 188914 Profit on disposal of purchased loan portfolios 1329 701 Share in profit in associate 1578 2363 Fair value gain on loan notes 5298 Gain on sale of associate 14697 Depreciation and amortisation 11729 8658 Net interest payable 71660 66028 Foreign exchange gains 611 1510 Equity settled sharebased payment expenses 3334 3061 Operating cash flows before movement in working capital 214689 201586 23944 23601 Increase in other receivables 13224 9243 2 29 Increase in amounts due from subsidiary undertakings   5848 9024 Increasedecrease in trade and other payables 5915 7305 14 5 Cash generated by operations 207380 199648 18080 14553 Income taxes and overseas taxation paidreceived 9598 2850 64 438 Net cash flow from operating activities before purchases of loan portfolios and loan notes 197782 196798 18144 14115 Purchase of purchased loan portfolios 195579 201700 Purchase price adjustment relating to prior year 474 Purchase of purchase of loan notes 30155 21315 Net cash used ingenerated by operating activities 27478 26217 18144 14115 136 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Arrow Global Group PLC  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Underlying Profit is considered to be a key measure in understanding the Groups ongoing financial performance.
Adjusting items are those items that by virtue of their size nature or incidence i. considered to be representative of the ongoing performance of the Group and these items are excluded from underlying profit.
31 December 31 December Continuing operations Revenue 319015 235930 Operating expenses Collection activity costs 117638 70261 Other operating expenses 88344 65615 Total operating expenses 205982 135876 Operating profit 113033 100054 Finance income 9 813 Finance costs 44317 48847 Share of profit in associates 1578 2363 Underlying profit before tax 70303 54383 Taxation charge on underlying activities 13697 8816 Underlying profit after tax 56606 45567 Noncontrolling interest 44 1 Underlying profit attributable to the owners of the Company 56562 45566 Underlying Basic EPS  0.32 0.26 Underlying tax rate 19.5% 16.2% Reconciliation of reported to underlying costs 2017 2016
Adjustments
Underlying
Reported
Adjustments
Underlying
Collection activity costs 118468 830 117638 70261  70261 Other operating expenses 94603 6259 88344 70637 5022 65615 Finance costs 71669 27352 44317 66841 17994 48847 Collection activity cost adjusting items relate to One Arrow costs incurred during the year.
Within other operating expenses adjusting items are 3815000 2016 nil of One Arrow costs and 2444000 of costs incurred relating to the acquisitions of Zenith Services S. in Italy and the Mars Capital companies in the UK and Ireland.
In the year to 31 December 2016 5022000 of costs were incurred relating to the completion of two acquisitions Vesting in the Netherlands Redrock in Portugal and the agreed acquisition of Zenith.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION UNAUDITED 137 Financial statements www. rrowglobalir.
Adjusted EBITDA means profit before interest tax depreciation amortisation foreign exchange gains or losses and other adjusting items.
The Adjusted EBITDA reconciliations for the year to 31 December are shown below Reconciliation of net cash flow to adjusted EBITDA 31 December 31 December Net cash flow used in operating activities 27478 26217 Purchases of loan portfolios 195579 201700 Purchase price adjustment relating to prior year 474 Purchase of loan notes 30155 21315 Income taxes paid 9598 2850 Working capital adjustments 7309 1938 Amortisation of acquisition and bank facility fee 273 276 Dividends and interest from associate 7233 2363 Disposal of intangible asset 1332 Acquisition costs 2444 5022 One Arrow costs 4645 Adjusted EBITDA 230616 209247 Reconciliation of core collections to adjusted EBITDA Income from loan portfolios 241290 188914 Portfolio amortisation 100920 97046 Core collections includes proceeds from disposal of purchased loan portfolios 342210 285960 Other income 71098 46315 Operating expenses 213071 140898 Depreciation and amortisation 11729 8658 Foreign exchange gains 611 1510 Amortisation of acquisition and bank facility fees 273 276 Dividends and interest from associate 7233 2363 Disposal of intangible asset 1332 Sharebased payments 3334 3061 Acquisition costs 2444 5022 One Arrow costs 4645 Adjusted EBITDA 230616 209247 Reconciliation of operating profit to adjusted EBITDA Profit for the year 39915 26306 Underlying finance income and costs 44308 48034 Taxation charge on ordinary activities 10644 5061 Share of profit on associate 1578 2363 Gain on sale of associate 14697 Adjusting finance costs 27352 17994 Operating profit 105944 95032 Portfolio amortisation 100920 97046 Depreciation and amortisation 11729 8658 Foreign exchange gains 611 1510 Profit on disposal of purchased loan portfolios 1329 701 Amortisation of acquisition and bank facility fees 273 276 Sharebased payments 3334 3061 Fair value gain on loan notes 5298 Disposal of intangible asset 1332 Dividends and interest from associate 7233 2363 Acquisition costs 2444 5022 One Arrow costs 4645 Adjusted EBITDA 230616 209247 138 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Arrow Global Group PLC  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Adjusted EBITDA means profit before interest tax depreciation amortisation foreign exchange gains or losses and other adjusting items.
The
Adjusted EBITDA reconciliations for the year to 31 December are shown below Adjusted EBITDA ratio represents the ratio of Adjusted EBITDA to core collections.
See page 25 for a reconciliation of the movement in purchased loan portfolios and loan notes under IFRS reconciled to cash ERC.
Adjusting items are those items that by virtue of their size nature or incidence i. considered to be representative of the ongoing performance of the Group and are therefore excluded from underlying profit after tax.
Average net assets is calculated as the average quarterly net assets from H1 2016 to H1 2017 as shown in the quarterly and half yearly statements.
In comparative periods this was calculated as the average annual net assets.
Cash interest cover represents interest on senior secured notes utilisation and nonutilisation RCF fees and bank interest to Adjusted EBITDA.
Cash result represents current cash generation on a sustainable basis and is calculated as Adjusted EBITDA less cash interest income taxes and overseas taxation paid purchase of property plant and equipment purchase of intangible assets and average replacement rate.
CGU means cashgenerating unit.
Collection activity costs represent the direct costs of external collections related to the Groups purchased loan portfolios such as commissions paid to thirdparty outsourced providers credit bureau data costs and legal costs associated with collections.
Core collections or core cash collections means cash collections on the Groups existing portfolios and loan notes including ordinary course portfolio sales and put backs.
Core collections is a key metric as it represents the Groups most significant cash inflow.
It is also a key component of adjusted EBITDA which is used to monitor the Groups leverage position.
The breakdown of core collections for the years ended 31 December 2017 and 31 December 2016 are as follows Collections from purchased loan portfolios 333567 285960 Collections from loan notes 8643 Core collections 342210 285960 Costtocollect ratio is the ratio of collection activity costs to core collections.
Creditors means financial institutions or other initial credit providers to consumers certain of which entities choose to sell paying accounts or nonpaying accounts receivables related to debt purchasers such as the Group.
CSA means Credit Services Association.
Customers means consumers whose unsecured loan obligation is owed to the Group as a result of a portfolio purchase made by the Group.
Defaulted debt means a debt where a customer has breached the repayment terms governing that debt such that it is unlikely to be paid.
Under the Consumer Credit Act 1974 there are specific legal obligations which require a customer to be sent the relevant statutory default notices after which the customers agreement may ultimately be terminated.
Other types of debts may also be defined as defaulted in the event that they remain unpaid for a period of 90 days or more if there is not an acceptable arrangement in place to bring the account back up to date in which case the creditor or lender may reasonably believe that the relationship has broken down.
Under the Data Protection Act 1990 it is a requirement that any organisation seeking to register a default with a credit reference agency must also send a notice of intention to file a default this notice is very similar in nature to that required under the Consumer Credit Act both of which give the debtor 28 days to bring the account back up to date before action is taken.
Diluted EPS means the earnings per share whereby the number of shares is adjusted for the effects of potential dilutive ordinary shares options and LTIPs.
DSBP means the Arrow Global deferred share bonus plan.
EBITDA means earnings before interest taxation depreciation and amortisation.
EBT means employee benefit trust.
EIR means effective interest rate which is based on the loan portfolios gross internal rate of return calculated using the loan portfolio purchase price and forecast 84month gross ERC at the date of purchase.
On acquisition there is a short period that is required to determine the EIR due to the complexity of the portfolios acquired.
EPS means earnings per share.
84month ERC and 120month ERC together gross ERC mean the Groups estimated remaining collections on purchased loan portfolios over an 84month or 120month period respectively representing the expected future core collections on purchased loan portfolios over an 84month or 120month period calculated at the end of each month based on the Groups proprietary ERC forecasting model as amended from time to time.
ERC Rollover relates to additional cash flows from rolling the asset life on all portfolios to seven years from the date of ERC including the impact of any foreign exchange movement and the impact of reforecast in the period.
GLOSSARY 139 www. rrowglobalir.
Existing portfolios or purchased loan portfolios are on the Groups statement of financial position and represent all debt portfolios that the Group owns at the relevant point in time.
A portfolio comprises a group of customer accounts purchased in a single transaction.
FCA means the Financial Conduct Authority.
Free cash flow means Adjusted EBITDA after the effect of capital expenditure and working capital movements.
FVTPL  Financial instruments designated at fair value with all gains or losses being recognised in the profit or loss.
Gross money multiple means core collections to date plus the 84month gross ERC or 120month gross ERC as applicable all divided by the purchase price for each portfolio excluding REO purchases and purchase price adjustments relating to asset management fees.
IFRS means EU endorsed international financial reporting standards.
Income from asset management includes commission income debt collection due diligence real estate management and advisory fees.
IPO means initial public offering.
ISOP means the initial share option plan.
Loan to value or LTV ratio represents the ratio of 84month ERC to net debt.
LTIP means the Arrow Global longterm incentive plan.
Net money multiple means collections to date plus the 84month gross ERC or 120month gross ERC as applicable net of collection activity costs all divided by the purchase price for each portfolio.
Net debt means the sum of the outstanding principal amount of the senior secured notes interest thereon amounts outstanding under the revolving credit facility and deferred consideration payable in relation to the acquisition of loan portfolios less cash and cash equivalents.
Net debt is presented because it indicates the level of debt after taking out of the Groups assets that can be used to pay down outstanding borrowings and because it is a component of the maintenance covenants in the revolving credit facility.
The breakdown of net debt for the year ended 31 December 2017 is as follows Cash and cash equivalents 35943 23203 Senior secured notes pretransaction fees net off 779347 701720 Revolving credit facility pretransaction fees net off 155757 76925 Secured bank overdrafts  6419 Secured net debt 899161 761861 Deferred consideration 30509 35401 Senior secured loan notes interest 6670 5430 Bank overdrafts 1332 1279 Other borrowings 10724 12077 Net debt 948396 816048 Net promoter score means a measure of customer satisfaction on a scale of 09.
Off market means those loan portfolios that were not acquired through a process involving a competitive bid or an auction like process.
Organic purchases of loan portfolios means those purchased through the ordinary course of business not through acquisition.
In the year ended 31 December 2017 organic purchases of loan portfolios included cash paid for portfolios and loan notes acquired during the year of 195579000 and 30155000 respectively less capitalised portfolio and loan note acquisition expenditure of 1785000.
Paying account means an account that has shown at least one payment over the last three months or at least two payments over the last six months.
Payout ratio represents the total amount of dividends paid out divided by the underlying profit after tax.
PCB means the Proprietary Collections Bureau a data matching tool designed by Arrow Global and Experian.
Putback means an account that is to be sold back or replaced with the original creditor.
Purchased loan portfolios see existing portfolios.
Purchases of loan portfolios resoldto be resold relates to a portfolio of assets which has been acquired at the year end and will shortly be resold to an investment partner.
These are separately disclosed from other purchased loan portfolios as an investment partner is intending to complete their acquisition from us.
PwC means PricewaterhouseCoopers.
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Arrow Global Group PLC  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 RCF means revolving credit facility.
Replacement rate means the level of purchases needed during the subsequent year to maintain the current level of ERC.
ROE means the return on equity as calculated by taking profit after tax divided by the average equity attributable to shareholders.
Average equity attributable is calculated as the average quarterly equity from H1 2016 to H1 2017 as shown in the quarterly and half yearly statements.
In the comparative period this is calculated as the average annual equity attributable.
Secured loan to value ratio represents the drawn RCF  senior secured notes and bank overdrafts all pretransaction fees net off less cash to 84month ERC.
SID means the Senior Independent Director of the Group.
SIP means the Arrow Global allemployee share incentive plan.
SME means small and mediumsized enterprises.
Secured loan to value or secured LTV ratio represents the ratio of 84month ERC to secured debt net debt as defined above excluding deferred consideration and interest on the senior secured notes and including the fair value of foreign currency contracts and interest rate swaps.
TCF means the treating customers fairly FCA initiative.
TSR means total shareholder return.
Underlying basic EPS represents earnings per share based on underlying profit after tax excluding any dilution of shares.
Underlying profit after tax means profit for the period after tax adjusted for the posttax effect of certain adjusting items.
The Group presents underlying profit after tax because it excludes the effect of items and the related tax on such items which are not considered representative of the Groups ongoing performance on the Groups profit or loss for a period and forms the basis of its dividend policy.
Underlying return on equity represents the ratio of underlying profit after tax attributable to equity shareholders to average shareholder equity.
GLOSSARY CONTINUED Registered and head office
12 Booth Street
M2 4AW United Kingdom Telephone 44tel Company secretary Stewart Hamilton
KPMG LLP 1 St Peters Square
M2 3AE Legal advisors Slaughter and May One Bunhill Row
EC1Y 8YY
Equiniti Limited Aspect House Spencer Road
West Sussex BN99 6DA Financial calendar for 2018 Announcement of 2017 fullyear results 1 March 2018 Announcement of the 3 months to 31 March 2018 results 10 May 2018 Annual general meeting 22 May 2018 Exdividend date for 2017 final dividend 31 May 2018 Record date for 2017 final dividend 1 June 2018 Close of DRIP elections 15 June 2018 Payment date of 2017 final dividend 6 July 2018 Announcement of 2018 halfyearly results 30 August 2018 Announcement of the 9 months to 30 September 2018 results 8 November 2018 Fullyear end 31 December 2018 Annual general meeting The forthcoming annual general meeting of the Company will take place at the Midland Hotel Peter Street Manchester M60 2DS on Tuesday 22 May 2018 at 2.30pm.
Notice of the annual general meeting of the Company which includes the business to be transacted and resolutions to be considered at the meeting appear in the document accompanying this annual report and accounts.
Shareholder information and website Equiniti Limited is our registrar and they offer many services to make managing your shareholding easier and more efficient.
You can find out further information about the Group and view this annual report and accounts results other announcements and presentations together with the latest share price information on the Companys investor relations website www. rrowglobalir. et.
Shareview
If you wish to receive electronic communications and manage your shareholding online please visit the website of our Registrar Equiniti Limited at site and click to register at the top of the page.
Customer support centre You can contact Equinitis customer support centre which is available to answer any queries you have in relation to your shareholding By phone
From overseas 44tel Lines are open from 08.30 to 17.30 Monday to Friday excluding public holidays in England and Wales.
By post Equiniti Limited Aspect House Spencer Road Lancing West Sussex BN99 6DA.
SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION The Groups commitment to environmental issues is reflected in this annual report which has been printed on ArcoPrint made from an FSC certified and ECF Process Chlorine Free material.
Printed in the UK by Pureprint Group using their environmental printing technology.
Both manufacturing mill and the printer are registered to the Environmental Management System ISO14001 and are Forest Stewardship Council FSC chainofcustody certified. www. rrowglobalir.
Belvedere
12 Booth Street
M2 4AW www. rrowglobalir.
Company No.
