SHAPING THE FUTURE OF
COMMUNICATIONS
COMMUNISIS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 COMMUNISIS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT 01 Highlights 02 Communisis at a glance 08 Chairmans statement 10 Business model 12 Chief Executives statement 16 Strategy 18 Risk management and principal risks 22 Financial review 26 Corporate social responsibility report CORPORATE GOVERNANCE 33 Introduction to Corporate governance 34 Board of Directors 36 Corporate governance report 40 Nomination Committee report 42 Audit Committee report 44 Directors remuneration report 60 Directors report Statement of Directors responsibilities FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 66 Independent auditors report 74 Consolidated income statement Consolidated statement of comprehensive income 76 Consolidated balance sheet 77 Consolidated cash flow statement Consolidated statement of changes in equity Notes to the Consolidated financial statements 116 Company balance sheet 117 Company statement of changes in equity Notes to the Company financial statements SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION 129 Shareholder information STRONG TRADING IN 2017 SAW COMMUNISIS GENERATING PROFITABLE GROWTH WITH GOOD LEVELS OF FREE CASH FLOW AND A SIGNIFICANT REDUCTION IN NET DEBT.
LONGTERM CONTRACTS HAVE BEEN SECURED WITH A MAJOR UK BANK AND WITH PROXIMITY LTD TO PROVIDE COMMUNICATION SERVICES TO THE BBC FOR THE TV LICENSING
A STRATEGY FOR THE GROUPS NEXT PHASE OF GROWTH IS BEING LAUNCHED A FOCUSED THREE YEAR PLAN TO CREATE ENHANCED RETURNS TO SHAREHOLDERS AS WE RAISE THE VALUE WE PROVIDE TO OUR CLIENTS.
Andy Blundell Chief Executive 8 March 2018 CASE STUDY UK MOBILE NETWORK OPERATOR RETAIL INNOVATION T o deliver standardisation and simplification for product and POSVM display the Communisis team needed to come up with a faster more cost effective and bespoke method for deploying campaigns into stores.
The solution was an online store of retail POS materials allowing managers to log in and order displays tailored to their requirements.
REDUCED CAMPAIGN MANAGEMENT FROM 5 DAYS TO 15 MINUTES FIND OUT MORE ONLINE AT COMMUNISIS.
COMMUNISIS IS AN INTEGRATED BUSINESS SERVICES COMPANY WHICH DRIVES CLIENT VALUE AND SUSTAINABLE PROFIT IMPROVEMENT THROUGH THE PROVISION OF INCREASINGL Y DIGITALL Y ENABLED SOLUTIONS FOR REGULATED TRANSACTIONAL COMMUNICATION AND MARKETING EXECUTION.
Strategic report Strategic Report 01 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
FINANCIAL HIGHLIGHTS
VALUE ENHANCEMENT PROGRAMME VEP 2020  THREE YEAR PLAN HIGHLIGHTS 2017 6.4 2016 6.1 2015 5.2 2017 14.4 2016 11.6 2015 17.3 2017 17.2 2016 16.7 2015 14.5 2017 2.66 2016 2.42 2015 2.20 The financial target is to create sustainable shareholder value over the next three years 20182020 by growing adjusted diluted earnings per share EPS within a range of 510% CAGR.
The VEP is a threeyear plan to deliver enhanced returns to our shareholders by raising the demonstrable value we deliver to our clients.
There will be a deliberate focus on margin improvement and related pricing initiatives.
The VEP will be driven by three key strategic themes Digital First Global Reach and Empowered Organisation.
The target has now been built into in our senior management remuneration policy and the design of the 2018 Long Term Incentive Plans LTIPs.
ADJUSTED EARNINGS PER SHARE EPS 6.4p 5% PROFIT BEFORE TAX 14.4m 24% 2017 12.5 2016 12.9 2015 12.0 FREE CASH FLOW 12.5m 3% ADJUSTED PROFIT BEFORE TAX 17.2m 3% 2017 24.3 2016 30.4 2015 39.4 NET DEBT 24.3m 20% FULL YEAR DIVIDEND 2.66p 10%
OPERATIONAL HIGHLIGHTS
Major UK Bank a new contract was won for marketing communication and an existing contract for transactional communication was renewed both for five year terms.
Proximity the partnership contract to provide communication services to the BBC for TV Licensing was renewed for a six year term.
HMRC Her Majestys Revenue and Customs good progress in the implementation of the contract for all outbound printed customer communication and forms fulfilment.
Following successful migration of all fulfilment activity to our Newcastle operation in May 2017 Communisis assumed full accountability for all printed customer communications with the transition of circa 180 million packs annually into our Halifax and Liverpool transactional facilities beginning in October 2017.
Overseas sales now represent 30% of total turnover 2016 26%.
New York good progress made with our US Editions office established in May 2017 to service clients in the financial services sector with content marketing services.
Hong Kong Communisis will open an office in Hong Kong in April 2018 for the sourcing of premiums the gifts which accompany many purchases of luxury goods.
Technology investment the programme to install a single platform for the management of our international supply chain for marketing execution is planned to go live in Q2 2018.
2017 2016 Total revenue m 375.9 361.9 4% Adjusted operating profit m 21.2 19.5 9% Adjusted profit before tax m 17.2 16.7 3% Profit before tax m 14.4 11.6 24% Adjusted earnings per share p 6.4 6.1 5% Proposed final dividend per share p 1.77 1.61 10% Free cash flow m  12.5 12.9 3% Net debt m 24.3 30.4 20% Adjusted metrics are stated before exceptional items and the amortisation of acquired intangibles to give a better understanding of the underlying performance of the Group.
Adjusted earnings per share is diluted and excludes the after tax effects of exceptional items amortisation of acquired intangibles and certain tax items in respect of prior years.
Free cash flow represents net operating cash flow less net capital expenditure.
FINANCIAL RESULTS
Communisis is at an exciting stage in its development with a bedrock of solid performance and deep client relationships to build upon.
The growth strategy for the next phase is highly focused and we already have clear evidence of the themes of Digital First Global Reach and Empowered Organisation resonating in our key markets.
The Board is looking forward to another positive year for the Group.
HIGHLIGHTS Strategic Report 02 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 SHAPING THE FUTURE OF CUSTOMER COMMUNICATIONS OUR PURPOSE GROWING VALUE SUSTAINABLY We measure value by how well our solutions meet our clients needs and how willing they are to pay for them.
This is reflected in our ability to earn an improved and sustainable margin.
Through consistent and predictable performance we continue to generate free cash which has enabled a strong dividend stream for shareholders.
COUNTRIES
LOCATIONS
OVER 2000 STAFF HELPING DELIVER CUSTOMER COMMUNICATIONS
OUR MISSION T o drive client value and sustainable profit improvement through the provision of increasingly digitally enabled solutions for regulated transactional communication and marketing execution.
COMMUNISIS AT A GLANCE VALUE FOR CLIENTS Across the markets in which we operate common themes which enable clients to maximise the benefits of the products services and insight we provide have enabled us to define our strategic priorities and the optimal divisional structure to deliver them.
Our clients need innovation in their supply chain enabling them to future proof focus on their core activities and grow return on investment and market share.
They need simplicity in their supply chain reducing the number of key suppliers to a smaller number of proactive strategic partners.
Resilience of service and regulatory compliance are critical.
Understanding these needs Communisis delivers security accuracy integrity and reliability with the cost competitive scale of our panEuropean network and UK operations.
We provide multichannel delivery and digital leadership to our clients as well as our unique expertise.
This allows our clients to increase sales at a premium and improve speed to market being lean standardised and simplified.
We help them stay safe manage risk keeping them informed and able to make better decisions.
This all builds loyalty and trust.
SUPPORTED BY OUR BRAND VALUES Being TRUSTED Being a LEADER Being IMAGINATIVE Being AGILE CASE STUDY LEADING FMCG BRAND
BRAND CONTROL With such a broad range of products and a wide geographical stretch its key for this client to deliver a consistent brand.
The Communisis team centralised procurement to control branding and create an online store to allow brand managers to order specific POS for their territories and retail partners.
GREATER BRAND CONSISTENCY IN 50 MARKETS ACROSS EMEA Strategic Report 03 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 HOW WE GENERATE REVENUE OUR CLIENTS Read more on page 5 Read more on page 4 Creating activation communications in Retail and FMCG channels that motivate consumers to experience and buy brands.
Brand activation strategy Shopper marketing Marketing supply chain management
Logistics
Point of Sale POS procurement Creating lasting and profitable personal customer relationships in all direct digital and social channels.
Missioncritical personalised communications Customer engagement Specialised content Transactional billing statements cheques and inbound services Regulatory communications THE CUSTOMER EXPERIENCE DIVISION THE BRAND DEPLOYMENT DIVISION Strategic Report 04 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 HOW OUR DIVISIONS OPERATE THE CUSTOMER EXPERIENCE DIVISION END CUSTOMER Our end to end communication lifecycle uses data rich and engaging content to ensure relevant and targeted interactions with our clients customers CHANNEL DELIVERY Based upon channel preference and customer journey communications are delivered by relevant channel BATCH AND REALTIME CUSTOMER DATA WEBSITE SMS POST APP EMAIL CONTENT GENERATION Data and artwork are integrated using our best in breed customer communication management products within our Connect platform.
Information design services are deployed at this stage in the communication cycle CHANNEL PREFERENCE Preference engines ensure we help our clients communicate with their customers across their preferred channel throughout the customer journey
Documents can be securely retrieved either by end customers or our clients CRM teams to enable decisioning referencing or query resolution
Composed documents are archived using the enterprise content management products within Connect and retained based upon data retention policies COMMUNISIS AT A GLANCE CONTINUED Strategic Report 05 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 THE BRAND DEPLOYMENT DIVISION CASE STUDY HOW THIS WORKED FOR A GLOBAL FMCG BRAND Before Communisis a client had a minimum of 23 touchpoints necessary to successfully deliver a project.
By driving standardisation providing consistency control and visibility whilst maximising savings opportunities we were able to reduce these touchpoints to seven whilst also enabling the client to realise the following further benefits increased speed to markets for campaigns encouraging innovation and valueadded benefits reduced cost to serve through a more consolidated delivery of the services access to innovation and capability from the supply chain and greater savings as a result of larger spend leverage.
7 TOUCHPOINTS DEMAND MANAGEMENT For a marketing execution project Communisis manages the agency interface and prototyping to ensure the product is fit for purpose as well as reviewing historic volumes and providing innovative solutions
Vendors are selected from our panEuropean network of over 700 approved suppliers ensuring quality assurance performance and capacity management are controlled throughout
End to end project management along the critical path to ensure simplified and seamless execution.
We provide business insight governance and online ordering capabilities with our point of sale toolkit
Delivery planning warehousing and logistics and assembly instructions for complex items all delivered to our clients activation plan to retailers Strategic Report 06 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 WHERE WE OPERATE THE GROUP CONTINUES TO EXPAND AND WIDEN ITS INTERNATIONAL
OUR CLOSENESS TO CLIENTS OFTEN THROUGH HAVING ONSITE TEAMS WITH COMMUNISIS STAFF SITTING ALONGSIDE CLIENTS MARKETING TEAMS FACILITATES THE IDENTIFICATION AND DEVELOPMENT OF NEW OPPORTUNITIES WHICH BOTH GROWS REVENUE AND IMPROVES THE RANGE OF OFFERINGS WE HAVE TO OUR CLIENTS.
Our clients take an increasingly global approach to marketing services and to meet this we continue to assess new opportunities both within EMEA and beyond.
CONNECTING BRANDS AND CUSTOMERS IN 20 COUNTRIES AND 22 LANGUAGES CASE STUDY HOTEL COFFEE SHOP AND RESTAURANT
GETTING MARKET POSITIONING RIGHT Our teams new brand for this client helped the company to find a unique identity in the crowded UK high street restaurant scene.
By building on the existing brand with contemporary striking communications and a streamlined focused menu we were able to strengthen market position and increase footfall beyond expectation in the flagship restaurant.
CONCEPT AND CAMPAIGN AWARDS WINNER COMMUNISIS AT A GLANCE CONTINUED Strategic Report 07 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 CASE STUDY FMCG BRAND IN POLAND MULTIBRAND EFFICIENCY For an international FMCG brand finding efficiency and simplicity within their print production is not only helpful but essential.
By aligning a toolkit of the core commercial print across all brand and distribution channels we were able to deliver a consistently qualitative commercial solution that shortened lead times and increased savings during the production of over 20 million items.
35% PROJECT COST SAVINGS FROM INITIAL 10% CASE STUDY FMCG BRAND FRANCE UNDERSTANDING CONSUMER
Ensuring customers continue to buy from the same brand again and again remains a critical component of success for any consumer focused business.
For this client we developed a loyalty magazine that contained personalised coupons to encourage new purchases.
This incentivised customers to stay loyal to the brand while also giving the company a highly useful buying habit measuring tool.
CAMPAIGN TIME TO MARKET REDUCED BY 16% Strategic Report 08 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 LAUNCH OF STRATEGY FOR NEXT PHASE OF GROWTH I joined the Communisis Board last March and was appointed to the chair at the Annual General Meeting AGM in May.
These preliminary results are therefore my first as Chairman of your Company.
The past twelve months have confirmed my initial views about the strength of the business.
A track record of growth backed by strong cash generation has been established over several years.
We perform mission critical work at scale for very substantial clients across the Financial Services and FastMoving Consumer Goods FMCG sectors.
We are significantly invested in our people systems and infrastructure to fulfil datasensitive regulationmandated customer communications at high volumes and to manage complex timecritical multinational product programmes for some of the worlds biggest brands.
We are differentiated from our competitorcomparator set in many ways.
Our
The foundation for further success is therefore in place.
To build upon it we have now set ourselves one key priority which is to raise the underlying profitability of the business in a sustainable way.
The Value Enhancement Programme VEP which we are launching is a threeyear plan to deliver enhanced returns to our shareholders by raising the demonstrable value we deliver to our clients.
Under the VEP we will launch a series of digital and dataled client initiatives which will include providing complete format and channel flexibility for client communications building out added value services in allied areas such as fraud protection and data security and developing data analytics driven insight programmes to give clients greater visibility of enhancement opportunities.
We also continue our commitment to embrace process innovation to deliver cost efficiency without compromising effectiveness of output.
The core aim of the VEP will be to evidence consistently that our clients will drive higher returns on their investment with us than they can either with alternative providers or by retaining in house the activity in which we specialise.
Communisis will not be the lowest price option  we are not a commodity level provider  but we will partner with our clients to deliver the highest returns on their spend.
The VEP is our practical response to three key strategic themes of our business Digital First Global Reach and Empowered Organisation.
Digital First recognises that an increasing proportion of the customers of our clients now prefer to communicate online.
This now established trend will have a notable effect on our transactional business over time.
It is our intention to take a still more proactive lead with Digital and put it at the forefront of our transactional business.
We will do that by accelerating existing organic developments working with a range of technology partners and where appropriate acquiring the necessary skills and experience to strengthen our core propositions.
We believe the time is ripe to enrich customer dialogue through the meaningful application of Digital  it is about a lot more than saving postage costs.
FULL YEAR DIVIDEND PER SHARE 2016 2.42p Communisis delivered a strong set of results in 2017 .
It was especially pleasing to see further growth in adjusted diluted EPS solid free cash flow and a significant reduction in net debt.
The final dividend for the year is proposed at 1.77p which added to the interim dividend of 0.89p gives a total of 2.66p a 10% increase on the previous year.
CHAIRMANS STATEMENT Strategic Report
09 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 CASE STUDY FMCG BRAND COUNTERING RETAIL OVERLOAD Introducing customers to a wider range of products was a challenge that produced excellent results.
Before they came to us over 75% of the coffee brands sales came from just two products making the need for more emphasis on their wider portfolio stronger than ever.
Our team devised a new campaign that involved segmenting each brand into a range of different coffeedrinking occasions.
This has helped to transform this brand and remains hugely popular and successful among consumers today.
NEW SPLIT OF SALES Digital transformation will have other positive impacts on
For example it will allow us to extend the application of data analytics as a service and capture opportunities for the digitisation of our services for marketing execution.
Global Reach is the recognition that many of our clients are truly international businesses and expect our services to be available in an increasing number of territories.
We already have 30% of our sales in overseas markets and a prudent approach in EMEA has seen our network expand through our main hubs in Paris Madrid Rome Warsaw and Frankfurt and eastward as far as Istanbul and Dubai.
We have announced that we will be opening an office in Hong Kong for the sourcing of premiums the gifts which accompany many purchases of luxury goods.
This move will make us more responsive in this growth area and contribute to increased margins by taking more direct control of these supply chains.
Heartened by the good progress Editions has made in New Y ork in 2017 with financial services clients we aim to significantly enhance our presence in the USA.
The three main opportunity areas we have identified are further growth for Editions in content marketing mostly in financial services scope to access marketing execution services under our existing master relationships with brand owners and digital transactional communications.
Empowered Organisation covers a range of initiatives designed to make Communisis progressively more efficient and valuable.
From a client perspective it is about our becoming still more integrated into client workflows to give them greater visibility and understanding of the impact of their communication and marketing execution choices and surfacing opportunities to enhance their efficiency or effectiveness or both.
From a Communisis commercial perspective this involves driving fresh marketing and commercial initiatives to deliver the right pipeline of growth opportunities.
Communisis will selectively target the business it is best equipped to deliver and where it can retain more of the value which it creates for its clients.
The structure of contracts will adapt accordingly.
From an organisational perspective we are fuelling this by devolving more direct PandL responsibility into the hands of our local site and country managers empowering them to drive the profitability of their discrete business units entrepreneurially.
Communisis remains committed to delivering enhanced returns to its shareholders.
The announcement of our threeyear VEP is a new expression of that commitment.
Alongside investing capital in pursuit of that growth we will continue to ensure that a strong dividend remains a key component of our total shareholder returns policy.
BOARD COMPOSITION Having reviewed the Board structure to enact these future plans we announced in December 2017 that Steve Rawlins was joining us as Chief Financial Officer CFO.
Steve has extensive experience of Strategic Report the digital media business services and FMCG sectors in both the UK and overseas markets.
Most recently Steve was CFO of EDC Communications a private equity backed group of digital media agencies.
Previously he held senior finance roles at Vendia UK Ltd Uniq PLC Caradon PLC and The Gillette Company.
Nonexecutive Director Helen Keays is to step down from the Board and from her role as Chair of the Remuneration Committee on 6 June 2018 due to other commitments.
We thank Helen for her significant contribution since 2014.
Our attention now turns to finding her replacement and we will update investors in due course.
DAVID GILBERTSON
8 March 2018 Strategic Report 10 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 We operate at scale and to the highest standards.
Our
END TO END CAPABILITY CUSTOMER EXPERIENCE Enterprise content management including Inbound.
Customer communication management.
Professional services.
Security communications.
Creative and agency services.
Film.
BRAND DEPLOYMENT Creative services.
Creative production.
Brand and shopper strategy.
Procurement.
Campaign management.
Warehousing fulfilment and logistics.
Installation and analytics.
INVESTMENT
Technology strategic partners Hewlett Packard Pitney Bowes Noosh and Quadient GMC.
Capital investment running at a rate of between 5m and 6m each year predominantly softwaretechnology. cheque fraud.
PEOPLE PRODUCT BUSINESS MODEL WHY CLIENTS CHOOSE COMMUNISIS We quantify the value we create for our clients and are specific about what differentiates us from our competitors be that our people products processes or performance.
We recruit retain and develop the very best talent in our industry.
We attract great people and invest in them to deliver exceptional results.
EXPERIENCE
50 change management professionals with 500 combined years of business transformation and transition experience.
Successfully managed 31 TUPE transfers in total.
Of
Favoured employer in our industry in the UK with more sector professionals than any competitor.
CIPS Chartered Institute of Purchasing and Supply Advance standard  a leading level held by fewer than 20 organisations globally.
QUALIFICATIONS
80% of our senior managers are degree or masters qualified and accredited by recognised professional bodies.
DIVERSITY
Presence in 20 countries with 22 languages spoken across our teams and over 150 professionals based in our European network.
Committed to Equality accredited business for five years.
Strategic Report 11 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 PERFORMANCE PROCESS Process is the foundation of repeatable outputs and consistent performance absolute necessities as far as our clients are concerned.
So not only do we hold ourselves to account we seek and maintain accreditation wherever relevant and value adding.
MANAGING RISK Accredited to 11 different ISO or industry standards.
Full disaster recoverybusiness continuity plans in place we conducted 55 client specific end to end tests and trained 200 employees in the last year.
Interoperable locations European network ensuring continuity of service.
Strong risk management framework to ensure we support our clients to communicate within regulation.
Corporate governance  Communisis is a PLC listed on the London Stock Exchange.
TECHNICAL CAPABILITY State of the art resilience delivered through tier 3 and 4 data centres.
End to end governance process supports seamless integration between our own IT and third party solutions.
TRANSITIONAL CAPABILITY Customer Experience 52 large 72 medium and 104 small projects managed over the last 12 months with total project budgets of 21m.
Brand Deployment 10 panEuropean contracts transferred into the business in the last five years and a further 20 into single markets delivering savings of 48m for our clients.
The performance of our business units is meticulously tracked and we are always looking for ways to improve them.
That means investment in technology to make our business even better.
SCALE
Customer Experience UK sites producing each day 4 million mail packs and 3.4 million encoded documents mail sorting 1.2 million items and processing 95 thousand inbound cases.
Brand Deployment manage marketing execution for our clients through 700 fully approved suppliers.
Leverage from European print spend.
INTEGRITY
Accuracy 0.71 recorded nonconformances per million units despatched.
Delivery industryleading 99.4% SLA performance.
Tracking every personalised communication is tracked through our business from composition to despatch.
CLIENT RETENTION Fiveyear average contract term and 90% retention rate.
Strategic Report 12 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 STRONG TRADING IN 2017 MARKET TRENDS The UK financial services industry remains the primary market for our Customer Experience division.
Our clients and prospects within this market continue to see lower headline growth due to saturation and are therefore primarily focused on retention of market share and enriching their customer relationships.
The continued migration to digital channels improving customer experience and emphasis on quality of customer communications are central to this and our solutions and services are well placed to fulfil client needs.
Within the insurance market organisations are more focused on gaining market share over retention and are proactively acquiring the capability to shift to channels of customer preference.
Digital channels are therefore preferred and communications are typically complex and highly personalised.
The utilities sector again is typified by lower headline growth but customer habits are changing and moving more digital to take personal control of consumption and respond to environmental concerns.
Demand for specialist content marketing capability such as that provided by our Editions Financial business is strong in the UK and US.
Experience during 2017 suggests that high quality content delivered by genuine sector specialists is being favoured by chief marketing officers to enable brands to speak with authority.
Within the international FMCG market the challenge for most brand owners in 2017 was the fluctuation of currency and how this has affected the repatriation of Euros or Pounds to Dollars typically.
This has caused some pressure on marketing budgets.
Instore marketers are responding to the trend to cheaper own brand alternatives and online shopping.
There has been a drive towards standardisation to increase production leverage and efficiency and a desire for displays to be more permanent.
There is still a focus on supply chain efficiencies and eliminating waste failed delivery with some market estimates at up to 20% of prefilled freestanding display units not making it to their intended shop floor destination.
Such challenges represent opportunity for our Brand Deployment division.
CHIEF EXECUTIVES STATEMENT 12 Communisis plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report 13 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 With the increased sales in the craft drinks sector whether that be beers gins etc. to respond to keep onshelf presence in supermarkets.
Brands are therefore offering more events or Gift with Purchase GWP to keep their instore presence and increase sales.
As a result we have seen a marked increase in the requirement for fast turnaround copacking of GWP for major shopping events Christmas Fathers Day and other anniversaries.
We expect to see this trend increase in 2018.
The broader agency market dynamic is changing significantly at present driven largely by the entrance of consultancybased businesses into the sector.
This has increased commoditisation of service and has led to a reduction of fees.
That said with the increased pushback on the lack of transparency online agencies are being asked to deliver more demonstrable sales and can charge for that effectiveness.
In addition there are increased calls to design products for instore that can be used efficiently as well as effectively to reduce costs and increase sales.
There remain strong opportunities in brand awareness and product launches and this is where for example our agency Twelve has been successful.
We still anticipate further consolidation within our sectors.
As we focus increasingly on provision of digital products and services our competitor set has shifted somewhat.
This now includes technologybased competitors as well as consultancy businesses.
We continue to monitor the impact of Brexit negotiations on the economies in which we operate.
There are not yet any clear political outcomes but given our activity in the wider supply chain for staple consumer goods and employment of foreign nationals incountry we continue to believe that we are relatively well protected from potential negative economic impacts Brexit may have.
RISKGDPRREGULATION
The Group has a formal approach to risk management.
In considering the risk to the business over the past 18 months the Group has reviewed and refined its approach to data protection in line with the changing global landscape and new legislation.
The EU General Data Protection Regulation GDPR is of particular focus and is a regulation which updates rights and provides opportunities for individuals and companies in the 21st century.
The primary objective of the GDPR is to give back control of personal data and to simplify the regulatory environment for international business.
When it is implemented in May 2018 in the words of the Information Commissioner GDPR will be a game changer for us all by putting the spotlight on accountability emphasising transparency extending the scope of data protection introducing fines for noncompliance and realising the business benefits of this changing environment.
CASE STUDY LEADING FMCG CLIENT INCREASING SALES AND WINNING AWARDS We worked with one brand to showcase their awardwinning products to a wider audience.
Our
Production rollout achieved a 27% uplift in sales of some products and won awards at the POPAI and Shop awards.
A THREEMONTH STORE TRIAL DEMONSTRATED A 42% SALES UPLIFT FOR FEATURED PRODUCTS VERSUS THE CONTROL STORE Strategic Report 14 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 RISKGDPRREGULATION CONTINUED Communisis activities as both a Data Controller and a Data Processor have required us to review our operations against the new regulations and put in place actions to address the risk of noncompliance.
As part of our ongoing investment that supports the business we have integrated Data Protection within the Group as part of our Information Security Management
This investment comprising 0.8m capital and 0.8m operational expenditure in 2018 includes dedicated Data Protection Compliance Officers who are experienced subject matter experts bringing in skills and experience from both the public and private sectors developing Records of Processing Activities models which are used to assess the processing Communisis undertakes as both a Data Controller and Data Processor and feed into an updated risk assessment procedure and Data Processing Impact Assessment implementing enhancements in technology to support new regulations and undertaking work in compliance with the Information Commissioners Office ICO guidance on contracts and liabilities to assist clients in their compliance.
DETAILED TRADING REVIEW PER DIVISION FOR 2017 CUSTOMER EXPERIENCE 2017 was a positive year for Customer Experience with a strong overall increase in profitability.
The Direct Mail business performed well showing significant improvement on prior year numbers.
This was largely driven by increased insourcing of work and stringent cost control.
The overall transactional business outbound and inbound improved profitability against prior year driven by new contracts and increased volumes.
Our
This was related to transition activity onboarding a new client to our Connect digital platform for customer communications management.
The Security Print business predominantly cheque book production was down on volume but demand for our new digital technology for fraud prevention has increased with a number of bank clients now using our system for eUCN a patented cheque fraud feature exclusive to Communisis.
We refocused our general creative agency Psona onto Communisis core client bases in Financial Services and FMCG and restructured to integrate its ongoing and future client activity.
BRAND DEPLOYMENT This division achieved proportionately less profit growth than revenue growth mainly in our core Managed Services business driven by country mix and investment in new markets.
The Campaign Fulfilment business outperformed expectations as it brought various new contracts onboard and we expanded our services in the drinks sector.
The Agencies finished ahead of prior year mainly due to projects relating to the telecommunications sector within T welve.
TECHNOLOGY
The continued importance of technology in the delivery of services to our clients and supporting our operating model provided focus to improve capability control and visibility of services and systems in 2017.
To enable this we made a number of significant industry hires in the year.
We implemented a best practice approach to enterprise architecture enabling us to align people process and technology with specific expertise from the financial services sector.
Amongst other benefits this approach allowed us to develop a scalable multitenanted product for digital asset management and workflow during 2017 which now supports five clients with capacity and capability for further onboarding.
This allows marketing teams access to creative content for action and approval.
CHIEF EXECUTIVES STATEMENT CONTINUED 14 Communisis plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report 15 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 Formal service reviews with stakeholders are now embedded creating dialogue which enables transformation plans aligned to business need and strategic priorities.
This is supported by an internal customer satisfaction survey providing quantitative understanding of the service we deliver and assisting us to shape our future planning.
Through systematic selection and contracting with 3rd party vendors the latter being increasingly pertinent as we continue to develop real time digital products we have improved services received from our technology supply base in addition to generating important savings in the year.
We have also prioritised investment in technology solutions and services.
This includes major software expenditure over two years with Noosh a product which allows Communisis to support marketing services and print procurement in a more operationally efficient and expedient way a significant step in the digitisation of our business processes in Brand Deployment.
We also adopted Solarwinds in the year for service and incident management and products for internal and external collaboration.
This extends to federation with clients to improve lines of communication and manage costs more effectively.
CASE STUDY MAJOR UK HIGH STREET BANK ENHANCING CUSTOMERS BANKING EXPERIENCE Our work with this banking client has become the backbone of their communications operation.
Their task for us was to decrease the operational costs of processing inbound communications.
Our solution was to transfer 430 employees to Communisis with all noncore banking activity and collaborate with the bank to create an end to end solution to link inbound and outbound communications.
The results were increased customer responsiveness a more costeffective system and the start of a decade long relationship between Communisis and the bank.
OVER 3000000 INBOUND COMMUNICATIONS A MONTH
Our progress with people related matters remains strong and supports our strategic agenda.
We are delighted to have retained with an improved result our Gold Level accreditation from the Committed to Equality organisation.
In 2017 we also made significant strides with managing and developing our talent boosted by a strong focus on personal performance management and leadership development programmes with 32 candidates completing a leadership programme in the year.
ANDY BLUNDELL Chief Executive 8 March 2018 Strategic Report 16 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 DIGITAL FIRST Core to our strategy is the need to adopt a Digital First approach to business developing our professional services capability and ensuring we excel at systems integration and building communications.
Digitisation is focused both in developing and enhancing delivery channels for our clients as well as our own internal business processes to provide operational efficiency.
STRATEGIC PRIORITIES New product development with greater emphasis on data analytics to support digital leadership and channel capability.
Marketing insight and innovation to inform strategic decision making.
Digitally enabled business processes delivering automation simplification and efficiency as well as reducing risk.
Increased use of technology to manage the interface between Communisis and our clients raising visibility of activity and making us easier to do business with.
ACHIEVEMENTS
The Group is increasing investment in technology to deliver more digital services to clients and to make its own operations more operationally effective.
Within the Customer Experience division we have invested in a new processing facility for our Enterprise Content Management digitisation platform in Leeds which gives us further capacity and capability to grow our inbound service line.
We are also moving to a single technology platform for the international supply chain management activity within the Brand Deployment division.
We are making our services GDPR resilient on behalf of our clients and a significant proportion of our investment overall in future to be in technology and riskrelated areas.
GLOBAL REACH Our international reach has increased year on year and this continues to form a core element of our growth strategy.
Where this has been largely EMEA marketing activation activity we are committed to growing both our Brand Deployment and Customer Experience divisions.
Targeted insight into prospect markets and territories which support further expansion and profitable growth.
Increased international representation in our middle and top management reflecting our increasing overseas revenues and presence.
Increased use of technology to facilitate centralised sourcing and consistency throughout the supply chain interface.
Leveraging established locations to drive other services to maximise investment.
ACHIEVEMENTS
Overseas revenue now represents 30% of total revenue.
We now have 700 fully approved suppliers outside the UK providing a comprehensive partner network.
Our content marketing agency Editions expanded operations to the US.
This represents a new market for Communisis and the first nonUK activity for the Customer Experience division.
STRATEGY Strategic Report 17 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 EMPOWERED ORGANISATION We recognise the importance of high performing and motivated leaders across our business and are committed to ensure they have the structure and support needed to lead our business units to success.
Increased ownership and accountability for delivery with enhanced support and access to specialised resource.
Promoting locally driven business development to improve capacity utilisation and mix.
Systematic annual cost efficiency reviews across our divisions to drive operating margin.
ACHIEVEMENTS
Invested additional resource in our commercial and marketing insight functions and adopted a methodology and process for defining prospects and vertical sectors which will deliver improved profitability.
Developed a value creation programme to ensure our teams have the tools to sell Communisis services on the basis of value and differentiation. commercial and client relationships.
CASE STUDY HEAL THCARE CLIENT UNDERSTANDING POS REQUIREMENTS The line of products offered by this client is vast.
The teams solution to the significant challenge to achieve brand consistency and standardise the range was to focus on the retailers themselves.
Through MI capture we were able to better understand their requirements and catalogue tailored items delivered directly to stores.
Through the introduction of Roamler Analytics future POS production and use will now be informed more than ever before.
REDUCED SETUP TIME SAVING UP TO 3 PER UNIT AT FULFILMENT STAGE Strategic Report 18 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
RISK MANAGEMENT AND PRINCIPAL RISKS
OUR APPROACH The Board is accountable for ensuring the identification and appropriate management of potential risks faced by the Group.
The internal audit functions responsibilities include overseeing the effectiveness of the internal control environment of the Group and its ongoing risk management programme.
This process is designed to identify evaluate and manage the principal risks faced by the business in line with the Group Risk Policy Statement.
Risk management is the extent to which the Group responds to the opportunities faced whilst at the same time understanding and seeking to control any threats that could prevent its achievement of business objectives and successful execution of our business strategy.
The aim of the Groups risk management programme is therefore to improve the awareness of the consequences of risktaking activities reduce the frequency of damaging events occurring and minimise the severity of the consequences if they do occur.
Part of this approach includes operation in line with or certification to a number of standards.
This helps the business to work to legal regulatory and contractual requirements using a set of clearly defined frameworks and management systems.
Policy requires that business unit heads demonstrate that they conform to the requirements of the Communisis Group risk management programme.
Assessments must be undertaken risks identified controls identified and action managed for all activities that are identified as being critical to Communisis.
During the year all business units are required to report their material risks on a monthly basis to the internal audit function enabling independent review and reporting to the Board and senior management teams.
Impact assessments are carried out to ascertain the likelihood of occurrence of each risk and the potential impact on the Group.
In addition the Board also carries out a regular top down risk assessment of the most significant strategic risks that are linked to the achievement of the Groups strategic initiatives.
VIABILITY STATEMENT The Group has prepared fiveyear forecasts of profitability and cash flow as part of the goodwill impairment testing and with average contract lives of five years the Group has good mediumterm visibility of the business.
Despite this there will always be uncertain factors outside the control of Communisis and forecasting can never take into account unknown future economic legal or regulatory changes which could impact the business and the markets in which it operates.
In recognition of this and consistent with the Value Enhancement Programme the Group has produced a viability assessment based on the threeyear period to December 2020 and can confirm that they have a reasonable expectation that the Group will continue to operate and meet its liabilities as they fall due for the next three years.
In making this statement the Directors have considered forecasts for the next three years which include the Groups key financial ratios and cash flows over the period and formed an opinion over the resilience of the Group.
This takes into account the current position the principal risks facing the business in severe but plausible scenarios and the effectiveness of any mitigating actions.
This assessment has considered the potential impacts of these risks on the business model future performance solvency and liquidity over the threeyear period.
The Directors consider the period to December 2020 to be appropriate as this is in line with the period covered by the Groups financial and strategic planning.
Clients have shown an increased willingness to enter into longer contractual terms resulting in improved visibility for the Group from a financial perspective.
With more emphasis being placed internally on identifying and managing pervasive risk the Directors are confident that the Group will operate in line with the threeyear forecasts.
Whilst the review has considered all the principal risks identified in the table below three have been identified for enhanced stress testing where they are considered to have the most significant plausibility and impact.
These are safeguarding of data and cyber risk response to technological change and the loss of major clients.
T esting in isolation was considered inappropriate as ultimately the occurrence of a severe data incident or adverse impact from technological change could lead to loss of major clients either through reputational damage or failure to respond to the clients progressive adoption of digital communication channels.
From May 2018 the impact of a data incident may also result in fines from the Information Commissioners Office due to General Data Protection Regulation GDPR.
The threeyear forecasts have therefore been stress tested by considering these data and technological risks and then overlaying the impact of the loss of the Groups top three customers.
During 2017 the Groups banking facilities were renewed and are in place until August 2022.
Availability of bank facilities is not expected to present any risk to the viability of the Group and has not therefore featured within the viability stress testing.
Whilst the occurrence of these risks is plausible the Group are confident that the mitigating actions detailed in the table overleaf are sufficient to minimise the impact.
GOING CONCERN The Directors after making enquiries have a reasonable expectation that the Group has adequate resources to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future a period not less than 12 months from the date of the Financial Statements.
For this reason they have adopted the going concern basis in preparing the Financial Statements.
MANAGING RISK TO DELIVER STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES T o successfully deliver against the Groups strategic initiatives we must first understand the risks faced and plan to manage them to an acceptable level.
Strategic Report 19 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 RISKS AND UNCERTAINTIES The principal risks and uncertainties facing the business are taken directly from the risk registers and are detailed below.
The Group faces other risks which are subject to regular review and have been assessed as lower risk and are therefore not included here.
Some risk factors remain beyond the direct control of the Group and the risk management programme.
We can therefore only provide reasonable but not absolute assurance that key risks are managed to an acceptable level.
The Group continues to monitor the impact of the UKs decision to exit the EU but until we have more visibility of the eventual outcome it is difficult to fully evaluate the impact on the Groups activities.
RISK AREA IMPACT MITIGATING ACTIONS AND MANAGEMENT CHANGE IN LEVEL OF RISK The Group must be able to respond to market and technological change Clients and their customers progressive adoption of digital formats and channels may impact Group strategy and market demand for products and services.
The impact is that the systems and equipment utilised by the Group could potentially be superceded earlier than anticipated by management.
A disruptive technological change has not been anticipated as a result of a lack of investment in new products and services.
We may not adequately identify and protect our IP.
Continued investment in technology and new services maintains and enhances the Groups competitive position.
Specific teams are embedded within the business to lead change and innovation.
The Group is committed to procuring new types of technology in order to be able to provide the latest services to clients and therefore maintain its competitive position.
Where appropriate we have protected IP through patents.
The level of risk is increasing The Group continues to pursue international expansion The Group now operates in 18 countries outside of the UK 2016 17 countries.
International exposure to geopolitical volatility and social instability may put the Group operations at risk.
Movements in foreign exchange rates can impact the Groups Sterling reported Financial Statements.
The Group operates in a range of jurisdictions where noncompliance with local laws may expose the Company to fines or other restrictions.
The Group has a work stream forum team that specifically deals with the management of operations that are carried out in nonUK locations.
A country risk assessment process has been developed along with country management manuals.
Foreign currency balances and cash flow forecasts are regularly reviewed to monitor exposure.
Principal exposure is in Euro denominated territories.
Advice is sought from expert legal and tax partners.
The level of risk is increasing Deterioration in the economic environment may decrease profitability The impact is that macroeconomic issues may quickly and detrimentally affect consumer expenditure which could impact the trading performance of the Groups clients and reduce their discretionary spend resulting in lower sales and profitability.
Market trends are monitored and factored into the Groups business planning budgeting and management processes.
This is especially pertinent with regard to Brexit.
Volume erosion protection is included in contract terms where possible.
The level of risk is stable Strategic Report 20 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 RISK MANAGEMENT AND PRINCIPAL RISKS CONTINUED RISK AREA IMPACT MITIGATING ACTIONS AND MANAGEMENT CHANGE IN LEVEL OF RISK The Group continues to integrate acquisitions to meet its strategic objectives The Groups last acquisition was in January 2015 which is now integrated fully within the Group with appropriate cost base control.
The ongoing risk is that in the longer term the acquisitions may not achieve the revenues anticipated within the business case on acquisition.
The Group has a clear strategy for ensuring growth.
This includes assessment of the alignment of the products and services supported by positive and robust integration.
We have adopted a twodivisional structure with the benefit of reducing complexity and providing a clearer market proposition to our client base.
The level of risk is stable Clients rely upon proven resilient business operations Certain Group operations depend upon the uninterrupted delivery of products and services that rely on complex computer networks and systems.
The impact is that the Group may face a significant business continuity incident that will materially affect its ability to deliver products or services to its clients and associated financial penalties.
A Business Continuity Management BCM system and BCM plans are in place.
These are exercised and audited for core areas of the Group.
The Group operates from multiple office inbound and manufacturing facilities which helps to mitigate against natural disasters.
Appropriate business interruption insurance is maintained.
Key areas of the Group have been integrated in to ISOIEC 22301 certification.
The level of risk is stable Safeguarding of data and cyber risk The Group processes personal and sensitive data on behalf of clients as part of its core services.
The impacts are that a failure to maintain a secure and fully functional IT infrastructure could result in an inability to meet contractual service obligations and New GDPR General Data Protection Regulation fines are to be implemented in 2018 of up to 4% of global revenue.
Continued investment in IT infrastructure security and monitoring guards against the inappropriate use of client data and maintains and enhances the effectiveness of controls.
Established information and security standards are subject to regular thirdparty audits.
Core areas of the Group are subject to certification including ISOIEC 27001.
Alignment with changing legislation is assessed and actioned this includes GDPR.
The level of risk is increasing People talent and skills recruitment and retention support Without learning development resource and succession planning there is a risk that the Group will be unable to develop retain and motivate highly skilled employees that are necessary to support operations expand and build client relationships.
There is also a possible impact to employee morale and wellbeing from a failure by the Group to maintain a safe and compliant working environment.
The Group actively monitors senior leadership to ensure motivation is maintained that succession plans are in place and applied to relevant team members.
A growing range of benefits and incentives are provided by the Group to its staff.
The Group has policies and procedures in place for training and development.
Business operational expansion and acquisitions also help to ensure that the Group has the right skills.
The Group provides regular training on health and safety for all employees and monitors performance to ensure compliance with all relevant regulations and employment laws across all jurisdictions in which the Group operates.
The level of risk is stable Strategic Report 21 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 RISK AREA IMPACT MITIGATING ACTIONS AND MANAGEMENT CHANGE IN LEVEL OF RISK Existing client concentration may mean that the loss of a major client could materially decrease sales A substantial percentage of the Groups revenues are derived from a relatively small number of clients and therefore the loss of one or more of these clients could have a material impact on the Groups sales.
This could result in a material decrease in profitability whilst new contracts are sought and excess capacity reduced.
In the year ended 31 December 2017 the top five clients of the Group accounted for approximately 48% of sales 2016 56%.
A strategic account management programme operates to preserve client relationships monitor compliance with service level agreements and expand the services offered to key clients.
Business development activities continue to promote the Groups services in a broad range of market sectors and into international markets reducing the historical reliance on the financial services sector.
Longterm client relationships and associated contractual commitments are developed.
The level of risk is stable Due to high operational gearing a reduction in revenues could significantly impact profitability The impacts are that the Group will not adapt sufficiently quickly to any technological change or downturn in demand with a consequent loss of competitiveness and profitability have adequate resources to invest in new technology and services retain its major client portfolio without replacement or recover debts and diversify sufficiently into other market sectors.
The Group prepares regular financial forecasts to evaluate its funding and liquidity requirements for the foreseeable future.
These forecasts are reviewed and approved by the Board.
Based on these forecasts appropriate funding and liquidity solutions are put in place to ensure that appropriate headroom is maintained.
A range of financing facilities are utilised with a reasonable degree of headroom over projected funding requirements.
The Groups lending arrangements have been renewed and are in place until August 2022.
Client credit is closely monitored and controlled to minimise the amount of overdue debt.
Credit insurance is obtained against larger nonfinancial services sector debts.
Working capital and capital expenditure are actively managed to ensure that banking covenants are not breached.
The level of risk is increasing A change in pension scheme assumptions could increase the pension deficit Communisis has continuing obligations under a defined benefit pension scheme that is now closed to new entrants.
The IAS 19 accounting pension deficit is 38.2m as at 31 December 2017.
The impact is that any changes in assumptions such as interest rates equity returns or discount rates could require substantial future cash contributions to eliminate any resulting increase in the pension scheme deficit and therefore decrease the Groups ability to expand the business through continued investment or to pay dividends to shareholders.
The Group works closely with the pension scheme trustees to adopt programmes that optimise returns on pension scheme assets reduce the ultimate pension liabilities and minimise the level of additional cash contributions required to eliminate any deficit.
The triennial valuation was completed in 2017 with a funding deficit of 29.8m.
Following this deficit repair payments have been set at a base of 2.55m in addition to the 1.15m annual payments under the Central Asset Reserve scheme.
The next triennial valuation will be in 2020.
The level of risk is stable Potential lease liabilities from past disposals could result in high cash costs to the Group The Group has contingent liabilities arising from lease commitment guarantees on past corporate disposals.
The principal impact is that current leasehold occupants will become insolvent and that guarantees will be called resulting in a material cash cost to the Group.
The financial status of the leasehold occupants is monitored on a regular basis.
Action will be taken to minimise the cost to the Group when default is anticipated.
The level of risk has decreased 22 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 Strategic Report
FINANCIAL REVIEW
CONTINUED GROWTH
The Group continues to grow in both revenues and profit generation across both divisions resulting in an adjusted operating profit of 21.2m 2016 19.5m and adjusted diluted earnings per share of 6.37p 2016 6.07p.
Strong conversion of profits to cash generated a free cash flow of 12.5m 2016 12.9m leading to further net debt reduction by 6.1m to 24.3m 2016 30.4m.
The Groups adjusted operating margin increased to 5.6% 2016 5.4%.
TRADING SUMMARY 2017 was a further year of growth in revenues and profits within both divisions with strong free cash generation and continued reduction in net debt.
Total revenue grew by 4% to 375.9m 2016 361.9m driven by expansion of international operations with overseas revenues now representing 30% of Group revenue 2016 26%.
Adjusted operating profits rose 9% to 21.2m 2016 19.5m from growth across both divisions.
Customer Experience grew from the integration of new business wins and strong performance across both traditional revenue streams and newer digital outputs.
Brand Deployment saw further development within its overseas network and an increased level of Campaign Fulfilment activity.
Together this delivered adjusted profit before tax of 17.2m 2016 16.7m and adjusted diluted earnings per share of 6.37p up from 6.07p in 2016 an increase of 5%.
Free cash flow of 12.5m 2016 12.9m remained strong despite increased tax payments and higher pension deficit repair payments as a result of higher underlying earnings and lower capital expenditure.
Net debt as a result reduced by 6.1m to 24.3m.
The segmental reporting is aligned with the Groups strategic direction and the way in which activities are managed.
Revenue and operating profit before exceptional items are reported in two divisions Customer Experience and Brand Deployment.
Central costs that support the full Group are reported separately.
CUSTOMER EXPERIENCE Gross revenue for the division was 189.3m increased from 185.0m in 2016.
This was due to the integration of new business wins and a strong year across both digital revenue streams and the traditional areas of direct mail and statements where volume erosion across transactional print channels continues but at lower levels than expected.
Adjusted operating profit for Customer Experience at 22.4m was 2.5m higher than 2016 with very strong performances across the business.
Significant improvements were seen in Direct Mail as a result of insourcing and strong cost control within the production environment in Inbound due to increased volumes and in our transactional business due to new business wins and the associated transition income relating to the integration into our transactional centres.
A challenging year in Cheques but mitigated through strong cost control with some initial take up of Strategic Report 23 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 eUCN boding well for 2018.
Editions Financial had another strong year and successfully established the New York office as planned initially providing content marketing to our client LinkedIn and onboarding further large financial services clients.
The Agencies performed at similar levels to 2016 but underwent a significant restructuring during the year with the closure of the Glasgow operation and full restructure of the London based teams entering 2018 leaner and more focused on core services and clients.
BRAND DEPLOYMENT Gross revenue grew to 186.6m from 176.9m during the year with Managed Services benefitting from strong sales growth across Germany Poland France Spain Italy and Dubai which saw its first full year of operations.
Adjusted operating profit showed some growth to 16.5m 2016 In Managed Services the margin did not increase proportionately in line with revenue as a result of country mix together with investment in new countries as we build out the international operations.
The focus going forwards is on operating margin improvement through both operational efficiencies and continued investment in systems along with integration of new client wins.
Campaign Fulfilment performed by our Newcastle based operation had a very successful year with growth in revenues and profits from a number of new contracts.
The agencies Life and Twelve together had a strong year with further growth and their most profitable year to date since acquisition.
CENTRAL AND CORPORATE COSTS Central costs are 0.8m higher than in 2016 driven by increased spend on technology and increased focus on marketing and development of the Communisis brand.
In addition pension costs in 2017 included within Corporate Costs did not benefit from 0.4m of oneoff settlement gains experienced in 2016.
The table below is an extract from the Groups segmental Income Statement.
2017 2016 m m
Customer Experience 189.3 185.0 Brand Deployment 186.6 176.9 Total Group revenue 375.9 361.9 Adjusted profit from operations Customer Experience 22.4 19.9 Brand Deployment 16.5 16.2 Central Costs 11.8 11.0 Corporate Costs 5.9 5.6 Adjusted operating profit 21.2 19.5 Amortisation of acquired intangibles 0.7 0.8 Profit from operations before exceptional items 20.5 18.7 Exceptional items 2.1 4.3 Profit from operations 18.4 14.4 Net finance costs including revaluation gainslosses 4.0 2.8 Profit before tax 14.4 11.6 Tax 2.6 3.0 Profit after tax 11.8 8.6 Earnings per share Basic p 5.64 4.12 Adjusted diluted p 6.37 6.07 Adjusted profit before tax m 17.2 16.7 Adjusted EBITDA m 29.8 29.4 Adjusted operating margin on gross revenue 5.6% 5.4% Account management and service costs relating to Customer Experience clients previously included within central costs have now been recognised within the Customer Experience segment from 2017.
The 2016 comparatives have been adjusted to show this on a like for like basis.
Strategic Report 24 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
FINANCIAL REVIEW CONTINUED
EXCEPTIONAL ITEMS Total exceptional costs charged in the year were 2.1m including 1.7m associated with restructuring across the agency and Managed Service businesses restructuring of the Group marketing function and closure of the Bangalore and Glasgow offices.
In addition there was a 0.2m noncash write off relating to customer relationship assets offset by a 0.3m fair value revaluation release of contingent consideration in respect of recent acquisitions.
The Group also incurred a 0.5m write off in respect of unsupported assets which will not be recovered.
NET FINANCE COSTS Finance costs were 1.2m higher than the prior year due to a swing on the impact of foreign currency translation of non trading balances.
2016 had benefitted from a 0.9m gain whereas there was a 0.4m loss in 2017.
Both pension and bank finance charges were at a consistent level in both years.
TAXATION
The effective tax rate in the Income Statement was 18.4% 2016 25.6%.
During the year the effective tax rate has benefitted from a number of credits which related to prior years.
The balance has been adjusted through the current year Income Statement as management consider that the adjustment is immaterial in the context of an understanding of the Groups financial performance for users of the financial statements.
Excluding this adjustment the tax rate would have been 22.7% which is higher than the UK rate of corporation tax due to the proportion of profits generated in overseas jurisdictions with higher tax rates.
CASH FLOW AND NET DEBT The table below summarises the cash flows for the year and the closing net debt position.
2017 2016 m m Profit from operations before exceptional items 20.5 18.7 Depreciation and other noncash items 10.0 11.2 Decrease in working capital 1.1 0.5 Pension scheme contributions 4.0 2.8 Interest and tax 5.2 4.3 Net operating cash flow before exceptional items 20.2 22.3 Exceptional items 2.7 3.7 Net operating cash flow 17.5 18.6 Net capital expenditure 5.0 5.7 Free cash flow 12.5 12.9 Investment in new contracts 0.7 1.2 Acquisition of subsidiary undertakings  0.3 Repayment of promissory loan note relating to acquisition of subsidiary undertakings 9.3 Dividends paid 5.2 4.8 Share issues net of directly attributable expenses 0.1 Debt arrangement fees 0.7 Purchase of shares  0.4 Revaluation 0.2 2.4 Increasedecrease in net bank debt 3.1 8.6 Opening net bank debt 19.7 28.3 Closing net bank debt 22.8 19.7 Unamortised borrowing costs 0.6 0.2 Net bank debt 22.2 19.5 Finance lease creditor 2.1 1.6 Promissory loan notes  9.3 Net debt 24.3 30.4 Strategic Report 25 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 Generating strong free cash flow and continued debt reduction remains a priority for the Group and during 2017 we are pleased to report a further 20% reduction in net debt of 6.1m to 24.3m.
Free cash flow remained strong at 12.5m 2016 12.9m with increased pension deficit repair payments higher tax payments and increased working capital being offset by higher underlying profitability lower capital expenditure and lower exceptional items.
Dividends paid to shareholders increased by 0.4m to 5.2m.
Promissory loan notes of 9.3m in respect of the Life Marketing Consultancy acquisition in January 2015 were repaid during January 2017 from normal facilities.
The overall movement in bank debt including this was a net cash outflow of 3.1m.
Excluding this repayment the cash improvement during the year was 6.2m.
The net bank debt at the end of the year was 22.8m 2016 19.7m with significant headroom within the Groups facilities of 70m.
Average net bank debt during the year was 41.9m 2016 32.7m at a higher level than 2016 following the repayment of the promissory loan notes.
During the year the banking facilities were renewed through to August 2022.
As part of the facility Communisis has to comply with a number of covenants including maintaining a multiple of net bank debt to EBITDA and EBITA to net finance costs both of which were in compliance with significant headroom.
DIVIDENDS
The Board has proposed a final dividend of 1.77p per share bringing the total dividend for the year to 2.66p per share an increase of 10% over 2016.
PENSIONS
The pension scheme accounting deficit at the year end decreased to 38.2m 2016 55.5m.
This reflects both an improvement in asset valuations and a reduction in liabilities.
The reduction in liabilities incorporates changes in mortality assumptions following the 31 March 2017 triennial valuation.
Discount rates in 2017 reduced to 2.5% from 2.7% with RPICPI rates remaining static.
Cash contributions to the pension scheme are determined by reference to the triennial actuarial valuation.
During the year the 31 March 2017 triennial valuation was completed with deficit repair payments being set for future years.
The contributions paid in 2017 towards the accounting deficit were 2.9m plus rental payments of 1.1m through the Central Asset Reserve arrangement.
The next triennial valuation will be in 2020.
BALANCE SHEET AND NET ASSETS Net assets as at 31 December 2017 have increased by 20.9m since the prior year.
This increase does however include the benefit of a 17.3m reduction in the pension scheme deficit.
Excluding this Group net assets increased by 3.6m during the year.
CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY The Group embraces corporate social responsibility and our policies make Communisis more resilient more productive and more predictable in performance whilst delivering economic and environmental benefits to society as a whole.
STEVE RAWLINS Chief Financial Officer 8 March 2018 Strategic Report 26 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY REPORT SUSTAINABLE ACTIVITIES Communisis has continued to elevate the level of corporate social responsibility CSR internally by constantly reviewing and improving processes to track sustainable activities that the business has been involved in.
We ensure that we support charitable organisations and continue to safeguard the future of our business through our focus on apprenticeships internships and learning and development.
OUR PEOPLE AND ORGANISATION We recruit develop and retain top quality people who help us to grow the business and achieve our strategic aims.
Details of how the Company attracts develops and retains the best people and engages develops and rewards its people are set out below.
ATTRACT DEVELOP AND RETAIN THE BEST PEOPLE We communicate our strategic goals to all of our managers and empower them to develop both themselves and those for whom they are responsible through focused training to ensure they can best deliver those goals.
In 2017 we grew our internal learning and development team.
This team delivers a range of technical leadership and developmental training to all our people running a number of tailored leadership training programmes throughout the year.
Some 120 of our most promising future leaders completed one of these programmes in 2017.
We also continued to grow our online resources through the Communisis Academy.
This is our learning and development hub which provides all of our employees with access to tools and materials to support their ongoing developmental needs.
It is a cloudbased system available 247 regardless of where our employees are based.
In 2017 we moved our annual review process to this platform allowing a digital flexible approach to managing objectives performance and individuals development needs.
Our apprenticeship programme continues to grow.
This now encompasses roles in IT business administration and digital marketing.
Plans are in place to have apprentices over four sites Liverpool Edinburgh Leeds and Andover.
In 2017 following the rollout of the Apprenticeship Levy we launched our programme of modern apprenticeships and now have over 60 colleagues across the Group completing qualifications ranging from Software Development to Business Administration and Improving Operational Performance to Leadership and Management.
Succession plans have been reviewed during the year and are in place for all senior and businesscritical roles.
These succession plans allow us to focus on learning and development requirements as well as driving our diversity agenda by identifying key talent and providing support with tailored development programmes.
Recruiting the best talent is critical to our ongoing success.
In
2017 our partnership with Randstad Sourceright went live.
This allows us to access the best recruitment tools and processes to support our line managers in finding the best people for their teams.
In addition this approach enhances our commitment to diversity and equality during the recruitment process by ensuring we follow best practice for ensuring fair and equitable recruitment processes.
In 2017 we have made great strides in presenting ourselves as an employer of choice.
We are working hard to bring a greater awareness of Communisis to the recruitment marketplace and help us attract the best new talent.
More work will follow in 2018 to enhance this further.
RETAINING OUR PEOPLE THROUGH ENGAGEMENT AND REWARD At Communisis we understand that the success of our business strategy is critically dependent upon the involvement of all employees.
We appreciate that employee engagement and wellbeing not only benefit our employees but also have a direct impact upon the performance of our business and we seek to achieve that engagement in a number of ways.
During 2017 we held information and consultation forums focus groups and internal surveys to listen to our teams acted upon that feedback at local and Company levels used various highquality digital channels to ensure timely and effective flows of information and developed improved and engaging visual communications to support our digital channels.
A healthy and safe working environment is central to everything we do.
We are committed to providing our employees with a safe place to work combined with excellent occupational health services.
In 2017 we further enhanced our flexible benefits offering by expanding the offering on our benefits platform available within the UK.
We are also constantly reviewing our international benefits offerings which vary by country linked to local legislation and practice.
We review remuneration regularly benchmarking salaries where appropriate and develop reward schemes which encourage and incentivise appropriately.
Our people also receive regular wellbeing communications and have the opportunity to engage in various advice and training initiatives on Wellbeing Days.
Our aim is to ensure that our people work within an environment which is conducive to good health and wellbeing and that our programmes and initiatives positively affect our peoples lives both inside and outside of work.
Strategic Report 27 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
We have an ongoing commitment to equality and diversity and have retained accreditation to the Committed2Equality standard in 2017.
Following an annual audit our accreditation has remained at Gold standard with an improved assessment result.
Communisis has focused on utilising appropriate recruitment processes and techniques to ensure we are able to reach all jobseekers.
We are also committed to flexible working arrangements and benefits provision which assists staff with their worklife balance.
The Group has in place an Equal Opportunities Policy and Statement details of which are set out below.
The ongoing commitment above together with the Groups Equal Opportunities Policy and Statement comprises the Groups policy on diversity.
EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES Our policy is to provide equal opportunities to all existing and potential employees.
We know that our reputation is dependent upon fair and equitable treatment of all our employees and we forbid discrimination on the grounds of race religion gender disability sexual orientation age nationality or ethnic origin.
Employment opportunities are equally available to all.
Employment opportunities are available to disabled persons in accordance with their abilities and aptitudes on equal terms with other employees.
If an employee becomes disabled during employment we make every effort to enable them to continue in employment by making reasonable adjustments in the workplace and providing retraining for alternative work where necessary.
MENTAL HEALTH AND WELLBEING In 2017 the business launched a significant initiative to support our peoples mental health and wellbeing.
The initiative started by participating in Mental Health Awareness Week in May 2017 at the end of which we made three commitments created a mental health and wellbeing group to lead and drive initiatives to support our people improved our internal support by training our HR team and signed the Time to change employer pledge detailing our commitments which included in 2018 creating mental health first aiders in the workplace.
This programme of works shows our commitment to our people and that we take the issue of mental health seriously and are committed to breaking down the taboo and helping end mental health discrimination in all workplaces.
GENDER
We have a progressive policy towards gender equality.
Whilst we have always taken the view that the most suitable candidate for any role should be the person who is appointed to that role we recognise the benefits that diversity can bring to any organisation and have embraced that philosophy when making all appointments into the business.
Our recruitment partnership with market leader Randstad Sourceright involves coaching training and upskilling our line managers to help them support our approach to both diversity and gender equality.
We also partner with CEB now Gartner for a suite of SHL psychometric assessment tools which ensure we have an objective and fair approach to candidate selection.
A breakdown by gender of the number of persons who were Directors senior managers and employees of the Group as at 31 December 2017 is set out below.
BREAKDOWN BY GENDER OF THE NUMBER OF PERSONS WHO WERE DIRECTORS SENIOR MANAGERS AND EMPLOYEES
67% MALE 4 33% FEMALE 2 SENIOR MANAGERS 55% MALE 22 45% FEMALE 18 ALL EMPLOYEES 59% MALE 1233 41% FEMALE 873 6733H 5545H 5941H 1 The category of senior managers comprises the Executive Board members and individuals who report directly into them.
GENDER PAY Under the Equality Act 2010 Gender Pay Gap Information Regulations 2017 Communisis is required to report various statistics and information linked to differences in pay by gender across the business.
The publishing of our gap analysis is on track to meet the reporting deadline of 4 April 2018.
Strategic Report 28 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY REPORT CONTINUED OUR PEOPLE AND ORGANISATION
SUPPORTING OUR SUPPLIERS Our supply chain is key to the success of Communisis.
We work hand in hand with our suppliers to understand our environmental impact and we plan to do more in 2018 to establish a reliable source of data within the supply chain through the strategic adoption of Ecovadis a supply chain management platform which will give us greater insights into the businesses that we work with.
SUPPORTING OUR PEOPLE Our aim is to give our employees rewarding careers that make the best use of the talents they have and also to equip them for the future by providing the opportunity to develop new skills.
Most importantly we want all our employees to feel they work for a company that treats them with respect and has values they can feel proud of.
Our aim is to be the employer of choice for the best people in our markets.
SUPPORTING OUR COMMUNITIES We actively encourage all employees to be socially active and participate in volunteering activities in the local community.
We support this by allowing a paid volunteer day per employee per year.
Our Insight and MI team travelled to the heart of East London to St Lukes Community Centre where they worked hard to help revamp some donated picnic benches and help out with some gardening.
They then helped clear one of the local parks by removing the fallen leaves and turning the soil planting fresh plants and flowers to blossom in time for spring and summer.
COMMUNISIS CHARITY AND VOLUNTEERING Support for our nominated charities continued during 2017 led by our Charity Committee which is made up of colleagues from all around the Group.
Proceeds from all fundraising events went to Children in Need Alzheimers Society and Macmillan Cancer
We will announce new nominated charity partners in 2018.
During 2017 our fundraising and donations amounted to 56723 which has been distributed amongst our nominated charities. total of 57998.
We continued to work with and support The Princes Trust through 2017 and will be doing so into 2018.
Our Volunteer Charity Champions represent all the business regions and support fundraising events engage with other employees set an example and are key to the success of our endeavours.
Below are some of the events we enjoyed in 2017.
YORKSHIRE THREE PEAKS On 7 July 2017 47 Communisis employees took on the Yorkshire Three Peaks.
Individuals either walked the 24mile long route with 5200ft of ascent or they supported those doing so.
Everyone challenged themselves whether that was to complete one peak two peaks or all three.
483 bottles of water 51 madetoorder sandwiches 104 energy gels and a countless number of blisters later everyone had completed the challenge coming in under the guideline of 12 hours.
This event alone raised over 5000.
47 Communisis employees took on the Yorkshire Three Peaks in July 2017 29 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 Strategic Report BAKE SALES Communisis is not alone in its love of cake and in 2017 we held numerous bake sales.
Highlights included Alzheimers Society Cupcake Day in June and Macmillan Coffee Morning in September.
All our sites got involved and raised thousands on behalf of these good causes in the process.
SUSTAINABILITY
Our work continued throughout 2017 with the sustainability forum which is comprised of stakeholders from across the business who can offer insight and expertise in all areas of the business.
The purpose of the forum is to share best practice capture our achievements and help shape the future of sustainability within Communisis.
We are committed to the development implementation and maintenance of an action plan to target improvements in our environmental and sustainability performance in addition to helping our clients with theirs and to monitoring our progress over time.
HUMAN RIGHTS AND MODERN SLAVERY We take the issue of human rights seriously.
The Modern Slavery Act 2015 has introduced changes in the UK law focusing on increasing transparency in supply chains.
A copy of the Groups slavery and human trafficking statement can be found on the Companys website site.
We are committed to ensuring there is transparency in our approach in tackling modern slavery in our supply chain.
ANTIBRIBERY POLICY The Groups antibribery policy sets out the ethical values required to ensure compliance with legal requirements.
Antibribery and corruption training is provided across the Group to all employees.
The training is provided via our online training portal.
Communisis values its reputation for ethical behaviour financial integrity and reliability.
It acknowledges that over and above the commission of any crime any involvement in bribery will also reflect adversely on its reputation.
Communisis aim is to limit its exposure to bribery and corruption by setting out a policy on antibribery and corruption training all employees so that they can recognise and avoid the use of bribery by themselves and others providing employees with a suitable channel of communication and ensuring sensitive information is treated appropriately rigorously investigating instances of alleged bribery and assisting the police and other appropriate authorities in any resultant prosecution and taking firm and vigorous action against any individual involved in bribery or corruption.
Strategic Report 30 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY REPORT CONTINUED HEALTH SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENT HEALTH SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY Communisis operates a combined Health Safety and Environmental Policy which strives to continuously improve our health safety and environment HSE compliance by integrating HSE practices as core values into our business activities.
This in turn significantly contributes to the commercial success of the business.
The Board Director responsible for implementation of the Health Safety and Environmental Policy is the Chief Executive.
KEEPING OUR PEOPLE SAFE The main focus of our Health and Safety Programme is the prevention of injury and loss.
We believe that all incidents are preventable and that our employees should be free to work in an environment that does not cause them injury or ill health.
In 2017 we were not subject to any regulatory enforcement resulting from any breaches of Health and Safety HandS legislation.
All manufacturing locations maintained their safety management certifications to the externally verified standard of Occupational Health and Safety Assessment Standard 180012007 OHSAS.
All endeavours are made to maintain a legally compliant business that operates without placing our employees customers and visitors at risk of injury.
We have a mature system of compliance checking through audit that enables us to monitor and improve our systems.
This activity is compounded by and reinforced by external verification audits that are undertaken by SGS our nominated external verification provider to the standard of OHSAS that we operate in our production sites.
In 2017 we combined the Health and Safety Policy with our Environmental Policy to create one unified document.
We continue to offer a cycle to work scheme and now have more colleagues than ever enjoying the benefits of a healthier lifestyle that this has brought to them.
We continue to utilise our online training portal to provide our HandS training.
This portal enables us to provide consistent training throughout the organisation.
In addition we have utilised other forms of training including facetoface training to raise line management awareness of HSE issues across our operational facilities.
PERFORMANCE AGAINST HEALTH SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY OBJECTIVES Demonstrate proactive leadership and management for the prevention of incidents illhealth and environmental pollution.
We have continued to be proactive in our approach to safety and environmental management through the implementation of initiatives such as line management responsibility training incident investigation awareness training and an increased focus on hazard observation and reporting.
Other areas such as occupational health surveillance and mental health awareness have also been the focus of Groupwide initiatives.
Demonstrate continuous improvements to our HSE management systems to reduce HSE risk and maintain legal compliance.
All operational facilities have maintained their OHSAS and International Organisation for Standardisation ISO 140012004 management system with two locations making the conversion to the new ISO 140012015 standard.
T o provide assurance that this effort is directed in the correct manner we have a rolling programme of internal audit reviews covering legal and process compliance.
Engage and consult with personnel to ensure their competency awareness and ability to work safely and in an environmentally responsible manner through the provision of supervision information instruction and training.
All operational facilities operate an employee forum where HSE issues are discussed and improvements are agreed.
Many of the forums liaise directly with local unions where representation is held to ensure that good communication information instruction and training is provided to all areas of our operations.
Our new online training portal has also enabled us to deploy training to a greater population of the workforce and provides consistency in the quality of the training.
Manage performance by monitoring and taking corrective action and ensure efficiency of communication for a positive culture.
We use a softwarebased system to manage various aspects of HSE documentation.
This includes hazard observation records risk assessment records audit schedule and nonconformance tracking.
Monitor and manage our environmental impacts based on energy usage waste management and supply chain practices.
Each operational facility monitors its energy use to reduce energy wastage.
High standards of waste segregation and recycling are present across the business.
We have renewed our Forest Stewardship Council FSC and Programme for the Endorsement of Forest Certification PEFC for the next three years showing our dedication to sustainable sourcing of the materials we use.
We operate a greenhouse gas management system which enables us to accurately record and report our emissions.
This system ensures consistency and transparency in our activities and is written to support ISO 140641.
We recognise that water scarcity and water pollution are a major global environmental challenge and we take all practicable steps to ensure that we manage our impact on these resources with the care that it requires.
Water consumption and waste generation across our operations are monitored and managed to ensure our environmental impact is as low as possible.
Strategic Report 31 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 HEALTH AND SAFETY PERFORMANCE The reportable incident frequency rate RIFR has reduced slightly to 0.12 from 0.13.
This is due to improved return to work processes utilising our external healthcare provider and Employee Assistance Programme.
The lost time incident frequency rate LTIFR referred to previously as Lost Time Accident Frequency Rate LTAFR has increased to 0.27 from 0.22.
As a result of this increase the business has taken additional risk management measures to ensure that relevant learnings were widely communicated risk assessment controls reviewed and additional training completed.
2016 numbers have been restated to reflect more accurate data.
Both frequency rates are calculated by taking the number of incidents multiplying by 100000 as the typical number of hours that a facility of 100 employees would work across 50 weeks per year and dividing this by the total number of hours worked based on permanent employees temporary employees agency employees and subcontractor employees.
RIFR AND LTIFR
RIFRtel
In 2017 we experienced 11 Lost Time Incidents five of which were reportable under the Reporting of Injuries Diseases and Dangerous Occurrences Regulations 2013 RIDDORs.
In 2016 there were 11 Lost Time Incidents and six RIDDORs respectively.
Whilst the 2017 number of Lost Time Incidents is the same as 2016 there is a marked improvement in relation to the number of days lost in respect of these incidents.
With only 110 Lost Working Days being recorded in 2017 against 170 days in 2016.
2016 numbers have been restated to reflect more accurate data.
INCIDENT BY TYPE Near Miss First Aid Medical Aid Lost Time Incident 1 Day
7 Days 2015  2016  2017 There continues to be exceptional HandS performance from some of the operational sites throughout the Group.
For example the site at Newcastle experienced no injuries for the second consecutive year.
Group performance also improved with a 68% increase in hazard observations being reported compared to 2016.
HSE OBSERVATIONStel 2017 ENVIRONMENTAL PERFORMANCE ENVIRONMENTAL LEGAL COMPLIANCE Communisis has maintained all its relevant environmental certifications and operational permits and has not been subject to any improvement abatement or enforcement notices.
We frequently evaluate our compliance against relevant environment legislation through a programme of auditing and review against current legislation.
CARBON REDUCTION COMMITMENT CRC AND GREENHOUSE GAS GHG Full compliance was achieved with CRC Phase 2 during 2017.
This aspect of our compliance was done in conjunction with Carbon Credentials Energy Services Limited our compliance partner which we continue to partner with to provide us with technical advice and support.
GHG REPORTING We continuously review and modify current reporting practices in order to fully meet compliance requirements.
Aside from continuous improvement of monitoring and measurement of activity data we ensure that there are internal controls in place in order to avoid the risk of any material discrepancy within this report.
Strategic Report 32 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY REPORT CONTINUED HEAL TH SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENT
ENVIRONMENTAL PERFORMANCE CONTINUED CARBON INTENSITY We have updated our carbon intensity calculation for 2017 and moved away from the previous measure that referred to paper consumption.
Going forward we will be reporting on two new measures that we believe give greater insight into the performance of the Group as a whole.
We have elected to report 1 tonnes of CO e per square footage of our property portfolio and tonnes of CO e from business travel against our average employee headcount during the year.
TONNES OF CO2E PER SQ FTtel Yearonyear there has been a positive improvement in carbon intensity performance across our property portfolio that we own or lease.
This can be attributed to energy efficiency projects that have been introduced.
For instance LED lighting and energy efficient compressors have been installed in various parts of our operations.
TRAVEL TONNES CO2E PER HEADCOUNTtel Our carbon intensity for travel as a ratio of average headcount shows a small reduction during 2017 0.560 compared to 2016 0.572.
This can be attributed to the continued focus on restricting travel and improving our internal communication technology.
The rate has however increased from 2014 and 2015 levels with an average of This is due to an increased amount of international travel that occurred as our global presence has increased.
The headcount calculation includes permanent employees temporary employees agency employees and subcontractor employees.
For the purposes of reporting any sites that were acquired or divested during a particular year will not have its square footage or energy included in the calculation.
As part of our continuous improvement process and our obligation to report GHG emissions we will continue to provide verification of the emissions statements and data made by the Company in accordance with ISO 140643.
Our current status is maintained at the top scoring of reasonable assurance as verified by our external thirdparty partner.
ENVIRONMENTAL PERFORMANCE MONITORING
Ecovadis is a supply chain management process that allows us to communicate our sustainability performance to our clients across a common platform.
This provides us with an externally verified score based on our approach to the environment labour practices and human rights fair business practices sustainable procurement and associated KPIs.
In 2017 we maintained a silver rating which placed us in the top 30% of subscribers.
CARBON DISCLOSURE PROJECT CDP Our climate change programme submission for 2017 was completed for both our Company performance and the way in which our supply chain is managed.
We have maintained our A score.
Yeartel 2017 Scope 1 1603 1571 1630 1816 Scope 2 9122 8514 7486 6138 Scope 3 101telTotal gross carbon TCO 2 e 11737 10869 10067 8884 The above table shows the audited and verified data by our external third party partner.
Scope 1 emissions are those that occur from sources that the Company own and directly manage or control.
These have increased due to an increase in our production activity.
Scope 2 emissions are those that are generated from the purchased electricity that the Company consumed and have decreased because our operational facilities continue to be more energy efficient through the process improvements that were implemented during 2017 .
Scope 3 emissions occur as a consequence of our activities but occur from sources that are not owned nor controlled by us.
These have reduced due to fewer European and domestic flights.
Corporate Governance 33 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 DEAR SHAREHOLDER To ensure continued focus on our longterm delivery we have launched the next phase of our strategic planning with financial targets to ensure continued shareholder returns and value.
To this end we have initiated a Value Enhancement Programme VEP with three key strategic themes Digital First Global Reach and Empowered Organisation.
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE This report serves to highlight that a strong governance framework is in place in order to support the Groups strategy.
The report sets out our approach to the main governance principles and outlines how the Board ensures that high standards of corporate governance are maintained.
CODE COMPLIANCE As a Board we remain committed to maintaining high standards of corporate governance and we endorse the provisions set out in the UK Corporate Governance Code 2016.
During the year under review we have assessed the level of compliance with the Code and the Board confirms that throughout the year the Company has continued to comply with all of the Codes provisions insofar as they apply to a FTSE SmallCap company.
FUTURE STRATEGIC DIRECTION The Board confirms its collective responsibility for the success of the Group by demonstrating its strong leadership in setting the Groups strategy and reviewing management performance.
The Board is accountable to the Companys shareholders for good governance and this report describes how the principles of good governance set out in the Code are applied within Communisis.
DAVID GILBERTSON
8 March 2018 INTRODUCTION TO CORPORATE GOVERNANCE Corporate Governance GOVERNANCE Corporate Governance 34 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 BOARD OF DIRECTORS DAVID GILBERTSON
TERM OF OFFICE Chairman of the Board since May 2017 having been appointed an Independent Nonexecutive Director in March 2017.
David is a member of the Audit Remuneration and Nomination Committees and Chairman of the Nomination Committee.
EXPERIENCE
David has more than 30 years experience in specialist business and professional information provision first as a journalist and editor and subsequently as leader of companies in public ownership private equity and private hands.
He has a significant corporate MandA track record and extensive experience of company governance at board level in both public and private domains and of managing shareholder relations and communication.
David was formerly CEO of Informa plc.
CURRENT EXTERNAL
David is Senior Independent Director of Tarsus Group plc.
He is Chairman of Old Street Labs Limited and Procurement Leaders Limited.
KEY STRENGTHS Extensive board and general management experience.
ANDY BLUNDELL Chief Executive TERM OF OFFICE Chief Executive since October 2009 and member of the Board since August 2009.
EXPERIENCE
Andy joined Communisis in January 2008 as Managing Director of Print Sourcing and became Group Sales Director in November 2008.
He was later appointed to the Board as
Chief Executive Officer designate on
25 August 2009 and took on the role permanently in October 2009.
Formerly
Andy was a Managing Director at Bemrose Booth Limited and a Managing Director at De La Rue plc.
CURRENT EXTERNAL
Andy is a Nonexecutive Director of RM plc.
KEY STRENGTHS Considerable executive management experience in relevant sectors.
Sales and Marketing Client focus.
Wide knowledge of international markets.
STEVE RAWLINS Chief Financial Officer TERM OF OFFICE Chief Financial Officer and member of the Board since December 2017.
EXPERIENCE
Steve joined Communisis in December 2017 and has extensive experience of the digital media business services and FMCG sectors in both the UK and overseas markets.
Most recently Steve was CFO of EDC Communications a private equity backed group of digital media agencies.
Previously he held senior finance roles at Vendia UK Ltd Uniq PLC Caradon PLC and The Gillette Company.
CURRENT EXTERNAL
None.
KEY STRENGTHS Extensive financial management experience.
KEY FOR COMMITTEE MEMBERSHIP AT 8 MARCH 2018 Audit Committee Remuneration Committee Nomination Committee MEET THE BOARD Any two Directors one of whom must be the Chairman the Chief Executive or the Chief Financial Officer.
F F Peter Hickson was Chairman of the Nomination Committee and a member of the Audit Remuneration and Administration and Finance Committees until 11 May 2017 when he stepped down as Chairman of the Board.
Administration and Finance Committee Committee Chairman Corporate Governance 35 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 PETER HARRIS Senior Independent Nonexecutive Director TERM OF OFFICE Independent Nonexecutive Director since July 2013 and Senior Independent Director since May 2015.
Peter is also Chairman of the Audit Committee and a member of the Remuneration and Nomination Committees.
EXPERIENCE
Peter has over 30 years financial experience and also has extensive media experience having spent the last 20 years in senior finance roles in the media sector.
He was previously the Interim Finance Director at Centaur Media plc Interim Chief Financial Officer of Bell Pottinger LLP CFO of the Engine Group and CFO of 19
Prior to that he was Group Finance Director of Capital Radio plc.
Peter has considerable experience in UK and US listed companies with international exposure.
CURRENT EXTERNAL
Peter is Executive Director and Chief Financial Officer of Next Fifteen Communications Group plc.
KEY STRENGTHS Extensive financial management experience including recent financial experience.
JANE GRIFFITHS Nonexecutive Director TERM OF OFFICE Independent Nonexecutive Director since May 2012.
Jane is also a member of the Audit Remuneration and Nomination Committees.
EXPERIENCE
Jane is a marketing professional with over 20 years international agency and brand owner experience for global brands across the luxury financial services IT telecommunications retail travel hospitality charity automotive and petrochemicals industry sectors.
Jane is currently working as an international marketing consultant.
Janes previous roles include Marketing Director EMERI for Christie Manson and Woods Limited and Marketing Director EMEA for Citibank NA.
She has also worked for a number of advertising agencies including Ogilvy Ogilvy One in London New York and Korea Arc Worldwide London part of the Leo Burnett Group and TBWAGGT London each with a seat on the senior management team and as a member of the Board.
CURRENT EXTERNAL
None.
KEY STRENGTHS Strong marketing and agency experience with global businesses.
HELEN KEAYS Nonexecutive Director TERM OF OFFICE Independent Nonexecutive Director since August 2014.
Helen is also Chair of the Remuneration Committee and a member of the Audit and Nomination
EXPERIENCE
Helen has over 20 years experience in travel retail consumer markets and telecoms with the majority of her career spent at GE Capital and Vodafone where she held various senior marketing roles.
Previously Helen was a Non executive Director of Majestic Wine plc Mattioli Woods plc and SKN Holdings
CURRENT EXTERNAL
Helen is a Nonexecutive Director of Dominos Pizza Group plc Nichols Plc and is also a Life Trustee of the Shakespeare Birthplace Trust.
KEY STRENGTHS Strong commercial experience in retail and consumer markets.
F Corporate Governance 36 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE REPORT INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
EXECUTIVE BOARD The Executive Board is the main operating board of Communisis plc and comprises the following people from across the Group ANDY BLUNDELL Chief Executive STEVE RAWLINS Chief Financial Officer ANDREW NEAL Group Human Resources Director DAVID HERRIDGE Managing Director  Customer Experience JON WELLINGS Managing Director  Brand Deployment MARK LEWIS Group Shared Services Director This report with the Directors Remuneration Report describes how the Board applies the principles of the UK Corporate Governance Code issued by the Financial Reporting Council which is publicly available at www. rc.
PublicationsCorporateGovernanceUKCorporateGovernance
Code2016. df.
UK CORPORATE GOVERNANCE CODE COMPLIANCE During the year under review the Company has complied with the main provisions of the UK Corporate Governance Code April 2016 the Code.
BOARD STRUCTURE The Board currently comprises the Chairman two Executive Directors and three independent Nonexecutive Directors.
David
Gilbertson was appointed as an independent NonExecutive Director on 1 March 2017 and took over as Chairman at the close of the AGM on 11 May 2017 when Peter Hickson stepped down from the Board.
On 4 December 2017 Mark Stoner Executive Director and Finance Director stepped down from the Board.
Steve Rawlins was appointed as an Executive Director and Chief Financial Officer on 4 December 2017.
We have announced today that Helen Keays will be leaving the business on 6 June 2018.
The
Nomination Committee will conduct an external search for a new Nonexecutive Director.
The roles and responsibilities of the Chairman and Chief Executive are set out in separate documents outlining their respective roles.
The Chairmans role fulfils a number of objectives including ethical leadership of the Board ensuring the Board agenda focuses on strategy value creation performance and accountability appropriate identification and supervision of significant risks effective communication with shareholders and that the Board as a whole acts efficiently in delivering the agreed strategies.
The Chief Executive is responsible for operational management of the Group leading the development and implementation of strategy setting and monitoring of budgets and other financial objectives organisational structure and setting and delivery of objectives of direct reports all for consideration by the Board.
Consistent with their role as part of a unitary board the Non executive Directors constructively challenge and help develop Company proposals on strategy.
They also test the integrity of financial information ensure financial controls are appropriate and robust determine appropriate levels of remuneration for Executive Directors and have a pivotal role in succession planning.
Biographical details of the Board as at the date of this report can be found on pages 34 and 35.
The Chairman does not have any other significant commitments in addition to those detailed in his biography.
CONFLICTS OF INTEREST The Companys Articles of Association contain provisions permitting Directors to take up any position that conflicts or may possibly conflict with the interests of the Company provided those Directors have sought authorisation from the Board before doing so.
All existing external appointments for each Director have been authorised by the Board and a register of interests is kept and reviewed on a regular basis.
All Directors have been made aware of the need to consult the Company Secretary about any possible conflicts which may arise so that prior consideration can be given by the Board to whether or not such conflict will be authorised.
BOARD PROCEEDINGS The Board schedules eight or nine meetings each year and also meets at other times as appropriate.
During 2017 there were nine scheduled meetings and two ad hoc meetings some of which were conducted by telephone.
The table opposite shows the attendance of each Director at meetings of the Board and its standing Committees during the year.
Details of membership of Committees are set out on pages 34 and 35.
Corporate Governance 37 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 The Company has adopted a schedule of matters reserved for Board approval which is reviewed annually and includes strategy budget approval and monitoring of performance acquisitions and disposals approval of the Annual Report interim preliminary and other market updates on the Companys performance approval of significant contracts and approval of Group policies.
The Company ensures that the Board is supplied with appropriate and timely information to enable it to discharge its duties.
Directors may seek independent professional advice if necessary at the expense of the Company.
All Directors have access to the services of the Company Secretary.
During the year under review the Chairman held meetings with the Nonexecutive Directors in the absence of the Executive Directors to discuss a range of issues including strategy financial performance progress towards targets management performance and management succession.
REELECTION
In accordance with the Code recommendation all members of the Board will be submitting themselves for reelection at this years AGM to be held on 10 May 2018 with the exception of Steve Rawlins who will be standing for election and Helen Keays who will be leaving the business on 6 June 2018 and therefore will not be offering herself for reelection at this years AGM.
As a result of consideration of the Directors input throughout the year and the Board evaluation process referred to below the Board is satisfied that all the Directors continue to demonstrate the level of skills and commitment to be fully effective in their respective roles as members of the Board.
NONEXECUTIVE DIRECTOR INDEPENDENCE Having considered the criteria for independence within the Code the Board is satisfied that David Gilbertson Jane Griffiths Peter Harris and Helen Keays remain independent.
INDUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT A formal and comprehensive induction process is in place for new Directors which includes an information pack and personalised induction programme.
This programme is tailored to the needs of each Director and agreed with him or her so that he or she can gain a better understanding of the Company.
Steve Rawlins further to his appointment on 4 December 2017 is currently undergoing a formal and comprehensive induction including site tours and meetings with senior management at the Companys main operating sites.
In order to ensure that Directors continue to further their understanding of the issues facing the Company presentations are made to the Board on key topics throughout the year.
This gives the Directors the opportunity to meet the management teams across the Group and improve their knowledge and understanding of the different areas of the Group.
The Directors also receive regular briefings on upcoming developments and if required training is arranged to cover specific areas for which the Directors need to have a more indepth knowledge.
ATTENDANCE BY DIRECTORS AT MEETINGS OF THE BOARD AND COMMITTEES IN 2017
Board Audit Remuneration Nomination and Finance 11 meetings 3 meetings 5 meetings 3 meetings 13 meetings David Gilbertson Andy Blundell 11    13 Steve Rawlins Jane Griffiths Peter Harris Helen Keays Mark Stoner Peter Hickson Meetings of the Administration and Finance Committee are held on an ad hoc basis and require the attendance of two Directors one of whom must be the Chairman Chief
Executive or Chief Financial Officer.
David Gilbertson was appointed a Nonexecutive Director on 1 March 2017 and Chairman with effect from 11 May 2017.
3 Steve Rawlins was appointed an Executive Director and Chief Financial Officer on 4 December 2017.
4 Mark Stoner stepped down as an Executive Director and Finance Director on 4 December 2017.
5 Peter Hickson stepped down as Chairman of the Board on 11 May 2017.
Corporate Governance 38 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE REPORT CONTINUED the Committee are made by the Board which considers the required balance of skills and expertise required for the Committee.
The Committee meets as required but not less than three times a year.
Three meetings were held during 2017.
It also meets in the absence of management for discussions with the external auditor and in the absence of the external auditor when undertaking its annual appraisal of the performance of the auditor.
The Committees primary function is to oversee and manage the appointment of and relationship with the Groups external auditor and to monitor and review the activities of the internal audit function to ensure appropriately robust and effective financial controls are in place and are adhered to.
The Committee is provided with sufficient resources to undertake its duties and has access to the Company Secretary who acts as secretary to the Committee and all other employees.
It may also take independent legal or professional advice at the expense of the Group when it believes it is necessary.
The Audit Committee Report is set out on pages 42 and 43.
NOMINATION COMMITTEE Details of the Nomination Committee are set out in the Nomination Committee Report on pages 40 and 41.
REMUNERATION COMMITTEE Details of the Remuneration Committee are set out in the Directors Remuneration Report on pages 44 to 59.
ADMINISTRATION AND FINANCE COMMITTEE The Committee comprises any two Directors one of whom must be the Chairman the Chief Executive or the Chief Financial Officer.
It may appoint its own Chairman and it meets when necessary.
It is empowered by the Board to administer the Companys share schemes in accordance with the Boards policy and any specific decisions of the Remuneration Committee that concern participation by Directors andor senior employees borrow money by entering into new or replacement facilities needed by the business enter into finance leases and operate existing banking facilities within the limit set by the Groups borrowing facilities immediately before taking action and subject to a transaction limit of 10m and enter into guarantees or indemnities where they are a necessary incidental of the exercise of the powers above.
BOARD EVALUATION A Board performance evaluation is conducted annually with the most recent being December 2017 .
The evaluation process was based on a questionnaire devised for the purpose and circulated to the Directors.
The performance of the Board as a whole and of each of its principal Committees was considered and included issues such as the assessment and monitoring of the Groups strategy and risks the mix of knowledge and skills on the Board processes and procedures oversight ethics and compliance.
The results were collated by the Company Secretary and reviewed by the Chairman who reported significant themes to the Board for further consideration and discussion.
The objectives for 2018 are explore ways for the Nonexecutive Directors to gain a more detailed understanding of the challenges faced by different areas of the business in order to facilitate insightful contributions to strategy discussions increase the proportion of Board time spent on strategic issues and to undertake a full review of Board members skills and experience to ensure that the appropriate skills and experience are in place to execute the strategy.
The evaluation process for 2018 is planned for the fourth quarter of the year.
BOARD COMMITTEES The Board has four Committees Audit Remuneration Nomination and Administration and Finance all of which have terms of reference which are reviewed annually and deal specifically with their authorities and duties.
The terms of reference may be viewed on the Companys website.
Only the Committee Chairman and Committee members are entitled to be present at the Audit Remuneration and Nomination Committee meetings but others may attend by invitation.
AUDIT COMMITTEE During the year the Audit Committee comprised Peter Harris Chairman David Gilbertson from 1 March 2017 Jane Griffiths and Helen Keays.
Peter Hickson stepped down from the Board and the Audit Committee on 11 May 2017.
Peter Harris is assessed as having the required recent and relevant financial expertise required by the Committee.
All appointments to Corporate Governance 39 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 INTERNAL CONTROL AND RISK MANAGEMENT The Board is responsible for maintaining a sound system of internal control in the Group and reviewing the effectiveness of financial operational and compliance controls.
This system is designed to provide assurance to the Groups objectives of reliable financial reporting operational effectiveness and efficiency compliance with laws regulations and policies and the safeguarding of assets.
The system aims to manage rather than eliminate the risk of failure to achieve business objectives.
By its nature it provides reasonable but not absolute assurance against material misstatement or loss.
The Group has an independent internal audit function which has a direct line of communication to the Audit Committee
The principal role in fulfilling the internal audit function is to review the adequacy and effectiveness of the controls operating within the business by undertaking an agreed schedule of independent audits each year.
The nature and scope of this annual audit programme is reviewed in advance by the Audit Committee each year and may be updated from time to time according to changing business circumstances and requirements.
The findings of these audits are reported in accordance with the internal audit terms of reference and any necessary corrective actions are agreed and monitored.
Summaries of these reports are presented to and discussed with the Audit Committee along with details of progress against action plans as appropriate.
The Board has overall accountability for ensuring that risks are effectively managed across the Group.
In addition the internal audit function within the Group also has responsibilities for the risk management programme.
A summary of this process is provided as part of the Viability Statement on page 18.
RELATIONS WITH SHAREHOLDERS An important role of the Board is to represent and promote the interests of its shareholders as well as being accountable to them for the performance and activities of the Company.
The Board believes it is very important to engage with its shareholders and its main channel of communication to institutional investors is through the Chief Executive and Chief Financial Officer via investor roadshows broker organised conferences faceto face meetings and the AGM.
The Company is a member of the Quoted Companies Alliance QCA which enhances access to leading small and midcap investors and helps the Company better understand its key criteria in making investment decisions.
Following the Companys preliminary and interim results announcements presentations are made to analysts and major shareholders to update them on the progress the Company has made towards its strategic objectives and invite them to ask questions.
Full details on results presentations RNS releases and trading updates are available on the Companys website.
In 2017 Andy Blundell utilised internet video channels via the Proactive Investor website to extend links to investors.
The Chairman and Senior Independent Director are also available to speak with major shareholders and brief the Board to ensure that they are aware of the views of shareholders.
Additionally the retail market has been kept in focus with direct communication and through intermediaries private client brokers.
Information in relation to those who have a significant direct or indirect holding in the Company are set out in the Directors Report on page 62.
GENDER DIVERSITY Details of the proportions of male and female employees on the Board in senior management positions and in the organisation as a whole are provided in the Corporate Social Responsibility Report on page 27.
STRUCTURE OF COMPANYS CAPITAL Details of the structure of the Companys capital are set out in the Directors Report on pages 60 to 63.
Approved by the Board on 8 March 2018 and signed on its behalf by Sarah Caddy Company Secretary 8 March 2018 Corporate Governance 40 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 ANNUAL STATEMENT BY THE CHAIRMAN OF THE NOMINATION
The Nomination Committee evaluates and keeps under review the composition of the Board and its Committees to maintain the appropriate balance of skills knowledge experience and independence to ensure their continued effectiveness.
Appropriate succession plans for the Nonexecutive Directors Executive Directors and senior management are also kept under review.
The Committee has continued to perform its duties in respect of its terms of reference a copy of which is available on the Companys website.
The Committee meets as required but has at least two scheduled meetings throughout the year.
Three meetings were held throughout 2017 and attendance records of the meetings held during the year can be found on page 37.
COMPOSITION
The composition of the Nomination Committee during the year was David Gilbertson Chairman Committee member from 1 March 2017 Chairman from 11 May 2017 Jane Griffiths Peter Harris and Helen Keays.
Peter Hickson stepped down from the Board and Chairman of the Nomination Committee on 11 May 2017.
Committee appointments are made by the Board.
The Committee is provided with sufficient resources to undertake its duties and has access to the Company Secretary who acts as secretary to the Committee and all other employees.
It may also take independent legal or professional advice at the expense of the Group when it believes it is necessary.
ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES The main roles and responsibilities of the Committee are to review the composition of the Board and make recommendations to the Board of any changes needed consider at the request of the Board or the Chairman the making of any appointment or reappointment to the Board evaluate the skills knowledge and experience of the Board and taking these into account prepare a description of the role and capabilities required for a particular appointment and identify and nominate for Board approval candidates to fill any Board vacancies.
NOMINATION COMMITTEE REPORT NOMINATION COMMITTEE Corporate Governance 41 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 KEY ACTIONS TAKEN DURING 2017 As part of its role to review the composition of the Board during 2017 the Nomination Committee recommended the appointment of a new Nonexecutive Director who would also replace Peter Hickson as Chairman of the Board and Chairman of the Nomination Committee at the close of the 2017 AGM.
The
Nomination Committee evaluated the balance of skills experience independence and knowledge of the Board before preparing a detailed candidate specification which defined the criteria for the new appointee in particular looking for a candidate with the relevant skills to take on the roles of Chairman of the Board and Chairman of the Nomination Committee.
The specification was agreed by the Nomination Committee.
Peter Hickson stepped down from the Board as Nonexecutive Chairman with effect from 11 May 2017.
I was appointed as a Nonexecutive Director on 1 March 2017 and as Nonexecutive Chairman with effect from 11 May 2017 and will offer myself for reelection at the May 2018 AGM.
In accordance with the requirements of the specification an independent external search agency Warren Partners was engaged to assist with the search for suitable candidates.
Warren Partners has no other connection with the Company.
Nomination Committee and Group Human Resources Director.
The final candidates were then interviewed by the other Non executive Directors.
Following those interviews the final candidate was selected and then met by the Executive Directors.
I was selected as Nonexecutive Director for my extensive knowledge and experience in relevant industry sectors and suitability to take over as Chairman of the Board and Chairman of the Nomination Committee when Peter Hickson stepped down at the AGM on 11 May 2017.
Peter Hickson was not involved in the final decision on the appointment of his upcoming successor.
The process described above was also followed in respect of the appointment of Steve Rawlins as an Executive Director and Chief Financial Officer with effect from 4 December 2017.
In connection with Steve Rawlins appointment the Committee used the services of Spencer Stuart which has no other connection with the Company.
Mark Stoner stepped down as an Executive Director and Finance Director with effect from 4 December 2017.
It has been announced today that Helen Keays will be leaving the business on 6 June 2018.
The Board would like to thank Helen for her commitment and contribution over the years and to wish her every success for the future.
The Committee will conduct an external search for a new Nonexecutive Director.
Following the appointment of a new Director the Chairman in conjunction with the Company Secretary and the Group Human Resources Director has responsibility for ensuring that a full formal and tailored induction to the Company is provided.
Such induction includes onetoone meetings with key management an overview of the Groups structure strategy and operations and site visits.
The Committee also carefully reviews and makes recommendations concerning the reappointment of any Nonexecutive Director at the conclusion of their specified term of office.
The Committee considered the positions of Peter Harris Jane Griffiths and myself.
It was the Committees view that it would be in the best interests of the Companys shareholders subject to careful and rigorous review for each of the Nonexecutive Directors to offer themselves for reelection at the 2018 AGM.
In the Committees view each of the Directors bring considerable management experience and an independent perspective to the Boards discussions and are considered to be independent of management and free from relationship or circumstance that could affect or appear to affect the exercise of their independent judgement therefore providing continued valuable support.
Helen Keays will be leaving the business on 6 June 2018 and therefore will not be offering herself for reelection at this years AGM.
DIVERSITY
The Board recognises the recommendations and benefits to the Group of diversity in the workforce and in the composition of the Board itself.
Whilst the Company will always make appointments based on the best candidate for the role it does take into consideration the recommendations within the Davies Report and seeks to follow the Code.
In 2017 female Directors accounted for 33.3% of the Board composition.
More details on diversity and gender across the Group can be found on page 27 .
The Committee will also consider the Parker Review findings on ethnic and cultural diversity when making future appointments to the Board.
David Gilbertson Chairman of the Nomination Committee 8 March 2018 Corporate Governance 42 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 AUDIT COMMITTEE REPORT ANNUAL STATEMENT BY THE CHAIRMAN OF THE AUDIT COMMITTEE The Committee has continued to perform its duties in respect of its terms of reference a copy of which is available on the Companys website.
Three meetings were held during the year two of which were scheduled to coincide with the Boards review and approval of the Groups interim statement and of its preliminary results announcement based on the Annual Report and Financial Statements.
Attendance records of the meetings held during the year can be found on page 37.
ROLE AND RESPONSIBILITIES Broadly the key activities and responsibilities of the Committee have been to review and challenge where necessary the effectiveness of the Groups internal controls audit function and risk management programme the financial reporting process including the adoption of critical accounting policies and practices the independence and effectiveness of the external auditor the Groups procedures and arrangements for handling any allegations from whistleblowers and to report to the Board any action required if a material cause for concern or scope for improvement is discovered.
COMPOSITION
The Committee is composed entirely of Nonexecutive Directors.
The composition of the Audit Committee during the year was Peter Harris Chairman Jane Griffiths Helen Keays and David Gilbertson Committee member from 1 March 2017.
Peter Hickson stepped down from the Board as a Committee member of the Audit Committee on 11 May 2017.
The relevant experience of each member is described on pages 34 and 35.
INTERNAL AUDIT AND CONTROL The Groups system of operational and internal financial control is subject to regular internal and external audits including those conducted on behalf of clients under contractual arrangements.
There were 419 separate audits completed during 2017.
This activity covered areas of compliance including information security quality health and safety environmental matters and business continuity arrangements in addition to financial reporting and internal controls.
The internal and external audit plans are set and approved in the context of a developing assurance reporting process and are flexed to deal with any changes with respect to the risk profile of the Group.
The Groups internal audit function reports independently and directly to the Audit Committee Chairman and maintains regular communication outside of the scheduled Committee meetings.
AUDIT COMMITTEE Corporate Governance 43 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 The FRC noted one matter in relation to pension disclosures where they believed that users of the accounts would benefit from improvements to existing disclosures.
As a result we have taken the opportunity to improve our disclosures in relation to our pension funding investment strategy in our 2017 Annual Report and Financial
The FRCs review covered only the specific disclosures relating to the thematic review of pensions disclosures and was not intended to provide any assurance that the report and accounts were correct in all material respects.
EXTERNAL AUDIT The Committee has responsibility for making a recommendation on the appointment reappointment and removal of the external auditor.
The external auditors appointment is reviewed periodically and the lead audit partner is rotated at least once every five years.
Ernst and Young LLP has been the Groups external auditor since September 2002 when the last audit tender took place.
A new audit partner was rotated onto the audit during the year as the previous partner had completed five annual audits.
The Committee is aware of the EU mandated requirement for auditor rotation and will monitor any legal or regulatory developments.
The Committee reviews reports from Ernst and Young LLP as part of the annual audit process.
These cover the scope approach and results of the external audit and include the procedures adopted for safeguarding the firms independence and objectivity.
The quality and content of these reports together with the performance and behaviour of the audit teams during the exercise of their duties inform the Committees assessment of audit effectiveness.
The external auditor meets privately with the Committee after each meeting without any member of the executive management team being present.
The Committee has an established policy for determining the nonaudit services that the external auditor can provide and the procedures required for preapproval of any such engagement.
This allows the Committee to satisfy itself that auditor objectivity and independence are safeguarded.
The split between audit and nonaudit fees for the year ended 31 December 2017 and the nature of the nonaudit services provided appear in Note 5.5 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Nonaudit fees totalled 20000 in respect of other assurance and advisory services provided during 2017.
Given the type of nonaudit services provided and at 9% of the external audit fee of 235000 they are not considered by the Committee to be of a nature or at a level that compromises the objectivity and independence of the external auditor.
Upon the recommendation of the Committee Ernst and Young LLP will be proposed for reappointment as auditor by shareholders at the AGM on 10 May 2018.
Peter Harris Chairman of the Audit Committee 8 March 2018
RISK MANAGEMENT
The Group has an established risk management programme details of which are provided in the Strategic Report and Corporate Governance sections.
The risk focus has been on the changes in data protection legislation data control assurance and cyber security.
The Committee also kept a keen eye upon health safety and environment which involved reviewing internal controls and challenging how risks are appropriately managed.
The impact of the exit from the European Union was also considered in the context of the Groups strategic risks.
SIGNIFICANT MATTERS RELATED TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS The Committee assesses whether suitable accounting policies have been adopted and appropriate estimates and judgements have been made based upon a review of accounting papers which have been prepared by management providing details of significant financial reporting issues together with reports from the external auditor prepared in contemplation of the interim and fullyear results.
Any issues arising are discussed with the external auditor together with any other matters which the auditor wishes to bring to the Committees attention.
In 2017 such issues included revenue recognition goodwill impairment and internal controls.
Of the matters considered during the year the most significant were revenue recognition and goodwill valuation the Committee continued to monitor the established Group policies for revenue recognition to ensure that they remained appropriate robust and were consistently applied and recoverability of goodwill is reviewed on an ongoing basis and an assessment of whether any impairment of goodwill is required is performed at least annually.
The principal judgements relate to the assumptions underlying the calculation of the value in use of the segmental businesses primarily whether the longterm plans are achievable the reasonableness of the overall macroeconomic factors that underlie the valuation process and the suitability of the discount rate used to determine the present value of future cash flows.
The Committee assessed this issue by considering management prepared papers and by reviewing reports from the external auditor both of which describe the supporting methodology the rationale and support for the key assumptions in the context of market comparators and the associated sensitivities.
The Committees conclusion was that a goodwill impairment was not required.
The key areas of focus during 2018 include the General Data Protection Regulation which is effective from May 2018 and the implementation of new International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS in respect of lease accounting IFRS 16 and revenue from contracts with customers IFRS 15.
As part of the Financial Reporting Councils FRC thematic review into pension disclosures the Company was notified that the pension disclosures in its 2016 Annual Report and Accounts would be reviewed.
Corporate Governance 44 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
DIRECTORS REMUNERATION REPORT
ANNUAL STATEMENT FROM THE CHAIR OF THE REMUNERATION COMMITTEE DEAR SHAREHOLDER I am pleased to present the Directors Remuneration Report for the year ended 31 December 2017 on behalf of the Board.
This Remuneration Report is split into two sections this letter introducing the Directors Remuneration Report and the Annual Report on Remuneration.
Our Directors Remuneration Policy which was approved by our shareholders at the 2017 AGM is set out for reference in the Appendix to this report.
REMUNERATION IN 2017 2017 was a year of continued progress for Communisis despite challenging trading conditions in a number of our markets.
As a consequence of this performance and the related growth in profits the Committee was pleased to approve the payment of annual bonuses for 2017  albeit at broadly threshold levels for our Executive Directors Andy Blundell only for 2017 30% of base salary.
However  we do expect to approve the vesting of part of the 2015 Long T erm Incentive Plan L TIP award.
The EPS condition for this award 80% weighting has been met.
A total of 55.066% of this part vested the share price condition 20% weighting will be measured after the performance period for this part ends on 15 April 2018.
The Committee also undertook the following actions in 2017 base salaries were reviewed for Executive Directors as part of the normal annual review of Companywide salaries.
In line with the levels of increases made to all staff the Chief Executives salary was increased by 1% from 1 July 2017 there was no pay increase awarded to the Finance Director in the year further LTIP awards were made to Executive Directors on 10 March 2017 the treatment of remuneration items for the Finance Director who stepped down from our Board on 4 December 2017 Mark Stoner were determined as more fully described on page 49 of this report and the remuneration for Steve Rawlins who joined us on 4 December 2017 as an Executive Director and Chief Financial Officer was approved.
Details of Steves remuneration arrangements for 2018 are set out in this report.
REMUNERATION POLICY IN 2018 We were very pleased to receive over 94% support when we renewed our Directors Remuneration Policy at our 2017 AGM.
For 2018 we have had to consider as a Committee whether our policy remains appropriate for Communisis and capable of supporting our revised strategic vision as more fully explained in the Chairmans Statement at the beginning of this Annual Report.
Having undertaken a review we concluded that our current policy as approved at the 2017 AGM remains appropriate.
We are thus not seeking to amend our policy at the 2018 AGM.
We have however decided to make certain changes in the way in which we will implement our policy in 2018.
These modifications are permitted within our current policy and so we do not propose to seek a further policy approval at the 2018 AGM.
REMUNERATION COMMITTEE Corporate Governance 45 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 SHAREHOLDER APPROVAL At the AGM on 10 May 2018 shareholders will be invited to approve the 2017 Directors Remuneration Report as set out on pages 44 to 52.
We are not seeking further approval from shareholders for our policy as set out for information in the Appendix to the Directors Remuneration Report at the 2018 AGM.
Our shareholders support for the resolution on the 2017 Directors Remuneration Report which will be proposed at the 2018 AGM is important for us as a Board and I would recommend all shareholders to vote for this resolution.
Yours sincerely Helen Keays Chair of the Remuneration Committee 8 March 2018
This report is presented in two parts.
The first part constitutes the Annual Report on Remuneration.
This outlines how the Committee implemented the Directors Remuneration Policy for the financial year ended 31 December 2017.
This report together with the Annual Statement from the Chair of the Remuneration Committee will be put to shareholders for approval at the AGM to be held on 10 May 2018.
Shareholder approval is on an advisory basis only.
The second part is an Appendix containing the Directors Remuneration Policy as approved by the Companys shareholders at the Companys AGM on 11 May 2017 which is reproduced here for information.
For completeness the scenario charts in the Directors Remuneration Policy have been updated to reflect Steve Rawlins remuneration arrangements for 2018.
The Company has complied with the principles and provisions relating to Directors remuneration in the UK Corporate Governance Code and these reports have been prepared in accordance with the Large and Mediumsized Companies and Groups Accounts and Reports Amendment Regulations 2013 the Regulations.
Where information disclosed has been subject to audit by the Companys auditor Ernst and Young LLP this is highlighted.
In summary the changes which we are making are as follows whilst the same performance measures from 2017 Adjusted EBIT 50% free cash flow 25% and personal objectives 25% will apply to the 2018 annual bonus in 2018 the percentage of maximum bonus payable for ontarget performance will be increased from 50% of maximum to 65% of maximum and within our LTIP we are again seeking to make annual awards subject to an equally weighted 5050 mix of threeyear EPS growth and threeyear absolute TSR growth targets.
For both measures the growth rates required for vesting are between 5% CAGR 25% vesting of that part and 10% CAGR 100% vesting of that part.
For 2017s awards the equivalent ranges were a 5% to 15% CAGR for threeyear EPS and a 7.5% to 17.5% CAGR for TSR with 15% of the award vesting at the threshold level for both measures.
The changes which we have made were not matters undertaken lightly by the Committee but we are under an obligation to act in the interests of our shareholders and in this regard we considered it important that our incentive plans align with our revised strategy and support its delivery.
The performance targets which we have set for the LTIP are aligned to the growth aspirations set out in the Chairmans Statement.
Accordingly the target ranges are we believe appropriately stretching in light of our revised strategy and if achieved will deliver strong performance for our shareholders in the prevailing business climate in our industry.
Additionally we would ask our shareholders to note that for absolute TSR we are starting the measurement point for the 2018 to 2020 threeyear cycle from a significantly higher base point than in 2017 Communisis TSR in financial year 2017 increased by 55.3% we strongly believe in our incentive plans being selffunding and hence the heavy emphasis on profitsbased measures within our plans adjusted EBIT EPS against which the costs of all bonuses and share plans are charged and we set appropriately stretching targets for our annual bonus our fiveyear average bonus outcome for the Chief Executive is 34.4% of maximum bonus levels and to ensure affordability even if our free cash flow and personal objectives measures for annual bonus are attained at levels higher than the equivalent performance on our adjusted EBIT measure the amount of bonus payable will be capped by the level of attainment on the adjusted EBIT metric.
Corporate Governance 46 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
DIRECTORS REMUNERATION REPORT CONTINUED
ANNUAL REPORT ON REMUNERATION
PROPOSED IMPLEMENTATION OF REMUNERATION POLICY IN 2018 UNAUDITED INFORMATION Element of Remuneration Policy Detail of implementation of Policy for 2018 Base salary Andy Blundell  364212 Steve Rawlins  250000 A further review will occur on 1 July 2018.
Pension No changes to the overall value of the pension arrangements for Executive Directors are anticipated for 2018.
From
1 July 2013 the pension entitlement for each Executive Director has been set at 12% of base salary.
Benefits There are no proposed changes to the benefits offered to Executive Directors in 2018.
The benefits to be received by Executive Directors in 2018 will include life assurance private medical cover car or car allowance provision and fuel card.
Annual performance bonus The maximum annual performance bonus for 2018 will remain at 100% of base salary.
The proposed performance measures and their respective weightings for the 2018 annual bonus are as follows Adjusted EBIT  50% Free cash flow  25% Personal objectives  25% The actual performance targets for 2018 are not disclosed prospectively as these are considered to be commercially sensitive by the Board.
The Committees intention is for the performance targets for each performance measure to be disclosed retrospectively in next years Directors Remuneration Report which is consistent with the fact the performance targets for the 2017 annual performance bonus are disclosed retrospectively in this report on page 48.
As described in the Annual Statement from the Chair of the Remuneration Committee reflecting the level of stretch within the targets set for the 2018 annual bonus the percentage of maximum bonus payable for ontarget performance in 2018 will be 65% of base salary.
Longterm incentives There will be an LTIP grant made in 2018 to the Executive Directors over shares worth 150% of salary.
The performance conditions for this award will be as follows 50% of the award will be subject to a performance condition requiring absolute growth in adjusted diluted EPS 50% of the award will be subject to a performance condition requiring absolute growth in TSR for both metrics the vesting range is detailed below both metrics will be measured over three financial years to 31 December 2020 EPS will be measured on the basis of adjusted diluted EPS and TSR growth will be measured using a threemonth averaging period to determine the starting and ending TSR levels.
Threshold Upper CAGR range 5% 6% 7.5% 10% Vesting % 25% 43% 70% 100% Allemployee share plans Continued opportunity to participate in the taxadvantaged Sharesave Scheme on the same basis as all other UK employees.
Chairman and Non Executive Directors fees David Gilbertsons fee as Chairman is currently 135000 per annum.
The Nonexecutive Director base fees for 2018 are currently 50000.
Peter Harris and Helen Keays each receive an additional 5000 fee as Chair of the Audit Committee and Remuneration Committee respectively.
Peter Harris also receives 5000 for his role as the Senior Independent Director.
Corporate Governance 47 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 ROLE AND MEMBERSHIP OF THE REMUNERATION COMMITTEE The Committees principal responsibilities are recommending to the Board the remuneration strategy and framework for the Executive Directors and senior managers determining within that framework the individual remuneration arrangements for the Executive Directors and senior managers and overseeing any major changes in employee benefit structures throughout the Group and reviewing remuneration trends across the Group.
The Committee has formal terms of reference which can be viewed on the Companys website.
During 2017 the Committee comprised Helen Keays Chair Peter Hickson stepped down 11 May 2017 David Gilbertson appointed Nonexecutive Director 1 March 2017 appointed Company Chairman 11 May 2017 Jane Griffiths and Peter Harris.
The Committee met on five occasions and attendances are given in the table on page 37.
The Chief Executive is invited to attend meetings of the Committee except when his own remuneration is being discussed.
ADVISERS TO THE COMMITTEE FIT Remuneration Consultants LLP FIT signatories to the Remuneration Consultants Groups Code of Conduct were appointed by the Committee following consideration of FITs experience in this sector.
FIT provides advice to the Committee on all matters relating to remuneration including best practice.
FIT provided no other services to the Group and accordingly the Committee was satisfied that the advice provided by FIT was objective and independent.
FITs fees in respect of 2017 were 34836.50 excluding VAT.
FITs fees were charged on the basis of the firms standard terms of business for advice provided.
At the Committees request administrative advice and support were provided by the Company Secretary the Companys Human Resources Director and the Companys Tax Manager.
2017 VOTING At the Companys AGM held on 11 May 2017 shareholders approved the Directors Remuneration Report for the year ended 31 December 2016 and approved the Directors Remuneration Policy.
Below is the result in respect of these resolutions which required a simple majority of the votes to be cast in favour in order for the resolution to be passed Votes for % Votes against % Remuneration Report 108911258 99.96% 42991 0.04% Remuneration Policy 102536765 94.12% 6406141 5.88% 93149 votes and 104492 votes were withheld from the Remuneration Report and Remuneration Policy resolutions respectively.
IMPLEMENTATION REPORT FOR 2017 SINGLE TOTAL FIGURE OF REMUNERATION IN 2017 FOR THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS AUDITED INFORMATION Salary Benefits
L TIP and
Pension
T otal Andy Blundell Mark Stoner Steve Rawlins 1 Benefits comprise life assurance private medical cover car or car allowance provision and fuel card.
2 Details of the performance measures and targets applicable to the annual bonus for 2017 are set out below.
LTIP vesting in 2017 is summarised below.
The value shown in the table above for LTIPs in 2017 represents vesting of the EPS element of the 2015 LTIP award which is measured to 31 December 2017.
The share price element of the 2015 award is not recognised in the table above but will be recognised in the 2018 report to the extent that this element vests on the measurement date of 14 April 2018.
The table assumes that 44.053% of the total award vests.
This is multiplied by the threemonth average share price to 31 December 2017 59.3426p per share.
Corporate Governance 48 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
DIRECTORS REMUNERATION REPORT CONTINUED
IMPLEMENTATION REPORT FOR 2017 CONTINUED SINGLE TOTAL FIGURE OF REMUNERATION IN 2017 FOR THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS AUDITED INFORMATION
The figures in the LTIP column shown above for 2016 representing the vesting of part of the 2014 LTIP awards have been restated from the 2016 report.
The values in the above table now reflect the value of the Companys shares on the dates of vesting 49p per share on 11 June 2017 46.5p per share on 2 August 2017 for half of Mark Stoners vesting shares multiplied by the number of shares vesting whereas the equivalent figure within the published 2016 single figure table was an estimate which reflected the average share price between 1 October 2016 and 31 December 2016 37.5832p per share.
5 Pension contributions are in line with the pension entitlements summary on page 48.
6 Mark Stoner ceased to be a Director on 4 December 2017.
More details can be found on page 49.
7 Steve Rawlins was appointed a Director on 4 December 2017.
The aggregate remuneration of all Directors under salary fees benefits cash contributions in lieu of pensions and annual bonus was 1114000 2016 1447000 2016 figures included remuneration details for Nigel Howes and Dave Rushton who are no longer remunerated.
Dave Rushton stepped down from the Board on 31 January 2016 and ceased to be an employee on 30 June 2016.
He was paid salary benefits and pension entitlement until 30 June 2016 only in accordance with his contractual notice period.
As noted above he was paid an additional 8622 in 2016 with regard to settlement of claims in relation to statutory rights.
He did not receive an annual bonus for 2016.
Dave Rushton exercised his outstanding LTIP options on 13 September 2016 14453 shares at 39.08p.
Nigel Howes stepped down from the Board on 31 January 2016 and ceased to be an employee on 31 January 2017.
He was paid salary benefits and supplement in lieu of pension until 31 January 2017 only in accordance with his contractual notice period.
He was paid an additional 5700 in January 2017 with regard to settlement of claims in relation to statutory rights.
He did not receive an annual bonus for 2016.
Nigel Howes exercised his outstanding LTIP options on 19 March 2017 222049 shares at 54.25p.
ANNUAL PERFORMANCE BONUS 2017 As Mark Stoner stood down from the Board on 4 December 2017 it was determined that he would not receive an annual performance bonus for 2017.
The performance measures for the 2017 annual performance bonus were as follows adjusted EBIT 50% weighting of total bonus free cash flow 25% weighting of total bonus and personal objectives 25% weighting of total bonus.
Level Threshold Maximum T otal value of award available 30% of weighting 100% of weighting Weighting Metric 50% of salary Adjusted EBIT m 20.5 22.6 25% of salary Free cash flow m 12 14 25% of salary Personal objectives Against these measures 21.2m was achieved for adjusted EBIT and 12.5m was achieved for free cash flow.
On the basis of the Committees judgement and considering performance against the performance measures described above the 2017 annual bonus for Andy Blundell was 109000 2016 89000 an outcome of 30% of salary.
Andy Blundell accepted the bonus in line with other members of the Executive Board.
VESTING OF LTIP AWARDS IN 2018 The 2015 LTIP award was based as to 20% of the award on a share price growth performance condition and as to 80% of the award on an EPS performance condition.
See page 51 for a summary of the performance conditions.
The share price growth performance condition requires the attainment of share price growth thresholds 65.513p to 90p on the third anniversary of the award date being 14 April 2018.
Accordingly the single figure table includes an estimated level of vesting for these awards based on the threemonth average share price to 31 December 2017 59.3426p estimated vesting nil.
The EPS performance condition of CAGR 7.5% to 15% has been achieved as to 55.066% vesting.
In the single total figure table 44.053% of the total 2015 LTIP award is represented as vesting.
PENSION ENTITLEMENTS SUMMARY Andy Blundell remains a member of the defined contribution section of the Communisis Pension Plan.
He receives a contribution of 10000 per annum to the Communisis Pension Plan.
His overall pension entitlement is 12% of base salary.
The balance above 10000 is paid as a salary supplement.
No Director participated in a defined benefit scheme in the year.
Steve Rawlins will receive all pension entitlements as a cash supplement.
Corporate Governance 49 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 PAYMENTS TO DIRECTORS LEAVING THE GROUP As was announced on 4 December 2017 Mark Stoner stepped down from his role as Finance Director on that day.
In accordance with the terms of his service agreement and the Directors Remuneration Policy Mark will receive the following treatments payment of his base salary and benefits for 12 months in line with his contractual notice period no annual bonus for 2017 the 2015 and 2016 LTIP awards made to Mark Stoner will be retained.
These awards may vest at the originally specified vesting dates subject to the performance conditions for the awards being achieved and subject to time prorating where applicable and it was agreed after the year end that the 2017 LTIP award to Mark Stoner would lapse.
COMPARATIVE TOTAL SHAREHOLDER RETURN The graph below shows the Companys total shareholder return performance compared with the FTSE All Share Index.
The graph provides a basis for comparison with a relevant equity index of which Communisis is a constituent and the Committee believes that no other published index provides a better comparison.
In accordance with the regulations the graph shows this performance over a nineyear period.
TOTAL SHAREHOLDER RETURN SINCE 31 DECEMBER 2008 TABLE OF HISTORICAL DATA CEO The Regulations also require a table setting out the remuneration of the Chief Executive CEO over the same period as the above chart and this data is presented below.
Single figure Annual variable element Longterm incentive of total award rates against vesting rates against Year CEO remuneration 000 maximum opportunity % maximum opportunity % 2017 Andy Blundell Andy Blundell Andy Blundell 476  12 2014 Andy Blundell 600 49 2013 Andy Blundell Andy Blundell Andy Blundell Andy Blundell 335 17 2009 Andy BlundellSteve Vaughan 442 6 30telDec Communisis plc FTSE AllShare 31 Dec 31 Dec 31 Dec 31 Dec 31 Dec 31 Dec 31 Dec 31 Dec 31 Dec TSR  value of a 100 unit investment made on 31 December 2008 Corporate Governance 50 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
DIRECTORS REMUNERATION REPORT CONTINUED
IMPLEMENTATION REPORT FOR 2017 CONTINUED RELATIVE IMPORTANCE OF SPEND ON PAY Profit distributed by Overall expenditure Year way of dividend 000 on pay 000 2016 5058 98619 2017 5564 94381 % change 10.00% 4.30%
Profit distributed by way of dividend has been taken as the dividend paid in respect of the relevant financial year.
For 2017 this is the interim dividend paid 1860000 and the proposed final dividend of 3704000.
No share buybacks were made in either year.
Overall expenditure on pay has been taken as the total employee costs wages and salaries social security costs and pension costs as set out in Note 5.3 Employee Benefits Expense in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
The reduction in the percentage of spend on pay primarily reflects the lower number of employees in the Group in 2017.
CEOS RELATIVE PAY In accordance with the regulations we present in the table below the percentage change in the prescribed pay elements salary taxable benefits and annual bonus outcome of the Chief Executive and the average percentage change for UKbased staff between financial year 2016 and financial year 2017.
YEARONYEAR PERCENTAGE CHANGE Salary % T axable benefits %
UKbased staff 2.35 11.35 26.13 DIRECTORS INTERESTS AUDITED INFORMATION The interests all being beneficial of the Directors in the Companys securities are set out below At 31 December 2017 At 31 December 2016 Director Ordinary shares Shares subject to option Ordinary shares Shares subject to option David Gilbertson 193000 Peter Hickson 1360778  1360778 Andy Blundell 405200 2733311 362843 1977778 Steve Rawlins Jane Griffiths Peter Harris Helen Keays Mark Stoner 179152 1754335 148910 1230549 1 23000 of these shares are held by Andy Blundells wife.
The holdings for Peter Hickson and Mark Stoner are shown as at the dates on which they stepped down from the Board being 11 May 2017 and 4 December 2017 respectively.
NOTES
The Directors and their families had no interest in the shares of any other company within the Group.
There have been no changes in the interests of those continuing Directors between the year end and 7 March 2018.
Corporate Governance 51 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 SHARE OPTIONS AUDITED INFORMATION The number of and prices at which options under the Long T erm Incentive Plan 2007 and Sharesave Scheme have been granted to Directors are set out below.
Except for Sharesave options all options are subject to the performance conditions described below and on page 46.
Options Options held at held at Earliest Latest 1 January Options Options Options 31 December Option exercise exercise 2017 granted lapsed exercised 2017 price p date date Long Term Incentive Plan Andy Blundell 300000  214171 85829  Nil 11.06.2017 09.06.2019 615000    615000 Nil 15.04.2018 13.04.2020 1062778    1062778 Nil 10.03.2019 08.03.2021 1055533   1055533 Nil 11.03.2020 10.03.2022 Mark Stoner 100000  71391 28609  Nil 11.06.2017 09.06.2019 100000  71391 28609  Nil 02.08.2017 31.07.2019 420000    420000 Nil 15.04.2018 13.04.2020 583009    583009 Nil 10.03.2019 08.03.2021 723786   723786 Nil 11.03.2020 10.03.2022 Sharesave Scheme Mark Stoner 27540    27540 45.75 01.06.2019 30.11.2019
The range of market price of shares in Communisis plc during the year ended 31 December 2017 was 39p to 66p.
The closing price on 31 December 2017 was 65p.
2 None of the Directors paid for the award of options.
Options granted in the year represent awards with a face value of 150% of base salary 543600 for Andy Blundell and 150% of base salary 372750 for Mark Stoner.
This has been calculated using the midmarket price of the preceding day before the date of grant being 51.5p for the options granted on 10 March 2017.
Threshold level of vesting for the LTIP awards granted in the year is 15% of the total number of awards granted.
Sharesave options are not subject to performance conditions.
5 The performance conditions attached to the LTIP awards granted during the year are set out below.
The Directors exercised the options indicated in the table above on 7 September 2017 when the market price of the Companys shares was 57p.
Additionally former Director Nigel Howes exercised 222049 options at 54.25p.
7 The aggregate gains of Directors from share options exercised in 2017 was 81537 2016 161858.
8 The 723786 LTIP shares granted to Mark Stoner in 2017 lapsed on 2 January 2018.
SUMMARY OF PERFORMANCE CONDITIONS FOR UNVESTED LTIP AWARDS Year of award Performance condition Performance condition 2017 EPS growth 50% weighting Measured over three financial years beginning with year of award 5% CAGR to 15% CAGR see below Absolute TSR 50% weighting Measured over three years from date of award 7.5% CAGR 15% of this part to 17.5% CAGR 100% of this part straightline vesting between these thresholds 2016 EPS growth 100% weighting Measured over three financial years beginning with year of award 5% CAGR to 15% CAGR see below
2015 EPS growth 80% weighting Measured over three financial years beginning with year of award 7.5% CAGR 25% of this part to 15% 100% of this part CAGR straightline vesting between these thresholds Absolute share price performance 20% weighting Measured at three years from date of award 65.513p 25% of this part to 90p 100% of this part
LTIP awards No LTIP shares will vest unless the Committee is satisfied as to the Companys underlying financial performance over the threeyear LTIP vesting period Corporate Governance 52 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
DIRECTORS REMUNERATION REPORT CONTINUED
IMPLEMENTATION REPORT FOR 2017 CONTINUED SUMMARY OF PERFORMANCE CONDITIONS FOR UNVESTED LTIP AWARDS CONTINUED
EPS is adjusted basic earnings per share i. and amortisation of acquired intangibles and the tax effect of these items.
Vesting is based on EPS for the final year of the threeyear performance period.
Both absolute TSR and share price are measured on the basis of threemonth averaging periods.
The vesting schedule for EPS growth for the 2016 and 2017 LTIP awards is as follows EPS growth compound annual growth % of award subject to EPS performance condition vesting Less than 5% p.
Nil
5% p.
15% 6% p.
20% 7.5% p.
25% 10% p.
75% 15% p.
Between each defined threshold Straightline vesting PROVISION OF SHARES FOR SHARE PLANS  DILUTION The current estimated dilution from subsisting awards including executive and allemployee share awards and assuming which is most unlikely that all subsisting options vest in full is approximately 4.36% of the shares in issue at the date of this report.
The Company has an Employee Benefit Trust which as at 7 March 2018 holds 441220 shares which may be used to satisfy options granted under the Executive Share Option Scheme and the LTIP and the above estimate of potential dilution is presented on the basis of assuming that the Employee Benefit Trust will satisfy certain outstanding awards.
Awards are currently managed to confine commitments within an overall dilution limit for allemployee share plans of no more than 10% of share capital in any 10year period and a limit of 5% of share capital in any 10year period for the Companys discretionary share plans.
Following approval of the 2017 LTIP by shareholders at the 2017 AGM the 5% limit in respect of the Companys discretionary share plans will no longer apply to new LTIP awards.
CHAIRMAN AND NONEXECUTIVE DIRECTOR FEES
Other benefits T otal 2017 T otal 2016
David Gilbertson 113  113 NA Nonexecutive Directors Jane Griffiths 50  50 50 Peter Harris 60  60 58 Helen Keays 55  55 53 EXTERNAL DIRECTORSHIPS Andy Blundell was appointed a Nonexecutive Director of RM plc on 25 May 2017.
He received a fee of 21692.35 in 2017 which he retained.
This report was reviewed and approved by the Board on 8 March 2018 and signed on its behalf by order of the Board.
Sarah Caddy Company Secretary 8 March 2018 Corporate Governance 53 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 APPENDIX TO DIRECTORS REMUNERATION REPORT DIRECTORS REMUNERATION POLICY REMUNERATION POLICY Remuneration for Executive Directors comprises the following elements FIXED PAY VARIABLE PAY
REMUNERATION
Base salary  Pension  Benefits  Annual performance bonus  Longterm incentives Element and purpose Policy Operation and opportunity Performance measures Base salary This is the core element of pay that reflects the individuals role and position within the Group and reflects capability and contribution.
Base salaries are reviewed periodically against companies of similar size and complexity and any salary increases are applied in line with the outcome of the relevant review with effect from 1 July in a financial year.
Base salaries are paid monthly in cash.
Any salary increases in the policy period will be made following consideration of business performance and as a cap no increase will take an Executive Directors salary above the median salary for Chief Executives in the FTSE SmallCap plus 10% determined using data available to the Committee at that time.
NA
Pension
To provide marketcompetitive levels of retirement benefits.
Provide a competitive employersponsored pension plan.
Pension contributions are paid in relation to membership of the defined contribution section of the Communisis Pension Plan as a salary supplement in lieu of pension contributions or as a Company contribution to personal pension arrangements.
Pension contributions are set at a maximum level of 12% of base salary per annum.
NA
Benefits
To aid retention and remain competitive within the marketplace.
Benefits comprise private medical cover car or car allowance provision and fuel card.
The Committee reserves the ability to introduce new benefits where it concludes that it is in the interests of Communisis to do so having regard to the particular circumstances and to market practice provided that the maximum aggregate value of all benefits in a year will not exceed the maximum amount stated in this table.
In any year the values of benefits for Executive Directors may vary in line with the cost of providing insurance and other benefits without the Committee taking action.
A limit on the maximum cash value of all benefits has been set at 40000 per annum for each Executive Director.
Actual levels of benefits will be disclosed each year in the single figure table.
NA Corporate Governance 54 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
DIRECTORS REMUNERATION REPORT CONTINUED
Element and purpose Policy Operation and opportunity Performance measures Annual performance bonus To motivate employees and incentivise delivery of annual performance targets.
Bonus levels and the appropriateness of measures are reviewed annually at the commencement of each financial year to ensure they continue to support our strategy.
Once set performance measures and targets will generally remain unchanged for the year except to reflect events such as corporate acquisitions or other major transactions where the Committee considers it to be necessary in its opinion to make appropriate adjustments.
The Committee will not set a maximum annual bonus level in excess of 100% of base salary for the duration of this policy.
Awards are paid in cash.
No bonus is paid at the threshold level of performance with amounts accruing from that point.
The performance measures applied may be financial or nonfinancial and can be corporate divisional or individual measures set for any year in such proportions as the Committee considers appropriate.
However the weighting of financial performance measures will not be reduced below 60% of total annual bonus potential in any year for the duration of this policy.
The Committee will consider overall Group and financial performance before any element of bonus is paid and accordingly may moderate the bonus outturn either upwards without exceeding the 100% of base salary cap or downwards.
Longterm incentives The Company operates the Communisis Long Term Incentive Plan 2017 LTIP to motivate and incentivise delivery of sustained performance over the long term.
Awards can be made on an annual basis with a vesting period of at least three years.
The Company also has scope to operate a taxadvantaged Executive Share Option Scheme.
Although there is no plan to make awards to Executive Directors under this plan at present the Company reserves the right to do so subject to the 30000 limit on HMRC approved options available under this plan.
Any such awards would be taken into account in making any awards under the LTIP in the same year.
The maximum value of LTIP awards which may be granted in any financial year is equivalent to 150% of base salary.
The threshold level of vesting for LTIP awards will not exceed 25% of the total award.
Performance measures applied to LTIP awards are reviewed from time to time to ensure they remain appropriate and aligned with shareholders interests.
The Committee may set such performance conditions on LTIP awards as it considers appropriate whether financial or nonfinancial and whether corporate divisional or individual.
However performance conditions will always measure performance over a period of at least three financial years commencing with the financial year in which the award is made.
Share ownership guidelines To encourage share ownership by the Executive Directors and ensure interests are aligned.
Executive Directors are expected to retain 50% of all shares net of tax which vest under the LTIP or any other discretionary longterm incentive arrangement introduced in the future until such time as they hold a specified value of shares.
Only beneficially owned shares and vested share awards discounted for anticipated tax liabilities may be counted for the purposes of the guidelines.
Share awards do not count prior to vesting.
The Remuneration Committee will review Executive Director shareholdings annually in the context of this policy.
100% of base salary for all Executive Directors.
NA
APPENDIX TO DIRECTORS REMUNERATION REPORT DIRECTORS REMUNERATION POLICY CONTINUED REMUNERATION POLICY CONTINUED Corporate Governance 55 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 Element and purpose Policy Operation and opportunity Performance measures Allemployee share plans To encourage share ownership by employees thereby allowing them to share in the longterm success of the Group and align their interests with those of the shareholders.
The Company operates a Sharesave plan for UK employees.
This is an allemployee taxadvantaged share plan and follows the usual form for such plans.
Executive Directors are able to participate in allemployee share plans on the same terms as other Group employees.
The exercise price of the options is usually equal to the market price of the shares at the date of invitation to participate less a maximum discount of 20%.
The maximum amount that can be invested in the scheme will not exceed the statutory limit from time to time currently 500 per month.
The options vest on the third or fifth anniversary of the commencement of the savings period depending upon the length of the savings period.
Consistent with normal practice such awards are not subject to performance conditions.
REMUNERATION POLICY  CHAIRMAN AND NONEXECUTIVE DIRECTORS The table below summarises the remuneration elements for the Chairman and NonExecutive Directors.
Element and purpose Policy Operation and opportunity Performance measures Chairman and Nonexecutive Director fees.
The fees paid to the Chairman and the fees of the other Nonexecutive Directors aim to be competitive with other fully listed companies of equivalent size and complexity.
The fees payable to Nonexecutive Directors are determined by the
The Chairmans fee is determined by the Committee.
Nonexecutive Directors will not participate in share incentive arrangements.
Fees are paid monthly in cash.
The aggregate fees and any benefits of the Chairman and Nonexecutive Directors will not exceed the limit from time to time prescribed within the Companys Articles of Association for such fees currently 500000 p. aggregate.
Any increases actually made will be appropriately disclosed.
NA
NOTES TO THE REMUNERATION POLICY TABLE Differences between the Policy on Remuneration for Directors from the Policy on Remuneration of other employees Where Communisis pay policy for Directors differs to its pay policies for groups of employees this reflects the appropriate market rate position for the relevant roles.
However elements of consistency of treatment are promoted through a single Groupwide annual bonus arrangement although quantum and the mix of performance metrics vary according to seniority and Groupwide share plans.
Stating maximum amounts for the remuneration policy The DRR Regulations and related investor guidance encourages companies to disclose a cap within which each element of remuneration policy will operate.
Where maximum amounts for elements of remuneration have been set within the Directors Remuneration Policy these will operate simply as caps and are not indicative of any aspiration.
Malus and clawback Malus being the forfeiture of unvested awards and clawback being the ability of the Company to claim repayment of paid amounts as a debt provisions apply to the annual bonus and LTIP.
These provisions may be applied where the Remuneration Committee considers it appropriate to do so following any material restatement of the Companys or a Group members financial results for any period individual gross misconduct or any other circumstances that have a sufficiently significant impact on the reputation of the Company or any Group member.
Travel and hospitality While the Remuneration Committee does not consider it to form part of benefits in the normal usage of that term it has been advised that corporate hospitality whether paid for by Communisis or another and certain instances of business travel including any related tax liabilities settled by the Company for the Directors and exceptionally their family members may technically come within the applicable rules and so the Remuneration Committee expressly reserves the right to authorise such activities within its agreed policies.
Corporate Governance 56 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
DIRECTORS REMUNERATION REPORT CONTINUED
APPENDIX TO DIRECTORS REMUNERATION REPORT DIRECTORS REMUNERATION POLICY CONTINUED REMUNERATION POLICY CONTINUED NOTES TO THE REMUNERATION POLICY TABLE CONTINUED Payments under previous policies For the avoidance of doubt in approving this Directors Remuneration Policy authority is given to the Remuneration Committee to honour any commitments entered into with former or current Directors under previous policies including the payment of pensions and the vesting of past share awards.
Discretions reserved in operating incentive plans The Remuneration Committee will operate the annual performance bonus and LTIP according to their respective rules and the above Remuneration Policy table.
The Remuneration Committee retains certain discretions consistent with market practice in relation to the operation and administration of these plans including the determination of performance measures and targets and resultant vesting and payout levels the ability to adjust performance measures and targets to reflect events including corporate actions andor to ensure the performance measures and targets operate as originally intended as described in the Termination Policy section below determination of the treatment of individuals who leave employment based on the rules of the incentive plans and the treatment of the incentive plans on exceptional events such as a change of control of the Company and the ability to make adjustments to existing awards made under the incentive plans in certain circumstances e. corporate restructurings or special dividends.
APPROACH TO RECRUITMENT REMUNERATION The Companys recruitment remuneration policy aims to give the Committee sufficient flexibility to secure the appointment and promotion of highcalibre executives to strengthen the management team and secure the skill sets to deliver our strategic aims.
The following represents principles to be applied by the Committee on recruitment of Executive Directors The starting point for the Committee will be to look to the policy for Executive Directors as set out in the policy table and structure a package in accordance with that policy.
Consistent with the DRR Regulations the caps contained within the general policy for fixed pay will not apply to a recruit although the Committee would not envisage exceeding those caps in practice.
For a new appointment base salary may be increased over time following progress and development in the role rather than being set directly at the level of a previous incumbent or at market level.
For an internal appointment any variable pay element awarded in respect of the prior role may either continue on its original terms or be adjusted to reflect the new appointment as appropriate.
For external and internal appointments the Committee may agree that the Company will make a contribution towards legal fees in connection with agreeing employment terms.
The annual performance bonus plan and LTIP will operate as outlined in the general policy in relation to any newly appointed Executive Director including the maximum award levels.
All awards for external appointments to compensate for awards forfeited on leaving a previous employer buyouts whether made under the annual performance bonus LTIP or otherwise including under UKLA Listing Rule 9.4.2 will be capped at the commercial value of the amount forfeited and will take account of the nature time horizons and performance requirements of those awards.
In particular the Committees starting point will be to ensure that any awards being forfeited which remain subject to outstanding performance requirements other than where substantially complete will be replaced with buyout awards subject to similar requirements and any awards with service requirements are also bought out with similar terms.
However exceptionally the Committee may relax those obligations in respect of buyouts where it considers it to be in the interests of shareholders and those factors are in the view of the Committee equally reflected in some other way for example through a discount to the face value of the awards forfeited.
For the avoidance of doubt such buyout awards are not subject to a formal cap.
A new Chairman or Nonexecutive Director would be recruited on the terms explained above in respect of the main policy for such Directors.
Corporate Governance 57 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 SERVICE CONTRACTS EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS The Committees policy is that each Executive Directors service agreement should be of indefinite duration subject to termination at normal retirement age and should otherwise be terminable by the Company on no more than 12 months notice and by the Director on six months notice.
The service agreements of all Executive Directors comply with that policy.
None of the service agreements include provision for compensation payments on early termination.
Whether any such compensation would be payable and the amount of any compensation would be determined according to the law of contract as it applies to the particular circumstances of an individual case.
Contracts do not contain change of control provisions.
The Committee reserves flexibility to alter these principles if necessary to secure the recruitment of an appropriate candidate but would expect a return to these principles within a reasonable timeframe.
The date of each Executive Directors appointment is Contract date Andy Blundell 2 November 2009 Steve Rawlins 4 December 2017 NONEXECUTIVE DIRECTORS Each Nonexecutive Director is engaged for an initial period of three years.
They are then invited to serve for a further threeyear period after which they are appointed annually.
These engagements can be terminated by either party on three months notice.
The Nonexecutive Directors cannot participate in the Companys share option schemes are not entitled to any pension benefit and are not entitled to any payment in compensation for early termination of their appointment.
The date of original appointment of each Nonexecutive Director and the effective date of their latest appointment is Date of original appointment Latest appointment date David Gilbertson 1 March 2017 1 March 2017 Jane Griffiths 17 May 2012 7 May 2015 Peter Harris 1 July 2013 12 May 2016 Helen Keays 1 August 2014 11 May 2017 TERMINATION POLICY SUMMARY It is appropriate for the Committee to consider treatments on a termination having regard to all of the relevant facts and circumstances available at that time.
This policy applies both to any negotiations linked to notice periods on a termination and any treatments that the Committee may choose to apply under the discretions available to it under the terms of the annual performance bonus and LTIP plans.
The potential treatments on termination under these plans are summarised below.
Incentives If a leaver is deemed to be a good leaver i. the discretion of the Committee.
If a leaver is deemed to be a bad leaver i. to join a competitor.
Other exceptional cases e. change in control.
Annual Performance Bonus Committee has discretion to award a prorated bonus.
No awards made.
Prorated bonus.
Long Term Incentive Plan LTIP Leaver will receive a prorated award subject to the application of the performance conditions.
Vesting levels may be varied by the Committee if considered appropriate.
Vesting will not be brought forward to the time of cessation of employment unless the Committee considers this appropriate.
All awards will normally lapse.
Leaver will receive a prorated award subject to the application of the performance conditions at the date of the event subject to standard Committee discretions to increase vesting taking into account relevant factors.
Similar treatments would apply to any awards made under the Executive Share Option Scheme in future.
Corporate Governance 58 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
DIRECTORS REMUNERATION REPORT CONTINUED
APPENDIX TO DIRECTORS REMUNERATION REPORT DIRECTORS REMUNERATION POLICY CONTINUED TERMINATION POLICY SUMMARY CONTINUED The Company has power to enter into settlement agreements with executives and to pay compensation to settle potential legal claims.
In addition and consistent with market practice in the event of termination of an Executive Director the Company may pay a contribution towards the individuals legal fees and fees for outplacement services as part of a negotiated settlement.
Any such fees would be disclosed as part of the detail of termination arrangements.
For the avoidance of doubt the policy does not include an explicit cap on the cost of termination payments.
In the event of cessation of a Nonexecutive Directors appointment they would be entitled to a threemonths notice period.
EXTERNAL APPOINTMENTS Andy Blundell is a Nonexecutive Director of RM plc.
No other Executive Director is a director of any company apart from subsidiaries of
Were any Executive Directors to take up such an external nonexecutive appointment they would be permitted to retain any fees earned from that appointment.
INDICATIVE TOTAL REMUNERATION LEVELS Communisis total remuneration opportunity The above chart aims to show how the remuneration policy set out above for Executive Directors is applied using the following assumptions Minimum  Consists of base salary benefits and pension.
Base salary is the current base salary.
Benefits for Andy Blundell are the benefits paid in 2017 as set out in the single figure table with Steve Rawlins benefits at expected 2018 levels for illustration.
Pension entitlements measured as 12% of base salary receivable either as a contribution or in cash.
000 Base salary Benefits Pension T otal fixed Andy Blundell 364 36 44 444 Steve Rawlins 250 11 30 291 In line with expectation Based on what the Director would receive if performance was in line with expectation excluding share price appreciation and dividends annual performance bonus consists of the ontarget bonus 65% of base salary and LTI consists of the threshold level of vesting 25%.
Assumed that the typical annual award is at 150% of base salary each year.
Maximum Based on the maximum remuneration receivable excluding share price appreciation and dividends annual performance bonus consists of the maximum bonus 100% of base salary and LTI assumes maximum vesting of awards 150% of total award.
Minimum In line with expectation
Minimum In line with expectation
100% 33% 54% 29% 17% 27% 100% 32% 53% 30% 27% 17% 41% Andy Blundell Steve Rawlins Long term incentives incl.
Sharesave  Annual performnce bonus  Total fixed pay 40% Corporate Governance 59 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 STATEMENT OF CONSIDERATION OF EMPLOYMENT CONDITIONS ELSEWHERE IN THE GROUP Pay and employment conditions in the Group are taken into account when setting Executive Directors remuneration.
The Committee receives regular updates from the Human Resources Director on overall pay and conditions in the Group including but not limited to changes in base pay and any staff bonus pools in operation.
There is also oversight of the allemployee Sharesave Scheme which Executive Directors and all other Group employees can participate in on the same terms and conditions.
The Company did not consult with employees in drawing up this Directors Remuneration Report.
STATEMENT OF CONSIDERATION OF SHAREHOLDER VIEWS Each year the Committee takes into account the approval levels of remunerationrelated matters at our AGM in determining that the current Directors Remuneration Policy remains appropriate for the Company.
The Committee also seeks to have a productive dialogue with investors on developments in the remuneration aspects of corporate governance generally and any changes to the Companys executive pay arrangements in particular.
Corporate Governance 60 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 DIRECTORS REPORT DIRECTORS AND GOVERNANCE The names and biographical details of the Directors who hold office at the date of this report are set out on pages 34 and 35.
The Directors who served during the year are shown below DAVID GILBERTSON appointed Nonexecutive Director 1 March 2017 appointed Chairman 11 May 2017
ANDY BLUNDELL Chief Executive STEVE RAWLINS appointed 4 December 2017 Chief Financial Officer JANE GRIFFITHS Nonexecutive Director PETER HARRIS Nonexecutive Director HELEN KEAYS Nonexecutive Director PETER HICKSON stepped down on 11 May 2017
MARK STONER stepped down on 4 December 2017 Finance Director Additional information relating to the remuneration and share interests of each Director is given in the Directors Remuneration Report on pages 44 to 59.
No Director had during or at the end of the year any material interest in any contract of significance in relation to the Groups business.
Details of the Directors service contracts are set out in the Directors Remuneration Report on page 57.
In accordance with the UK Corporate Governance Code all Directors will offer themselves for reelection at the AGM on 10 May 2018 in line with best market practice with the exception of Helen Keays who will be leaving the business on 6 June 2018 and therefore will not be offering herself for reelection at this years AGM.
The corporate governance statement required by Disclosure and Transparency Rule DTR 7.2.1 is contained within the Corporate Governance Report on pages 36 to 39 as permitted by DTR 7.2.9.
Communisis plc the Company is a company incorporated in England and Wales and is listed on the London Stock Exchange.
Its registered office address is Communisis House Manston Lane Leeds LS15 8AH and its registered number is .
The Directors present their Annual Report Financial Statements and Independent Auditors Report for the year ended 31 December 2017.
With the exception of details of Directors interests which are set out on page 50 of the Directors Remuneration Report the information to be included in the Annual Report and Financial Statements under LR9.8.4C of the UK Financial Conduct Authoritys Listing Rules is set out in this Directors Report.
STRATEGIC REPORT Section 414C of the Companies Act 2006 the Act requires us to present a fair review of the business during the year ended 31 December 2017 and a description of the principal risks and uncertainties facing the Company.
The review must be a balanced and comprehensive analysis of both the development and performance of the Companys business during the financial year and the position of the Companys business at the end of the year consistent with the size and complexity of the business.
It also requires us to provide details of expected future developments in the Group and an indication of the Groups overseas branches.
The Strategic Report can be found on pages 1 to 32.
RESULTS AND DIVIDENDS The results for the year are shown on page 74.
An interim dividend of 0.89p per ordinary share was paid on 13 October 2017.
The Directors now propose a final dividend of 1.77p per ordinary share to be paid on 18 May 2018 to shareholders on the register at close of business on 20 April 2018.
This makes total dividends for the year of 2.66p per share 2016 2.42p.
Corporate Governance 61 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 Finally we have been upgrading our management information tools which removes Adobe Flash as this technology presents issues for many of our clients and the new interface is pure HTML5.
Connect
TM now has over 30 products to enable clients to create send and receive multichannel communications.
SHARE CAPITAL Note 19 to the Consolidated Financial Statements contains details of the changes in issued share capital of the Company during the year.
FINANCIAL RISK MANAGEMENT
Disclosures required under paragraph 6 in Schedule 7 of The Large and Mediumsized Companies and Groups Accounts and Reports Amendment Regulations 2013 have been provided in Note 26 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
PURCHASE OF OWN SHARES The Directors authority to make purchases of the Companys shares on its behalf is given by resolution of the shareholders and renewed annually at the Companys AGM.
No share buybacks were undertaken by the Company during 2017.
In March and November 2016 the Communisis plc Employee Benefit Trust acquired 320000 and 800000 shares respectively for total consideration of 441691.
SHARE OPTION SCHEMES Further options were granted during the year under the Groups share option schemes.
Details of the options outstanding at year end are given in Note 13 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY The Groups approach to corporate social responsibility is detailed within its report set out on pages 26 to 32.
POLITICAL DONATIONS No political expenditure was incurred during the year nor were any contributions made for political purposes.
EMPLOYMENT POLICY Communisis is committed to the principle of equal employment opportunity for all employees and to providing employees with a work environment free of discrimination and harassment.
Employment decisions at Communisis are based on candidates abilities to match the business needs job requirements and individual qualifications for roles.
We are committed to treating all candidates in a fair and objective manner regardless of their age race colour nationality ethnic origin creed disability sexual orientation sex gender identity marital or civil partnership status parental status religion belief or nonbelief social or economic class employment status or any other criteria that cannot be shown to be properly justifiable.
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT Expenditure on research and development in the year was nil 2016 nil.
In respect of internal development activities in 2017 we continued active development across Connect channel communication platform.
A key challenge for clients in marketing wishing to adopt any type of workflow system is the definition of their own processes.
To simplify this within Mantl
TM we have developed new standard processes for many types of workflow such as Direct Marketing and Product Literature.
The initial release of these features helped us reduce onboarding for the first client down to eight weeks where previously it was between three and six months.
For retail customers ensuring their point of sale material is displayed correctly is a major challenge.
Our current compliance tool enables retail stores to photograph their displays and central marketing can then approve or provide instructions to correct the displays.
We have been researching image analysis and recognition to do this automatically.
Proof of concept work suggests that walls with up to three posters on may be recognisable but beyond that the resolution of the posters becomes too small.
There is a tradeoff between how quickly multiple items can be confirmed as correct and verifying each item particularly when the change between versions may be low.
Like all organisations we are moving away from developing applications to building multitenanted platforms and in 2017 we updated Connect infrastructure stack.
Over time this will enable us to deliver more integrated support with the ability to centrally monitor the production delivery and receipt of communications.
We launched two new products within the Connect and transactional customers.
Personalised Video as the name suggests enables an email to be sent to customers containing a link to a video with content tailored to them.
We have also developed DocBox as a solution to longterm storage of terms and conditions in a digital form.
Many of our clients are required by the regulator to provide documentation in a so called Durable Medium one that cannot be tampered with and will be available to the customer for the relevant regulatory period.
DocBox provides a unique encrypted URL for each document plus underlying storage that enables clients to prove that each customer is being served the correct terms and conditions for the product they have and also that the document has not been changed since it was posted.
DocBox saved our initial client over 1m in postage costs for terms and conditions mailings.
Corporate Governance 62 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 DIRECTORS REPORT CONTINUED
Notice of the AGM to be held on 10 May 2018 is contained in a separate document sent or made available electronically to shareholders with this report and is available on the Companys website.
DISCLOSURE OF INFORMATION TO THE AUDITOR In accordance with Section  of the Act the Directors confirm that so far as each is aware there is no relevant audit information of which the auditor is unaware.
Each Director has taken all steps that he or she ought to have taken as a Director to make himself or herself aware of and to establish that the auditor is aware of any relevant audit information.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION FOR SHAREHOLDERS The following is additional information required for shareholders as a result of the implementation of the Takeover Directive into UK law.
At 31 December 2017 the Companys issued share capital comprised % of total issued Number  share capital Ordinary shares of 25p each 209619144 52404786.00 100 Each share carries one vote with the result that the total voting rights at the same date were 209619144.
The Company is not aware of any agreements between shareholders that may result in restrictions in the transfer of shares or voting rights.
The Companys issued share capital as at 8 March 2018 was 209701138.
Every holder of ordinary shares present in person or by proxy at the AGM of the Company will be entitled to vote.
A poll will be taken on each of the resolutions in the Notice of Meeting and every member present in person or by proxy and entitled to vote shall have one vote for every ordinary share held.
EMPLOYMENT POLICY CONTINUED Opportunities are available to disabled employees for training career development and promotion on the same basis as all other employees.
Where existing employees become disabled it is the Groups policy to provide continuing employment wherever practicable in the same or an alternative position and to provide appropriate assistance equipment and facilities for them to carry out the role.
Further details of the way in which we engage with our employees on matters which affect them and encourage their involvement and participation in the performance of the Group are given on page 10 and on pages 26 to 29.
QUALIFYING THIRDPARTY INDEMNITY PROVISION Article 172 of the Companys Articles of Association provides that subject to the provisions of the enactments concerning companies which limit the scope of indemnities in favour of Directors every Director and officer and the auditor of the Company is to be indemnified out of the assets of the Company against all costs charges expenses losses and liabilities which he or she may sustain or incur in or about the execution of his or her office or in relation thereto.
This is a qualifying thirdparty indemnity provision within the meaning of Section 236 of the Act.
The Company also takes out insurance covering claims against the Directors or officers of the Company and any subsidiary.
This insurance provides coverage in respect of some of the Companys liabilities under Article 172.
FUTURE DEVELOPMENTS Future developments are described in the Strategic Report on pages 1 to 32.
GOING CONCERN AND VIABILITY The Directors Going Concern and Viability Statements are set out in the Strategic Report on page 18.
The Directors have assessed the longerterm prospects of the Group in accordance with provision C.2.2 of the Code.
This is included in the Strategic Report on page 18.
MAJOR INTERESTS IN SHARES The Company was notified under DTR 5 of the following major holdings of voting rights associated with its shares as at the year end and changes made as at 7 March 2018 Voting rights as at % of total issued Voting rights as at % of total issued Shareholder 31 December 2017 share capital 7 March 2018 share capital Richard Griffiths and controlled undertakings 48500000 23.16 48500000 23.16 Henderson Group plc 20916657 9.99 20916657 9.99 CRUX Asset Management Limited 12000000 5.73 12000000 5.73 Majedie Asset Management Limited 10651768 5.13 10651768 5.13 Corporate Governance 63 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 SIGNIFICANT INTERESTS Directors interests in the share capital of the Company as at 8 March 2018 and 31 December 2017 are shown in the table on page 50.
Significant interests in voting rights notified under DTR 5 are shown on page 62.
CONTRACTS WITH SHAREHOLDERS There are no contracts of significance or any other contracts between the Company and a controlling shareholder within the meaning of Listing Rule 9.8.4R.
SIGNIFICANT SHARE SCHEMES The Communisis Employee Benefit Trust holds 0.21% as at 8 March 2018 2016 0.39% of the issued share capital of the Company in trust for the benefit of employees of the Group and their dependents.
The voting rights of these shares are exercisable by the Trustees.
GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS All disclosures concerning the Groups greenhouse gas emissions as required to be disclosed under the Companies Act 2006 Strategic Report and Directors Report Regulations 2013 are contained in the Corporate Social Responsibility Report forming part of the Strategic Report on pages 26 to 32.
CHANGE OF CONTROL The Company is party to a number of contracts that could be terminated by the other party in the event of a change of control of the Company.
The Company is also party to a number of banking agreements that upon a change of control of the Company are terminable by the banks upon provision of written notice.
There are no agreements between the Company and its Directors or employees providing for additional compensation for loss of office or employment whether through resignation redundancy or otherwise where such loss of office or employment occurs because of a takeover bid.
AUDITOR
The Directors will place a resolution before the AGM to re appoint Ernst and Young LLP as auditor for the ensuing year.
Approved by the Board on 8 March 2018 and signed on its behalf by Sarah Caddy Company Secretary 8 March 2018 The Notice of Meeting specifies deadlines for exercising voting rights either in person or by proxy in relation to resolutions to be passed at that meeting.
All votes including proxy votes will be counted and made available as soon as practicable after the AGM and published on the Companys website.
There are no restrictions on the transfer of ordinary shares in the Company other than the registration of share transfers may be suspended at such times and for such periods not exceeding 30 days in any year as the Directors may determine certain restrictions may from time to time be imposed by laws and regulations for example insider trading laws and market requirements relating to close periods and the restrictions imposed by the Listing Rules of the Financial Conduct Authority whereby certain employees of the Company require the approval of the Company to deal in the Companys securities.
A special resolution at a general meeting of the shareholders is required to amend the Companys Articles of Association.
Directors are reappointed by ordinary resolution at a general meeting of the shareholders.
The Articles provide that the Board can appoint a Director but anyone so appointed must be elected by an ordinary resolution at the next AGM.
At each AGM onethird of the Directors previously elected at an AGM must retire by rotation.
Each retiring Director who wishes to continue to serve must be reelected at the meeting.
In line with best practice the Board conducts annual reelections for all Directors and will follow this policy at the 2018 AGM.
DIRECTORS AUTHORITIES The Directors are authorised under the terms of Section 551 of the Act to issue ordinary shares up to a maximum aggregate nominal value of 17448000 and under the terms of Section 560 of the Act authorised to issue ordinary shares in connection with a rights issue up to a maximum aggregate nominal value of 34896001 such amount to be reduced by any allotments made under the first part of this paragraph.
Pursuant to Section 570 of the Act the Directors are also authorised to allot shares for cash without first offering them to existing shareholders up to a limit of 5% of the Companys issued ordinary share capital.
This authority also gives the Directors the power to allot shares for cash in connection with a rights issue.
Both these authorities will expire at the AGM on 10 May 2018 and the Directors will seek to have them renewed at that meeting.
Corporate Governance 64 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 STATEMENT OF DIRECTORS RESPONSIBILITIES PARENT COMPANY FINANCIAL STATEMENTS PREPARED UNDER UK GAAP The Directors are responsible for preparing the parent company Financial Statements in accordance with applicable United Kingdom law and regulations.
Company law requires the Directors to prepare Financial Statements for each financial year.
Under that law the Directors have elected to prepare the Financial Statements in accordance with United Kingdom Generally Accepted Accounting Practice United Kingdom Accounting Standards and applicable law.
Under company law the Directors must not approve the Financial Statements unless they are satisfied that they give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Company and of the profit and loss of the Company for that period.
In preparing these Financial Statements the Directors are required to select suitable accounting policies and then apply them consistently make judgements and estimates that are reasonable and prudent state whether applicable UK accounting standards have been followed subject to any material departures disclosed and explained in the Financial Statements and prepare the Financial Statements on a going concern basis unless they consider that to be inappropriate.
The Directors are responsible for keeping proper accounting records that are sufficient to show and explain the Companys transactions and disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the financial position of the Company and enable them to ensure that the Financial Statements comply with the Companies Act 2006.
They are also responsible for safeguarding the assets of the Company and hence for taking reasonable steps for the prevention and detection of fraud and other irregularities.
GROUP FINANCIAL STATEMENTS PREPARED UNDER IFRS The Directors are responsible for preparing the Annual Report and Financial Statements in accordance with applicable law and regulations.
Company law requires the Directors to prepare Financial Statements for each financial year.
Under that law the Directors have prepared the Group Financial Statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS as adopted by the European Union EU.
Under company law the Directors must not approve the Financial Statements unless they are satisfied that they give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Group and of the profit or loss of the Group for that period.
In preparing these Financial Statements the Directors are required to select suitable accounting policies and apply them consistently make judgements and estimates that are reasonable and prudent state whether IFRS as adopted by the EU has been followed subject to any material departures disclosed and explained in the Group Financial Statements and prepare the Financial Statements on a going concern basis unless it is inappropriate to presume that the Group will continue in business.
The Directors are responsible for keeping adequate accounting records which show and explain the Groups transactions and disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the financial position of the Group and enable them to ensure that the Financial Statements comply with the Companies Act 2006 and Article 4 of the International Accounting Standards IAS
They are also responsible for safeguarding the assets of the Group and hence for taking reasonable steps for the prevention and detection of fraud and other irregularities.
The Directors are also responsible for preparing the Directors Report the Strategic Report the Directors Remuneration Report and the Corporate Governance Report in accordance with the Companies Act 2006 and applicable regulations including the requirements of the Listing Rules and the Disclosure and Transparency Rules.
Corporate Governance 65 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 DIRECTORS RESPONSIBILITY STATEMENTS PURSUANT TO DTR 4 Each of us for himself or herself and on behalf of each other Director who held office on 31 December 2017 confirms that to the best of his or her knowledge the Consolidated Financial Statements prepared in accordance with IFRS as issued by the IASB and IFRS as adopted by the EU give a true and fair view of the assets liabilities financial position and profit or loss of the Company and the undertakings included in the consolidation as a whole and the Strategic Report and the Directors Report include a fair review of the development and performance of the business and the position of the Company and the undertakings included in the consolidation taken as a whole together with a description of the principal risks and uncertainties it faces.
In accordance with Section 418 of the Companies Act 2006 each Director in office at the date of this report confirms that so far as the Director is aware there is no relevant audit information of which the Companys auditor is unaware and he or she has taken all the steps that he or she ought to have taken as a Director in order to make himself or herself aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that the Companys auditor is aware of that information.
In addition the Directors as at the date of this report consider that the Annual Report and Financial Statements taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Companys performance business model and strategy.
By order of the Board Andy Blundell Chief Executive 8 March 2018 Steve Rawlins Chief Financial Officer 8 March 2018 Financial Statements 66 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
In our opinion Communisis plcs Group financial statements and parent company financial statements the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the Groups and of the parent companys affairs as at 31 December 2017 and of the Groups profit for the year then ended the Group financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union the parent company financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with United Kingdom Generally Accepted Accounting Practice and the financial statements have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006 and as regards the Group financial statements Article 4 of the IAS Regulation.
We have audited the financial statements of Communisis plc which comprise Group Parent company Consolidated Balance Sheet as at 31 December 2017 Company Balance Sheet as at 31 December 2017 Consolidated Income Statement for the year then ended Company Statement of Changes in Equity for the year then ended Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income for the year then ended Related notes 1 to 22 to the financial statements including a summary of significant accounting policies Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity for the year then ended Consolidated Cash Flow Statement for the year then ended Related notes 1 to 32 to the financial statements including a summary of significant accounting policies The financial reporting framework that has been applied in the preparation of the Group financial statements is applicable law and International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union.
The financial reporting framework that has been applied in the preparation of the parent company financial statements is applicable law and United Kingdom Accounting Standards including FRS 101 Reduced Disclosure Framework United Kingdom Generally Accepted Accounting Practice.
BASIS FOR OPINION We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing UK ISAs UK and applicable law.
Our responsibilities under those standards are further described in the Auditors responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements section of our report below.
We are independent of the Group and parent company in accordance with the ethical requirements that are relevant to our audit of the financial statements in the UK including the FRCs Ethical Standard as applied to listed public interest entities and we have fulfilled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with these requirements.
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion.
USE OF OUR REPORT This report is made solely to the companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006.
Our
To the fullest extent permitted by law we do not accept or assume responsibility to anyone other than the company and the companys members as a body for our audit work for this report or for the opinions we have formed.
CONCLUSIONS RELATING TO PRINCIPAL RISKS GOING CONCERN AND VIABILITY STATEMENT We have nothing to report in respect of the following information in the annual report in relation to which the ISAs UK require us to report to you whether we have anything material to add or draw attention to the disclosures in the annual report set out on pages 18 to 21 that describe the principal risks and explain how they are being managed or mitigated the directors confirmation set out on page 18 in the annual report that they have carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the entity including those that would threaten its business model future performance solvency or liquidity the directors statement set out on page 18 in the financial statements about whether they considered it appropriate to adopt the going concern basis of accounting in preparing them and their identification of any material uncertainties to the entitys ability to continue to do so over a period of at least twelve months from the date of approval of the financial statements whether the directors statement in relation to going concern required under the Listing Rules in accordance with Listing Rule 9.8.6R3 is materially inconsistent with our knowledge obtained in the audit or the directors explanation set out on page 18 in the annual report as to how they have assessed the prospects of the entity over what period they have done so and why they consider that period to be appropriate and their statement as to whether they have a reasonable expectation that the entity will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the period of their assessment including any related disclosures drawing attention to any necessary qualifications or assumptions.
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT TO THE MEMBERS OF COMMUNISIS PLC FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 Financial Statements 67 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 OVERVIEW OF OUR AUDIT APPROACH Key audit matters  Revenue recognition Carrying value of goodwill Audit scope  We performed an audit of the complete financial information of 5 components and audit procedures on specific balances for the remaining 17 components.
The components where we performed full or specific audit procedures accounted for 99.5% of profit before tax adjusted for exceptional items 99.5% of Revenue and 99% of Total assets.
Materiality  Overall Group materiality of 0.8m which represents 5% of profit before tax adjusted for exceptional items.
Exceptional items are defined in note 5.4 to the Annual Report and Financial Statements KEY AUDIT MATTERS Key audit matters are those matters that in our professional judgement were of most significance in our audit of the financial statements of the current period and include the most significant assessed risks of material misstatement whether or not due to fraud that we identified.
These matters included those which had the greatest effect on the overall audit strategy the allocation of resources in the audit and directing the efforts of the engagement team.
These matters were addressed in the context of our audit of the financial statements as a whole and in our opinion thereon and we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters.
Risk Our response to the risk Key observations communicated to the Audit Committee Revenue recognition Refer to the Audit Committee Report pages 42 and 43 and Notes 2 and 4 of the Group financial statements The Group has reported revenues of 375.9m 2016 361.9m.
We identified 4 specific risks of fraud and error in respect of improper revenue recognition given the nature of the Groups products and services as follows Inappropriate cutoff of revenue Inappropriate accounting for complex contractual arrangements Inappropriate accrual or deferral of income Management bias or override of controls.
There is no change in the risk profile in the current year.
At each full and specific scope audit location with significant revenue streams We performed walkthroughs of each significant class of revenue transactions and assessed the design effectiveness of key controls.
For revenue recognised close to the period end we vouched all transactions above our testing threshold to documentation supporting recognition of revenue.
For revenue accrued but unbilled at the period end we vouched all transactions above our testing threshold to documentation supporting recognition of revenue on a stage of completion basis.
We have performed audit procedures over a sample of complex contractual arrangements and assessed whether the revenue recognition policies adopted were appropriate and consistently applied.
We performed other substantive transactional testing and analytical procedures to assess the recognition of revenue throughout the year.
Where practicable at 9 components we performed testing over full populations of transactions using data analysis.
For revenue recorded through journal entries outside of normal business processes we performed testing on a sample basis to establish whether a service had been provided or a sale had occurred in the financial year to support the revenue recognised We also considered the adequacy of the Groups disclosure of accounting policies for revenue recognition in notes 2 and 4 to the financial statements respectively.
At each full and specific scope audit location with significant revenue streams 12 components we performed audit procedures which covered 99.5% of the Groups revenue.
All procedures were performed by the primary team Based on the procedures performed we did not identify any evidence of material misstatement in the revenue recognised in the year or revenue deferred at 31 December 2017.
Financial Statements 68 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT TO THE MEMBERS OF COMMUNISIS PLC CONTINUED FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 KEY AUDIT MATTERS CONTINUED Risk Our response to the risk Key observations communicated to the Audit Committee Carrying value of goodwill Refer to the Audit Committee Report pages 42 and 43 and Notes 2 and 12 of the Group financial statements We focused on this area due the size of the goodwill balance 164m 2016 164m and because the directors assessment of value in use of the Groups Cash Generating Units CGUs involves assumptions about the future performance of the business and the discount rates applied to future cash flow forecasts.
We consider there to be a fraud risk due to the significance of the carrying value of goodwill the inherent judgements involved and recent trading challenges in some jurisdictions where the Group operates making the estimate susceptible to override by management.
There is no change in the risk profile in the current year.
We challenged managements assumptions used in its impairment models for assessing the recoverability of the carrying value of goodwill.
We focused on the appropriateness of CGU identification the method applied to estimate recoverable values discount rates and forecast cash flows.
Specifically
We assessed the design effectiveness of internal financial controls over managements budgeting process and their assessment and measurement of impairment.
We have confirmed that the CGUs identified are the lowest level at which management monitors goodwill.
We tested the method applied in the value in use calculation as compared to the requirements of IAS 36 Impairment of Assets and the mathematical accuracy and integrity of managements model.
We obtained an understanding of and assessed the basis for key underlying assumptions for the 2018 budget.
We have confirmed that the cash flow forecasts used in the valuation are consistent with information approved by the Board and have reviewed the historical accuracy of managements forecasts.
We challenged management on its cash flow forecasts and the implied growth rates for 2018 and beyond by considering evidence available to support these assumptions and their consistency with findings from other areas of our audit.
The discount rates and long term growth rates applied within the model were assessed in conjunction with EY valuation specialists including comparison to economic and industry forecasts where appropriate.
For both CGUs we performed sensitivity analyses by stress testing key assumptions in the model with downside scenarios to understand the parameters that should they arise could lead to a different conclusion in respect of the carrying value of goodwill.
We considered the appropriateness of the related disclosures provided in note 12 in the Group financial statements.
The entire goodwill balance was subject to full scope audit procedures.
Based on the results of our work we agree with managements conclusion that no impairment of goodwill is required in the current year.
We agree with managements assessment of the reasonably possible changes in key assumptions that would result in an impairment in any Cash Generating Unit and the disclosure given in note 12 to the financial statements.
In the prior year our auditors report included a key audit matter in relation to Accounting for a change in segments.
As the reportable segments have not changed in 2017 this has not been included this year.
Financial Statements 69 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 AN OVERVIEW OF THE SCOPE OF OUR AUDIT TAILORING THE SCOPE Our assessment of audit risk our evaluation of materiality and our allocation of performance materiality determine our audit scope for each entity within the Group.
Taken together this enables us to form an opinion on the consolidated financial statements.
We take into account size risk profile the organisation of the Group and effectiveness of Groupwide controls changes in the business environment and other factors such as recent Internal audit results when assessing the level of work to be performed at each entity.
In assessing the risk of material misstatement to the Group financial statements and to ensure we had adequate quantitative coverage of significant accounts in the financial statements of the 22 reporting components of the Group we selected 12 components covering entities within Europe which represent the principal business units within the Group.
Of the 12 components selected we performed an audit of the complete financial information of 5 components full scope components which were selected based on their size or risk characteristics.
For the remaining 7 components specific scope components we performed audit procedures on specific accounts within that component that we considered had the potential for the greatest impact on the significant accounts in the financial statements either because of the size of these accounts or their risk profile.
The reporting components where we performed audit procedures accounted for 100% 2016 100% of the Groups Profit before tax adjusted for exceptional items 100% 2016 100% of the Groups Revenue and 100% 2016 100% of the Groups Total assets.
For the current year the full scope components contributed 95% 2016 96% of the Groups Profit before tax adjusted for exceptional items 94% 2016 94% of the Groups Revenue and 94% 2016 94% of the Groups Total assets.
The specific scope components contributed 4% 2016 4% of the Groups Profit before tax adjusted for exceptional items 5% 2016 6% of the Groups Revenue and 5% 2016 5% of the Groups Total assets.
The audit scope of these components may not have included testing of all significant accounts of the component but will have contributed to the coverage of significant accounts tested for the Group.
Of the remaining 10 components that together represent 1% of the Groups Profit before tax adjusted for exceptional items none are individually greater than 1% of the Groups Profit before tax adjusted for exceptional items.
For these components we performed other procedures including analytical review testing of consolidation journals and intercompany eliminations to respond to any potential risks of material misstatement to the Group financial statements.
The charts below illustrate the coverage obtained from the work performed by the audit team.
5% 4% 5% 94% 1% 95% 1% 94% 1%
PBT
0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% Total assets Full Specific Review CHANGES FROM THE PRIOR YEAR There have been no changes to the scope compared to the prior year.
INVOLVEMENT WITH COMPONENT TEAMS In establishing our overall approach to the Group audit we determined the type of work that needed to be undertaken at each of the components by us as the primary audit team.
All audit work performed for the purposes of the audit of the Group Financial Statements was undertaken by the primary audit team.
Financial Statements 70 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT TO THE MEMBERS OF COMMUNISIS PLC CONTINUED FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 OUR APPLICATION OF MATERIALITY We apply the concept of materiality in planning and performing the audit in evaluating the effect of identified misstatements on the audit and in forming our audit opinion.
MATERIALITY
The magnitude of an omission or misstatement that individually or in the aggregate could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of the users of the financial statements.
Materiality provides a basis for determining the nature and extent of our audit procedures.
We determined materiality for the Group to be 800000 2016 780000 which is 5% 2016 5% of the Groups adjusted profit before tax.
We believe that adjusted profit before tax provides us with a consistent year on year basis for determining materiality and is the most relevant performance measure to the stakeholders of the entity.
Nonrecurring items are set out in Note 5.4 of the Groups financial statements.
We determined materiality for the Parent Company to be 1.7 million 2016 1.5 million which is 2% 2016 2% of net assets.
This is higher than Group materiality of 800000 however for the purpose of the Group audit we performed our work using allocated performance materiality of 120000.
STARTING BASIS Profit before tax 14.4m
Adjustment for non recurring items Exceptional items of 2.1m
Profit before tax adjusted for exceptional items of 16.5m Materiality of 800000 5% of materiality basis During the course of our audit we reassessed initial materiality and the only change in the final materiality from our original assessment at planning was to reflect the actual reported performance of the Group in the year.
PERFORMANCE MATERIALITY The application of materiality at the individual account or balance level.
It is set at an amount to reduce to an appropriately low level the probability that the aggregate of uncorrected and undetected misstatements exceeds materiality.
On the basis of our risk assessments together with our assessment of the Groups overall control environment our judgement was that performance materiality was 50% 2016 75% of our planning materiality namely 400000 2016 580000.
We have set performance materiality at this percentage to ensure that uncorrected and undetected misstatements in all accounts do not exceed our materiality level.
We have set performance materiality at this percentage due to our past experience of the audit that indicate a higher risk of misstatements both corrected and uncorrected.
Audit work at component locations for the purpose of obtaining audit coverage over significant financial statement accounts is undertaken based on a percentage of total performance materiality.
The performance materiality set for each component is based on the relative scale and risk of the component to the Group as a whole and our assessment of the risk of misstatement at that component.
In the current year the range of performance materiality allocated to full and specific scope components was 80000 to 240000 2016 117000 to 350000.
REPORTING THRESHOLD An amount below which identified misstatements are considered as being clearly trivial.
We agreed with the Audit Committee that we would report to them all uncorrected audit differences in excess of 40000 2016 39000 which is set at 5% of planning materiality as well as differences below that threshold that in our view warranted reporting on qualitative grounds.
We evaluate any uncorrected misstatements against both the quantitative measures of materiality discussed above and in light of other relevant qualitative considerations in forming our opinion.
Financial Statements 71 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 OTHER INFORMATION The other information comprises the information included in the annual report set out on pages 1 to 65 other than the financial statements and our auditors report thereon.
The directors are responsible for the other information.
Our opinion on the financial statements does not cover the other information and except to the extent otherwise explicitly stated in this report we do not express any form of assurance conclusion thereon.
In connection with our audit of the financial statements our responsibility is to read the other information and in doing so consider whether the other information is materially inconsistent with the financial statements or our knowledge obtained in the audit or otherwise appears to be materially misstated.
If we identify such material inconsistencies or apparent material misstatements we are required to determine whether there is a material misstatement in the financial statements or a material misstatement of the other information.
If based on the work we have performed we conclude that there is a material misstatement of the other information we are required to report that fact.
We have nothing to report in this regard.
In this context we also have nothing to report in regard to our responsibility to specifically address the following items in the other information and to report as uncorrected material misstatements of the other information where we conclude that those items meet the following conditions Fair balanced and understandable set out on page 65  the statement given by the Directors that they consider the annual report and financial statements taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Groups performance business model and strategy is materially inconsistent with our knowledge obtained in the audit or Audit committee report set out on page 42  the section describing the work of the audit committee does not appropriately address matters communicated by us to the audit committee or Directors statement of compliance with the UK Corporate Governance Code set out on page 36  the parts of the directors statement required under the Listing Rules relating to the companys compliance with the UK Corporate Governance Code containing provisions specified for review by the auditor in accordance with Listing Rule 9.8.10R2 do not properly disclose a departure from a relevant provision of the UK Corporate Governance Code.
OPINIONS ON OTHER MATTERS PRESCRIBED BY THE COMPANIES ACT 2006 In our opinion the part of the directors remuneration report to be audited has been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 2006.
In our opinion based on the work undertaken in the course of the audit the information given in the strategic report and the directors report for the financial year for which the financial statements are prepared is consistent with the financial statements and the strategic report and the directors report have been prepared in accordance with applicable legal requirements.
MATTERS ON WHICH WE ARE REQUIRED TO REPORT BY EXCEPTION In the light of the knowledge and understanding of the Group and the parent company and its environment obtained in the course of the audit we have not identified material misstatements in the strategic report or the directors report.
We have nothing to report in respect of the following matters in relation to which the Companies Act 2006 requires us to report to you if in our opinion adequate accounting records have not been kept by the parent company or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or the parent company financial statements and the part of the Directors Remuneration Report to be audited are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns or certain disclosures of directors remuneration specified by law are not made or we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit.
Financial Statements 72 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT TO THE MEMBERS OF COMMUNISIS PLC CONTINUED FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 RESPONSIBILITIES OF DIRECTORS As explained more fully in the directors responsibilities statement set out on pages 64 and 65 the directors are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements and for being satisfied that they give a true and fair view and for such internal control as the directors determine is necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error.
In preparing the financial statements the directors are responsible for assessing the Group and parent companys ability to continue as a going concern disclosing as applicable matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless the directors either intend to liquidate the Group or the parent company or to cease operations or have no realistic alternative but to do so.
AUDITORS RESPONSIBILITIES FOR THE AUDIT OF THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error and to issue an auditors report that includes our opinion.
Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with ISAs UK will always detect a material misstatement when it exists.
Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if individually or in the aggregate they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these financial statements.
EXPLANATION AS TO WHAT EXTENT THE AUDIT WAS CONSIDERED CAPABLE OF DETECTING IRREGULARITIES INCLUDING FRAUD The objectives of our audit in respect to fraud are to identify and assess the risks of material misstatement of the financial statements due to fraud to obtain sufficient appropriate audit evidence regarding the assessed risks of material misstatement due to fraud through designing and implementing appropriate responses and to respond appropriately to fraud or suspected fraud identified during the audit.
However the primary responsibility for the prevention and detection of fraud rests with both those charged with governance of the entity and management.
Our approach was as follows We obtained an understanding of the legal and regulatory frameworks that are applicable to the Group and determined that the most significant frameworks which are directly relevant to specific assertions in the financial statements are those that relate to the reporting framework IFRS FRS 101 the Companies Act 2006 and UK Corporate Governance Code and the relevant tax compliance regulations in the jurisdictions in which the Group operates.
We understood how Communisis plc is complying with those frameworks by making enquiries of management Internal Audit those responsible for legal and compliance procedures and the Company Secretary.
We corroborated our enquiries through our review of board minutes and papers provided to the Audit Committee.
We assessed the susceptibility of the Groups financial statements to material misstatement including how fraud might occur by meeting with management from various parts of the business to understand where it considered there was a susceptibility to fraud.
We also considered performance targets and their propensity to influence efforts made by management to manage earnings.
We considered the programmes and controls that the Group has established to address risks identified or that otherwise prevent deter and detect fraud and how senior management monitors those programmes and controls.
Where the risk was considered to be higher we performed audit procedures to address each identified fraud risk.
These procedures included testing manual journals and were designed to provide reasonable assurance that the financial statements were free from fraud and error.
Based on this understanding we designed our audit procedures to identify noncompliance with such laws and regulations identified in the paragraphs above.
Our procedures involved journal entry testing with a focus on manual consolidation journals and journals indicating large or unusual transactions based on our understanding of the business enquiries of Legal Counsel Group management Internal Audit subsidiary Management at all full and specific scope components and focused testing as referred to in the key audit matters section above.
In addition we completed procedures to conclude on the compliance of the disclosures in the Annual Report and Accounts with the requirements of the relevant accounting standards UK legislation and the UK Corporate Governance Code 2016.
A further description of our responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements is located on the Financial Reporting Councils website at httpswww. rc. iteauditorsresponsibilities.
This description forms part of our auditors report.
Financial Statements 73 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 OTHER MATTERS WE ARE REQUIRED TO ADDRESS We were appointed by the company on 11 October 2002 to audit the financial statements for the year ending 31 December 2002 and subsequent financial periods.
The period of total uninterrupted engagement including previous renewals and reappointments is 16 years covering the years ending 2002 to 2017.
The nonaudit services prohibited by the FRCs Ethical Standard were not provided to the Group or the parent company and we remain independent of the Group and the parent company in conducting the audit.
The audit opinion is consistent with the additional report to the audit committee.
Mark Morritt Senior statutory auditor for and on behalf of Ernst and Young LLP Statutory Auditor
8 March 2018
The maintenance and integrity of the Communisis plc website is the responsibility of the directors the work carried out by the auditors does not involve consideration of these matters and accordingly the auditors accept no responsibility for any changes that may have occurred to the financial statements since they were initially presented on the website.
Legislation in the United Kingdom governing the preparation and dissemination of financial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
Financial Statements 74 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statementstel
Before amortisation of acquired intangibles and exceptional items
Note 5.4 T otal
Amortisation of acquired intangibles and exceptional items Note 5.4 T otal Revenue 4 375865  375865 361932  361932 Changes in inventories of finished goods and work in progress 22  22 291  291 Raw materials and consumables used 197551  197551 191210  191210 Employee benefits expense 5.3 91597 1570 93167 95094 3525 98619 Other operating expenses 56914 482 57396 45921 742 46663 Depreciation and amortisation expense 8663 733 9396 9945 809 10754 Profit from operations 21162 2785 18377 19471 5076 14395 Finance revenue 4 1  1 963  963 Finance costs 5.1 3943  3943 3765  3765 Profit before taxation 17220 2785 14435 16669 5076 11593 Income tax expense 6 3249 586 2663 3956 990 2966 Profit for the year attributable to equity holders of the parent 13971 2199 11772 12713 4086 8627 Earnings per share 8 On profit for the year attributable to equity holders and from continuing operations basic 6.40p 5.64p 6.08p 4.12p diluted 6.37p 5.61p 6.07p 4.12p Dividend per share paid during the year 2.50p 2.29p proposed 1.77p 1.61p Dividends paid and proposed during the year were 5.2m and 3.7m respectively 2016 4.8m and 3.4m respectively.
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these Consolidated Financial Statements.
All income and expenses relate to continuing operations.
CONSOLIDATED INCOME STATEMENT FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 Financial Statements 75 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017
Profit for the year 11772 8627 Other comprehensive incomeloss to be reclassified to profit or loss in subsequent years Exchange differences on translation of foreign operations 19 415 1129 Gainloss on cash flow hedges taken directly to equity 134 29 Income tax thereon 6 23 3 Items not to be reclassified to profit or loss in subsequent years Adjustments in respect of prior years due to change in tax rate 6 824 411 Actuarial gainslosses on defined benefit pension plans 14 14805 15972 Income tax thereon 6 2517 2715 Other comprehensive incomeloss for the year net of tax 13638 12565 T otal comprehensive incomeloss for the year net of tax 25410 3938 Attributable to Equity holders of the parent 25410 3938 The accompanying notes are an integral part of these Consolidated Financial Statements.
Financial Statements 76 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
Assets
Noncurrent assets Property plant and equipment 10 19296 21638 Intangible assets 11 186124 187903 Trade and other receivables 16 1966 821 Deferred tax assets 6 4636 6406 212022 216768 Current assets Inventories 15 7756 6968 Trade and other receivables 16 77375 66203 Cash and cash equivalents 18 30182 38294 115313 111465 T otal assets 327335 328233 Equity and liabilities Equity attributable to the equity holders of the parent Equity share capital 19 52405 52344 Share premium 19 75 Merger reserve 19 519 519 ESOP reserve 19 163 297 Cumulative translation adjustment 19 742 327 Retained earnings 85558 65322 T otal equity 139136 118215 Noncurrent liabilities Interestbearing loans and borrowings 20 53604 58751 Trade and other payables 22 951 1511 Provisions 21 42 42 Financial liabilities 23  228 Retirement benefit obligations 14 38217 55479 92814 116011 Current liabilities Interestbearing loans and borrowings 20 884 614 Trade and other payables 22 92993 90968 Income tax payable 1414 2210 Provisions 21  215 Financial liabilities 23 94 95385 94007 T otal liabilities 188199 210018 T otal equity and liabilities 327335 328233 The Consolidated Financial Statements on pages 74 to 115 were approved by the Board on 8 March 2018 and signed on its behalf by Andy Blundell Steve Rawlins
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these Consolidated Financial Statements.
CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEET 31 DECEMBER 2017 Financial Statements 77 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
Cash flows from operating activities Cash generated from operations 30 22624 22909 Interest paid 1800 2065 Interest received 1 18 Income tax paid 3419 2250 Net cash flows from operating activities 17406 18612 Cash flows from investing activities Acquisition of subsidiary undertakings net of cash acquired  252 Purchase of property plant and equipment 1559 3225 Purchase of intangible assets 4364 3808 Proceeds from the sale of property plant and equipment 283 118 Net cash flows from investing activities 5640 7167 Cash flows from financing activities Share issues net of directly attributable expenses 136 49 Purchase of shares  442 New borrowings under old loan facility 5000 5000 Repayment of borrowings under old loan facility 63000 8000 New loan facility 63000 Repayment of borrowings under new loan facility 10000 Repayment of promissory loan note in respect of acquisition of subsidiary undertakings 7 9300 Debt arrangement fees 657 Dividends paid 9 5222 4773 Net cash flows from financing activities 20043 8166 Net decreaseincrease in cash and cash equivalents 8277 3279 Cash and cash equivalents at 1 January 38294 32719 Exchange rate effects 165 2296 Cash and cash equivalents at 31 December 18 30182 38294 The accompanying notes are an integral part of these Consolidated Financial Statements.
CONSOLIDATED CASH FLOW STATEMENT FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 Financial Statements 78 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
Share premium
Merger reserve
Capital redemption reserve
Retained earnings T otal equity At 1 January 2016 52302 5986  15600 10 1375 802 52363 126814 Profit for the year        8627 8627 Other comprehensive loss       1129 13694 12565 T otal comprehensive loss       1129 5067 3938 Employee share option schemes value of services provided        505 505 Shares issued  exercise of options 42 10      3 49 Shares issued from ESOP     155   155 Purchase of own shares     442    442 Issue of capital reduction shares   15081 15081 Capital reduction  5996 15081   1375  22452 Dividends paid        4773 4773 At 31 December 2016 52344   519 297  327 65322 118215 Profit for the year        11772 11772 Other comprehensive income       415 13223 13638 T otal comprehensive income       415 24995 25410 Employee share option schemes value of services provided        597 597 Shares issued  exercise of options 61 75       136 Shares issued from ESOP     134   134 Dividends paid        5222 5222 At 31 December 2017 52405 75  519 163  742 85558 139136 The accompanying notes are an integral part of these Consolidated Financial Statements.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 Financial Statements 79 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 AUTHORISATION OF FINANCIAL STATEMENTS The Consolidated Financial Statements of Communisis plc the Group for the year ended 31 December 2017 were authorised for issue in accordance with a resolution of the Directors on 8 March 2018.
Communisis plc is a public limited company incorporated and domiciled in England and Wales whose shares are traded on the London Stock Exchange.
The registered office is located at Communisis House Manston Lane Leeds LS15 8AH.
The nature of the Groups operations and its principal activities are set out in the Chief Executives Statement on pages 12 to 15.
ACCOUNTING POLICIES 2.1 BASIS OF PREPARATION The Consolidated Financial Statements of Communisis plc are for the year ended 31 December 2017.
They have been prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS as adopted by the European Union.
The Consolidated Financial Statements are presented in Sterling and all values are rounded to the nearest thousand British pounds 000 except where otherwise indicated.
New standards and interpretations There are no IFRS or IFRIC IFRS Interpretations Committee of the IASB interpretations effective for the first time this financial year that have had a material impact on the Group.
The Group has not early adopted any standards interpretations or amendments that have been issued but are not yet effective.
2.2 BASIS OF CONSOLIDATION The Consolidated Financial Statements comprise the Financial Statements of Communisis plc and its subsidiaries as at 31 December each year.
The results of subsidiaries prepared for the same reporting year as the parent company are included in these Consolidated Financial Statements using consistent accounting policies.
All intragroup balances and transactions including unrealised profits arising from intragroup transactions have been eliminated in full.
Subsidiaries are fully consolidated from the date on which control is transferred to the Group and cease to be consolidated from the date on which control is transferred out of the Group.
Where there is a change of control of a subsidiary the Consolidated Financial Statements include the results for the part of the reporting year during which Communisis plc has control.
2.3 SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING JUDGEMENTS AND ESTIMATES The key judgements and assumptions concerning the future and other key sources of estimation uncertainty at the Balance Sheet date that have a significant risk of causing a material adjustment to the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities within the next financial year are discussed below.
Judgements
Exceptionals
The Group presents separately on the face of the Income Statement material items of income and expense which because of the nature and expected infrequency of the events giving rise to them merit separate presentation to allow shareholders to understand better the elements of financial performance in the year.
An element of management judgement is required in identifying these exceptional items.
Additional information is included in Note 5.4.
Development costs Expenditure on a development project such as computer software which is reliably measurable is capitalised when the technical feasibility and commercial viability of the project is demonstrated.
The Group must intend to and have available the resources to complete the project and be satisfied that the intangible asset arising from the development project will generate probable future economic benefits.
An element of management judgement is required when distinguishing between the research and development phases of a project.
Additional information is included in Note 5.3.
Estimates
Impairment of goodwill The Group determines whether goodwill is impaired on at least an annual basis.
This requires an estimation of the value in use of the cashgenerating units to which the goodwill is allocated.
Estimating the value in use requires the Group to make an estimate of the expected future cash flows from the cashgenerating unit and also to choose a suitable discount rate in order to calculate the present value of those cash flows.
The carrying amount of goodwill at 31 December 2017 was 164m 2016 164m.
Additional information is included in Note 12.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 Financial Statements 80 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED 2.3 SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING JUDGEMENTS AND ESTIMATES CONTINUED
The actuarial valuation involves making assumptions about mortality rates and future pension increases.
Due to the longterm nature of these plans such estimates are subject to significant uncertainty.
Discount rates are based on interest rates of AA rated corporate bonds that have terms of maturity approximating to the terms of the relevant pension liability.
Additional information is included in Note 14.
Revenue recognition Revenue from the delivery of client projects is recognised by reference to the stage of completion.
This is more commonly seen within the agency businesses.
Stage of completion is estimated using an appropriate measure according to the nature of the contract such as costs incurred relative to total anticipated costs.
Where the financial outcome of a project cannot be reliably measured revenue is only recognised to the extent that the expenses recognised are recoverable.
2.4 SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES Foreign currency transactions Transactions in foreign currencies are recorded in the functional currency at the rate ruling at the date of the transaction.
Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are retranslated at the rate of exchange ruling at the Balance Sheet date and exchange differences arising are recognised in the Income Statement.
The functional currencies of the overseas subsidiaries include the Euro the Indian Rupee the Swedish Krona the Swiss Franc the Turkish Lira the Polish Zloty the Romanian Leu the United Arab Emirates Dirham and the United States Dollar.
The assets and liabilities of these overseas subsidiaries are translated into Sterling at the rate of exchange ruling at the Balance Sheet date and their Income Statements are translated at the weighted average exchange rates for the year where this is a reasonable approximation to actual translation rates.
The exchange differences arising on the retranslation are taken directly to a separate component of equity described as the cumulative translation adjustment.
On disposal of a foreign entity the cumulative amount recognised in equity relating to that particular foreign operation is recognised in the Income Statement.
Property plant and equipment Property plant and equipment is stated at cost less accumulated depreciation and accumulated impairment in value.
Land is not depreciated.
Depreciation is calculated on a straightline basis over the estimated useful life of the asset as follows Freehold property 25 to 50 years Long leasehold property 25 to 50 years Short leasehold property 5 to 20 years Plant equipment and motor vehicles 3 to 20 years The carrying values of property plant and equipment are reviewed for impairment when events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value may not be recoverable.
If any such indication exists and where the carrying values exceed the estimated recoverable amount the assets are written down to their recoverable amount.
The recoverable amount of property plant and equipment is the greater of fair value less costs to sell and value in use.
In assessing value in use the estimated future cash flows are discounted to their present value using a pretax discount rate that reflects current market assessments of the time value of money and the risks specific to the asset.
Useful economic lives depreciation methods and residual values are reviewed annually.
For an asset that does not generate largely independent cash inflows the recoverable amount is determined for the cashgenerating unit to which the asset belongs.
Impairment losses are recognised in the Income Statement.
Business combinations Business combinations are accounted for using the acquisition method.
The cost of an acquisition is measured as the aggregate of the consideration transferred measured at acquisition date fair value.
Acquisition costs incurred are expensed and included in exceptional items.
When the Group acquires a business it assesses the financial assets and liabilities assumed for appropriate classification and designation in accordance with the contractual terms economic circumstances and pertinent conditions as at the acquisition date.
Assets acquired and liabilities assumed in transactions separate to the business combinations such as the settlement of preexisting relationships or postacquisition remuneration arrangements are accounted for separately from the business combination in accordance with their nature and applicable IFRSs.
Any contingent consideration to be transferred by the acquirer will be recognised at fair value at the acquisition date.
Subsequent changes to the fair value of the contingent consideration which is deemed to be an asset or a liability will be recognised in accordance with IAS 39 either in profit or loss or as a change to other comprehensive income.
If the contingent consideration is classed as equity it is not remeasured until it is finally settled within equity.
Financial Statements 81 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED 2.4 SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED
Goodwill on acquisitions is initially measured at cost being the excess of the cost of the business combination over the acquirers interest in the net fair value of the identifiable assets liabilities and contingent liabilities.
Following initial recognition goodwill is measured at cost less any accumulated impairment losses.
Goodwill is not amortised.
Goodwill is reviewed for impairment annually or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that its carrying value may be impaired.
Goodwill is allocated to the related cashgenerating units monitored by management for the purpose of impairment testing.
Where goodwill has been allocated to a cashgenerating unit or group of cashgenerating units and an operation within that unit or group of units is disposed of the goodwill associated with the operation disposed of is included in the carrying amount of the operation when determining the gain or loss on disposal of the operation.
Goodwill disposed of in this circumstance is measured based on the relative values of the operations disposed of and the portion of the cashgenerating unit or group of units retained.
Intangible assets Intangible assets are carried at cost less accumulated amortisation and accumulated impairment losses.
Intangible assets created within the business are not capitalised unless the specific conditions in IAS 38 are met and expenditure is charged to the Income Statement in the year in which the expenditure is incurred.
Intangible assets arising from a business combination are capitalised at fair value at the date of acquisition where they can be measured reliably.
Following initial recognition the cost model is applied to the class of intangible assets.
Amortisation charged on assets is recognised in amortisation expense in the Income Statement over the expected life of the asset.
Intangible assets currently recognised are being amortised over a period of between five and ten years.
Amounts paid to secure customer contracts are capitalised and amortised over the length of the contract.
An impairment review is carried out when events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable.
Research costs are expensed as incurred.
Expenditure on a development project such as computer software which is reliably measurable is capitalised when the technical feasibility and commercial viability of the project is demonstrated.
The Group must intend to and have available the resources to complete the project and be satisfied that the intangible asset arising from the development project will generate probable future economic benefits.
Following the initial recognition of the development expenditure the cost model is applied requiring the asset to be carried at cost less any accumulated amortisation and accumulated impairment losses.
Any expenditure carried forward is amortised over the period of expected future sales from the related project from the date the asset is available for use.
The carrying value of development costs is reviewed when there is an indicator of impairment.
In addition it is reviewed annually when the asset is not yet in use.
Acquired computer software and licences are capitalised.
These costs are amortised over their estimated useful lives three to eight years.
Costs associated with maintaining computer software programs are recognised as an expense as incurred.
Costs that are directly associated with the production of identifiable and unique software products controlled by the Group and that will generate probable economic benefits exceeding costs beyond one year are recognised as intangible assets.
Direct costs include the costs of software development employees.
These costs are amortised over their estimated useful lives three to eight years.
Useful lives are also examined on an annual basis and adjustments where applicable are made on a prospective basis.
Inventories
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost and net realisable value.
Raw materials are stated at purchase cost on a firstin firstout basis.
For finished goods and work in progress costs include directly attributable material and labour costs and certain overhead costs that contribute in bringing the inventories to their present location and condition.
Selling expenses and other administrative overhead expenses are excluded.
Net realisable value is the estimated selling price in the ordinary course of business less estimated costs of completion and the estimated costs necessary to make the sale.
Provision is made for items of stock that are damaged obsolete or slow moving.
Financial Statements 82 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED 2.4 SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED Trade and other receivables Trade and other receivables are recognised and carried at original invoice amount less an allowance for any uncollectable amounts.
An estimate for doubtful debts is made.
Bad debts are written off when identified.
Impairment of assets At each reporting date the Group assesses whether there is any indication that an asset may be impaired.
Where an indicator of impairment exists the Group makes a formal estimate of recoverable amount.
Where the carrying amount of an asset exceeds its recoverable amount the asset is considered impaired and is written down to its recoverable amount.
Recoverable amount is the higher of an asset or cashgenerating units fair value less costs to sell and its value in use.
Recoverable amount is determined for an individual asset unless the asset does not generate cash inflows that are largely independent of those from other assets or groups of assets in which case impairment is determined at the cashgenerating unit level.
The carrying amounts of the cashgenerating units to which goodwill is allocated and intangible assets not yet available for use are reviewed annually or more frequently when there is an indication of impairment.
Value in use is determined by the estimated future pretax cash flows discounted to their present values using a pretax discount rate that reflects current market assessments of the time value of money and the risk specific to the asset.
Cash and cash equivalents Cash and cash equivalents in the Consolidated Balance Sheet comprise cash at bank and in hand and shortterm deposits with an original maturity of three months or less.
For the purpose of the Consolidated Cash Flow Statement cash and cash equivalents are as defined above net of outstanding bank overdrafts.
Trade and other payables Trade and other payables are recognised and carried at original invoice amount.
Financial instruments Financial assets and financial liabilities are recognised in the Consolidated Balance Sheet when the Group becomes a party to the contractual provisions of the instrument.
Financial liabilities The Groups financial liabilities include borrowings and trade and other payables which are all classified as other financial liabilities.
Other financial liabilities are initially measured at fair value net of transaction costs.
Other financial liabilities are subsequently measured at amortised cost using the effective interest method with interest expense recognised on an effective yield basis.
The effective interest method is a method of calculating the amortised cost of a financial liability and of allocating interest expense over the relevant period.
The effective interest rate is the rate that exactly discounts estimated future cash payments through the expected life of the financial liability or where appropriate a shorter period.
Derecognition of financial liabilities The Group derecognises financial liabilities when and only when the Groups obligations are discharged cancelled or they expire.
Derivative financial instruments and hedge accounting Initial recognition and subsequent measurement The Group uses derivative financial instruments such as forward currency contracts and interest rate swaps to hedge its foreign currency and interest rate risks respectively.
Such derivative financial instruments are initially recognised at fair value on the date on which a derivative contract is entered into and are subsequently remeasured at fair value.
Derivatives are carried as financial assets when the fair value is positive and as financial liabilities when the fair value is negative.
Any gains or losses arising from changes in fair value on derivatives during the year that do not qualify for hedge accounting and the ineffective portion of an effective hedge are taken directly to the Income Statement.
The fair value of forward currency contracts is the difference between the forward exchange rate and the contract rate.
The forward exchange rate is referenced to current forward exchange rates for contracts with similar maturity profiles.
The fair value of interest rate swaps is the difference between the fixed rate and the onemonth LIBOR rate implied at the Balance Sheet date calculated monthly and discounted to present value.
For the purpose of hedge accounting hedges are classified as cash flow hedges when hedging exposure to variability in cash flows which is either attributable to a particular risk associated with a recognised asset or liability or a highly probable forecast transaction or when hedging the foreign currency risk in an unrecognised firm commitment.
Financial Statements 83 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED 2.4 SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED Derivative financial instruments and hedge accounting continued Initial recognition and subsequent measurement continued For those derivatives designated as hedges and for which hedge accounting is desired the hedging relationship is formally designated and documented at its inception.
This documentation identifies the risk management objective and strategy for undertaking the hedge the hedging instrument the hedged item or transaction the nature of the risk being hedged and how effectiveness will be measured throughout its duration.
Such hedges are expected to be highly effective in offsetting changes in fair value or cash flows and are assessed on an ongoing basis to determine that they actually have been highly effective throughout the financial reporting periods for which they were designated.
Cash flow hedges The effective portion of the gain or loss on the hedging instrument is recognised in other comprehensive income while any ineffective portion is recognised immediately in the Income Statement.
Amounts taken to equity are transferred to the Income Statement when the hedged transaction affects profit or loss such as when the hedged financial income or financial expense is recognised or when a forecast sale occurs.
Where the hedged item is the cost of a nonfinancial asset or nonfinancial liability the amounts taken to other comprehensive income are transferred to the initial carrying amount of the nonfinancial asset or liability.
If the forecast transaction or firm commitment is no longer expected to occur amounts previously recognised in equity are transferred to the Income Statement.
If the hedging instrument expires or is sold terminated or exercised without replacement or rollover or if its designation as a hedge is revoked amounts previously recognised in equity remain in other comprehensive income until the forecast transaction or firm commitment occurs.
The Group sometimes uses forward exchange contracts as hedges of its exposure to foreign currency risk in forecasted transactions and firm commitments.
During 2017 and 2016 the Group did not utilise any hedging instruments other than in respect of interest rates as detailed in Note 23.
Provisions
Provisions are recognised when the Group has a present obligation legal or constructive as a result of a past event it is probable that an outflow of resources embodying economic benefits will be required to settle the obligation and a reliable estimate can be made but there is some uncertainty about the timing or the amount of the future expenditure required in settlement.
If the effect of the time value of money is material provisions are determined by discounting the expected future cash flows at a pretax rate that reflects current market assessments of the time value of money and where appropriate the risks specific to the liability.
Where discounting is used the increase in the provision due to the passage of time is recognised as a finance cost.
Pensions and similar obligations Group companies operate defined contribution and defined benefit pension plans.
Payments to the defined contribution pension plans are charged as an expense to the Income Statement as incurred when the related employee service is rendered.
The Group has no further legal or constructive payment obligations once the contributions have been made.
For the defined benefit pension plan the cost of administering the pension scheme is recognised in employee benefits expense in the Income Statement.
The Group determines the net interest incomeexpense on the net defined benefit assetsliabilities for the year by applying the discount rates used to measure the defined benefit obligations at the beginning of the year to the net defined benefit assetsliabilities at the beginning of the year taking into account any changes in the net defined benefit assetsliabilities during the year as a result of contributions and benefit payments.
The liability recognised in the Balance Sheet in respect of the defined benefit pension plan is the present value of the defined benefit obligation at the Balance Sheet date less the fair value of the plan assets.
The defined benefit obligation is calculated annually by independent actuaries.
The present value of the defined benefit obligation is determined by discounting the estimated future cash outflows using interest rates of AA rated corporate bonds that have terms of maturity approximating to the terms of the relevant pension liability.
AA rated corporate bonds are used as the most suitable proxy for calculating the discount rate.
All actuarial gains and losses that arise in calculating the present value of the defined benefit obligation and the fair value of plan assets are recognised in the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income.
When a settlement or a curtailment occurs the obligation and the related plan assets are remeasured using current actuarial assumptions and the resultant gain or loss is recognised in the Income Statement during the period in which the settlement or curtailment occurs.
A settlement is the elimination of all obligations for benefits already accrued and a curtailment is the reduction of future obligations as a result of a material reduction in the scheme membership or a reduction in future entitlement.
Financial Statements 84 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED 2.4 SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED Sharebased payment transactions Certain Directors and management are eligible to participate in sharebased payment schemes all of which are equitysettled.
The cost of equitysettled transactions with employees is measured by reference to their fair value at the date at which they are granted.
The fair value is determined by an external valuer using an appropriate model.
In valuing equitysettled transactions no account is taken of any vesting conditions other than conditions linked to the price of the shares of Communisis plc market conditions.
The cost of equitysettled transactions is recognised together with a corresponding increase in equity over the period in which the performance or service conditions are fulfilled ending on the date on which the relevant employees become fully entitled to the award the vesting date.
The cumulative expense recognised for equitysettled transactions at each reporting date reflects the extent to which the vesting period has expired and the Groups best estimate of the number of equity instruments that will ultimately vest.
No expense is recognised for awards that do not ultimately vest except for awards where vesting or nonvesting is conditional upon a market condition which are treated as vesting irrespective of whether or not the market condition is satisfied provided that all other performance or service conditions are satisfied.
The Group has an employee share ownership plan ESOP for the granting of nontransferable options.
Shares in the Group held by the ESOP are accounted for in the same way as treasury shares and presented in the Balance Sheet as a deduction from equity described as the ESOP reserve.
Where an equitysettled award is cancelled it is treated as if it had vested on the date of cancellation and any cost not yet recognised in the Income Statement for the award is expensed immediately.
This includes any awards where nonvesting conditions within the control of the Group or the employee are not met.
Any compensation paid up to the fair value of the award at the cancellation or settlement date is deducted from equity with any excess over fair value being treated as an expense in the Income Statement.
Where an equitysettled award is forfeited the total cost recognised in the Income Statement to date for the award is reversed.
ESOP reserve Communisis plc shares held by the Group are classified in shareholders equity as the ESOP reserve and are recognised at cost.
Consideration received for the sale of such shares is also recognised in equity with any difference between the proceeds from sale and the original cost being taken to retained earnings.
No gain or loss is recognised in the Income Statement on the purchase sale issue or cancellation of equity shares.
Leases
The determination of whether an arrangement is or contains a lease is based on the substance of the arrangement at the inception date.
The determination considers whether fulfilment of the arrangement is dependent on the use of a specific asset or assets or the arrangement conveys a right to use the assets.
Finance leases which transfer to the Group substantially all the risks and benefits incidental to ownership of the leased item are capitalised at the commencement of the lease at the fair value of the leased asset or if lower at the present value of the minimum lease payments.
Lease payments are apportioned between finance charges and reduction of the lease liability on a straightline basis.
Finance charges are recognised in the Income Statement.
Leased assets are depreciated over the useful life of the asset.
However if there is no reasonable certainty that the Group will obtain ownership by the end of the lease term the asset is depreciated over the shorter of the estimated useful life of the asset and the lease term.
Operating lease payments are recognised as an expense in the Income Statement on a straightline basis over the lease term or in accordance with utilisation of the leased asset when the contract is based on usage.
Revenue
Revenue in the year represents the turnover net of discounts derived from services provided to clients and sales of goods.
Revenue is recognised at the fair value of the consideration received or receivable to the extent that it is probable that the economic benefits will flow to the Group and the revenue can be reliably measured.
The following specific recognition criteria must also be met before revenue is recognised Provision of services The provision of print sourcing services includes the sourcing and supply of printed and other marketing material included within Brand Deployment revenue.
Revenue from such services is recognised when the significant risks and rewards of ownership of the material have passed to the client and the amount of revenue can be measured reliably this is usually on despatch by the supplier.
Revenue from creative data and analysis services included within Customer Experience revenue is recognised when the service has been provided and client acknowledgement of stage completion has been received.
Revenue from campaign management services included within Brand Deployment revenue is recognised when the service has been provided on a time basis which is either a monthly or annual charge or on a management fee basis.
Financial Statements 85 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED 2.4 SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED Revenue continued Provision of services continued Revenue from delivery of client projects is recognised by reference to the stage of completion.
Stage of completion is estimated using an appropriate measure according to the nature of the contract such as costs incurred relative to total anticipated costs or other measures such as contract milestone completion.
Where the project outcome cannot be measured reliably revenue is recognised only to the extent of the expenses recognised that are recoverable.
Revenue from postal sortation services included within Customer Experience revenue is recognised on despatch of the post to the postal carrier.
Revenue from software licences is recognised over the period of the licence.
Sale of goods Revenue is recognised when the significant risks and rewards of ownership of the goods have passed to the buyer and the amount of revenue can be measured reliably this is usually on despatch by the Group.
Interest
Finance revenue is recognised as the interest accrues using the effective interest method which is the rate that exactly discounts estimated future cash receipts through the expected life of the financial instrument to the net carrying amount.
Income from suppliers The Group receives rebates from certain suppliers for transactions that based on the terms of the relevant contracts and local law are either remitted to clients or retained by the Group.
If amounts are passed on to clients they are recorded as liabilities until settled or if retained by the Group are recorded as a reduction to cost of sales as earned.
These rebates are not complex in nature and there is no management judgement in calculating these.
The rebates are typically calculated based on a fixed percentage of purchase value.
Exceptional items The Group presents separately  on the face of the Income Statement those material items of income and expense which because of the nature and expected infrequency of the events giving rise to them merit separate presentation to allow shareholders to understand better the elements of financial performance in the year .
This facilitates comparison with prior periods and to better assess trends in financial performance.
Income tax Current tax Current tax assets and liabilities for the current year are measured at the amount expected to be recovered from or paid to the taxation authorities.
The tax rates and tax laws used to compute the amount are those that are enacted or substantively enacted by the Balance Sheet date.
Deferred tax Deferred income tax is provided using the liability method on all temporary differences at the Balance Sheet date between the tax bases of assets and liabilities and their carrying amounts for financial reporting purposes.
Deferred income tax liabilities are recognised for all taxable temporary differences except in respect of taxable temporary differences associated with investments in subsidiaries where the timing of the reversal of the temporary differences can be controlled and it is probable that the temporary differences will not reverse in the foreseeable future.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are not recognised if the temporary differences arise from the initial recognition of goodwill or from the initial recognition other than in a business combination of other assets and liabilities in a transaction that affects neither the taxable profit nor the accounting profit.
Deferred income tax assets are recognised for all deductible temporary differences carryforward of unused tax assets and unused tax losses to the extent that it is probable that taxable profit will be available against which the deductible temporary differences and the carryforward of unused tax assets and unused tax losses can be utilised.
In respect of deductible temporary differences associated with investments in subsidiaries deferred tax assets are only recognised to the extent that it is probable that the temporary differences will reverse in the foreseeable future and taxable profit will be available against which the temporary differences can be utilised.
The carrying amount of deferred income tax assets is reviewed at each Balance Sheet date and reduced to the extent that it is no longer probable that sufficient taxable profit will be available to allow all or part of the deferred income tax asset to be utilised.
Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are measured at the tax rates that are expected to apply to the year when the asset is realised or the liability is settled based on tax rates and tax laws that have been enacted or substantively enacted at the Balance Sheet date.
Income tax relating to items recognised in other comprehensive income or directly in equity is also recognised in other comprehensive income or directly in equity.
Financial Statements 86 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED 2.4 SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED Sales tax Revenues expenses and assets are recognised net of the amount of sales tax except where the sales tax incurred on a purchase of goods and services is not recoverable from the taxation authority in which case the sales tax is recognised as part of the cost of acquisition of the asset or as part of the expense item as applicable and receivables and payables which are stated with the amount of sales tax included.
The net amount of sales tax recoverable from or payable to the taxation authority is included as part of receivables or payables in the Balance Sheet.
Dividend distribution The final dividend distribution to the Companys shareholders is recognised as a liability in the Groups Financial Statements in the year in which the dividend is approved by the Companys shareholders.
Interim dividends are recognised in the year in which they are paid.
2.5 ADOPTION OF NEW AND REVISED STANDARDS The IASB and IFRIC have issued a number of standards and interpretations with an effective date after 1 January 2018.
With the exception of the new revenue standard IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers effective 1 January 2018 replacing IAS 18 Revenue and the new leases standard IFRS 16 Leases effective 1 January 2019 replacing IAS 17 Leases the Directors do not anticipate that the adoption of these standards and interpretations will have a material impact on the Groups Financial Statements.
IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers The standard replaces IAS 18 Revenue IAS 11 Construction Contracts and related interpretations.
It provides a single comprehensive model to use in accounting for revenue and costs from contracts with customers and includes extensive disclosure requirements.
The core principle is that an entity recognises revenue at an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled to in exchange for transferring the goods or services to a customer.
The principles in IFRS 15 are applied using the fivestep model.
The Group will adopt IFRS 15 using the full retrospective application method and consequently apply the new standard to each reporting period presented i.
2017 in accordance with IAS 8 Accounting Policies Changes in Accounting Estimates and Errors.
As a practical expedient under IFRS 15 the Group will apply the five step approach to portfolios of contracts with similar characteristics as it is not expected that the Financial Statements would materially differ had the standard been applied to the individual contracts within the portfolio.
In addition the following practical expedients will also be taken contracts which are completed at the beginning of the earliest period presented will not be restated contracts that are started and completed in the same annual reporting period will have no impact and therefore will not be restated where contracts are completed but had variable consideration an entity will use the transaction price at the date the contract was completed rather than estimates of the variable consideration in comparative periods contract modifications which occurred before the beginning of the earliest period presented will be reflected in aggregate and for all periods presented before the date of initial application we will not disclose the amount of the transaction price allocated to the remaining performance obligations or an explanation of when we expect to recognise that amount as revenue.
The Group is in the process of finalising the impact on the 2017 results.
At this stage the following areas of change have been identified certain revenue streams within the Customer Experience segment should be treated on an Agent basis under IFRS 15 whereas under IAS 18 these are accounted for on a Principal basis.
As Agent the Group will recognise revenue net i. consideration after deduction of third partys fees when or as the performance obligation is satisfied.
An adjustment to both revenue and costs is therefore required when restating the 2017 comparatives in accordance with IFRS 15.
This will not affect profit however margins will be improved due to the lower revenue figures and the profile of transition revenue relating to the integration of new contracts into Communisis is likely to change under IFRS 15.
The extent of this change will vary between contracts dependent on the specifics of each individual transition project.
IFRS 16 Leases The standard replaces IAS 17 Leases and related interpretations.
It introduces a single lessee accounting model referred to as the rightofuse model which will apply to most leases.
The standard therefore primarily changes operating lease accounting for lessees.
All lease arrangements will give rise to the recognition of a rightofuse asset and a lease liability.
Lease costs will be recognised in the form of deprecation of the rightofuse asset and interest on the lease liability.
Lessee accounting under IFRS 16 is therefore similar to accounting for finance leases under existing IAS 17.
Lessor accounting under IFRS 16 is similar to existing IAS 17 accounting and is not expected to have a material impact for the Group.
Financial Statements 87 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED 2.5 ADOPTION OF NEW AND REVISED STANDARDS CONTINUED IFRS 16 Leases continued The Group is currently assessing and quantifying the impact of the accounting changes that will arise under IFRS 16 however the following changes to lessee accounting will have a material impact on the Consolidated Income Statement Consolidated Balance Sheet and Consolidated Cash Flow Statement after the Groups adoption on 1 January 2019 rightofuse assets will be recognised for most assets that are leased by the Group under operating leases currently no lease assets are recognised on the Consolidated Balance Sheet.
The biggest asset category impacted for the Group will be Land and Buildings liabilities will be recorded for future lease payments of existing operating leases in the Consolidated Balance Sheet for the reasonable certain period of the lease.
Liabilities are not currently recorded for operating leases future operating lease commitments are however disclosed.
The lease liability recognised on transition will not equal the lease commitments reported on 31 December 2017 but may not be dissimilar.
This increase in debt will have an impact on gearing ratios lease expenses will be for depreciation of the rightofuse assets and interest on lease liabilities.
Interest will typically be higher in the early stages of a lease and reduce over the term as with current finance lease accounting under existing IAS 17.
The effect of this change will increase EBITDA.
Currently operating lease expenses are recognised on a straightline basis over the lease term and operating lease cash flows are currently included within operating activities in the Consolidated Cash Flow Statement under IFRS 16 these will be recorded as cash flows from financing activities.
IFRS 9 Financial Instruments The standard is effective from 1 January 2018 and replaces IAS 39 Financial Instruments.
It brings together all three aspects of the accounting for financial instruments project classification and measurement impairment and hedge accounting.
During 2017 the Group performed an impact assessment of the three aspects of IFRS 9 which are summarised below Classification and measurement Loans and trade receivables are held to collect contractual cash flows and are expected to give rise to cash flows representing solely payments of principal and interest.
The Group analysed the contractual cash flow characteristics of those instruments and concluded that they meet the criteria for amortised cost measurement under IFRS 9.
This is the same treatment as under IAS 39 therefore reclassification is not required.
Impairment
IFRS 9 requires the Group to record expected credit losses on all of its loans and trade receivables either on a twelvemonth or lifetime basis.
The Group will apply the simplified approach detailed in IFRS 9 and record lifetime expected losses on its trade receivables.
The
Group however expects no material increase in the bad debt provision as a result of this change.
Hedge accounting The Group determined that existing hedge relationships are still deemed effective hedging relationships and hence will continue to qualify for hedge accounting under IFRS 9.
As IFRS 9 does not change the general principles of how an entity accounts for effective hedges applying the hedging requirements of IFRS 9 will not have a material impact on the Groups Financial Statements after adoption.
The assessment is based on currently available information and may be subject to change arising from further reasonable and supportable information being made available to the Group in 2018 when the standard is adopted.
Overall the Group expects no material impact on its Financial Statements.
SEGMENTAL INFORMATION BUSINESS SEGMENTS The Groups activities are now predominantly focused in two main areas which are Customer Experience and Brand Deployment.
During the year there have been two changes to cost allocations within the segments as follows Pass Through revenue representing preagreed or contracted revenues that include an element regarding print postal and other marketing material which are passed on to clients at cost as part of a wider service is now reported directly within the Customer Experience and Brand Deployment segments.
This change has been made to allow the full underlying segmental split of gross revenue to be better understood.
Account management and service costs relating to Customer Experience clients previously included within Central Costs have now been recognised within the Customer Experience segment.
Pension scheme costs are included in the Corporate Costs segment.
Financial Statements 88 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 SEGMENTAL INFORMATION CONTINUED BUSINESS SEGMENTS CONTINUED The Communisis Board being the Chief Operating Decision Maker considers the performance of Customer Experience and Brand Deployment in assessing the performance of the Group and making decisions about the allocation of resources.
Segmental disclosures have therefore been presented on this basis.
Segment performance is evaluated based on profit from operations and is measured consistently with profit from operations in the Income Statement.
However  Corporate Costs and Central Costs are managed on a Group basis and are not allocated to operating segments.
Transfer pricing between business segments is set on an arms length basis in a manner similar to transactions with third parties.
The revenue and operating profit figures reviewed by the Chief Operating Decision Maker exclude sales between business segments and as such sales between business segments are excluded from the figures in the segmental results tables below.
The segment results for the year ended 31 December 2017 are as follows
Experience
Brand
Deployment
Central
Costs
Corporate
Costs
T otal Revenue 189279 186586   375865 Profit from operations before amortisation of acquired intangibles and exceptional items 22373 16497 11759 5949 21162 Amortisation of acquired intangibles 570 163   733 Profit from operations before exceptional items 21803 16334 11759 5949 20429 Exceptional items 1315 734 289 286 2052 Profit from operations 20488 15600 12048 5663 18377 Net finance costs 3942 Profit before tax 14435 Income tax expense 2663 Profit for the year 11772 Other segmental information Depreciation 3413 187  159 3759 Amortisation 4637 Revenue includes sales to two clients which each individually represent more than 10% of the Groups total revenue.
Sales to client 1 were 68.8m including transactions with the Brand Deployment business segment and to client 2 were 43.1m including transactions with the Customer Experience business segment.
The resegment results for the year ended 31 December 2016 are as follows
Experience
Brand
Deployment
Central
Costs
Corporate
Costs
T otal Revenue 185053 176879   361932 Profit from operations before amortisation of acquired intangibles and exceptional items 19915 16216 11080 5580 19471 Amortisation of acquired intangibles 599 210   809 Profit from operations before exceptional items 19316 16006 11080 5580 18662 Exceptional items 3128 495 29 615 4267 Profit from operations 16188 15511 11109 6195 14395 Net finance costs 2802 Profit before tax 11593 Income tax expense 2966 Profit for the year 8627 Other segmental information Depreciation 383tel4348 Amortisation 4714 1084 548 60 6406 Revenue includes sales to two clients which each individually represent more than 10% of the Groups total revenue.
Sales to client 1 were 88.7m including transactions with the Brand Deployment business segment and to client 2 were 48.7m including transactions with the Customer Experience business segment.
Financial Statements 89 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 SEGMENTAL INFORMATION CONTINUED GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION Revenues from external clients United Kingdom 262473 266153 Other countries 113392 95779 375865 361932 Noncurrent assets United Kingdom 205320 209444 Other countries 100 97 205420 209541 Noncurrent assets for this purpose consist of property plant and equipment and intangible assets.
REVENUE
Revenue disclosed in the Income Statement is analysed as follows Sales revenue Sale of goods 160951 142733 Provision of services 214914 219199 375865 361932 Finance revenue Interest income on financial assets carried at amortised cost 1 18 Gain on foreign currency liabilities  945 No revenue was derived from exchanges of goods and services 2016 nil.
OTHER EXPENSES 5.1 TOTAL FINANCE COSTS Interest expense for borrowings at amortised cost 2030 2289 Loss on foreign currency liabilities 425 Retirement benefit related cost Note 14 1488 1476 3943 3765 5.2 NET FINANCE COSTS Interest on financial assets measured at amortised cost 1 18 Interest on financial liabilities measured at amortised cost 2030 2289 Net interest on financial assets and financial liabilities not at fair value through Income Statement 2029 2271 Lossgain on foreign currency liabilities 425 945 Retirement benefit related cost 1488 1476 3942 2802 Financial Statements 90 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 OTHER EXPENSES CONTINUED 5.3 EMPLOYEE BENEFITS EXPENSE Wages and salaries 78355 82150 Social security costs 8471 8155 Pension costs 4046 4409 Sharebased payments equitysettled 597 505 Redundancy costs 1698 3400 93167 98619 In addition to the above 93167000 a further 1214000 of employee costs have been capitalised during the year as part of various development projects around the Group.
These costs have been capitalised as software and are included in Note 11.
The total employee benefits expense for the year ended 31 December 2017 is therefore 94381000.
Of the 1698000 redundancy costs 1570000 has been included in exceptional items in Note 5.4.
Number
Number
The average monthly number of employees during the year was made up as follows Customer Experience 1471 1514 Brand Deployment 457 478 Central Costs 129 145 Corporate Costs 24 27 2081 2164 Compensation of key management personnel Shortterm employee benefits 2394 2531 Postemployment benefits 52 91 Compensation for loss of office 112 139 Sharebased payments equitysettled 460 342 T otal compensation paid to key management personnel 3018 2825 Key management personnel consist of statutory Directors of the Company along with nonstatutory Directors who sit on the Executive Board.
In the year ended 31 December 2016 an adjustment of 139000 was made in respect of actual compensation for loss of office charged and provided for in 2015.
Details of individual statutory Directors remuneration with pension entitlements and interests for the Directors of the Company only are provided within the Directors Remuneration Report on pages 44 to 59.
Details of the Groups pension commitments are provided in Note 14 to these Financial Statements.
Details of the Directors interests in employee share incentive plans are provided within the Directors Remuneration Report on pages 44 to 59.
5.4 AMORTISATION OF ACQUIRED INTANGIBLES AND EXCEPTIONAL ITEMS Profit from operations is arrived at after charging the following items Exceptional restructuring costs 1737 4260 Customer relationship asset write off 170 118 Contingent consideration write off 361 452 Write off of unsupported assets 506 Capital restructure costs  109 Trade name impairment  232 Exceptional items 2052 4267 Nonexceptional amortisation of acquired intangibles 733 809 2785 5076 During 2017 the Group incurred 1737000 in respect of organisational restructuring to reduce the cost base deliver efficiency improvements and outsource noncore activities.
The restructuring costs included 1570000 relating to staff restructuring and 167000 in respect of the site closures at the Bangalore office and Bothwell Street Glasgow and associated legal costs.
Of the 1737000 140000 is unpaid at 31 December 2017.
Financial Statements 91 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 OTHER EXPENSES CONTINUED 5.4 AMORTISATION OF ACQUIRED INTANGIBLES AND EXCEPTIONAL ITEMS CONTINUED The 170000 customer relationship asset write off relates to customer relationships valued as part of acquisition accounting in recent years.
It is indicative of the current nature of client turnover in agency businesses where revenues are project based and not usually underpinned by longterm contracts.
The 361000 reduction in contingent consideration relates to fair value revisions of the contingent consideration in respect of the acquisitions of Life Marketing Consultancy Limited Life and Psona Films Limited being 300000 and 61000 respectively.
The
452000 reduction in contingent consideration in the year ended 31 December 2016 relates to fair value revisions of the contingent consideration in respect of the acquisitions of Life and The Meaningful Marketing Group Limited being 200000 and 252000 respectively.
The Group also incurred a charge of 506000 in respect of the write off of unsupported assets which will not be recovered.
The trade name impairment of 232000 in the year ended 31 December 2016 is in relation to Life.
The trade name was assigned a value of 512000 at acquisition on 5 January 2015.
Trading with this business has been lower than expected resulting in the trade name impairment.
The 109000 capital restructure costs in the year ended 31 December 2016 relate to nonrecurring professional fees in relation to the capital reduction exercise undertaken during that year to create additional distributable reserves.
5.5 AUDITORS REMUNERATION The remuneration of the auditor is analysed as follows Audit of the Group Financial Statements 151 150 Other fees to the auditor  local statutory audits for subsidiaries 84 88 other assurance services 10 9 other advisory services 10 5.6 OPERATING LEASE PAYMENTS Minimum lease payments 11487 11364 Sublease receipts 1135 1098 10352 10266 INCOME TAX The major components of income tax expense for the years ended 31 December 2017 and 2016 are Tax charged in the Consolidated Income Statement Current income tax UK corporation tax 2738 2736 Adjustments in respect of prior years 555 197 Overseas tax on profits for the year 1256 787 T otal current income tax charge 3439 3720 Deferred income tax Origination and reversal of temporary differences 740 636 Adjustments in respect of prior years 36 105 Adjustments in respect of prior years  due to change in tax rate  13 T otal deferred tax credit 776 754 Tax charge in the Consolidated Income Statement 2663 2966 Tax relating to items charged or credited to other comprehensive income Deferred income tax Actuarial gainslosses on pension scheme current year credit 2517 2715 Adjustment in respect of prior years  due to change in tax rate 824 411 T ax on financial liabilities 23 3 Tax chargecredit in the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income 1716 2307 Financial Statements 92 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 INCOME TAX CONTINUED Current tax adjustments in respect of prior years relate to the release of provisions created in respect of prior years tax submissions agreed in the current year.
RECONCILIATION OF THE TOTAL TAX CHARGE The tax expense in the Income Statement for the year is lower 2016 higher than the average standard rate of corporation tax in the UK of 19.25% 2016 20%.
The differences are reconciled below Profit before income tax 14435 11593 At UK statutory income tax rate of 19.25% 2016 20% 2779 2319 Expenses not deductible for tax purposes 297 317 Nontaxable income 138 97 Effect of different tax rates of subsidiaries operating in other jurisdictions 424 204 Unrecognised tax losses in overseas territories 7 60 Sharebased payments 92 110 Change in deferred tax in respect of rolled over capital gains 23 26 Adjustments in respect of prior years 591 92 Adjustment in respect of prior years  due to change in tax rate  13 Tax charge in the Consolidated Income Statement 2663 2966 The Group has unrecognised losses amounting to 380000 2016 200000 which arose outside of the UK and which are available indefinitely for offsetting against future taxable profits of the companies in which the losses arose.
No deferred tax asset has been recognised in respect of these losses as they may not be used to offset taxable profits elsewhere in the Group and there is no evidence of recoverability in the near future.
If the Group were able to recognise all unrecognised deferred tax assets the profit would have been increased by 96000.
DEFERRED TAX Deferred tax included in the Consolidated Balance Sheet is as follows Accelerated capital allowances 777 925 Other shortterm timing differences 50 185 Losses available for offset against future taxable income 353 387 Capital gains rolled over into replacement assets 413 436 Sharebased payments 383 176 Pensions 5221 7331 Financial liabilities 15 39 Customer relationship intangible assets 196 351 Deferred tax asset 4636 6406 The realisation of the above current year deferred tax asset is dependent upon the anticipated continuing profitability of the Group.
The deferred tax asset is recognised as the Directors foresee future profits adequate to assume recovery.
The deferred tax credit included in the Consolidated Income Statement is as follows Accelerated capital allowances 141 149 Other shortterm timing differences 116 19 Losses available for offset against future taxable income 27 166 Heldover capital gains  153 Capital gains rolled over into replacement assets 23 31 Sharebased payments 207 9 Pensions 393 337 Customer relationship intangible assets 155 240 Deferred tax credit 776 754 The provision for deferred tax at 31 December 2017 has been made at rates between 17% and 19% depending upon the anticipated time of reversal.
This reflects the legislation included in the Finance Act 2016 reducing the rate of corporation tax to 17% from April 2020.
Financial Statements 93 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 ACQUISITION OF BUSINESS In the year ended 31 December 2017 there have been movements in contingent consideration in relation to Psona Films Limited and Life as outlined below PSONA FILMS LIMITED On 25 April 2014 the Group acquired the entire issued share capital of Jacaranda Productions Limited.
On 30 June 2014 the Companys name was changed to Psona Films Limited.
As part of the purchase agreement a contingent consideration was agreed.
An amount equal to 10% of annual gross profits of the company was payable to the sellers at the end of each of the three earnout periods being the years ended 30 April 2015 2016 and 2017.
The total contingent consideration would in no circumstance exceed the value of 500000.
As at the date of acquisition the fair value of the contingent consideration was estimated at 200000 determined using a discounted cash flow method.
As at 31 December 2017 a total of 139000 had been paid out under this arrangement for the earnout periods ending 30 April 2015 and 30 April 2016.
However as the conditions of the contingent consideration arrangement were not met in the final earnout period the remaining balance at 30 April 2017 was written off to the Income Statement.
A reconciliation of the fair value of the contingent consideration liability is provided below At 1 January 2017 61 Fair value revision 61 At 31 December 2017 The results of this business are included within the Customer Experience segment.
LIFE MARKETING CONSULTANCY LIMITED On 5 January 2015 the Group acquired the entire share capital of Life.
As part of the purchase agreement a contingent consideration was agreed the mechanism for which was subsequently revised in 2015 to maintain incentivisation for the management of Life.
As at 31 December 2016 the fair value of all contingent consideration was revised to 300000.
The final contingent consideration liability will be quantified and settled in 2019.
An assessment of the likely contingent consideration payable was performed by looking at the relative likelihood of a range of outcomes of over or under achieving against the current forecasts over the earnout period.
As at 31 December 2017 using this methodology the fair value of the contingent consideration was revised to nil.
A reconciliation of the fair value of the contingent consideration liability is provided below At 1 January 2017 300 Fair value revision 300 At 31 December 2017 The results of this business are included within the Brand Deployment segment.
The Group has used Level 3 hierarchy valuation techniques to determine the fair value of the contingent consideration.
The fair value hierarchy is described in Note 23.
In January 2017 the Group repaid the 9300000 twoyear promissory loan note which was used to finance part of the initial consideration for the acquisition of Life Marketing Consultancy Limited.
EARNINGS PER SHARE
Number
Weighted average number of ordinary shares excluding treasury shares for basic earnings per share 208804 209211 Effect of dilution Share options 1008 336 Weighted average number of ordinary shares excluding treasury shares adjusted for the effect of dilution 209812 209547 441220 2016 806319 shares were held in trust at 31 December 2017.
Share options in issue total 2470608 2016 4395426 options.
Financial Statements 94 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 EARNINGS PER SHARE CONTINUED Basic and diluted earnings per share is calculated as follows Profit attributable to equity holders of the parent 11772 8627 Earnings per share Basic 5.64p 4.12p Diluted 5.61p 4.12p ADJUSTED EARNINGS PER SHARE Adjusted earnings per share are derived from net profit from continuing operations before exceptional items amortisation of acquired intangibles and certain tax items in respect of prior years attributable to equity holders of the parent is derived as follows Profit after taxation from continuing operations 11772 8627 Exceptional items Note 5.4 2052 4267 T axation on exceptional items 461 819 Amortisation of acquired intangibles Note 5.4 733 809 T axation on amortisation of acquired intangibles 125 171 T axation  adjustments in respect of prior years 609 Profit after taxation from continuing operations excluding exceptional items and amortisation of acquired intangibles 13362 12713 Adjusted earnings per share Basic 6.40p 6.08p Diluted 6.37p 6.07p The basis of measurement of adjusted earnings per share is to reflect more accurately the measure of earnings per share used by the market.
Adjusted earnings per share uses the same weighted average number of ordinary shares as reported above.
DIVIDENDS PAID AND PROPOSED Declared and paid during the year Amounts recognised as distributions to equity holders in the year Final dividend for the year ended 31 December 2015 of 1.47p per share  3077 Interim dividend for the year ended 31 December 2016 of 0.81p per share  1696 Final dividend for the year ended 31 December 2016 of 1.61p per share 3362 Interim dividend for the year ended 31 December 2017 of 0.89p per share 1860 5222 4773 Proposed for approval at AGM not recognised as a liability as at 31 December Final equity dividend on ordinary shares of 1.77p 2016 1.61p per share based on issued share capital at the date of approval of the Financial Statements 3704 3358 Financial Statements 95 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 PROPERTY PLANT AND EQUIPMENT
Long leasehold property
Plant equipment and motor vehicles T otal
At 1 January 2016 8217 176 2895 61873 73161 Additions 23  405 2932 3360 Disposals    3218 3218 Exchange adjustment    39 39 At 31 December 2016 8240 176 3300 61626 73342 Additions 21  73 1610 1704 Disposals 796   5696 6492 At 31 December 2017 7465 176 3373 57540 68554
At 1 January 2016 3929 176 788 45185 50078 Depreciation charge for the year 280  211 3857 4348 Impairment    334 334 Disposals    3077 3077 Exchange adjustment    21 21 At 31 December 2016 4209 176 999 46320 51704 Depreciation charge for the year 196  228 3335 3759 Disposals 950   5252 6202 Exchange adjustment    3 3 At 31 December 2017 3455 176 1227 44400 49258 Net book value at 31 December 2017 4010  2146 13140 19296 Net book value at 31 December 2016 4031  2301 15306 21638 Net book value at 31 December 2015 4288  2107 16688 23083 The carrying value of plant and equipment held under finance leases and hire purchase contracts at 31 December 2017 was 2883999 2016 2059000.
With the exception of finance leases and hire purchase contracts above there is no security or any restriction on title.
Included within plant equipment and motor vehicles are assets currently in development of 151000 2016 1500000.
Depreciation is expected to commence in 2018.
There are a number of assets included within property plant and equipment that have been fully amortised but are still in use by the
The total cost and accumulated depreciation of these assets at 31 December 2017 is 39091000 2016 44532000.
Financial Statements 96 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 INTANGIBLE ASSETS
Software assets
Trade names
T otal
At 1 January 2016 240198 25811 31509 512 1200 299230 Additions  2206   86 2292 Disposals  761    761 At 31 December 2016 240198 27256 31509 512 1286 300761 Additions  4028    4028 Disposals  446 454   900 At 31 December 2017 240198 30838 31055 512 1286 303889 Amortisation and impairment At 1 January 2016 76177 14030 1603tel863 Amortisation during the year  3281 2944 69 112 6406 Impairment Note 5.4   118 232  350 Disposals  761    761 At 31 December 2016 76177 16550 1909tel858 Amortisation during the year  2626 2862 37 112 5637 Impairment Note 5.4   170   170 Disposals  446 454   900 At 31 December 2017 76177 18730 2167tel765 Net book value at 31 December 2017 164021 12108 9384 72 539 186124 Net book value at 31 December 2016 164021 10706 1241tel903 Net book value at 31 December 2015 164021 11781 1547tel367 Software assets are amortised evenly over their useful economic lives of between three and eight years.
Included in software assets is 2666000 2016 336000 currently in development.
Amortisation is expected to commence in 2018.
As at 31 December 2017 the forecast revenue for some of the customer relationships within recent acquisitions had declined from initial expectations resulting in an indication of impairment.
The relevant customer relationship assets have therefore been reduced accordingly and 170000 2016 118000 has been recorded in exceptional items Note 5.4.
Included within licences are amounts spent for the development of software which the Group has the exclusive right to sell within the UK.
There are a number of assets included within software that have been fully amortised but are still in use by the Group.
The total cost and accumulated amortisation of these assets at 31 December 2017 is 7803000 2016 8954000.
IMPAIRMENT OF GOODWILL Goodwill acquired through business combinations is allocated for impairment testing purposes to two cashgenerating units CGUs which are reportable segments as follows Customer Experience and Brand Deployment.
These represent the lowest level within the Group at which goodwill is monitored for internal management purposes.
The carrying amount of goodwill allocated to cashgenerating units is as follows Customer Experience 86691 86691 Brand Deployment 77330 77330 164021 164021 The Group conducts annual impairment tests on the carrying value of goodwill using value in use calculations.
The key assumptions included in the value in use calculations are revenue growth product and services mix and profit margins the longterm growth rates and the discount rate applied.
Financial Statements 97 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 IMPAIRMENT OF GOODWILL CONTINUED The Group prepares cash flow forecasts for these CGUs based on the most recent annual budgets approved by the Board.
These are based upon detailed budgets for the coming year and internal forecasts of future growth over a fiveyear period and cash flows beyond the fiveyear period are extrapolated using external forecasts of expected growth rates.
Further information on the assumptions used within the major CGUs is detailed below.
KEY ASSUMPTIONS USED IN VALUE IN USE CALCULATIONS The calculation of value in use for all CGUs is most sensitive to the following assumptions revenue growth rates product and services mix and profit margins and growth rates used to extrapolate cash flows beyond the budget period.
In addition the calculation of value in use is sensitive to movements in the discount rate.
Revenue growth included in the approved financial budgets The revenue forecast in the Customer Experience cash flow projections based on financial budgets is a decline of 4% in 2018 followed by growth of between 3% and 5% in years two to five.
The revenue forecast in the Brand Deployment cash flow projections based on financial budgets is a decline of 2% in 2018 followed by growth of between 7% and 8% in years two to five.
Product and services mix and profit margins Brand Deployment is expected to have an increased share of Group revenues relative to Customer Experience over the fiveyear forecast period.
The Group profit margin based on gross revenue is projected to increase from 5.6% in 2017 to 7.5% by the end of the detailed forecast period.
Profit growth rate used to extrapolate cash flows beyond the budget period The profit growth rate used to extrapolate cash flow projections beyond the budget period for all CGUs is considered to be a representative rate for the markets to which these segments are dedicated and in line with longterm economic growth forecasts.
Profit growth rates have been assessed individually for each CGU.
Profit growth rates of 1.9% have been used for Customer Experience and 2.4% for Brand Deployment.
Discount rates The pretax discount rate applied to the Customer Experience cash flow projections is 11.4% and to Brand Deployment cash flow projections is 11.7%.
This is the Groups weighted average cost of capital adjusted to a pretax rate and adjusted to reflect managements view of the market assessment of specific risks associated with each separate CGU.
Goodwill at 31 December
Profit margin years 25 based on gross revenue %
Pretax discount rate % Customer Experience 86691 4% 3% 3% 5% respectively 11% 12% 13% 14% respectively 1.9 11.4 Brand Deployment 77330 8% 7% 7% 7% respectively 10% 11% 11% 11% respectively 2.4 11.7 Goodwill at 31 December
Profit margin years 25 based on gross revenue % T erminal growth rates %
Customer Experience 86691 5% 5% 5% 6% respectively 12% 12% 13% 13% respectively 2.3 12.2 Brand Deployment 77330 6% 7% 4% 4% respectively 10% 10% 11% 11% respectively 2.7 11.9 Goodwill was allocated to each individual CGU using a relative value approach during the resegmentation which was completed in 2016.
The growth rates used in years two to five are below the growth rates expected by management for the business.
In 2017 no impairment charges have been made 2016 nil.
The headroom at 31 December 2017 was 33m 2016 35m in the Customer Experience segment and 96m 2016 87m in the Brand Deployment segment.
Financial Statements 98 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 IMPAIRMENT OF GOODWILL CONTINUED SENSITIVITY TO CHANGES IN ASSUMPTIONS There are reasonably possible changes in key assumptions within the Customer Experience segment which could erode the headroom.
The sensitivity to each of these reasonably possible changes is detailed below.
In each sensitivity assessment all other items assumptions other than the assumption being sensitised remained equal shortterm revenue growth rates in years two to five would need to reduce from between 3% and 5% to between 1% and 1% to remove all headroom on the Customer Experience impairment test the pretax discount rate would need to increase in absolute terms by 2.5% to remove all headroom within the Customer Experience impairment test on average longterm profit growth rates would need to be reduced in absolute terms by 2.5% to remove all headroom in the Customer Experience segment and profit margin would need to drop by 1.8% in years two to five which equates to a 14.3% drop in overall segmental profits to remove all headroom in the Customer Experience segment.
There are no reasonably possible changes in key assumptions within the Brand Deployment segment which could erode the headroom to the point at which an impairment is necessary.
SHAREBASED PAYMENTS THE COMMUNISIS LONG TERM INCENTIVE PLAN 2007 Certain Directors and managers are eligible to participate in this plan at the discretion of the Remuneration Committee.
The exercise price in respect of options granted under the scheme is nil.
There are no cash settlement alternatives.
The share price measure in respect of the 2015 grant of options is calculated by reference to the average share price in the final three months of the threeyear performance period in comparison with the average share price in the three months immediately preceding grant Base Share Price.
The Total Shareholder Return TSR measure in respect of the 2017 grant of options is measured by reference to the change in the Net Return Index of the Group over the threeyear period commencing on the date of grant.
The earnings per share performance will be measured on the basis of adjusted basic earnings per share being earnings per share from continuing operations before exceptional items and amortisation of acquired intangible assets and the tax effect of these items.
For attainment between certain annual growth rate thresholds vesting will occur on a straightline pro rata basis.
The Remuneration Committee will only sanction vesting of the awards granted if they are satisfied as to the Groups underlying financial performance in the performance period.
Year of grant Vesting condition and period 2015 A maximum of 20% of the options will vest on the attainment of certain share price thresholds and the remaining 80% will vest on the attainment of growth in earnings per share over the financial years 201517.
Vesting will be calculated by comparing earnings per share at the end of financial year 2017 to the earnings per share at 31 December 2014 and calculating the compound annual growth rate.
2016 All options will vest on the attainment of growth in earnings per share over the financial years 201618.
Vesting will be calculated by comparing earnings per share at the end of financial year 2018 to the earnings per share at 31 December 2015 and calculating the compound annual growth rate.
2017 A maximum of 50% of the options will vest on the attainment of growth in TSR over three years from the date of grant and calculating the compound annual growth rate in this measure.
The remaining 50% will vest on the attainment of growth in earnings per share over the financial years 201719.
Vesting will be calculated by comparing earnings per share at the end of financial year 2019 to the earnings per share at 31 December 2016 and calculating the compound annual growth rate.
The fair value of options granted under the Long Term Incentive Plan 2007 in the year to 31 December 2017 was estimated on the date of grant using a binomial simulation option pricing model taking into account the terms and conditions upon which the options were granted.
The following were used in the option pricing model 2017 2016 Share price at the date of grant 52.50p 47.00p Estimated annualised dividend yield 4.6% 4.7% Riskfree interest rate 0.2% 0.5% Expected volatility used in the modelling under the BlackScholes valuation model 39.0% 38.7% Weighted average fair value of the share options granted 33.38p 41.00p The expected life of the options is based on historical data and is not necessarily indicative of exercise patterns which may occur.
The expected volatility reflects historical volatility adjusted for future trends which may also not necessarily be the actual outcome.
Both the historical and expected volatilities reflect the volatility of the share prices of Communisis plc and comparator companies.
Financial Statements 99 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 SHAREBASED PAYMENTS CONTINUED THE COMMUNISIS LONG TERM INCENTIVE PLAN 2007 CONTINUED The following table illustrates the number movements in the Long Term Incentive Plan options during the year.
The Long Term Incentive Plan options are nil cost options so the weighted average exercise prices WAEP is nil in all cases.
Number of shares Number of shares Outstanding at 1 January 5906359 6048291 Granted during the year 3497764 3191359 Forfeited during the year 603735 1115547 Expired during the year 507681 1870885 Exercised during the year 365096 346859 Outstanding at 31 December 7927611 5906359 1 The weighted average share price at the date of exercise for the options exercised in the year ended 31 December 2017 was 55p 2016 45p.
The weighted average remaining contractual life for the share options outstanding under the Long Term Incentive Plan as at 31 December 2017 is 1.52 years 2016 1.75 years.
The weighted average fair value of all options granted under the Long Term Incentive Plan during the year was 33p 2016 41p.
Number of shares Number of shares Equitysettled awards granted to Directors of Communisis plc 1055533 1062778 Equitysettled awards granted to former Directors of Communisis plc 723786 583009 Equitysettled awards granted to other employees 1718445 1545572 T otal equitysettled awards granted during the year 3497764 3191359 THE EXECUTIVE SHARE OPTION SCHEME 2010 Certain Directors and managers are eligible to participate in this scheme at the discretion of the Remuneration Committee.
The exercise price of the options granted under this scheme is equal to the market value of the shares on the date of grant.
No options were granted under this scheme in the year ended 31 December 2017 or in the year ended 31 December 2016.
THE SHARESAVE SCHEME All UK employees including Executive Directors are eligible to participate in the Communisis Sharesave Scheme.
The exercise price of the options is usually equal to the market price of the shares at the date of invitation to participate less a maximum discount of 20%.
The options vest on the third anniversary of the commencement of the savings period.
Any options which have not been exercised within six months of the vesting date lapse.
No options were granted under the Sharesave Scheme in 2017.
The weighted average fair value of the options granted was estimated at the date of grant using the BlackScholes option pricing model.
The following were used in the option pricing model and assumed that option holders will exercise their option at expiry 2017 2016 Share price at the date of grant  44.00p Estimated annualised dividend yield  5.0% Riskfree interest rate  0.6% Expected volatility used in the modelling under the BlackScholes valuation model  38.9% Exercise price for options exercisable three years after the date of grant  45.75p The volatility has been determined by reference to Communisis plcs and comparator companies historical volatility over a threeyear period adjusted for expected future trends to reflect the share price of Communisis plc in the future.
The dilutive effect of outstanding options is reflected as additional share dilution in the computation of earnings per share.
The following table illustrates the number and WAEP of and movements in share options during the year.
Number of shares
Number of shares
Outstanding at the beginning of the year 4395426 50.05p 2640861 55.57p Granted during the year   3123921 45.75p Forfeited during the year 191777 45.75p 1171653 27.73p Exercised during the year 243134 56.04p 155659 31.68p Expired during the year 1489907 56.07p 42044 31.68p Outstanding at the end of the year 2470608 46.16p 4395426 50.05p Exercisable at the end of the year 86397 57.50p 1 The weighted average share price at the date of exercise for the options exercised in the year ended 31 December 2017 was 62p 2016 43p.
Financial Statements 100 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 SHAREBASED PAYMENTS CONTINUED THE SHARESAVE SCHEME CONTINUED The weighted average remaining contractual life for the share options outstanding under the Sharesave Scheme as at 31 December 2017 is 1.95 years 2016 1.63 years.
The weighted average fair value of all Sharesave options granted during the year was nil 2016 7.80p.
The range of exercise prices for options outstanding under all schemes at the end of the year was nil  57.5p 2016 nil  57.5p.
The number of share options for which the exercise price is nil totals 7927611 2016 5906359.
RETIREMENT BENEFIT PLANS The Group operates the Communisis Pension Plan which comprises a defined contribution and defined benefit section.
DEFINED CONTRIBUTION SECTION The Group operates a UK defined contribution arrangement within all UK trading Group companies.
The assets of the arrangements are held separately from those of the Group.
Group companies are required to contribute a specified percentage of payroll costs to the retirement benefit scheme to fund the benefits.
The only obligation of the Group with respect to the retirement benefit scheme is to make the specified contributions.
The total cost charged to income of 3007000 2016 3105000 represents contributions payable to these arrangements by the Group at specified rates.
At 31 December 2017 478000 of contributions due in respect of the current reporting period had not yet been paid over to the arrangements 2016 all paid over.
This liability was paid on 4 January 2018.
The Group expects to contribute 3000000 to the defined contribution pension arrangements in 2018.
DEFINED BENEFIT SECTION The section is closed to all members with no employees accruing further benefits under the plan.
The following tables summarise the components of net benefit expense recognised in the Consolidated Income Statement and the amounts taken to the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income Recognised in profit from operations Administration costs 826 857 Gains on settlements  352 Recognised in arriving at profit from operations 826 505 Interest expense 5524 6466 Interest income 4036 4990 Net interest on defined benefit liability 1488 1476 Net benefit expense 2314 1981 Taken to the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income Actual return on scheme assets excluding interest income 9659 18990 Actuarial losses arising from changes in financial assumptions 6555 34962 Actuarial gains arising from changes in demographic assumptions 2676 Experience gains arising on liabilities 9025 Actuarial gainslosses recognised in the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income 14805 15972 Benefit liabilityasset The following table summarises the funded status and amounts recognised in the Consolidated Balance Sheet for the defined benefit pension plan.
Defined benefit obligation 200957 208357 Value of plan assets 162740 152878 Net pension deficit 38217 55479 The defined benefit obligation comprises 200957000 2016 208357000 arising from a partly funded plan.
Financial Statements 101 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 RETIREMENT BENEFIT PLANS CONTINUED DEFINED BENEFIT SECTION CONTINUED Benefit liabilityasset continued Changes in the fair value of the funded status of the defined benefit plan are as follows Opening net pension deficit 55479 41145 Contributions by employer 4771 3619 Gains on settlements  352 Net interest expense 1488 1476 Administration costs 826 857 Actuarial gainslosses 14805 15972 Closing net pension deficit 38217 55479 Present value of the defined benefit obligation Changes in the present value of the defined benefit obligation are as follows Opening defined benefit obligation 208357 177486 Interest expense 5524 6466 Benefits paid 7778 8069 Actuarial losses arising from changes in financial assumptions 6555 34962 Actuarial gains arising from changes in demographic assumptions 2676 Experience gain arising on liabilities 9025 Creditor extinguished on settlements  2488 Closing defined benefit obligation 200957 208357 Value of plan assets Changes in the value of plan assets are as follows Opening plan assets 152878 136341 Interest income 4036 4990 Administration costs 826 857 Contributions by employer 4771 3619 Benefits paid 7778 8069 Actual return on scheme assets excluding interest income 9659 18990 Assets distributed on settlements  2136 Closing plan assets 162740 152878 The values of major categories of plan assets and the relative percentage of the total plan assets are as follows % % Asset category Assets with a quoted market price in an active market Diversified growth funds 74507 46 91154 60 Liability driven investments 27501 17 23407 15 Synthetic equitiesliability driven investments 24269 15 Diversified alternatives 15313 9 Property income fund 14062 9 13410 9 Emerging market equities   14018 9
Direct lending 2688 2 Insured liabilities 2258 1 2500 2 Cash 2142 1 8389 5 162740 100 152878 100 None of the above represent equities or bonds issued by the Group or properties owned by the Group.
Financial Statements 102 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 RETIREMENT BENEFIT PLANS CONTINUED DEFINED BENEFIT SECTION CONTINUED Value of plan assets continued Communisis Trustee  Company Limited the Trustee has been appointed by Communisis to administer and manage the Communisis Pension Plan on behalf of the members in accordance with the terms of the Trust Deed and Rules of the Plan and relevant legislation.
There are currently four Trustee Directors two of whom are company nominated one of whom is the Independent Chairman and two of whom are membernominated.
One of the membernominated Trustees is a current pensioner of the Communisis Pension Plan and the other an active contributing member.
Membernominated Trustee Directors are usually appointed for a threeyear term but are then eligible for reappointment subject to a vote of the membership.
The overall management of the investment of the assets of the Communisis Pension Plan is the responsibility of the Plan Trustees.
However the daytoday execution of the investment and associated transactions is delegated to the Plans appointed Investment Managers.
The Trustees agreed investment strategy is based on analysis of the liability profile of the Plan and the risk and returns expected from the various asset classes held over the longer term.
The primary objective of the Trustees is to operate a strategy which provides longterm growth and security for all beneficiaries.
The risk that the investments may not be sufficient to cover the Plan liabilities is one which is monitored by the Trustees and their advisers as well as by the Company.
The funding position and the divergence of invested assets is under regular review.
During 2017 the Plan Trustees reviewed and implemented a new investment strategy for the Defined Benefit Section of the Communisis Pension Plan.
The new investment strategy was agreed with the Company and is designed to achieve similar long term investment returns to the previous investment strategy but importantly it aims to do this by taking less investment risk.
This has been achieved by improving asset diversification and hedging a greater proportion of the interest and inflation risk inherent in the Plans liabilities.
The key new funds introduced were Synthetic equityliability driven investments  a pooled fund that uses derivatives in order to track global equity market returns and simultaneously provide exposure to changes in real interest rates.
This fund helps increase the Plans hedging of the inflation risk inherent in its liabilities Diversified alternatives  a pooled fund that invests across a range of mostly private market assets such as private equity specialist property investments infrastructure and private debt.
The diversified nature of these asset classes and their less frequent pricing means that investment returns tend to be smoother than comparable public market investments and Direct lending  this fund invests in senior loans of mostly midmarket European companies and the fund is expected to produce materially better returns than an investment in publicly quoted corporate debt.
The Communisis Pension Plan invests in liability driven investments LDIs to both reduce investment risk and to better manage the liabilities of the Plan.
The objective of LDIs are to have sufficient assets to meet both current and future liabilities as they fall due rather than simply having assets which deliver a positive investment return.
LDIs are executed using approaches ranging from increasing the duration of the gilt portfolio to the use of more sophisticated strategies using financial instruments such as swaps.
LDIs are designed primarily to hedge interest and inflation risk with an element of active equity exposure in order to seek higher returns.
We believe that LDIs are a key risk management tool given the impact that the fluctuations in liabilities can have on the Plans funding levels and deficits.
The Group expects to pay 5000000 to the defined benefit pension scheme in 2018 of which 1150000 relates to annual rent and 1000000 to administration costs.
In February 2012 the Group and the Trustees agreed to a Central Asset Reserve arrangement involving the securitisation of a rental stream on one of the Groups freehold properties to help address the pension fund deficit.
In connection with the arrangement certain freehold property was transferred to a limited partnership established by the Group.
The partnership is controlled by and its results are consolidated by the Group.
The fair value of the assets transferred was 9750000 and on the same date the Plan used the contribution to acquire an interest in the partnership for its fair value of 9750000.
The Plans partnership interest entitles it to a distribution of 1150000 each year from the income of the partnership over 15 years.
The Plans interest in the partnership does not qualify as a Plan asset for the Group.
In addition to the rental payments referred to above in order to remove the deficit a further recovery plan subject to reassessment following future triennial valuations has been agreed.
The latest triennial actuarial valuation for the pension scheme was performed at 31 March 2017.
The recovery plan following completion of the triennial actuarial valuation comprises eight annual contributions payable by 5 October each year from 2017 up to and including 2024.
It was agreed that deficit repair contributions to the scheme will be 2550000 increasing in line with dividend increases or 3% if higher.
We believe this is a balanced outcome for the Group and pension scheme Trustees and provides certainty over cash payments for the next three years.
The Board continues to work with the Trustees to seek opportunities to reduce the deficit and liability exposure and accelerate progress to the goal of selfsufficiency for the defined benefit pension scheme.
Financial Statements 103 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 RETIREMENT BENEFIT PLANS CONTINUED DEFINED BENEFIT SECTION CONTINUED
Independent qualified actuaries have updated the accounting deficit valuation to take account of the requirements of IAS 19 Employee Benefits in order to assess the liabilities of the scheme at 31 December 2017.
The principal weighted average assumptions used to determine benefit obligations for the Groups Plan are shown below % % Discount rate 2.50 2.70 Inflation assumption  Retail Price Index 3.25 3.25 Inflation assumption  Consumer Price Index 2.25 2.25 Mortality rates Mortality rates have assumed the base table of 110% of S2PA to be consistent with the approach adopted at the actuarial valuation dated 31 March 2017 2016 base table of 110% of S1PA.
Assumed life expectancy for a member aged 65 is as follows Y ears
Current pensioners Male 20.8 20.9 Female 22.7 23.2 Future pensioners Male 22.2 22.6 Female 24.2 25.1 Sensitivity analysis Sensitivity analysis has been performed to determine the impact on the defined benefit obligation as a result of reasonable changes in the key assumptions occurring at the end of the reporting period.
A change of 0.1 percentage points in the discount rate would have the following effects
Decrease
Discount rate Effect on profit from operations 56 45 Effect on defined benefit obligation 3400 3400 A change of 0.1 percentage points in the Consumer Price Index would have the following effect
Decrease
Inflation
Effect on profit from operations 56 55 Effect on defined benefit obligation 2300 2200 An increase of one year in life expectancy would have the following effect
Effect on profit from operations 169 Effect on defined benefit obligation 6500 The Plan is exposed to inflation and interest rate risk and changes in the life expectancy of pensioners.
The Plans exposure to equity market risk is mitigated by a diverse portfolio of investments.
The weighted average duration of the defined benefit obligation at 31 December 2017 is approximately 17 years 2016 17 years.
INVENTORIES
Raw materials 4467 3952 Work in progress 1958 2339 Finished goods 1331 677 7756 6968 All inventories are held at the lower of cost and net realisable value.
Financial Statements 104 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 TRADE AND OTHER RECEIVABLES Trade receivables 49951 44505 Prepayments accrued income and other receivables 29390 22519 79341 67024 Current 77375 66203 Noncurrent 1966 821 79341 67024 Trade receivables are noninterest bearing and generally on 3090 days credit terms with an average of 50 days.
The carrying value of trade receivables is considered a reasonable approximation of fair value.
All of the Groups trade and other receivables have been reviewed for indicators of impairment.
The doubtful debt provision has moved as follows At 1 January 1404 306 Provisions made during the year 166 1104 Released during the year 1104 6 At 31 December 466 1404 In determining the recoverability of a trade receivable the Group considers any change in the credit quality of the trade receivable from the date credit was initially granted up to the reporting date.
The Group trades only with recognised creditworthy third parties.
The top 10 clients make up 56% of the receivables balance 2016 44%.
Generally clients who wish to trade on credit terms are subject to credit verification procedures.
In addition receivable balances are monitored on an ongoing basis with the result that the Groups exposure to bad debts is not significant.
The Group has in place trade credit insurance arrangements which cover 38% of the Groups revenue up to a maximum aggregate claim in any one year of 4500000.
The concentration of credit risk is therefore limited to the carrying value of trade receivables not covered by the credit insurance.
The Directors believe that there is no further credit provision required in excess of the allowance for doubtful debts in respect of the portion not covered by the credit insurance and an excess of 40000 in respect of the portion covered by the credit insurance.
Certain trade receivables were found to be impaired and a provision of 466000 2016 1404000 is carried at the year end.
Trade receivables are shown net of this doubtful debt provision.
In addition some of the unimpaired trade receivables are past due as at the reporting date.
The age of financial assets past due but not impaired is as follows Overdue by less than 30 days 3960 1407 3060 days overdue 1156 550 6190 days overdue 647 300 91 days 2283 327 8046 2584 Management have considered the unimpaired receivables past due and do not consider there is any change in credit risk that requires any additional provisions.
Financial Statements 105 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 FINANCIAL ASSETS AND LIABILITIES 17.1 FINANCIAL ASSETS BY CATEGORY The IAS 39 categories of financial assets included in the Consolidated Balance Sheet and the headings in which they are included are as follows Noncurrent assets Trade and other receivables  loans and receivables 1330 691 Cash and cash equivalents 1tel Current assets Trade and other receivables  loans and receivables 69367 58317 Cash and cash equivalents 30182 38294 99549 96611 17.2 FINANCIAL LIABILITIES BY CATEGORY The IAS 39 categories of financial liabilities included in the Consolidated Balance Sheet and the headings in which they are included are as follows Noncurrent liabilities Interestbearing loans and borrowings  financial liabilities measured at amortised cost 53000 58000 Unamortised loan arrangement fees 596 176 Trade and other payables  financial liabilities measured at amortised cost 242 652 Financial liabilities  228 Hire purchase commitments 1200 927 Provisions 42 42 53888 59673 Current liabilities Trade and other payables  financial liabilities measured at amortised cost 81921 87603 Financial liabilities 94 Hire purchase commitments 884 614 Provisions  215 82899 88432 17.3 CHANGES IN LIABILITIES ARISING FROM FINANCING ACTIVITIES The IAS 39 categories of financial liability included in the Consolidated Balance Sheet and the headings in which they are included are as follows 1 January
Amortisation of loan arrangement fee 31 December Noncurrent interestbearing loans and borrowings 57824 5657 237 52404 1 January
Amortisation of loan arrangement fee 31 December Noncurrent interestbearing loans and borrowings 60648 3000 176 57824 Financial Statements 106 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTS Cash at bank and in hand 30182 38294 Cash at bank earns interest at floating rates based on daily bank deposit rates.
The carrying amount of these assets approximates to their fair value.
EQUITY SHARE CAPITAL AND RESERVES 2017 2016 Number of shares 000 Number of shares 000 Allotted and fully paid Ordinary shares of 25p each 209619144 52405 209376010 52344 At the year end the Group had one class of ordinary shares which carry no right to fixed income.
The Group has two share option schemes under which options to subscribe for the Companys shares have been granted to employees Note 13.
SHARE PREMIUM RESERVE This represents the share premium attaching to those shares issued upon the exercise of certain share options.
At 31 December 2017 the share premium reserve was 75000 2016 nil.
At 1 January 2016 5986 Exercise of share options 10 Capital reduction 5996 At 31 December 2016 Exercise of share options 75 At 31 December 2017 75 MERGER RESERVE This represents the share premium attaching to those shares issued upon the acquisition of subsidiaries.
At 31 December 2017 the merger reserve on consolidation was 519000 2016 519000.
At 1 January 2016 15600 Capital reduction 15081 At 31 December 2016 and 2017 519 ESOP RESERVE The ESOP reserve is used to record the investment in Communisis plc shares held by the employee share ownership plan ESOP.
The
ESOP is for the benefit of all employees and can be used in conjunction with any of the Groups share schemes.
The ESOP reserve holds 441220 shares at 31 December 2017 2016 806319 with an average cost of 36.86p 2016 36.83p and the market value of these shares is 284589 2016 349781.
At 1 January 2016 10 Shares issued from ESOP 155 Purchase of own shares 442 At 31 December 2016 297 Shares issued from ESOP 134 At 31 December 2017 163 CAPITAL REDEMPTION RESERVE The capital redemption reserve is used to record the effect of share capital buybacks made by the Company where the nominal value of share capital acquired is transferred to this reserve.
At 31 December 2017 the capital redemption reserve was nil 2016 nil.
At 1 January 2016 1375 Capital reduction 1375 At 31 December 2016 and 2017  Financial Statements 107 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 EQUITY SHARE CAPITAL AND RESERVES CONTINUED CUMULATIVE TRANSLATION ADJUSTMENT The cumulative translation adjustment reserve is used to record exchange differences arising from the translation of the Financial Statements of foreign subsidiaries.
At 1 January 2016 802 Translation movements 1129 At 31 December 2016 327 Translation movements 415 At 31 December 2017 742 INTERESTBEARING LOANS AND BORROWINGS
Current
Hire purchase contracts May tel884 614
Hire purchase contracts May 2022 1200 927 65000000 bank loan 2016 65000000 August 2022 52404 57824 53604 58751 HIRE PURCHASE See Note 25 for full details.
BANK OVERDRAFTS The bank overdrafts are principally denominated in Sterling and bear interest at rates set by reference to the UK base rate.
The overdrafts are secured by cross guarantee arrangements with the relevant banks.
At 31 December 2017 and 31 December 2016 bank overdraft facilities of 5000000 were available but not utilised.
65000000 BANK LOAN In August 2017 the 65000000 bank loan facility was renewed.
This loan is secured by a cross guarantee arrangement and is repayable in August 2022.
Interest is charged at LIBOR plus a rate of between 1.5% and 2.25% depending on the ratio of net debt to EBITDA in the preceding performance period.
The Group is subject to a number of covenants in relation to its borrowing which if breached would result in its loans becoming immediately repayable.
These covenants specify certain maximum limits in terms of net debt as a multiple of EBITDA and interest payable as a multiple of EBITA.
At the year end and throughout the year the Group was not in breach of any bank covenants.
At 31 December 2017 the Group had available 12000000 2016 7000000 of undrawn committed borrowing facilities in respect of which all conditions precedent had been met.
With the exception of hire purchase agreements early repayment is possible under the terms of all the borrowing facilities listed above at no cost by giving more than five days notice.
PROVISIONS
Onerous
Dilapidation provisions T otal At 1 January Arising during the year 215  215 Utilised 179 106 285 Released during the year 115 30 145 At 31 December 2017  42 42 Current 2017 Noncurrent 2017  42 42 At 31 December 2017  42 42 Current Noncurrent 2016  42 42 At 31 December Financial Statements 108 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 PROVISIONS CONTINUED ONEROUS LEASES The onerous lease provisions related to the estimated costs for the rental obligations in respect of the exits from Bangalore and Bothwell Street Glasgow.
The provisions reflected the estimated net cost to the Group over the remainder of the lease period.
At
31 December 2017 both provisions had been settled in full.
DILAPIDATION PROVISIONS The dilapidation provisions represent the estimated costs required to reinstate premises to a state as required under the lease.
At
31 December 2017 the provision existed for premises in Edinburgh which expire in 2021.
TRADE AND OTHER PAYABLES Trade payables 63426 58188 Other payables 2234 2727 T axation and social security 6347 3980 Accruals and deferred income 21936 27584 Interest payable 1 93944 92479 Current 92993 90968 Noncurrent 951 1511 93944 92479 Trade and other payables are noninterest bearing and generally on 3090 day credit terms.
The carrying values are considered to be a reasonable approximation of fair value.
FINANCIAL LIABILITIES Current liabilities Interest rate swaps 94 Noncurrent liabilities Interest rate swaps  228 INTEREST RATE SWAPS At 31 December 2017 the Group has two arrangements each of a notional amount of 10000000 with maturity dates being in 2018.
The Group pays fixed rates of interest of 3.16% and 1.77% respectively on each arrangement and on both the Group receives a variable rate equal to LIBOR  1.5% on the notional amount.
FAIR VALUE HIERARCHY The Group used the following hierarchy for determining and disclosing the fair value of financial instruments by valuation technique Level 1 quoted unadjusted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities Level 2 other techniques for which all inputs which have a significant effect on the recorded fair value are observable either directly or indirectly and Level 3 techniques which use inputs which have a significant effect on the recorded fair value that are not based on observable market data.
As at 31 December 2017 the Group held the following financial instruments measured at fair value Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Financial liabilities at fair value through profit or loss Interest rate swaps 94  94 During the year there were no transfers between Level 1 and Level 2 fair value measurements and no transfers into or out of Level 3 fair value measurements.
As disclosed within Note 27 the fair value of loans has been calculated using Level 2 valuation techniques and the fair value of contingent consideration has been calculated using Level 3 valuation techniques as outlined in Note 7.
Financial Statements 109 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 OBLIGATIONS UNDER OPERATING LEASES OPERATING LEASE COMMITMENTS  GROUP AS LESSEE Motor vehicles and machinery leases The Group has entered into commercial leases on motor vehicles and items of machinery.
These leases have a remaining life of between one and six years.
Future minimum rentals payable under noncancellable operating leases as at 31 December are as follows No later than one year 5708 6115 After one year but no more than five years 6007 8518 After five years 22 93 11737 14726 Land and building leases The Group has entered into commercial land and building leases.
These leases have a remaining life of between one and ten years.
Future minimum rentals payable under noncancellable operating leases as at 31 December are as follows No later than one year 3876 3955 After one year but no more than five years 13593 14114 After five years 7556 8879 25025 26948 OPERATING LEASE COMMITMENTS  GROUP AS LESSOR Surplus land and building leases The Group has entered into commercial land and building leases consisting of the Groups surplus office and manufacturing buildings.
These properties have been sublet and the leases have a remaining life of six years.
Future minimum rentals receivable under noncancellable operating leases as at 31 December are as follows No later than one year 1135 1135 After one year but no more than five years 4542 4542 After five years 551 1686 6228 7363 HIRE PURCHASE COMMITMENTS The Group has entered into hire purchase contracts for various items of plant and machinery with a purchase option at the end of the lease term for a nominal fee.
Future minimum lease payments under finance leases and hire purchase contracts together with the present value of the net minimum lease payments are as follows 2017 2016
Present value of payments Note 20
Present value of payments Note 20 Within one year 95telAfter one year but no more than five years 1266 1200 956 927 T otal minimum lease payments 2217 2084 1622 1541 Less amounts representing finance charges 133  81 Present value of minimum lease payments 2084 2084 1541 1541 Financial Statements 110 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 FINANCIAL RISK MANAGEMENT OBJECTIVES AND POLICIES The Groups principal financial instruments comprise bank loans and overdrafts Note 20 cash and shortterm deposits Note 18 and interest rate swaps Note 23.
The main purpose of these financial instruments is to raise finance for the Groups operations and to manage interest rate risk.
The Group has various other financial assets and liabilities such as trade receivables and trade payables which arise directly from its operations.
It is and has been throughout the year under review the Groups policy that no trading in financial instruments shall be undertaken.
The main risks arising from the Groups financial instruments are cash flow interest rate risk foreign currency risk liquidity risk and credit risk.
CASH FLOW INTEREST RATE RISK The Groups exposure to the risk of changes in market interest rates relates primarily to the Groups mediumterm debt obligations with a floating interest rate.
All borrowings are held on floating rate terms and so the Group is exposed to interest rate movements on these borrowings.
The
Groups policy is to monitor interest rate exposure on this floating rate debt and maintain interest rate swaps through separate financial instruments where appropriate.
At the end of 2017 the Group has two arrangements each with a notional amount of 10000000 covering 88% of the year end bank debt 2016 100%.
Within bank debt the Group includes all interestbearing bank loans and borrowings less cash and cash equivalents.
At 31 December 2017 if interest rates had been 100 basis points higher for the full financial year with all other variables held constant this would have resulted in a reduction of pretax profits of 330000 and a posttax reduction in equity of 266000 if interest rates had been lower by 25 basis points throughout the financial year the pretax profits would have been 83000 higher and the posttax impact on equity would have been an increase of 67000.
FOREIGN CURRENCY RISK The Group operates principally in the UK with approximately 30% 2016 26% of sales denominated in currencies other than Sterling and of this figure 26% 2016 24% of sales arising from companies operating with functional currencies other than Sterling.
The majority of foreign currency transactions are naturally hedged from buying and selling within the same currency.
Where this is not the case and Communisis is entering into a significant foreign currency transaction with no natural hedge in place the Group enters into forward foreign exchange contracts to control these risks.
There were no foreign currency contracts outstanding at the year end 2016 none.
LIQUIDITY RISK The Group regularly monitors its risk to a shortage of funds taking account of the maturity profile of its financial assets and liabilities and the projected cash flows from operations.
The Groups objective is to maintain a balance between continuity of funding and flexibility through a mix of mediumterm funding of committed floating rate facilities supplemented by uncommitted bank overdraft facilities.
In 2017 the Group refinanced its borrowings which are repayable in August 2022.
At 31 December 2017 none of the Groups medium term debt matures in less than 12 months 2016 nil none matures between one and two years from the Balance Sheet date 2016 100% and 100% matures between two to five years from the Balance Sheet date 2016 nil.
The Directors consider this funding structure to be adequate for the Groups current requirements.
The maturity profile of the Groups financial liabilities at 31 December 2017 is shown in Note 27.
CREDIT RISK The Group trades only with recognised creditworthy third parties.
Generally customers who wish to trade on credit terms are subject to credit verification procedures.
During the year the Group has entered into trade credit insurance arrangements which cover 38% of the Groups turnover up to a maximum aggregate claim in any one year of 4500000.
The concentration of credit risk is therefore limited to the carrying value of trade receivables not covered by the credit insurance as disclosed in Note 16.
The Groups exposure to credit risk arises from the default of the counterparty with a maximum exposure equal to the carrying amount of these instruments.
As at the Balance Sheet date there are no significant concentrations of credit risk within the Group.
The credit risk arising from the other financial assets of the Group which comprise cash and cash equivalents is managed by Group treasury in accordance with Group policy.
Investments of surplus funds are only made with established banks approved by the Board.
The Groups exposure to credit risk arises from default of the counterparty with a maximum exposure equal to the carrying amount of these instruments.
Financial Statements 111 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 FINANCIAL RISK MANAGEMENT OBJECTIVES AND POLICIES CONTINUED CAPITAL MANAGEMENT The primary objective of the Groups capital management is to ensure that it maintains a strong credit rating and healthy capital ratios in order to support the business and maximise shareholder value.
The Group monitors capital using a gearing ratio being bank debt divided by equity plus bank debt.
The policy is to maintain the gearing ratio below 50%.
Within bank debt the Group includes all interestbearing bank loans and borrowings less cash and cash equivalents.
Interestbearing bank loans and borrowings 53000 58000 Less cash and cash equivalents 30182 38294 Bank debt 22818 19706 Equity 139136 118215 Capital and bank debt 161954 137921 Gearing ratio 14.09% 14.29% For the purposes of capital management the Group considers undiscounted interestbearing loans and borrowings as the appropriate measure for the purposes of determining bank debt.
FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS The following table sets out the maturity of the Groups financial liabilities based on contractual undiscounted payments.
At 31 December 2017 Within 1 year years years years years
5 years T otal Trade and other payables 81921 242     82163 65000000 bank loan 1060 1060 1060 1060 53618  57858 Interest rate swaps 94      94 Provisions    42   42 Hire purchase 95tel120  2217 84026 1878 1345 1387 53738  142374 At 31 December 2016 Within 1 year years years years years
5 years T otal Trade and other payables 9096tel149 261 92479 65000000 bank loan 1317 58329     59646 Interest rate swaps 137 91     228 Provisions 215 42     257 Hire purchase 666 666 290    1622 93303 5963tel261 154232 Carrying value is considered to approximate fair value for all of the Groups financial instruments other than bank loans which have a carrying value of 52404000 2016 57824000 and a fair value of 57262000 2016 59470000.
The fair value of loans has been calculated using Level 2 valuation techniques reflecting the borrowing rate at the end of the reporting period and any unamortised arrangement fees relating to those borrowings.
The known nonperformance risk at 31 December 2017 was assessed to be insignificant.
CAPITAL COMMITMENTS As at 31 December 2017 the Group had not entered into any contractual commitments for the acquisition of property plant and equipment 2016 494000 or intangible assets 2016 nil.
Financial Statements 112 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 CONTINGENT LIABILITIES The Group has contingent liabilities where it has provided rental guarantees to landlords in respect of certain leasehold properties occupied by companies that were formerly subsidiaries in the Group but have subsequently been sold.
The principal risk is that current leasehold occupants will become insolvent and that guarantees will be called resulting in a material cash cost to the Group.
To the extent that they have not already been called these guarantees represent contingent liabilities of the Group.
Other than those leases for which the liability is considered to be remote the Group has guaranteed rentals on a lease with a remaining term of six years with an annual rental of 1135000.
In addition there are four further rental guarantees totalling 80000 with remaining lease terms of between two and six years.
No provision for these guarantees has been made in the Financial Statements because at the Balance Sheet date the Directors believe that it is not probable that they will be called.
CASH GENERATED FROM OPERATIONS Continuing operations Profit before tax 14435 11593 Adjustments for Amortisation of intangible assets arising on business acquisitions 733 809 Depreciation and other amortisation 8663 9945 Exceptional items 2052 4267 Loss on sale of property plant and equipment 7 25 Sharebased payment charge 597 505 Net finance costs 3942 2802 Additional contribution to the defined benefit pension plan 3988 2836 Cash cost of exceptional items 2704 3700 Changes in working capital Increasedecrease in inventories 761 904 Increase in trade and other receivables 15546 9912 Increase in trade and other payables 15194 8507 Cash generated from operations 22624 22909 RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS During the year the Directors were remunerated for services provided to the Group.
This is disclosed in the Directors Remuneration Report on pages 44 to 59.
The Directors are included within key management personnel for whom details of compensation are disclosed in Note 5.3.
There were no other related party transactions in the year.
INVESTMENTS
The Consolidated Financial Statements include the Financial Statements of Communisis plc the ultimate parent undertaking and all subsidiary undertakings.
The Groups subsidiary operations are listed in the following table.
The registered offices for each subsidiary are referenced in the table and listed on page 115.
Name Country of incorporation Registered office % equity interest 2017 % equity interest 2016 Immediate parent Absolute Data Solutions Limited England and Wales 1 100 100 Communisis Data Intelligence Limited Art Master of Chelsea Limited England and Wales 1 100 100 Wakefield Holdings Limited B2E Consulting Limited England and Wales 1 100 100 Communisis Data Intelligence Limited Bangquote Limited England and Wales 1 100 100 Dataform Northern Limited Canada 2 Limited England and Wales 1 100 100 Communisis Dataform Limited Chorley Direct Mail Limited England and Wales 1 100 100 Waddingtons House Limited Communisis 2012 Limited England and Wales 1 100 100 Communisis plc Communisis BBF Limited England and Wales 1 100 100 Robot No.6 Limited Communisis Broadprint Limited England and Wales 1 100 100 Robot No.7 Limited Communisis Capital Partner Limited England and Wales 1 100 100 Communisis UK Limited Communisis Chorleys Limited England and Wales 1 100 100 Waddingtons House Limited CommunisisCRM Limited England and Wales 1 100 100 Waddingtons House Limited Communisis Data Intelligence Limited England and Wales 1 100 100 Communisis UK Limited Financial Statements 113 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 Name Country of incorporation Registered office % equity interest 2017 % equity interest 2016 Immediate parent Communisis Dataform Limited iii England and Wales 1 100 100 Communisis plc Communisis Dataform South West Limited England and Wales 1 100 100 Communisis Dataform Limited Communisis Digital Limited iii England and Wales 1 100 100 Communisis UK Limited Communisis Europe Limited England and Wales 1 100 100 Communisis plc Communisis Group Strategic Partnerships Limited England and Wales 1 100 100 Communisis UK Limited Communisis International Limited England and Wales 1 100 100 Communisis plc Communisis One Limited iiii England and Wales 1 100 100 Communisis Chorleys Limited Communisis Security Products Limited England and Wales 1 100 100 Robot No.7 Limited Communisis Trustee Company Limited England and Wales 1 100 100 Waddington Limited Communisis Trustee  Company
England and Wales 1 100 100 Communisis plc Communisis UK Limited England and Wales 1 100 100 Communisis plc Dataform Digital Limited England and Wales 1 100 100 Communisis Dataform Limited Dataform Midlands Limited England and Wales 1 100 100 Communisis Dataform Limited Dataform Northern Limited England and Wales 1 100 100 Communisis Dataform Limited
Lickfold Limited iiv England and Wales 1 100 100 Waddingtons House Limited Geronimo Marketing and Communications Limited England and Wales 1 100 100 The Meaningful Marketing Group
House of Dubreq Limited England and Wales 1 100 100 Waddington Limited Imagio Limited England and Wales 1 100 100 Wakefield Holdings Limited Intuistic Limited England and Wales 1 100 100 Communisis Data Intelligence Limited Jacaranda Productions Limited England and Wales 1 100 100 Robot No.6 Limited Jaypak Limited England and Wales 1 100 100 Waddington Limited John Mansfield Timber Limited England and Wales 1 100 100 Communisis plc John Waddington Properties England and Wales 1 100 100 Imagio Limited Johnsen and Jorgensen Plastic Limited England and Wales 1 100 100 Waddington Limited Ken Stokes Limited England and Wales 1 100 100 Robot No.6 Limited Kieon Limited England and Wales 1 100 100 Waddington Limited Laser Image Limited England and Wales 1 100 100 Robot No.6 Limited Life Marketing Consultancy Limited England and Wales 1 100 100 Communisis plc McCorquodale Colour Display Limited England and Wales 1 100 100 Robot No.7 Limited MonoWeb Limited England and Wales 1 100 100 Waddington Limited NEWJMTCO Limited ivi England and Wales 1 100 100 Communisis plc PFB Advertising Limited ivii England and Wales 1 100 100 Communisis One Limited Print Directive Limited England and Wales 1 100 100 Communisis Dataform Limited Psona Limited England and Wales 1 100 100 Psona Group Limited Psona Films Limited England and Wales 1 100 100 Psona Group Limited Psona Glasgow Limited England and Wales 1 100 100 Psona Group Limited Psona Group Limited England and Wales 1 100 100 Communisis plc Psona 12 Limited England and Wales 1 100 100 Psona Group Limited Public Creative Limited England and Wales 1 100 100 Psona Limited Robot No.6 Limited England and Wales 1 100 100 Communisis plc Robot No.7 Limited England and Wales 1 100 100 Robot No.6 Limited Standard Check Book Company Limited England and Wales 1 100 100 Robot No.7 Limited Subbuteo Sports Games Limited England and Wales 1 100 100 Waddington Limited Supervision Entertainment Limited England and Wales 1 100 100 Waddington Limited The Communications Agency One Limited England and Wales 1 100 100 Waddington Limited The Garden Marketing Limited England and Wales 1 100 100 Communisis 2012 Limited The Meaningful Marketing Group Limited iii England and Wales 1 100 100 Psona Group Limited Waddington Limited viii England and Wales 1 100 100 Communisis plc Waddingtons Business Forms Limited England and Wales 1 100 100 Waddington Limited Waddingtons Games Limited England and Wales 1 100 100 Waddington Limited INVESTMENTS CONTINUED Financial Statements 114 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 Name Country of incorporation Registered office % equity interest 2017 % equity interest 2016 Immediate parent Waddingtons Playing Card Company Limited England and Wales 1 100 100 Waddington Limited Waddingtons Security Print Limited England and Wales 1 100 100 Communisis plc Waddingtons Videomaster Limited England and Wales 1 100 100 Waddington Limited Wakefield Holdings Limited England and Wales 1 100 100 Communisis UK Limited Yomego Limited England and Wales 1 100 100 Robot No.7 Limited Communisis Belgie NV Belgium 2 100 100 Communisis Europe Limited Communisis Deutschland GmbH Germany 3 100 100 Communisis Europe Limited Communisis Digital Private Limited India 4 100 100 Communisis Digital Limited Communisis France S.
France 5 100 100 Communisis Europe Limited Communisis Hellas Marketing Services EPE Greece 6 100 100 Communisis Europe Limited Communisis Inc.
USA 7 100 100 Communisis International Limited Communisis Ireland Limited Ireland 8 100 100 Communisis UK Limited Communisis Italia Srl Italy 9 100 100 Communisis Europe Limited Communisis Marketing Services LLC United Arab Emirates 10 49 49 Communisis International Limited Communisis Nederland B.
V .
The Netherlands 11 100 100 Communisis Europe Limited Communisis NI Limited i Northern Ireland 12 100 100 Robot No.7 Limited Communisis Pension Funding Limited Partnership i Scotland 13 100 100 Communisis Capital Partner Limited GDE LimitedCommunisis Trustee Company Limited GDE Limited i Scotland 13 100 100 Communisis UK Limited
Limited i Scotland 13 100 100 Waddingtons House Limited Waddingtons House Limited i ix Scotland 13 100 100 Waddington Limited Communisis Poland Sp. z o.
Poland 14 100 100 Communisis International Limited Communisis Portugal LDA Portugal 15 100 100 Communisis Europe Limited Communisis Romania S.
Romania 16 100 100 Communisis Europe Limited Communisis Spain S.
Spain 17 100 100 Communisis Europe Limited Communisis Suisse Srl Switzerland 18 100 100 Communisis Europe Limited Communisis Sverige AB Sweden 19 100 100 Communisis Europe Limited Communisis Turkey Ofis Hizmetleri Pazarlama Ticaret Limited Sirketi Turkey 20 100 100 Communisis Europe Limited Editions Publishing Limited Scotland 21 100 100 Communisis UK Limited Editions Financial Inc.
USA 22 100  Communisis Inc.
Communisis Marketing Services Limited Liability Company Russian Federation 23 100  Communisis International Limited Communisis Marketing Services d.
Beograd
Serbia 24 100  Communisis International Limited INVESTMENTS CONTINUED Financial Statements 115 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
1 Communisis House Manston Lane Leeds LS15 8AH 2 Pegasus Park De Kleetlaan 12A 1831 Diegem Belgium 3 Am Kronberger Hang 8 65824 Schwalbach am T aunus Germany 4 41 Patalamma T emple Street Near South End Circle Basavanagudi Bangalore Karnataka India 5 53 Rue Boissiere 75116 Paris France 6 Patroklou 1 and Paradissou Athens 151 25 Greece 7 1209 Orange Street Wilmington Delaware 19801 USA 8 Suite 3 One Earlsfort Centre Earlsfort T errace Dublin Ireland 9 Via Montenapoleone n.29 20121 Milan Italy 10 Standard Chartered T ower Level 5 Emmar Square DownT own Burj Khalifa Dubai United Arab Emirates 11 Monfor Offices  4th floor Sir Winston Churchilllaan 299 2288 DC Rijswijk The Netherlands 12 Marlborough House 30 Victoria Street Belfast Northern Ireland BT1 3GG 13 1 Rutland Court Edinburgh Scotland EH3 8EY 14 ul.
Mila 2 00180 Warszawa Poland 15 Av.
16 Bulevardul Dimitrie Pompei nr.
57 Cladirea Hermes Business Etaj 2 Biroul 205 Sector 2 Bucuresti  Romania 17 Calle Gurtubay 4 3 derecha 28001 Madrid Spain 18 11 chemin du FaubourgdeCruseilles Carouge 1227 Geneva Switzerland 19 Berga Backe 2 Box 68 182 11 Danderyd Sweden 20 Kucukbakkalkoy Mahallesi V edat Gunyol Caddesi Defne Sokak No 1 Flora Residence Kat 18 Daire 180118021803 Atas ehir  Istanbul 34750 T urkey 21 50 Lothian Road Edinburgh Midlothian Scotland EH3 9WJ 22 111 Eighth Avenue New York NY 10011 USA 23 762 3 Smolenskaya Square  Moscow Russian Federation 24 Spanskih boraca 5210 Novi Beograd Belgrade Serbia i Dormant company.
Ownership held in ordinary shares ordinaryA shares preferenceA shares and preferenceB shares. iii Ownership held in ordinaryA shares and ordinaryB shares. iv Ownership held in ordinary shares and deferred shares. v Ownership held in ordinaryA shares ordinaryB shares and ordinaryC shares. vi Ownership held in ordinary shares ordinaryA shares ordinaryB shares ordinaryC shares and preference shares. vii Ownership held in ordinary shares and 4% noncumulative preference shares. viii Ownership held in ordinary shares 6% preference shares and 8% preference shares. ix Ownership held in ordinary shares and ordinaryA shares.
INVESTMENTS CONTINUED Financial Statements 116 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 COMPANY BALANCE SHEET 31 DECEMBER 2017
Assets
Noncurrent assets Property plant and equipment 6 144 173 Intangible assets 7 118 154 Trade and other receivables 9 3 Investments 8 228765 228565 Deferred tax assets 5 1031 1424 230061 230316 Current assets Trade and other receivables 9 2631 5391 Income tax receivable 1543 209 Cash and cash equivalents 10 303 115 4477 5715 T otal assets 234538 236031 Equity and liabilities Equity share capital 15 52405 52344 Share premium 16 75 ESOP reserve 16 163 297 Retained earnings 17 32835 26824 T otal equity 85152 78871 Noncurrent liabilities Interestbearing loans and borrowings 11 52404 57824 Trade and other payables 12 242 613 Financial liabilities 13  228 Loans due to group undertakings 62857 70787 Retirement benefit obligations 18 4384 6507 119887 135959 Current liabilities Interestbearing loans and borrowings 11 25167 6651 Trade and other payables 12 4238 14423 Financial liabilities 13 94 Provisions 14  127 29499 21201 T otal liabilities 149386 157160 T otal equity and liabilities 234538 236031 The Company has taken advantage of the exemption provided by Section 408 of the Companies Act 2006 not to publish its individual Income Statement.
The profit for the year attributable to the members of the Company was 9148000 2016 658000 loss.
The Financial Statements on pages 116 to 128 were approved by the Board on 8 March 2018 and signed on its behalf by Andy Blundell Steve Rawlins
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these Financial Statements.
Financial Statements 117 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 COMPANY STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017
Share premium
Merger reserve
Capital redemption reserve
T otal equity At 1 January 2016 52302 5986 15081 10 1375 11239 85973 Loss for the year Other comprehensive loss 1783 1783 T otal comprehensive loss 2441 2441 Employee share option schemes  value of services provided Shares issued  exercise of options 42 10 Shares issued from ESOP Purchase of own shares Issue of capital reduction shares 15081 15081 Capital reduction 5996 15081 1375 22452 Dividends paid 4773 4773 At 31 December 2016 52344 26824 78871 Profit for the year 9148 9148 Other comprehensive income 1622 1622 T otal comprehensive income 10770 10770 Employee share option schemes value of services provided Shares issued  exercise of options 61 75 Shares issued from ESOP Dividends paid 5222 5222 At 31 December 2017 52405 75   163  32835 85152 The accompanying notes are an integral part of these Financial Statements.
Financial Statements 118 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 NOTES TO THE COMPANY FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 AUTHORISATION OF FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND STATEMENT OF COMPLIANCE WITH FRS 101 The Financial Statements of Communisis plc the Company for the year ended 31 December 2017 were authorised for issue on 8 March 2018 and the Balance Sheet was signed on the Boards behalf by Andy Blundell and Steve Rawlins.
Communisis plc is incorporated and domiciled in England and Wales.
The Company Financial Statements are prepared in accordance with Financial Reporting Standard 101 Reduced Disclosure Framework FRS 101 and in accordance with applicable United Kingdom law and accounting standards.
The Companys Financial Statements are presented in Sterling and all values are rounded to the nearest thousand British pounds 000 except where otherwise indicated.
The results of Communisis plc are included in the Consolidated Financial Statements of Communisis plc which are available from Communisis House Manston Lane Leeds LS15 8AH.
The principal accounting policies adopted by the Company are set out in Note 2.
ACCOUNTING POLICIES 2.1 BASIS OF PREPARATION The accounting policies which follow set out those policies which apply in preparing the Financial Statements for the year ended 31 December 2017.
The Company has taken advantage of the following disclosure exemptions under FRS 101 the requirements of paragraphs 45b and 4652 of IFRS 2 Sharebased Payment because the sharebased payment arrangement concerns its own equity instruments and its separate Financial Statements are presented alongside the Consolidated Financial Statements of the Group and the disclosures are included in the Consolidated Financial Statements of the Group in which the entity is consolidated the requirements of IFRS 7 Financial Instruments Disclosures as the disclosures are included in the Consolidated Financial Statements of the Group in which the entity is consolidated the requirements of paragraphs 9199 of IFRS 13 Fair Value Measurement as the disclosures are included in the Consolidated Financial Statements of the Group in which the entity is consolidated the requirement in paragraph 38 of IAS 1 Presentation of Financial Statements to present comparative information in respect of paragraph 79aiv of IAS 1 ii paragraph 73e of IAS 16 Property Plant and Equipment and iii paragraph 118e of IAS 38 Intangible Assets the requirements of paragraphs 10d 10f 16 38A 38B 38C 38D 40A 40B 40C 40D 111 and 134 to 136 of IAS 1 Presentation of Financial Statements the requirements of IAS 7 Statement of Cash Flows the requirements of paragraphs 30 and 31 of IAS 8 Accounting Policies Changes in Accounting Estimates and Errors the requirements of paragraph 17 of IAS 24 Related Party Disclosures the requirements in IAS 24 Related Party Disclosures to disclose related party transactions entered into between two or more members of a group provided that any subsidiary which is a party to the transaction is wholly owned by such a member and the requirements of paragraphs 130fii 130fiii 134d134f and 135c135e of IAS 36 Impairment of Assets as the disclosures are included in the Consolidated Financial Statements of the Group in which the entity is consolidated.
The Company has taken advantage of the exemption provided by Section 408 of the Companies Act 2006 not to publish its individual Income Statement and related notes.
The Company has net current liabilities of 25022000 as at 31 December 2017 2016 net current liabilities of 15486000.
The
Companys objectives policies and processes for managing its liquidity risk as well as potential exposure to cash flow interest rate risk are described in Note 26 in the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Through the Group the Company has considerable financial resources and as a consequence the Directors believe that the Company is well placed to manage its business risks successfully.
After making enquiries the Directors have a reasonable expectation that the Company has adequate resources to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future.
Accordingly they continue to adopt the going concern basis in preparing the Financial Statements.
Financial Statements 119 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED 2.2 SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING JUDGEMENTS AND ESTIMATES Estimation uncertainty The key assumptions concerning the future and other key sources of estimation uncertainty at the Balance Sheet date that have a significant risk of causing a material adjustment to the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities within the next financial year are discussed below.
Pensions
The actuarial valuation involves making assumptions about discount rates mortality rates and future pension increases.
Due to the longterm nature of these plans such estimates are subject to significant uncertainty.
Additional information is included in Note 18.
2.3 SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES Intangible assets Intangible assets are carried at cost less accumulated amortisation and accumulated impairment losses.
Intangible assets created within the business are not capitalised unless specific conditions are met and expenditure is charged to the Income Statement in the year in which the expenditure is incurred.
Acquired computer software and licences are capitalised.
These costs are amortised over their estimated useful lives three to eight years.
Costs associated with maintaining computer software programs are recognised as an expense as incurred.
Costs that are directly associated with the production of identifiable and unique software products controlled by the Company and that will generate probable economic benefits exceeding costs beyond one year are recognised as intangible assets.
Direct costs include the costs of software development employees.
These costs are amortised over their estimated useful lives three to eight years.
Useful lives are also examined on an annual basis and adjustments where applicable are made on a prospective basis.
Property plant and equipment Property plant and equipment in the Financial Statements of the Company are stated at cost less aggregate depreciation and any provision for impairment.
Depreciation is calculated on a straightline basis over the estimated useful life of the asset as follows Plant and equipment 3 to 10 years The carrying values of property plant and equipment are reviewed for impairment when events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value may not be recoverable.
If any such indication exists and where the carrying values exceed the estimated recoverable amount the assets are written down to their recoverable amount.
The recoverable amount of property plant and equipment is the greater of fair value less costs to sell and value in use.
In assessing value in use the estimated future cash flows are discounted to their present value using a pretax discount rate that reflects current market assessments of the time value of money and the risks specific to the asset.
Useful economic lives depreciation methods and residual values are reviewed annually.
For an asset that does not generate largely independent cash inflows the recoverable amount is determined for the cashgenerating unit to which the asset belongs.
Impairment losses are recognised in the Income Statement.
Investments
Investments are shown at cost less provision for impairment.
The cost of an investment is measured as the aggregate of the consideration transferred measured at acquisition date fair value.
Any contingent consideration will be recognised at fair value at the acquisition date.
Subsequent changes to the fair value of the contingent consideration which is deemed to be an asset or a liability will be recognised in accordance with IAS 39 either in profit and loss or in other comprehensive income.
If the contingent consideration is classed as equity it is not remeasured until it is finally settled within equity.
Investments are reviewed for impairment annually or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that its carrying value may be impaired.
Investments are allocated to the related cashgenerating units monitored by management for the purpose of impairment testing.
Trade and other receivables Trade and other receivables which generally have 3090 day credit terms are recognised and carried at original invoice amount less an allowance for any uncollectable amounts.
An estimate for doubtful debts is made.
Bad debts are written off when identified.
Cash and cash equivalents Cash and cash equivalents in the Balance Sheet comprise cash at bank and in hand and shortterm deposits with an original maturity of three months or less.
Financial Statements 120 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 NOTES TO THE COMPANY FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2016 ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED 2.3 SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED Trade and other payables Trade and other payables which generally have 3090 day credit terms are recognised and carried at original invoice amount.
Income tax Current tax being UK corporation tax is provided at amounts expected to be paid or recovered using the tax rates and laws that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the Balance Sheet date.
Deferred income tax is provided using the liability method on all temporary differences at the Balance Sheet date between the tax bases of assets and liabilities and their carrying amounts for financial reporting purposes.
Deferred income tax liabilities are recognised for all taxable temporary differences except in respect of taxable temporary differences associated with investments in subsidiaries where the timing of the reversal of the temporary differences can be controlled and it is probable that the temporary differences will not reverse in the foreseeable future.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are not recognised if the temporary differences arise from the initial recognition of goodwill or from the initial recognition other than in a business combination of other assets and liabilities in a transaction that affects neither the taxable profit nor the accounting profit.
Deferred income tax assets are recognised for all deductible temporary differences carryforward of unused tax assets and unused tax losses to the extent that it is probable that taxable profit will be available against which the deductible temporary differences and the carryforward of unused tax assets and unused tax losses can be utilised.
In respect of deductible temporary differences associated with investments in subsidiaries deferred tax assets are only recognised to the extent that it is probable that the temporary differences will reverse in the foreseeable future and taxable profit will be available against which the temporary differences can be utilised.
The carrying amount of deferred income tax assets is reviewed at each Balance Sheet date and reduced to the extent that it is no longer probable that sufficient taxable profit will be available to allow all or part of the deferred income tax asset to be utilised.
Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are measured at the tax rates that are expected to apply to the year when the asset is realised or the liability is settled based on tax rates and tax laws that have been enacted or substantively enacted at the Balance Sheet date.
Income tax relating to items recognised in other comprehensive income or directly in equity is also recognised in other comprehensive income or directly in equity.
Foreign currencies The Companys functional currency and presentation currency is Sterling.
Transactions in foreign currencies are recorded at the rate ruling at the date of the transaction.
Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are retranslated at the rate of exchange ruling at the Balance Sheet date.
All differences are taken to the Income Statement.
Nonmonetary items that are measured in terms of historical cost in a foreign currency are translated using the exchange rates as at the dates of the initial transactions.
Nonmonetary items measured at fair value in a foreign currency are translated using the exchange rates at the date when the fair value was determined.
Pension costs The Company operates defined contribution and defined benefit pension plans.
Payments to defined contribution pension plans are charged as an expense to the Income Statement as incurred when the related employee service is rendered.
The Company has no further legal or constructive payment obligations once the contributions have been made.
The defined benefit pension plan is a Group scheme as detailed in the Group accounting policies note in the Group Consolidated Financial Statements on page 83.
In accordance with the Company policy in respect of the defined benefit pension scheme a proportion equating to 12.3% of all movements on the defined benefit scheme is recognised within the Company accounts.
This proportion is based on the number of members employed by the Company at the time that the scheme was closed to future accrual.
The proportionate split is applied to all costs settlements and actuarial gains and losses as detailed below.
The costs of administering the defined benefit pension scheme are recognised in employee benefits expense in the Income Statement.
When a settlement eliminating all obligations for benefits already accrued or a curtailment reducing future obligations as a result of a material reduction in the scheme membership or a reduction in future entitlement occurs the obligation and the related plan assets are remeasured using current actuarial assumptions and the resultant gain or loss is recognised in the Income Statement during the period in which the settlement or curtailment occurs.
All actuarial gains and losses that arise in calculating the present value of the defined benefit obligation and the fair value of plan assets are recognised immediately in the Statement of Comprehensive Income.
Financial Statements 121 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED 2.3 SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED
The determination of whether an arrangement is or contains a lease is based on the substance of the arrangement at inception date whether fulfilment of the arrangement is dependent on the use of a specific asset or assets or the arrangement conveys a right to the use of assets.
Operating lease payments are recognised as an expense in the Income Statement on a straightline basis over the lease term or in accordance with utilisation of the leased asset if more appropriate.
Employee share ownership plan Communisis plc shares held by the Company are classified in shareholders equity as the ESOP reserve and are recognised at cost.
Consideration received for the sale of such shares is also recognised in equity with any difference between the proceeds from sale and the original cost being taken to retained earnings.
No gain or loss is recognised in the Income Statement on the purchase sale issue or cancellation of equity shares.
Borrowings
Borrowings are recognised initially at fair value net of transaction costs incurred.
Borrowings are subsequently stated at amortised cost any difference between the proceeds net of transaction costs and the redemption value is recognised in the Income Statement over the period of the borrowings using the effective interest method.
Borrowings are classified as current liabilities unless the Company has an unconditional right to defer settlement of the liability for at least 12 months after the Balance Sheet date.
Provisions
Provisions are recognised when the Company has a present obligation legal or constructive as a result of a past event it is probable that an outflow of resources embodying economic benefits will be required to settle the obligation and a reliable estimate can be made but there is some uncertainty about the timing or amount of the future expenditure required in settlement.
If the effect of the time value of money is material provisions are determined by discounting the expected future cash flows at a pretax rate that reflects current market assessments of the time value of money and where appropriate the risks specific to the liability.
Where discounting is used the increase in the provision due to the passage of time is recognised as a finance cost.
Sharebased payment transactions Certain Directors and management are eligible to participate in sharebased payment schemes all of which are equitysettled in return for services provided to Communisis plc.
The cost of equitysettled transactions with employees is measured by reference to the fair value at the date on which they are granted.
The fair value is determined by an external valuer using an appropriate model.
In valuing equitysettled transactions no account is taken of any vesting conditions other than conditions linked to the price of the shares of Communisis plc market conditions.
The cost of equitysettled transactions is recognised together with a corresponding increase in equity over the period in which the performance or service conditions are fulfilled ending on the date on which the relevant employees become fully entitled to the award the vesting date.
The cumulative expense recognised for equitysettled transactions at each reporting date reflects the extent to which the vesting period has expired and the Companys best estimate of the number of equity instruments that will ultimately vest.
No expense is recognised for awards that do not ultimately vest except for awards where vesting is conditional upon a market or nonvesting condition which are treated as vesting irrespective of whether or not the market or nonvesting condition is satisfied provided that all other performance or service conditions are satisfied.
Where an equitysettled award is cancelled it is treated as if it had vested on the date of cancellation and any cost not yet recognised in the Income Statement for the award is expensed immediately.
This includes any award where nonvesting conditions within the control of the Company or the employee are not met.
Any compensation paid up to the fair value of the award at the cancellation or settlement date is deducted from equity with any excess over fair value being treated as an expense in the Income Statement.
Where an equitysettled award is forfeited the total cost recognised in the Income Statement to date for the award is reversed.
Derivative financial instruments and hedge accounting Initial recognition and subsequent measurement The Company uses derivative financial instruments such as forward currency contracts and interest rate swaps to hedge its foreign currency and interest rate risks respectively.
Such derivative financial instruments are initially recognised at fair value on the date on which a derivative contract is entered into and are subsequently remeasured at fair value.
Derivatives are carried as financial assets when the fair value is positive and as financial liabilities when the fair value is negative.
Any gains or losses arising from changes in fair value on derivatives during the year that do not qualify for hedge accounting and the ineffective portion of an effective hedge are taken directly to the Income Statement.
The fair value of interest rate swaps is the difference between the fixed rate and the onemonth LIBOR rate implied at the Balance Sheet date calculated monthly and discounted to present value.
Financial Statements 122 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED 2.3 SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED Derivative financial instruments and hedge accounting continued Initial recognition and subsequent measurement continued For the purpose of hedge accounting hedges are classified as cash flow hedges when hedging exposure to variability in cash flows which is either attributable to a particular risk associated with a recognised asset or liability or a highly probable forecast transaction or when hedging the foreign currency risk in an unrecognised firm commitment.
For those derivatives designated as hedges and for which hedge accounting is desired the hedging relationship is formally designated and documented at its inception.
This documentation identifies the risk management objective and strategy for undertaking the hedge the hedging instrument the hedged item or transaction the nature of the risk being hedged and how effectiveness will be measured throughout its duration.
Such hedges are expected to be highly effective in offsetting changes in fair value or cash flows and are assessed on an ongoing basis to determine that they actually have been highly effective throughout the financial reporting periods for which they were designated.
Cash flow hedges The effective portion of the gain or loss on the hedging instrument is recognised directly in equity while any ineffective portion is recognised immediately in the Income Statement.
Amounts taken to equity are transferred to the Income Statement when the hedged transaction affects profit or loss such as when the hedged financial income or financial expense is recognised or when a forecast sale occurs.
Where the hedged item is the cost of a nonfinancial asset or nonfinancial liability the amounts taken to equity are transferred to the initial carrying amount of the nonfinancial asset or liability.
If the forecast transaction or firm commitment is no longer expected to occur amounts previously recognised in equity are transferred to the Income Statement.
If the hedging instrument expires or is sold terminated or exercised without replacement or rollover or if its designation as a hedge is revoked amounts previously recognised in equity remain in equity until the forecast transaction or firm commitment occurs.
OPERATING COSTS AND INCOME AUDITORS REMUNERATION The auditors remuneration charge relating to the year was 21000 2016 20500.
The Company is exempt from disclosing remuneration for nonaudit services as the Group accounts are required to include the information required by Regulation 41b of the Companies Regulations 2005 in respect of the Group.
EMPLOYEE BENEFITS EXPENSE Wages and salaries 2731 2210 Social security costs 348 233 Pension costs 208 163 Sharebased payments equitysettled 338 251 Redundancy costs  181 3625 3038
Number
The average number of persons employed by the Company during the year was United Kingdom 24 27 DIRECTORS REMUNERATION Details of individual Directors remuneration pension entitlements and interests of the Directors in Communisis plc are provided within the Directors Remuneration Report on pages 44 to 59.
DIVIDENDS PAID AND PROPOSED Declared and paid during the year Amounts recognised as distributions to equity holders in the year Final dividend for the year ended 31 December 2015 of 1.47p per share  3077 Interim dividend for the year ended 31 December 2016 of 0.81p per share  1696 Final dividend for the year ended 31 December 2016 of 1.61p per share 3362 Interim dividend for the year ended 31 December 2017 of 0.89p per share 1860 5222 4773 Proposed for approval at AGM not recognised as a liability as at 31 December Final equity dividend on ordinary shares of 1.77p 2016 1.61p per share based on issued share capital at the date of approval of the Financial Statements 3704 3358 NOTES TO THE COMPANY FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2016 Financial Statements 123 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 DEFERRED TAX Deferred tax included in the Balance Sheet is as follows Depreciation in excess of capital allowances 33 47 T emporary differences 7 102 Sharebased payments 231 130 Pension 745 1106 Financial liabilities 15 39 Deferred tax asset 1031 1424 The provision for deferred tax at 31 December 2017 has been made at rates between 17% and 19% depending upon the anticipated time of reversal.
This reflects the legislation included in the Finance Act 2016 reducing the rate of corporation tax to 17% from April 2020.
PROPERTY PLANT AND EQUIPMENT Plant and equipment
At 1 January 2017 1495
Disposals 1251 At 31 December 2017 244
At 1 January 2017 1322 Charge for year 29 Disposals 1251 At 31 December 2017 100 Net book value at 31 December 2017 144 Net book value at 31 December 2016 173 INTANGIBLE ASSETS
Cost
At 1 January 2017 340 Additions 53 Disposals 118 At 31 December 2017 275
At 1 January 2017 186 Charge for year 89 Disposals 118 At 31 December 2017 157 Net book value at 31 December 2017 118 Net book value at 31 December 2016 154 Financial Statements 124 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
Shares
Provisions
T otal
At 1 January 2017 404821 176256 228565 Fair value adjustment 200  200 31 December 2017 405021 176256 228765 Details of the Companys investments are outlined in Note 32 in the Consolidated Financial Statements.
TRADE AND OTHER RECEIVABLES Trade receivables 308 475 Amounts owed by subsidiary companies 769 3478 Other receivables 603 527 Prepayments and accrued income 228 289 VAT receivable 726 622 2634 5391 Current 2631 5391 Noncurrent 3 2634 5391 CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTS Cash at bank and in hand 303 115 INTERESTBEARING LOANS AND BORROWINGS
Current
Bank overdrafts On demand 25167 6651 25167 6651
65000000 bank loan 2016 65000000 August 2022 52404 57824 77571 64475 BANK OVERDRAFTS The bank overdrafts are principally denominated in Sterling and bear interest at rates set by reference to the UK base rate.
The overdrafts are secured by cross guarantee arrangements with the relevant banks.
65000000 BANK LOAN This loan is secured by a cross guarantee arrangement and is repayable in August 2022.
Interest is charged at LIBOR plus a rate of between 1.5% and 2.25% depending on the ratio of net debt to EBITDA in the preceding performance period.
The Company is subject to a number of covenants in relation to its borrowing which if breached would result in its loans becoming immediately repayable.
These covenants specify certain maximum limits in terms of net debt as a multiple of EBITDA and interest payable as a multiple of EBITA.
At the year end and throughout the year the Company was not in breach of any bank covenants.
At 31 December 2017 the Company had available 12000000 2016 7000000 of undrawn committed borrowing facilities in respect of which all conditions precedent had been met.
Early repayment is possible under the terms of all the borrowing facilities listed above at no cost by giving more than five days notice.
NOTES TO THE COMPANY FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2016 Financial Statements 125 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 TRADE AND OTHER PAYABLES Trade and other payables 521 2190 Amounts due to subsidiary companies 143 21 Other payables 326 130 T axation and social security 2067 1957 Accruals and deferred income 1423 10738 4480 15036 Current 4238 14423 Noncurrent 242 613 4480 15036 FINANCIAL LIABILITIES Current liabilities Interest rate swaps 94 Noncurrent liabilities Interest rate swaps  228 INTEREST RATE SWAPS At 31 December 2017 the Company has two arrangements each of a notional amount of 10000000 with maturity dates being in 2018.
The Company pays fixed rates of interest of 3.16% and 1.77% respectively on each arrangement and on both the Company receives a variable rate equal to LIBOR  1.5% on the notional amount.
PROVISIONS
Dilapidation provisions T otal At 1 January telUtilised 106 106 Released during the year 21 21 At 31 December 2017 DILAPIDATION PROVISIONS The dilapidation provisions represent the estimated costs required to reinstate the Chiswell Street London premises to a state as required under the lease.
The costs were incurred in 2017.
CALLED UP SHARE CAPITAL 2017 2016 Number of shares 000 Number of shares 000 Allotted and fully paid Ordinary shares of 25p each 209619144 52405 209376010 52344 The Company has one class of ordinary shares which carries no right to fixed income.
The Company has two share option schemes under which options to subscribe for the Companys shares have been granted to employees Note 19.
During the year the Company issued 243134 ordinary shares with a nominal value of 60784 in respect of Sharesave options for consideration of 136226.
The difference of 75442 between the consideration received and the nominal value has been taken to the share premium reserve.
Financial Statements 126 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017
SHARE PREMIUM This represents the share premium attaching to those shares issued upon the exercise of certain share options.
At 31 December 2017 the share premium reserve was 75000 2016 nil.
At 1 January 2016 5986 Exercise of share options 10 Capital reduction 5996 At 31 December 2016 Exercise of share options 75 At 31 December 2017 75 MERGER RESERVE This represents the share premium attaching to those shares issued upon the acquisition of subsidiaries.
At 31 December 2017 the merger reserve was nil 2016 nil.
At 1 January 2016 15081 Capital reduction 15081 At 31 December 2016 and 2017 ESOP RESERVE The ESOP reserve is used to record the investment in Communisis plc shares held by the employee share ownership plan ESOP.
The
ESOP is for the benefit of all employees and can be used in conjunction with any of the Groups share schemes.
The ESOP reserve holds 441220 shares at 31 December 2017 2016 806319 with an average cost of 36.86p 2016 36.83p and the market value of these shares is 284589 2016 349781.
At 1 January 2016 10 Shares issued from ESOP 155 Purchase of own shares 442 At 31 December 2016 297 Shares issued from ESOP 134 At 31 December 2017 163 CAPITAL REDEMPTION RESERVE The capital redemption reserve is used to record the effect of share capital buybacks made by the Company where the nominal value of share capital acquired is transferred to this reserve.
At 31 December 2017 the capital redemption reserve was nil 2016 nil.
At 1 January 2016 1375 Capital reduction 1375 At 31 December 2016 and 2017 RETAINED EARNINGS At 1 January 26824 11239 Profitloss for the financial year 9148 658 Ordinary dividends paid 5222 4773 Adjustment in respect of prior years due to change in tax rate  47 Net gainloss on cash flow hedges taken directly to equity 111 26 Actuarial gainslosses on defined benefit pension plans 1821 1965 Income tax chargecredit on items taken directly to Other Comprehensive Income 310 255 Employee share option schemes  value of services provided 597 505 Shares options exercised  3 Shares issued from ESOP 134 155 Capital reduction  22452 At 31 December 32835 26824 NOTES TO THE COMPANY FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2016 Financial Statements 127 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 RETIREMENT BENEFIT PLANS The Company operates the Communisis Pension Plan which comprise a defined contribution and defined benefit section.
DEFINED CONTRIBUTION SECTION The Company operates UK defined contribution arrangements.
The assets of the arrangements are held separately from those of the Company.
The Company is required to contribute a specified percentage of payroll costs to the retirement benefit scheme to fund the benefits.
The only obligation of the Company with respect to the retirement benefit scheme is to make the specified contributions.
The total cost charged to income of 106000 2016 165000 represents contributions payable to these arrangements by the Company at specified rates.
At 31 December 2017 16000 of contributions due in respect of the current reporting period had not yet been paid over to the arrangements 2016 all paid over.
This liability was paid on 4 January 2018.
The Company expects to contribute 0.1m 2016 0.1m to the defined contribution pension arrangements in 2018.
DEFINED BENEFIT SECTION These Financial Statements include a proportion of the Group pension deficit and charge which has been allocated to the Company based on the number of members employed by the Company at the time the scheme was closed to future accrual.
Defined benefit obligation 23969 24879 Fair value of plan assets 19585 18372 Net pension deficit 4384 6507 Detailed disclosure can be found in Note 14 to the Consolidated Financial Statements on pages 100 to 103.
SHAREBASED PAYMENTS The Company operates two schemes details of which can be found in Note 13 to the Consolidated Financial Statements on pages 98 to 100.
The following table illustrates the number and movements in the Long Term Incentive Plan options during the year.
The Long Term Incentive Plan options are nil cost options so the weighted average exercise prices WAEP are nil in all cases.
Number
Number
Exercised during the year 365096 346859 Outstanding at the end of the year 7927611 5906359 1 The weighted average share price at the date of exercise for the options exercised in the year ended 31 December 2017 was 55p 2016 45p.
The weighted average remaining contractual life for the share options outstanding under the Long Term Incentive Plan as at 31 December 2017 is 1.52 years 2016 1.75 years.
The following table illustrates the number and weighted average exercise prices WAEP of and movements in Sharesave Scheme options during the year.
Number
WAEP
Number
WAEP
Exercised during the year 243134 56.04p 155659 31.68p Outstanding at the end of the year 2470608 46.16p 4395426 50.05p 1 The weighted average share price at the date of exercise for the options exercised in the year ended 31 December 2017 was 62p 2016 43p.
The weighted average remaining contractual life for the share options outstanding under the Sharesave Scheme as at 31 December 2017 is 1.95 years 2016 1.63 years.
The range of exercise prices for options outstanding under all schemes at the end of the year was nil57.5p 2016 nil57.5p.
The number of share options for which the exercise price is nil total 7927611 2016 5906359.
Financial Statements 128 Communisis plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 OTHER FINANCIAL COMMITMENTS At 31 December 2017 the Company had annual commitments under noncancellable operating leases for assets as set out below Land and buildings Operating leases which expire within one year 10 55 in two to five years  10
Operating leases which expire within one year 30 54 in two to five years .
CONTINGENT LIABILITIES The Company has contingent liabilities where it has provided rental guarantees to landlords in respect of certain leasehold properties occupied by companies that were formerly subsidiaries in the Group but have subsequently been sold.
The principal risk is that current leasehold occupants will become insolvent and that guarantees will be called resulting in a material cash cost to the Group.
To the extent that they have not already been called these guarantees represent contingent liabilities of the Company.
Other than those leases for which the liability is considered to be remote the Company has guaranteed rentals on a lease with a remaining term of six years with an annual rental of 1135000.
In addition there are four further rental guarantees totalling 80000 with remaining lease terms of between two and six years.
No provision for these guarantees has been made in the Financial Statements because at the Balance Sheet date the Directors believe that it is not probable that they will be called.
RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS The Company has taken advantage of the exemption under paragraph 8k of FRS 101 not to disclose related party transactions with its wholly owned subsidiaries.
Remuneration of key management personnel is disclosed in the Directors Remuneration Report on pages 44 to 59.
NOTES TO THE COMPANY FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2016 2018 FINANCIAL CALENDAR 8 March 2018 Preliminary results announcement 19 April 2018 Exdividend date for the final dividend 20 April 2018 Record date to be eligible for the final dividend 10 May 2018 Annual General Meeting 18 May 2018 Final dividend payment date 2 August 2018 Interim results announcement 13 September 2018 Exdividend date for the interim dividend 14 September 2018 Record date to be eligible for the interim dividend 12 October 2018 Interim dividend payment date ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING AGM 2018 This years AGM will be held at the offices of Eversheds Sutherland LLP 1 Wood Street London EC2V 7WS on Thursday 10 May 2018.
The meeting will start at 12 noon and registration will be available from 11.30 am.
HOW TO GET IN TOUCH REGISTERED OFFICE Communisis plc Communisis House Manston Lane
LS15 8AH Tel 44 0tel Registered in England and Wales
COMPANY SECRETARY Sarah Caddy HEAD OFFICE Communisis plc 10 Little Portland Street
W1W 7JG Tel 44 0tel
AUDITOR
Ernst and Young LLP 1 Bridgewater Place Water Lane
LS11 5QR
Liberum Capital Limited Ropemaker Place 25 Ropemaker Street
EC2Y 9LY CORPORATE LAWYERS Eversheds Sutherland LLP Clarion Solicitors LLP Pinsent Masons LLP Ward Hadaway LLP PRINCIPAL BANKERS HSBC Bank plc Lloyds Banking Group plc Santander UK plc Barclays Bank PLC REGISTRAR AND SHAREHOLDING ENQUIRIES Administrative enquiries about the holding of Communisis shares such as change of address change of ownership and dividend payments should be directed to our registrar Link Asset Services BY PHONE Please calltel and calls will be charged at 12p per minute plus your phone companys access charge.
If you are outside the United Kingdom please call 44tel and calls will be charged at the applicable international rate.
Lines are open between 09.00 and 17.30 Monday to Friday excluding public holidays in England and Wales.
BY EMAIL email
You can use the Share Portal at site To register for this service you will require your investor code which can be located on a recent dividend confirmation or on your share certificate.
For all other enquiries please contact Link Asset Services by post at the following address Link Asset Services The Registry 34 Beckenham Road
Kent
BR3 4TU
We encourage shareholders to have dividends paid directly into their bank account to ensure efficient payment and cleared funds on the payment date.
If you have a UK bank account you can sign up for this service on the Share Portal by clicking on your dividend options and following the onscreen instructions or by contacting Link Asset Services on the number above.
ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATIONS Shareholders can register to receive shareholder information electronically.
Registering for electronic communications is very straightforward.
Just visit site You will require your investor code which can be located on a recent dividend confirmation or on your share certificate.
BOILER ROOM SCAMS Unfortunately we are aware that in the past some of our shareholders were targeted by fraudsters who made offers to buy their shares at prices substantially in excess of the market price.
General information on boiler room scams and how to report a suspected scam is available from the FCAs website at www. ca. itensumersscams.
SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION Shareholder Information 129 Communisis plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 FIND OUT MORE ONLINE AT COMMUNISIS.
OM
Communisis plc 10 Little Portland Street
