Delivering operational excellence Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Who we are Tyman is a leading international supplier of engineered components to the door and window industry.
Our building products solutions include a full suite of window and door hardware including high security locks electronic access controls and perfectly matching hardware compact balances casement operators and hinges that enable windows to function efficiently and effectively weatherproof seals for doors and windows roof access hatches smoke vents and sidewalk doors used in residential commercial and infrastructure applications complex ancillary extrusions that improve window and door performance and in the UK we also offer the market leading sash window renovation service.
Find out more about our business on Page 5 How we create value Our business model is built around our customers the products we sell to them and the service we provide to them.
Flexibility and engineered solutions Financial discipline Quality and service See our business model on Page 10 Financial highlights
2016 457.6m 14.2% Underlying Operating Profit 2016 69.8m 10.0% Profit before Taxation 2016 29.4m 17.6% Underlying Earnings Per Share 2016 25.41p 5.9% Dividend per share 2016 10.50p 7.1% Underlying Net Debt 2016 176.7m 7.4%
2016 1.89x 0.06x Alternative Performance Measures provide additional useful information to shareholders on the underlying performance of the business.
A detailed description of APMs which have been consistently applied is included on Page 146 Operational highlights Further year of profitable growth assisted by increased contributions from Bilco and Giesse acquisitions and favourable exchange rates.
AmesburyTruth ahead of last year with strong Bilco growth partially offset by some short term market share loss in smaller residential customers and operational issues in Juarez Mexico which are now largely resolved.
ERA gained share in both OEM and distribution in what remains a slow market.
SchlegelGiesse increased margins by c.
190 bps as its enlarged product offering continues to gain traction.
Synergy targets for both Giesse and Bilco acquisitions exceeded.
Leverage back within the Groups target range of 1.50 to 2.00x at year end.
Industryleading facilities opened in Sioux Falls South Dakota Statesville North Carolina and Wolverhampton West Midlands.
Group effective tax rate for 2018 expected to reduce by c.
400 bps to 26.027.0 per cent following changes to US Federal tax rate.
Financial statements 89 Independent auditors report 96 Consolidated income statement 97 Consolidated statement of comprehensive income 97 Consolidated statement of changes in equity 98 Consolidated balance sheet 99 Consolidated cash flow statement 100 Notes to the financial statements 137 Independent auditors report 141 Company balance sheet 142 Company statement of changes in equity 143 Notes to the Company financial statements 146 Alternative Performance Measures 149 Definitions and glossary of terms 151 Roundings and exchange rates 152 Fiveyear summary Governance and Directors report 52 Board of Directors 54 Tyman Management Committee 55 Chairmans introduction to governance 56 Statement of governance 61 Audit Committee report 67 Nominations Committee report 69 Other statutory information 71 Remuneration report Strategic report IFC A brief overview 02 Delivering operational excellence 03 Our investment case 04 Group at a glance 06 Chairmans statement
08 Chief Executive Officers review
10 Tymans business model 12 Tymans strategy 14 Key performance indicators 18 Operating review 26 Financial review 36 Risk management 38 Principal risks and uncertainties 42 Viability statement 44 Sustainability
89 Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 02 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements Delivering operational excellence
The Groups footprint project brought a number of new and expanded facilities online adding to the centres of excellence within the Groups operations.
Giesse merges sites in Bologna Two Giesse facilities in Bologna were consolidated onto the larger manufacturing site with an offsite logistics warehouse retained for the storage and dispatch of finished goods.
New sites in Sioux Falls and Statesville Two new centres of excellence opened in Sioux Falls South Dakota and Statesville North Carolina.
The movement of plant and machinery and key personnel to the new centres of excellence was completed on time and within budget.
See our Operating review on Page 18 Howe Green acquired by the Group Howe Green is one of the worlds leading manufacturers of floor wall and ceiling access hatches.
For over 30 years Howe Green has been at the forefront of design and innovation in the highly specialised architectural building products sector.
See our Operating review on Page 22 Find out more at site 03 Wolverhampton site becomes a centre of excellence ERA occupied its new facility at Wolverhampton in the West Midlands during the second half of the year with the final warehouse moves taking place in the first two months of 2018.
The purpose built 136000 sq. ft. onto a single site.
Harrogate site opened for business Ventrolla moved to a new facility in the first quarter of the year which allows the business to manufacture larger timber windows for commercial projects as well as residential joinery.
See our Operating review on Page 22 The Juarez centre of excellence became fully operational This site is now a 157 000 sq. ft. footprint project.
The expansion has transformed this facility into a fullservice manufacturing unit.
See our Operating review on Page 18
Countries
Strong relationships with customers and suppliers Sourcing and distribution sites A balanced financial discipline
14% Proven expertise and experience Pedigree dating back to Our investment case Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 04 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements Group at a glance Tymans businesses are market leaders in their chosen geographies.
The Group provides innovative solutions to offer a complete range of hardware seals and extrusions for both residential and commercial applications.
Market leaders Where Tymans products are sold US  56% UK  16% Europe  11 % Canada  7% Rest of the World  7% Australia  2% China  1 % 5616711217N Sourcing analysis US  53% Far East inc.
China  20% Italy  10% UK  8% Other Europe  3% Canada  2% Mexico  2% Australia  1 % South America  1 % 532281031120N What Tyman sells Hardware  45% Sealing  17% Balances  11 % Operators  9% Speciality access products  9% Polymer extrusion  4% Industrial and restoration  4% Metal forming  1 % 45917111494N Manufacturers of doors and windows  73% Distributors and wholesalers  19% Other industrial uses  8% Who Tyman sells to 73198N Find out more at site 05 Optimising our footprint Significant progress made in rationalising the Group footprint AmesburyTruth site ERA site SchlegelGiesse site Bilco site Ashland site ISC third party warehouse Manufacturing site Sourcingdistribution site Site rationalisation announced Tymans North American Division operates as AmesburyTruth.
AmesburyTruth is a prominent manufacturer of window and door hardware components extrusions and sealing systems.
With manufacturing and distribution capabilities throughout North America AmesburyTruth is well positioned to offer leading window and door manufacturers innovative products and engineered solutions for both residential and commercial applications.
AmesburyTruths commercial activities include Bilco North Americas leading manufacturer of smoke vents roof access hatches and sidewalk doors.
Tymans UK and Ireland Division operates as ERA.
ERA is a leader in the design development manufacture and distribution of innovative solutions for the residential building and home improvement markets.
ERA provides a wide range of mechanical security hardware decorative hardware weather seals and electronic security systems including wireless alarms CCTV and video.
These products are brought to the market under the ERA and Fab and Fix brands.
ERA also owns Ventrolla a leading sash window renovation business.
ERAs commercial and light infrastructure business is Bilco incorporating Howe Green a manufacturer and distributor of commercial and light infrastructure floor and roof access covers.
SchlegelGiesse comprises the Groups businesses outside North America together with its UK sealing and extrusion businesses.
The Division has manufacturing operations in the UK Germany Italy China Brazil and Australia along with light assembly and distribution facilities in Argentina France Greece India Spain Turkey and the United Arab Emirates.
The Divisions products are sold in residential and commercial applications all over the world under the Schlegel and Giesse brands.
Revenue
2016 290.1m
Operating Profit 2016 54.6m
2016 73.0m
Operating Profit 2016 11.7m
2016 94.6m
Operating Profit 2016 9.4m More on Pages 18 to 21 More on Pages 22 to 23 More on Pages 24 to 25 facilities exited properties for sale significant new facilities Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 06 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements
Chairmans statement
This is my first statement since my appointment as Chairman of Tyman in May of last year in succession to Jamie Pike.
Tyman has again demonstrated its resilience in producing a solid set of results for 2017 and a further year of profitable growth assisted by increased contributions from the Bilco and Giesse businesses purchased in 2016 and by further margin expansion in the enlarged SchlegelGiesse business.
These results were achieved despite the Group encountering some challenges during the year.
Operational issues in Juarez Mexico took longer to resolve than expected there was some short term market share loss in AmesburyTruth and subdued market conditions continued in the United Kingdom.
In 2017 alongside its regular agenda items the Board has spent considerable time on four key topics how the Board operates succession planning Group strategy and health and safety.
How the Board operates The Board conducted an externally facilitated evaluation during the year with a focus on how the Board and its associated Committees operate the results of which are summarised in the Corporate governance section on pages 56 to 60.
This exercise has proved useful in that it confirmed the open and collegiate culture of the Group Board while providing specific direction for improvement of the Boards processes in the future.
A solid set of results with good cash generation demonstrating the Groups resilience.
Please join us on 10 May 2018 in Wolverhampton to see first hand how one of Tymans Divisions is delivering our commitment to operational excellence.
Martin Towers Nonexecutive Chairman Martin Towers Nonexecutive Chairman Find out more at site 07 Board priorities 2017 has seen the Board focus on four key areas How the Board operates Succession planning Group strategy Health and safety Find out more about governance on Pages 56 to 60 As in previous years the Board continued with its established practice of spending time with Divisional management and employees away from the Group head office.
In 2017 Board meetings were held in the US and Italy with site visits made to the Groups two facilities in Juarez Mexico.
The Board also attended the Group Management Conference held in Bologna Italy in October.
Succession planning Succession planning is a key Board responsibility and the Nominations Committee has spent considerable time during the year considering succession plans for both the Board and for the Divisional Management Teams.
Further details on succession planning are contained in the Nominations Committee report on pages 67 to 68.
A number of changes to the Board composition and roles took place during the year.
As announced at the time of the interim results from August 2017 James Brotherton took on responsibility for Group strategy corporate development and MandA in addition to his existing duties as Chief Financial Officer.
Helen Clatworthy joined the Board as an Independent Nonexecutive Director in January 2017 and took over from me as Chair of the Audit Committee in May.
Since the year end Tyman has announced the appointment of Pamela Bingham as an Independent Nonexecutive Director and the retirement of Angelika Westerwelle.
I would like to welcome Pamela to the Group Board and thank Angelika for her service to Tyman.
Jamie Pike stepped down as Nonexecutive Chairman in May 2017 and I succeeded him from that date.
Jamie joined Tyman in November 2009 following a challenging period for the Group and led the Board through the subsequent seven and half years in which Tyman changed considerably.
He made a significant contribution to the Groups development in that time and on behalf of all shareholders I would like to thank Jamie for his leadership and to wish him well for the future.
Group strategy To allow scope for discussion and debate the Board held a strategy away day in 2017 which included presentations to the Board from the three Divisional CEOs concerning the strategy for their Divisions respective markets.
The Groups strategy remains to be a leading international supplier of engineered components to the door and window industry.
This strategic focus which was adopted in 2010 has allowed Tyman to differentiate itself in the various national markets in which the Group operates.
As the Group has grown the strategy has evolved from a pure play on residential markets to include commercial applications and now light infrastructure.
Our strategy is implemented through a combination of our commitment to operational excellence targeted acquisitions and close alignment with our customers.
Tyman remains the only supplier of scale that can offer its customers wherever they are located a one stop solution for all their engineered component requirements.
Further details on the Groups strategy are set out in the business model on pages 10 to 11.
2017 saw further significant investment made in the Groups operating footprint with new facilities constructed in Statesville North Carolina and Wolverhampton West
These investments provide the Divisions with the modern manufacturing sourcing and distribution facilities necessary to achieve operational excellence and support our future growth.
The Group made one small acquisition in the year Howe Green which has performed well since completion and has a good pipeline of prospects in the UK light infrastructure space.
The integrations of Bilco and Giesse are now largely complete and it is pleasing to note the contributions that both businesses are making to the Group.
Health and safety The health and safety of our employees remains a key priority for the Board and it is disappointing to have to report that the number of lost time incidents increased year on year and that severity rates increased across all three Divisions.
As part of the Groups commitment to operational excellence the Board remains determined that all employees will be provided with a high quality safe and appropriate working environment.
2017 saw further investments made in new plant and machinery and in appropriate guarding as well as additional third party audits of operating environments.
All three Divisions now have their own dedicated Health and Safety Officer whose remit includes the rolling review of policies and procedures as well as the investigation of incidents as and when they occur.
The Board continues to place a high priority on Tyman achieving real and tangible improvement to the Groups health and safety record and in 2018 the Chief Executives remuneration will in part be determined by the Groups progress in this area.
Dividend
Underlying Earnings Per Share increased to 26.91 pence in 2017 assisted by full year contributions from Giesse and Bilco and exchange translation benefits.
In light of the Groups performance during the year the Board is recommending a final dividend of 7 .75 pence per share making a total of 11.25 pence per share for the year which equates to Dividend Cover of 2.40x and is an increase of 7 .1 per cent over the previous year.
Outlook and AGM As an international manufacturer working with customers in many different countries the Group has continued to deliver for its stakeholders in 2017.
The investments Tyman has made in each of its Divisions this year positions the Group well for further profitable growth in the years to come.
The Groups AGM this year will be held at the ERA Divisions new facility in Wolverhampton on Thursday 10 May 2018.
I do hope that as many shareholders as possible are able to join us to see first hand how one of Tymans Divisions is delivering our commitment to operational excellence.
Martin Towers Nonexecutive Chairman 7 March 2018 Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 08 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements Focusing on our strengths
Chief Executive Officers review
2017 saw a further year of profitable growth for the Group with increased contributions from the Bilco and Giesse acquisitions and continued favourable exchange rates on translation.
Footprint projects in each of the Divisions progressed well such that the Group has the safe modern and flexible facilities necessary to support our customers needs increase our product quality and improve our service levels.
Reported Revenue and Underlying Operating Profit increased by 14.2 and 10.0 per cent respectively principally due to the Bilco and Giesse acquisitions and favourable exchange rates on translation.
On a constant currency like for like basis Revenue increased by 1.7 per cent in the year and Underlying Operating Profit decreased by 1.5 per cent.
Cash generation was lower than in recent years due to targeted investment in working capital and continued investment in the balance sheet including gross capital expenditure at 1.27x Depreciation.
The
Group remains cash generative and Leverage at the year end of 1.83x was again comfortably back within the Groups core yearend target range of 1.50x to 2.00x.
ROCE decreased slightly in the year to 13.6 per cent with the Group continuing to target achieving a ROCE of 15.0 per cent over the medium term.
The Group has again demonstrated its resilience in producing a solid set of results.
Louis Eperjesi Chief Executive Officer Find out more at site 09 2018 priorities Tymans key priorities for 2018 are an extension of the themes that the Group has developed over the past few years and include Health and safety The Groups health and safety performance in the past two years has been disappointing despite the significant investment made in both time and resources dedicated to health and safety functions in each Division.
Securing a demonstrable improvement to the Groups health and safety record in 2018 is regarded by the Board as being of the highest importance.
2018 will see further investment made in employee training the development of safer working practices additional capital investment and sharing of best practice across Divisions.
Footprint
Tyman made significant changes to its footprint in 2017 in each of its Divisions such that the Group has safe modern and flexible facilities necessary to support customers needs increase product quality and improve service levels.
2018 will see the completion of moves into the new facilities in the UK and US and the exit from two significant sites in North America.
Successful management of these moves with minimal operational disruption to the businesses will be a key priority for the Group during the year.
Group collaboration The Group has successfully established interDivisional teams in the areas of health and safety risk management and supply chain through TSA.
Cross selling of other Divisions products continued to gain traction most notably with the Giesse products in North American and UK markets.
Encouraging effective communication consistency of approach sharing of best practice and standards of operational excellence across each of the Divisions remains a focus in 2018.
Financial objectives A return to like for like Revenue growth and margin expansion in each Division underpinned by working capital discipline and cash generation to enable the Group to make further progress towards its committed medium term ROCE target of 15.0 per cent.
Input cost inflation pressures in 2018 will be managed through a combination of effective purchasing price management and cost reduction programmes.
Selfhelp initiatives Continuing with the Groups well established selfhelp initiatives to improve the businesses in particular in the areas of new product development people supply chain and capital projects with a focus on automation and lean manufacturing to ensure Tyman differentiates itself from the competition and continues to grow market share.
MandA
Pursuing the Groups active acquisition programme prioritising hardware and seals businesses in the UK and Europe and selecting emerging markets together with commercial hardware businesses in key end markets.
Integration
The completion of the integration of Bilco and the start of the integration of Ashland Hardware into AmesburyTruth.
Tyman expects to see a further year of profitable growth.
Louis Eperjesi
Chief Executive Officer
Outlook
AmesburyTruth expects US residential and commercial markets will show growth in 2018 possibly assisted by increasing real wages as the changes to the US tax code become established.
The Canadian market for the Divisions products is expected to show further growth although at a slower rate than was seen in 2017.
AmesburyTruth is well placed to capture the opportunities that exist in 2018 and expects to see market share recovery among smaller customers like for like sales growth and a return to margin expansion during the year.
ERA expects that UK residential RMI demand will continue to be slow in 2018 and as a consequence expects that the market will contract to a similar extent to 2017.
Given the subdued market backdrop ERAs focus will be on further share gains leveraging the opportunities offered by ERAs new facility new product introductions and management of costs and overheads.
The outlook for ERAs commercial and light infrastructure products remains promising in 2018.
SchlegelGiesse expects that Continental European markets will show broadbased incremental growth in 2018 and is well placed to take further market share.
The second half momentum established in the Middle East and Latin America is expected to continue with key Brazilian and Argentine markets recovering.
China and Asia Pacific markets are likely to remain variable with opportunities for growth in certain countries.
Volumes in 2018 to date are in line with expectations and there is a promising order book in each Division.
Tyman expects to see a further year of profitable growth in 2018.
Louis Eperjesi
Chief Executive Officer
7 March 2018 Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 10 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements Creating value for stakeholders Tymans business model The Groups business model is driven by its key strengths which delivers value to Tymans customers shareholders and people.
Expertise and experience Strong relationships Financial discipline Quality and service Engineered solutions
Delivering stakeholder value Capital allocation and cash generation Market share gain and pricing discipline Maximising margins through elimination of cost and waste Find out more at site 11 Value creation Our customers Providing customers with the engineered components they need to add form and function to their end products.
Providing the highest quality product for the relevant price point.
Offering industryleading levels of service.
Investing in products and processes such that Tyman is the partner of choice.
Our shareholders Increasing shareholder value through focusing on returns through capital allocation and cash generation profitable growth in market share year on year and pricing discipline to ensure a fair return on investment.
Our people Giving employees a modern safe operating environment and opportunities for career development.
Investment in facilities across all three Divisions.
Commitment to improving health and safety across the Group.
Enhanced training and development programmes.
1.7% increase in organic Revenue 7% increase in dividend employees Tymans key strengths
Tyman chooses to manufacture certain products such as complex balances extrusions and seals close to the customer base when flexibility variety or complexity are key to the component manufacturing process and to the customer.
Engineered solutions Substantially all of the components supplied to Tymans customers  whether manufactured by Divisions in their own plants or sourced externally  are engineeringled valueadded products made to Tymans designs protected where possible and practical by patents and intellectual property and manufactured on the Groups proprietary tooling.
Quality and service The manufacturing decision for Tyman comes back to the Groups desire to differentiate its product offering from the Groups competitors by providing customers with the highest quality product at the relevant price point delivered to specification on time and in full.
Financial discipline Tyman focuses on financial disciplines that encompass margin targets for each product close scrutiny of the cost base optimisation of working capital and a rigorous approach to return on capital and its allocation both internally in the form of capital investment and externally in the form of MandA.
Strong relationships We believe in establishing an honest and fair longterm relationship with suppliers and customers based on value quality and range of products industryleading service and valueadded technical support.
Expertise and experience Tyman invests in its people through employee training career path development and improvement of working practices and conditions.
Training schemes around the Group include apprenticeship schemes vocational training as well as personal development programmes.
Tymans strategy Market share gain and pricing discipline Maximising margins through elimination of cost and waste Capital allocation and cash generation See our strategy on Pages 12 to 13 Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 12 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements Delivering the strategy Tymans strategy The Groups strategy is to create shareholder value through being a leading international supplier of engineered components to the door and window industry.
Strategic objectives Tyman aims to secure profitable market share increases annually through deeper penetration of the existing customer base the development of new products and winning new customers.
The breadth of the Groups product offering and our ability to offer customers engineered solutions means that in each market there remain opportunities for the Group to continue to increase its market share.
Performance in 2017 The Group lost some residential market share in North America in 2017 however grew share in a number of international markets.
Focus for 2018 Profitable growth in market share remains a core objective for the Group and each Division is targeting further improvements in 2018.
In North America the changes made to the route to market for smaller customers are expected to lead to market share recovery in 2018.
Given market conditions profitable share gain in the UK will be a particular focus for ERA.
Risks
Market conditions
Loss of major customers Raw material costs and supply chain failures Business integration Key performance indicators Like for like Revenue growth Underlying Operating Margin Strategic objectives Divisions scrutinise Tymans manufacturing and sourcing processes to ensure that they are providing products to the customer in the most efficient manner.
Divisions operate rolling programmes of process improvement engineering designed to eliminate unnecessary cost from our processes and reduce scrap levels.
Performance in 2017 The Group made significant progress on its various projects  including business improvement footprint integration and sourcing during the year which will improve the flexibility of its manufacturing and sourcing capabilities.
Focus for 2018 Improvements to processes will be a focus for each Division in 2018 in order to improve the Groups health and safety record meet increasing quality standards and eliminate unnecessary cost and waste from processes.
Risks
Competitors
Loss of major customers Raw material costs and supply chain failures Footprint rationalisation Business integration Key Executives and personnel Key performance indicators Like for like Revenue growth Underlying Operating Margin Return on Capital Employed and Return on Controllable Capital Employed Return on Acquisition Investment Underlying basic EPS Strategic objectives Divisions target minimum gross margin thresholds for each product line and in pricing consider the end to end cost of providing the necessary product and service to customers.
For the ultimate customer wherever they are located Tymans aim is to provide a differentiated product offering at an appropriate price delivered to specification on time and in full.
Performance in 2017 Price discipline was well maintained in 2017 across each Division with the Group securing price and surcharge increases of 9.0 per cent in aggregate to recover in part raw material cost increases and exchange rate movements.
AmesburyTruth did not recover all material cost increases incurred by the Division in 2017 .
Focus for 2018 Inflationary cost pressures will continue in 2018 with further increases in commodity prices expected.
Each Division will monitor pricing closely to ensure it reflects the costs of doing business.
Risks
Market conditions
Loss of major customers Key performance indicators Like for like Revenue growth Underlying Operating Margin A Market share gain C Process scrutiny B Pricing discipline Market share gain and pricing discipline Maximising margins through elimination of cost and waste Find out more at site 13 Strategic objectives The Group adopts a rigorous appraisal process for all items of capital investment in order to ensure that investments are supported by a robust business case.
Divisional investment plans are required to provide an attractive return to the Group overall while also ensuring that Divisions continue to invest in making facilities safe leading edge and attractive working environments that are fit for purpose for an international manufacturing organisation.
Performance in 2017 Returns on capital decreased slightly during the year reflecting the increased levels of capital employed in the business following investment and the reduced Underlying Operating Margin.
Focus for 2018 The Group will continue to invest in the Divisions in 2018 through its footprint and integration projects and will seek to improve the Underlying Net Operating Margin as it makes progress towards its ROCE target of 15 per cent.
Risks
Footprint rationalisation Business integration Financial risks Liquidity and credit risks Key performance indicators
Return on Capital Employed and Return on Controllable Capital Employed Return on Acquisition Investment Dividend growth Operating Cash Conversion Strategic objectives Each Division is targeted on conversion of 100.0 per cent of its Underlying Operating Profit into operating cash.
These Divisional cash conversion targets intentionally exclude capital investment in order to encourage the required long term investment decisions necessary to improve the Groups business.
At a Group level Operating Cash Conversion is measured after capital investment.
In any one year a Division may need to invest in working capital in order to support customers needs however a focus on cash conversion ensures that working capital investment receives the necessary scrutiny.
Performance in 2017 The Group generated 31.7 million of Free Cash Flow in 2017 which more than covered the Group dividend the acquisition of Howe Green and other investments.
This was despite the significant capital and operational investment made in each Division in connection with the various footprint projects.
Leverage was back within the Groups target range at the year end for the sixth successive year.
Focus for 2018 Further improvements to cash generation are targeted in the year with a more normal working capital cycle expected in 2018.
2018 will be the final year of material capital and operational investment in the North American footprint project.
Risks
Key executives and personnel Financial risks Liquidity and credit risks Key performance indicators
Return on Acquisition Investment Dividend growth Operating Cash Conversion D Capital allocation E Cash generation Capital allocation and cash generation See risks on Pages 36 to 41 See key performance indicators on Pages 14 to 17 Profitable growth in market share remains a core objective for the Group and each Division is targeting improvements in market share in 2018.
Louis Eperjesi Chief Executive Officer Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 14 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements Tracking performance Key performance indicators Tyman measures success through a focus on KPIs which are measured reported on and challenged at all levels of the business.
8.0% 6.0% 4.0% 2.0% 0.0% 2016 2017 0.4% 0.9% 1.7% 7.4% 6.3% Like for like Revenue growth
Operating Margin
Year on year Revenue growth from continuing operations measured on a like for like basis.
The KPI is used to evaluate the ability of the Group to grow its business organically year on year.
Underlying Operating Profit from continuing operations as a percentage of Revenue from continuing operations.
The KPI is used to evaluate the profitability and financial health of the Group.
Refer to page 148 for definition of Underlying Operating Profit.
Underlying Net Debt divided by Adjusted EBITDA both calculated at average exchange rates.
The KPI is used to evaluate the ability of the Group to generate sufficient cash flows to cover its contractual debt servicing obligations.
Refer to page 148 for definitions of Underlying Net Debt and Adjusted EBITDA.
Strategic pillars Strategic pillars Strategic pillars A A A B B B C C C D D D E E E Like for like Revenue growth 1.7% Underlying Operating Margin 14.7%
16.0% 12.0% 8.0% 4.0% 0.0%tel 2016 2017 14.6% 13.1% 10.9% 15.3% 14.7% 0.00xteltel performance Organic Revenue growth improved for the second successive year with 2.2 per cent of the increase relating to pricing and surcharge actions offset in part by a 0.5 per cent decrease in sales volumes.
Target
To grow Revenue organically year on year.
2017 performance Underlying Operating Margins decreased by 60 bps the decrease largely driven by higher input costs across the Group in the year.
Target
To maintain and improve operating margins through the management control of the Groups processes as well as overheads and administrative costs.
2017 performance Leverage decreased by 0.06x to 1.83x largely driven by the combined beneficial effect of a fall in Underlying Net Debt and a rise in adjusted EBITDA.
Leverage at the year end was comfortably within the Groups target range of 1.50x to 2.00x and below 2.00x for the sixth successive year.
Target
To maintain a core Leverage ratio of between 1.50x to 2.00x at the year end throughout the cycle.
Target range Covenant level Trend Trend Trend Find out more at site 15 Return on Capital Employed and Return on Controllable Capital Employed Return on Acquisition
Return on Capital Employed is defined as the LTM Underlying Operating Profit as a percentage of the LTM average capital employed.
Return on Controllable Capital Employed is defined as the LTM Underlying Operating Profit as a percentage of the LTM average controllable capital employed.
The KPIs are used to evaluate how efficiently the Groups capital and controllable capital are being employed to improve profitability.
Refer to page 148 for definitions of controllable capital employed and Underlying Operating Profit.
Underlying Operating Profit including synergies generated by an acquisition divided by the total cost of the acquisition.
This KPI is monitored during the first two years of ownership.
The KPI is used to evaluate the efficiency and returns achieved by the Group from its investments in recent material business acquisitions.
Refer to page 148 for definition of ROAI Strategic pillars A B C D Strategic pillars A B C D E E Return on Capital Employed 13.6% Return on Controllable Capital Employed 49.6% Return on Acquisition Investment 15.0% 10.0% 5.0% 0.0%tel 2016 2017 1 2.5 % 11.4% 9.0% 13.8% 13.6% 60.0% 40.0% 20.0% 0.0%tel 2016 2017 53.1 % 53.4 % 45.9% 22.6% 28.0% 50.2% 14.0% 12.7% 49.6% 19.2% 23.5% 50.0% 40.0% 30.0% 20.0% 10.0% 0.0%
2017 ROAI Annualised ROAI Bilco Howe Green 2017 performance ROCE decreased by 20 bps to 13.6 per cent 2016 13.8 per cent and ROCCE decreased by 60 bps to 49.6 per cent 2016 50.2 per cent.
The fall in both measures is principally due to increases in average capital and controllable capital employed following the 2016 acquisitions.
The Group continues to target a ROCE of 15.0 per cent over the medium term.
Target
To maintain and steadily improve ROCE and ROCCE with a medium term target for ROCE of 15.0 per cent.
2017 performance Giesse has made a significant contribution to the Group since its acquisition in March 2016 and has materially exceeded the Groups minimum target return threshold on both a run rate and annualised basis.
The ROAI for Bilco has increased as synergy benefits have started to be realised in the year.
Bilco is expected to exceed the minimum run rate target return threshold within two years of acquisition.
Howe Green has been owned by the Group for ten months at the year end and has performed encouragingly since acquisition.
Target
For all acquisitions to achieve a run rate of ROAI greater than 15.0 per cent within two years of acquisition.
A Market share gain B Pricing discipline C Process scrutiny D Focus on capital allocation E Focus on cash generation Our strategy
Target
Trend Trend Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 16 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements Key performance indicators continuedtel 2016 2017
Dividend growth Operating Cash
Underlying Profit after Taxation divided by the basic weighted average number of ordinary shares in issue during the year excluding those held as treasury shares.
The KPI is used to determine the improvement in underlying EPS for our shareholders.
Refer to page 148 for definition of Underlying Profit after Taxation.
Year on year growth in total dividends.
The KPI is used to evaluate the delivery of consistent and balanced returns to shareholders in the form of dividends.
Operational Cash Flow divided by Underlying Operating Profit.
The KPI is used to evaluate the cash flow generated by the business operations in order to pay down debt return cash to shareholders and invest in acquisitions.
R e f e r t o page 148 for definitions of Operational Cash Flow and Underlying Operating Profit.
Strategic pillars Strategic pillars Strategic pillars A A A B B B C C C D D D E E E Underlying basic EPS Dividend growth Operating Cash Conversion 85.6% 0.00ptel 2016 2017 120.0% 80.0% 40.0% 0.0%tel 2016 2017 84.9% 71.8% 116.4% 105.9% 85.6% 2017 performance Underlying basic EPS increased by 5.9 per cent to 26.91 pence.
The increase reflects the improvement in Underlying Operating Profit offset by higher finance costs in the year and the higher Underlying effective tax rate for the Group.
Target
To improve underlying EPS performance year on year.
2017 performance Dividends have continued to grow consistently and by 7.1 per cent in the year.
This equates to dividend cover of 2.40x towards the top end of the Groups target range of 2.00x to 2.50x.
Target
To grow dividends annually at least in line with underlying earnings.
2017 performance Operating Cash Conversion fell to 85.6 per cent with the measure impacted mostly by the year on year investment made in trade working capital of 10.4 million.
Target
To maximise conversion of the Groups underlying operating profit into cash over any 12month period while continuing to make the necessary capital investments to support the business.
Fiveyear average A Market share gain B Pricing discipline C Process scrutiny D Focus on capital allocation E Focus on cash generation Our strategy Trend Trend Trend Find out more at sitetel 2013 100.0% 80.0% 60.0% 40.0% 20.0% 0.0% 2016 2017 81.9% 82.0% 90.8% 81.5% On time in full delivery rate Lost time injuries Proportion of customer orders that are delivered in full within the customer required time slot.
The KPI is used to evaluate the manufacturing productivity and how efficient the business is at meeting delivery deadlines.
The number of lost time injuries and the lost time injury rate are used to evaluate the frequency and directional trend of reported injuries.
Refer to page 149 for definitions of the number of lost time injuries and the lost time injury rate.
Strategic pillars Strategic pillars A A B B C C D D E E On time in full delivery rate 82.0% Lost time injuries tel 2016 2017 2017 performance The on time delivery rate improved marginally in the year following declines in 2015 and 2016.
As with the prior year OTIF performance was impacted by factory moves in North America and the United Kingdom arising from footprint rationalisation programmes.
Target
To maintain and steadily improve the on time delivery rate to achieve an on time in full delivery performance to customer request of over 95.0 per cent.
2017 performance Although the Group has invested in its safety culture the increase in both KPIs is disappointing.
The severity of incidents was minor and most were preventable.
The Group continues to place a high priority on delivering tangible improvements to its health and safety record.
Target
To reduce the number of injuries and lost work time hourly rates year on year.
87.1%
Rate
Trend Trend Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 18 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements Two new centres of excellence
Operating review
Change CC LFL Revenue 332.7 290.1 15% 2% Underlying Operating Profit 59.7 54.6 9% Underlying Operating Margin 17.9% 18.8% 90 bps 30 bps USm except where stated 2017 2016 Change CC LFL Revenue 428.8 393.1 9% 2% Underlying Operating Profit 77.0 74.1 4% Underlying Operating Margin 17.9% 18.8% 90 bps 30 bps 2016 restated for transfer of Bilco UK from AmesburyTruth to ERA.
Jeff Graby
President and Chief Executive Officer
AmesburyTruth starts declined during the year reflecting a rebalancing of US construction towards single family units.
Total residential completions in the US increased by 7.4 per cent in the year to 1.2 million units.
Repair and remodelling improved in 2017 with the NAHB RMI sentiment index averaging 57 2016 54 and the LIRA index increasing by 6.4 per cent.
The aggregate value of residential construction put in place in the US in 2017 increased by 6.2 per cent to US532.9 billion 2016 US502.0 billion.
Market data is aggregated across all aspects of repair and remodelling the Division believes that the repair and remodelling for its products grew at a slower rate than the overall market.
The Division believes that the residential door and window market in the US increased in value terms by c.
4.5 per cent during the year.
US commercial US commercial markets were flat in 2017 with the value of nonresidential construction put in place increasing marginally to US720.4 billion 2016 US719.6 billion.
Canadian market Canadian housing starts increased by 5.4 per cent in 2017 with continued growth in multifamily.
The value of Canadian nonresidential construction put in place grew by 1.6 per cent year on year with commercial construction flat.
Summary
Mixed trading performance in 2017 despite favourable market conditions.
Juarez centre of excellence fully operational and two new centres of excellence opened.
Three facilities closed in 2017 and 2018 and closures of Rochester and Amesbury facilities announced.
Strong Bilco growth with delivery of US2.8 million revenue and cost synergies in 2017.
Market
US residential US residential markets saw further growth in new build starts and completions during 2017.
Seasonally adjusted single family starts and completions each increased to 0.8 million units increases of 3.5 per cent and 6.9 per cent respectively.
Multifamily
Find out more at site 19 Business performance and developments AmesburyTruth had a mixed year during 2017 despite generally favourable market conditions.
On a reported basis Revenue increased by 9.1 per cent to US428.8 million 2016 restated US393.1 million principally due to the full year contribution of Bilco to the Division in the year.
Like for like Revenue for the year was 1.9 per cent ahead of 2016 following an improved second half performance from Bilco with volumes in the core AmesburyTruth business marginally ahead of last year.
Reported Underlying Operating Profit increased by 3.9 per cent to US77.0 million 2016 restated US74.1 million.
Like for like Underlying Operating Profit was flat year on year.
Input costs increased significantly most notably for zinc where the spot unit cost at December increased by 57.0 per cent year on year as well as for other raw materials such as paint and oil derivatives.
The impact of these increases was not fully recovered through price although AmesburyTruth expects to resume its usual practice of cost recovery through price in 2018.
Overheads
AmesburyTruths Underlying Operating Margin decreased to 17.9 per cent 2016 restated 18.8 per cent due to the consolidation of Bilco for a full 12 months and the increased input costs previously discussed.
The Division remains confident that it will achieve a blended Underlying Operating Margin of 20.0 per cent over the medium term.
Residential and commercial Volumes into residential were broadly flat during the year with modest growth in US tier one and two customers and from Bilco residential products being offset by volume declines in US tier three and four customers.
The Division lost some market share in US residential during the year.
The Divisions commercial offering made good progress during the year with increased contributions from both the Bilco and Giesse product offerings.
Revenue in commercial increased by 4.3 per cent to US62.7 million 2016 full year restated US60.1 million.
The run rate of major project quote activity in Bilco in Q4 2017 was significantly higher than in Q4 2016.
Canada
Performance in Canada for the Division improved during 2017 reflecting better market conditions and some recovery of share lost in previous years assisted by more favourable exchange rates.
Canadian Revenue increased by 8.8 per cent to US46.0 million 2016 full year US42.3 million with new customer and product wins across both AmesburyTruth and Bilco products.
Tier three and four account coverage In June AmesburyTruth transferred its US tier three and four account coverage to a national sales representative network ISC.
Previously coverage was managed through state or regional representatives which led to some inconsistencies in service depending on location.
Progress with ISC has been promising with trading in US tiers three and four during the second half of the year increasing by 4.7 per cent compared with the equivalent period in 2016 and c.
US1.4 million of annualised incremental orders secured to date which should convert into Revenue in 2018.
Like for like Revenue increased by 1.9 per cent following strong Bilco growth and core Amesbury T ruth business volumes were marginally ahead of 2016.
Jeff Graby
President and Chief Executive Officer
AmesburyTruth
Assembly parts store Sioux Falls South Dakota.
Pile weather strip in Statesville North Carolina.
Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 20 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements Business performance and developments continued Tier three and four account coverage continued At the same time the Division started its first distribution pilot with ISC taking pallet space in a Dallas Texas warehouse.
The warehouse allows customers in the region access to over 200 AmesburyTruth SKUs with guaranteed order fulfilment within four hours if required.
The pilot has exceeded expectations and in 2018 ISC plans to take space in a second warehouse in Nashville Tennessee and to extend the range of SKUs available to customers.
The Division is confident that this differentiated twin track approach to service and distribution of product will lead to a recovery in AmesburyTruths market share among US tier three and four customers.
Footprint project Further progress was made with the footprint project in 2017.
The Juarez centre of excellence became fully operational and two new centres of excellence opened in Sioux Falls South Dakota and Statesville North Carolina.
The manufacturing facility in Canton South Dakota and the vacated facilities in Sioux Falls and Statesville all closed.
The movement of plant and machinery and key personnel to the new centres of excellence was completed on time and within budget however the operational issues encountered by the Division in 2016 at the Juarez facility persisted into 2017.
Recruitment and retention of qualified semiskilled operatives proved more challenging than expected and the facility did not meet its initial targeted output and quality levels.
This led to increased levels of scrap and product rework and the requirement to support US tier one and two customers led to increased levels of expedited freight.
Encouragingly AmesburyTruth has seen the expected reductions in direct labour and direct overhead from the moves starting to come through during the year which gives the Division confidence that the targeted net financial benefits from the footprint project will be achieved now that the business has reached its targeted output and quality levels and freight costs have started to normalise.
In 2018 the facilities in Rochester New York and Amesbury Massachusetts will close with production moving to the Statesville centre of excellence.
These production moves are relatively low risk in that they are contained within the United States and the Division has been a significant employer in the Statesville area for a number of years.
The facility build out phase of the project is now substantially complete with the exception of a potential extension to the fourth centre of excellence in Owatonna Minnesota which remains under evaluation.
At the end of 2019 the AmesburyTruth manufacturing footprint excluding the Bilco and Ashland sites is expected to be as follows Centres of excellence Satellite sites Juarez Mexico Cannon Falls Minnesota Owatonna Minnesota Fremont Nebraska Sioux Falls South Dakota Toronto Canada Statesville North Carolina Footprint project financials
Inception to date
Estimate
Estimate
PandL charge Operational expenditure Capital expenditure 12.7 1.5 1.5 Cash receipts Total cash costs 21.3 5.6 9.0 1.0 Total cumulative cash costs 21.3 26.9 35.9 36.9 Incremental PandL saving  2.0 3.0 5.0 Cumulative annual PandL saving  2.0 5.0 10.0 1 PandL charge comprises exceptional items incurred and to be incurred in connection with the footprint project.
2 Operational expenditure comprises gross cash costs incurred and expected to be incurred in connection with the footprint project in respect of items that are not capitalised.
The Division expects to realise gross cash receipts of up to US5.0 million from disposals of capital assetsexits from lease obligations as part of the footprint project.
Only proceeds from completed disposals and exits are included in the table above and in net project cost estimates.
Operating review continued Find out more at site 21 Cash costs incurred during 2017 in connection with the footprint project were US13.1 million in line with expectations coming into the year.
The overall net project cost is now estimated at c.
US37.0 million 2016 US34.0 million with the increase year on year principally due to firmer estimates of the cost to close the Rochester site.
Following the announcement of the decision to close the Amesbury and Rochester sites agreements have been reached with the relevant trade unions covering severance and exit arrangements.
These agreements include the closure of the Rochester postretirement medical benefit scheme at the end of 2018 with no future obligations to AmesburyTruth in respect of the scheme from that date see page 32.
The closure of the scheme has reduced AmesburyTruths actuarial liability by US4.2 million.
As
AmesburyTruth has now entered into a firm commitment in respect of these sites the estimated costs to close of US10.2 million have been provided for in the 2017 financial statements.
At the start of the year incremental PandL savings of US2.0 million were expected to be realised in 2017 however scrap product rework and increased levels of expedited freight meant that there were no net benefits realised in 2017 .
2018 should see c.
US2.0 million of incremental PandL savings realised as the Division starts to progress towards its cumulative target of US10.0 million savings per annum from 2020.
Bilco
A new senior management team was appointed for Bilco during the year and has made good progress in improving the focus of the business.
A more structured approach to pricing has been adopted and savings were secured in the areas of freight procurement personnel and warehousing.
In 2017 Bilco including the contribution from Bilco UK increased Revenue by 3.1 per cent to US59.9 million 2016 Full Year US58.1 million and Underlying Operating Profit by 69.3 per cent to US9.4 million 2016 Full Year US5.6 million.
Installations of Bilco products in the year included the LA Metro the San Francisco Bay Area Rapid Transit and the Blue Origin Exploration Park in Florida.
Injection moulding in Juarez Mexico.
The increase in Bilcos Underlying Operating Profit was principally due to improved trading particularly in the second half of the year as well as delivery of US2.8 million of cost and revenue synergies during the year.
The run rate of synergies at 31 December 2017 was US3.0 million some 20.0 per cent ahead of the target set out at the date of acquisition and twelve months ahead of schedule.
Bilco is on track to meet the Group target run rate ROAI of 15.0 per cent within two years of ownership.
Bilco has a promising order book for 2018.
NPD and investment In 2017 customers started the transition to the new proprietary Elon foam seal from the legacy Qlon foam seal.
A new constant force balance Stasis which offers superior features and benefits compared with the industry standard products will be launched in the second half of 2018.
The Division expects to bring to market its electronic patio door and multipoint locks during 2018.
Additional investments in manufacturing capability and automation in connection with the footprint project are expected in 2018 with a focus on operational and quality improvements.
Outlook
AmesburyTruth expects US residential and commercial markets will show growth in 2018 possibly assisted by increasing real wages as the changes to the US tax code become established.
The Canadian market for the Divisions products is expected to show further growth although at a slower rate than was seen in 2017.
AmesburyTruth is well placed to capture the opportunities that exist in 2018 and expects to see market share recovery among smaller customers like for like sales growth and a return to margin expansion during the year.
Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 22 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements Operating review continued m except where stated 2017 2016 Change CC LFL Revenue 80.3 73.0 10% 3% Underlying Operating Profit 10.2 11.7 13% 25% Underlying Operating Margin 12.7% 16.1% 340 bps 440 bps 1 2016 restated for transfer of Bilco UK from AmesburyTruth to ERA.
Darren Waters
Chief Executive Officer  ERA
Business performance and developments ERA performed credibly in 2017 against a difficult market backdrop.
ERAs like for like Revenue for the year increased by 2.8 per cent with the increase reflecting the 2016 pricing and surcharge actions which more than offset small aggregate volume decreases.
On a reported basis Revenue increased by 10.0 per cent principally due to the incremental contributions from Bilco UK and Howe Green.
Underlying raw material prices continued to increase through 2017 and consequently the Division implemented a price increase in November 2017 the benefits of which will largely flow through in 2018.
Overheads
Underlying Operating Margins in the Division were impacted by increased raw material costs and overheads although benefited from the inclusion of the higher margin business at Bilco UK and Howe Green.
The 2016 comparator margin benefited from currency hedges put in place at a time when Sterling was significantly stronger against international currencies.
ERA continues to target an Underlying Operating Margin in the midteens in the medium term.
OEM and distribution Despite the challenging market conditions OEM volumes decreased by only 2.9 per cent reflecting the continued growth in bifold hardware products and door cylinders together with encouraging takeup from new product introductions.
The Division made further progress in distribution with incremental listings secured at both existing and new customers.
As a result distribution volumes increased by 6.8 per cent across the year.
Summary
Share gains in OEM and distribution despite subdued markets.
New West Midlands facility occupied in second half of year.
Higher raw material input costs through 2017 to be recovered in 2018 by November 2017 price increase.
New trade alarm and door intercom range launched into the market.
Market
The UK market was challenging in 2017.
New build residential construction continued to grow however the RMI sector of the market which comprises the substantial majority of UK residential construction activity contracted as consumers elected to defer significant items of expenditure.
ERA estimates that the window and door market volumes contracted by between 6.0 and 8.0 per cent in 2017 although there were certain subsectors that showed encouraging growth most notably bifold doors.
Credible performance Find out more at site 23 ERA Home Smartware sales in the year were broadly in line with 2016.
During 2017 a new range of trade alarms and door intercoms was launched into the market with an encouraging level of listings secured with retailers and specialist distributors.
The TouchKey night latch is in beta testing phase and is expected to be launched commercially during 2018 with the TouchKey multipoint lock offering to follow.
The Division has branded its smartware product family ERA Home which includes the full range of cloudbased home alarms and video intercoms as well as the TouchKey electronic access products.
UK commercial From 1 January 201 7  responsibility for Bilco UK was transferred from AmesburyTruth to ERA and in March the Group acquired Howe
Accordingly ERAs results for the year ended 31 December 2017 include the postacquisition contribution from Howe Green and a full twelve month contribution from Bilco UK.
The combination performed well during the year contributing 7.2 million to the Divisions Revenue in 2017 at a promising margin with installations including the new Crossrail stations Heathrow Terminal Five and Battersea Power Station.
The two businesses provide ERA with a platform to develop a meaningful commercial and light infrastructure access business for the UK market.
The Division has appointed a dedicated product manager to support the promotion of Giesse products to the UK commercial market and expects this initiative will start to yield benefits in 2018.
Ventrolla
Ventrolla moved to a new facility in the first quarter of the year which allows the business to manufacture larger timber windows for commercial projects as well as its core residential joinery offering.
Revenue in the year for Ventrolla increased by 7.0 per cent to 5.3 million 2016 5.0 million however profitability was impacted by capacity constraints prior to the facility move lower installer productivity and a small 0.1 million exposure to Carillion which has been fully provided.
Ventrolla has a promising order book for 2018 has secured a number of commercial contract wins and since the half year has seen installer productivity improve.
Tyman Sourcing Asia TSA reports through ERA and is responsible for the Groups Far Eastern sourcing operations.
TSA manages the supply chain for the majority of the Divisions UK sales.
In 2017 purchases made by TSA on behalf of all Group companies totalled US75.1 million across 47 active suppliers.
The management team was strengthened during 2017 and investments were made in the areas of product quality logistics and supplier assessments.
New facility ERA occupied its new facility at Wolverhampton in the West Midlands during the second half of the year with the final warehouse moves taking place in the first two months of 2018.
The purpose built 136000 sq. ft. and assembly operations.
The facility has significant room for expansion as ERA grows.
The Division is now able to offer customers improved service levels with later dispatch cut off times same or next day delivery of products and consolidated shipments of multiple SKUs.
The new facility enables the Division to offer customers improved service levels and later dispatch cut off times.
Darren Waters
Chief Executive Officer  ERA
Showroom at Wolverhampton West Midlands.
Outlook
ERA expects that UK residential RMI demand will continue to be weak in 2018 and as a consequence expects that the market will contract to a similar extent to 2017.
Given the subdued market backdrop the focus of the Division will be on further share gains leveraging the opportunities offered by the new facility new product introductions and management of costs and overheads.
The outlook for ERAs commercial and light infrastructure products remains promising in 2018.
Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 24 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements Operating review continued m except where stated 2017 2016 Change CC LFL Revenue 109.7 94.6 16% Underlying Operating Profit 12.8 9.4 36% 19% Underlying Operating Margin 11.6% 10.0% 160 bps 190 bps m except where stated 2017 2016 Change CC LFL Revenue 125.2 115.8 8% Underlying Operating Profit 14.6 11.5 27% 19% Underlying Operating Margin 11.6% 10.0% 160 bps 190 bps Business performance and developments SchlegelGiesse had another strong year during 2017 as the enlarged hardware and seals product proposition continued to gain traction in the Divisions core markets.
Revenue of 125.2 million for the year was broadly flat on a like for like basis with further growth in EMEAI offset by more challenging markets in the UK China Australia and Latin America.
Encouragingly the Divisions second half performance improved compared with the first half reflecting good sales growth in Latin America and the Middle East and sustained improvements in Continental Europe.
Price increases were achieved by the Division during the year principally in Continental Europe which offset small aggregate volume decreases elsewhere in the Group.
On a reported basis Revenue increased by 16.0 per cent assisted by the full year contribution from Giesse.
Reported Underlying Operating Profit increased by 27.0 per cent to 14.6 million 2016 11.5 million and by 19.0 per cent on a constant currency like for like basis.
The largest contributor to the improved profitability was the delivery of increased synergy benefits during the year.
Underlying Operating Margins in the Division increased to 11.6 per cent 2016 10.0 per cent as SchlegelGiesse made further progress towards its medium term target of a 15.0 per cent Underlying Operating Margin.
EMEAI
Performance in Continental Europe was encouraging with Revenue increasing by 5.0 per cent across the region and most end markets showing meaningful year on year improvement.
Spain Russia and Turkey saw
New SchlegelGiesse brand launched in March 2018.
Strong 2017 performance with enlarged hardware and seals product offering gaining traction in core markets.
Growth in EMEAI offset by more challenging markets in UK China Australia and Latin America.
Delivery of synergy benefits improved profitability.
Market
Markets in Europe continued to recover in 2017 with most countries showing year on year market growth.
Middle Eastern markets saw variable demand patterns through the year and Indian markets remained positive.
China and Asia Pacific markets continued to grow albeit at lower levels than in recent years.
Latin American markets remained subdued in the first half of the year however recovered promisingly in the second half of the year.
Integration
Peter Santo Chief Executive Officer  SchlegelGiesse Find out more at site 25 the year and intercompany sales to other Group Divisions increased to c.
4.0 million.
In 2017 the two Giesse facilities in Bologna Italy were consolidated onto the larger manufacturing site with an offsite logistics warehouse retained for the storage and dispatch of finished goods.
New general managers were appointed during the year in Australasia Brazil China and the Middle East and a new Divisional CFO was recruited.
As at 31 December 2017 in aggregate 7.6 million of synergy benefits have been recorded from the Giesse acquisition 0.7 million of which have been recorded below Underlying Operating Profit and 2.2 million of which relate to incremental cross selling of products within the Division and the Group.
The delivered synergies represent an increase of approximately 90.0 per cent over the original targets put in place at the date of the acquisition.
Total costs of the integration of Schlegel and Giesse incurred since acquisition were 2.7 million.
NPD and investment The Division has continued to invest in the seals and hardware ranges with extensions to the Giesse hardware range due to be launched in 2018 and new sealing technology in advanced testing.
The Henlow facility moved onto the Divisional SAP platform during the year and plans are in process to move further facilities onto SAP during 2018.
Additional investments in manufacturing capability and automation are expected in 2018. the Nordics.
The UK was relatively subdued with sealing Revenue down 3.4 per cent reflecting general market conditions.
In the Middle East the second half was notably stronger than the first half leading to Revenue for the year 3.2 per cent ahead of 2016.
The Division entered 2018 with an encouraging order book in the region.
The business in India continues to grow rapidly from a low base with Revenue increasing by 28.0 per cent in the year.
China and Asia Pacific China and Asia Pacific markets were more challenging for the Division in 2017.
In China Revenue decreased by 16.2 per cent due to project postponements and cancellations particularly in Southern China.
During 2018 SchlegelGiesse intends to review the Divisions route to market in China.
Australasian Revenue was slightly lower in 2017 with improved performance in New Zealand more than offset by weaker trading in the Australian market which slowed incrementally in the second half.
Profitability in the region was enhanced by the mix of product sales.
As expected Revenue in the Pacific Rim was lower than last year following changes to the route to market made at the end of 2016.
There were some pockets of growth in the region most notably in Vietnam and
Further penetration of Pacific Rim markets remains an opportunity for the Division.
Latin America Revenue in Latin America decreased by 10.0 per cent across the year following a very subdued first half.
The second half of the year was much improved in the region with market recovery evident in both Argentina and Brazil.
Despite lower sales profitability in Latin America remained in line with the previous year due to the savings made from the consolidation of the Brazilian sites that took place towards the end of 2016.
The Latin American region remains profitable and cash generative and makes an operating margin in line with the rest of the Division.
Giesse integration The integration of Giesse completed with the launch of the new Divisional brand SchlegelGiesse at the start of March 2018.
The Division now operates through a functional reporting structure under a unified executive team and with a greatly simplified legal and financial structure.
The Division has a single salesforce in each key market selling the complete range of hardware seals and extrusions supported by dedicated product managers.
Cross selling initiatives within the Division delivered 4.0 million of incremental revenue during Giesse synergy benefits of 7 .6 million have been recorded in 2017 representing an increase of approximately 90.0 per cent over original targets.
Peter Santo
Chief Executive Officer
SchlegelGiesse
Warehousing in Budrio Italy.
Outlook
2018 has started promisingly for SchlegelGiesse in most geographies.
SchlegelGiesse expects that Continental European markets will show broadbased incremental growth in 2018 and is well placed to take further market share.
The second half momentum established in the Middle East and Latin America is expected to continue with key Brazilian and Argentine markets recovering.
China and Asia Pacific markets are likely to remain variable with opportunities for growth in certain countries.
Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 26 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements
Financial review
A solid set of results James Brotherton Chief Financial Officer Income statement Revenue and profit Reported Group Revenue increased by 14.2 per cent to 522.7 million 2016 457.6 million assisted by favourable exchange movements and the enlarged size of the Group.
On a constant currency like for like basis Group Revenue was 1.7 per cent ahead of last year with 2.2 per cent of the increase relating to pricing and surcharge actions offset in part by a 0.5 per cent decrease in sales volumes.
Reported Gross Margin was 36.5 per cent 2016 36.5 per cent.
Underlying Administrative Expenses increased to 114.1 million 2016 97.5 million with 4.0 million of the increase attributable to the impact of foreign exchange and the balance principally due to the inclusion of Bilco for a full twelve months.
Centrally incurred costs in the year were well controlled at 5.9 million 2016 6.0 million.
Underlying Operating Profit increased by 10.0 per cent to 76.8 million 2016 69.8 million and decreased by 1.5 per cent on a constant currency like for like basis.
The favourable impact on the full year Underlying Operating Profit from acquisitions exchange movements and pricing actions was partially offset by higher input costs and other inflationary increases.
The Groups Underlying Operating Margin decreased by 60 bps to 14.7 per cent 2016 15.3 per cent.
Underlying Profit before Taxation increased by 10.0 per cent to 68.3 million 2016 62.1 million and decreased by 1.4 per cent on a constant currency like for like basis.
Reported Profit before Taxation increased by 1 7 .6 per cent to 34.5 million 2016 29.4 million.
Materials and input costs The price of key raw materials and input costs is tracked closely by the Group to ensure the Divisions are procuring product at the optimal price for the quantities consumed and are in a position to secure price increases from customers where required.
Four principal categories of raw material are monitored by reference to the Division with the highest usage steel oil derivatives zinc and aluminium.
Tymans largest raw material and component purchase is steel across many different types and grades.
Oil derivatives are used in the manufacture of seal extrusion and injectionmoulded products.
Zinc aluminium and associated alloys are used in the manufacture of a number of hardware products.
In addition ERA monitors the cost of a representative basket of those products sourced from the Far East by Tyman Sourcing Asia into the UK which is influenced by local labour and overhead rates raw material price variations and exchange rates.
At a Group level the pricing of US stainless steel is monitored as a proxy for the steel category.
Find out more at site 27 Tyman expects a reduction in the Underlying effective tax rate in 2018 of approximately 400 bps to between 26.0 and 27 .0 per cent.
James Brotherton Chief Financial Officer Overall category
Average
Spot
Aluminium Euro 18.7 10.6% 5.4% Polypropylene Euro 28.7 11.5% 11.1% Stainless steel US 41.6 2.4% 16.5% Zinc US 34.0 40.4% 57.0% Far East components UK 42.2 10.0% 2.9% 1 FY 2017 materials cost of sales for raw materials components and hardware for overall category in million.
2 Average 2017 tracker price compared with average 2016 tracker price.
3 Spot tracker price as at 31 December 2017 compared with spot tracker price at 31 December 2016.
Raw material costs increased in the year with average prices across most commodity categories being higher than 2016.
On a spot basis at the year end commodities were significantly more expensive compared with 31 December 2016 with the exception of US stainless steel.
This confirms the Groups view that commodity cycles have turned with input costs mainly trending upwards.
The Group will manage the impact of input cost inflation in 2018 through a combination of effective purchasing pricing actions surcharging and cost reduction programmes.
Exceptional items m 2017 2016 Footprint restructuring  costs 16.4 3.5 Footprint restructuring  credits 5.7 0.8 Footprint restructuring  net 10.7 2.7 MandA and integration  costs 2.2 3.0 MandA and integration  credits 2.9 MandA and integration  net 0.7 3.0 Writeoff of inventory fair value adjustments  5.7 Profit on disposal of business  0.3 Property provision releases and disposals  0.2 Total exceptional items 10.0 10.9 Exceptional items comprise 10.2 million of net costs cash settled in the year 2016 5.3 million and net noncash credits of 0.2 million 2016 net noncash costs of 5.6 million.
These items are regarded by the Group as exceptional as they are significant and nonrecurring in nature.
Footprint restructuring As announced in March 2015 and reported in previous periods footprint restructuring principally relates to directly attributable costs incurred in the ongoing North American footprint project.
Gross costs attributable to footprint restructuring in the year amounted to 16.4 million of which 15.2 million 2016 2.6 million relates to the North American project.
Credits relating to footprint restructuring include 1.8 million relating to the respective disposal and exit from the Canton South Dakota and Sioux Falls South Dakota facilities and a reduction of 3.3 million in past service costs relating to the expected closure of the Rochester postretirement benefit medical plans on 31 December 2018.
The North American footprint project is expected to conclude by 2020.
The remaining 0.6 million of exceptional costs relates to footprint projects in ERA and SchlegelGiesse.
Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 28 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements Financial review continued Income statement continued Exceptional items continued MandA and integration MandA and integration credit of 0.7 million comprises gross costs of 2.2 million offset by credits of 2.9 million.
The gross costs relate to the net legal financial taxation and consultancy costs associated with the Howe Green acquisition intellectual property defence costs relating to preacquisition periods as well as the integration of businesses acquired in prior years.
The credits principally comprise 2.3 million associated with the pension liability recoverable from and indemnified by the previous owners of Bilco see page 32 together with 0.6 million of surplus provisions created an acquisition no longer required.
Prior year exceptional items Writeoff of inventory fair value adjustments in 2016 are noncash adjustments relating to the IFRS 3 requirement that finished goods held in inventory must be revalued to their market value on acquisition.
The equivalent revaluation of Howe Green inventory acquired in March 2017 was immaterial.
Profit on disposal of business relates to the net deferred consideration for EWS received in 2016.
Property provision releases and disposals relate to surplus onerous lease provisions released in 2016.
Finance costs Net finance costs increased to 9.4 million 2016 7.8 million.
Interest payable on bank loans private placement notes and overdrafts increased to 8.2 million 2016 7.8 million reflecting the rise in the Groups average cost of funds in the second half of 2017.
Noncash movements charged to net finance costs in the year include amortisation of borrowing costs of 0.4 million 2016 0.4 million pension interest of 0.6 million 2016 0.5 million and a loss on the revaluation of fair value currency hedges of 0.4 million 2016 gain of 0.3 million.
Income from short term bank deposits decreased to 0.2 million 2016 0.5 million.
Underlying net finance costs increased by 0.8 million to 8.5 million 2016 7 .7 million.
Interest rates on borrowings The Groups average cost of funds and margin payable over the year increased by 10 bps to 3.4 per cent 2016 3.3 per cent reflecting the increases in margins payable on facility borrowings in the second half of the year as well as increased base rates.
Interest rate swap contracts A portion of the Groups floating rate borrowings are held at fixed rates via interest rate swap contracts.
At the year end the notional value to swap of the Groups outstanding borrowings under the revolving credit facility was 14.0 per cent 2016 14.2 per cent.
The weighted average fixed rate of the swap contracts was 1.7 per cent 2016 1.7 per cent.
In addition the Group has issued US100.0 million in aggregate under its US Private Placement programme all of which is held at fixed rates.
In total 35.9 per cent 2016 37.2 per cent of the Groups Underlying Gross Indebtedness is effectively held at fixed rates of interest.
At 31 December 2017 the Group held interest swap contracts amounting to a fair value liability of 0.3 million 2016 0.3 million.
During the year the movement in fair value was immaterial 2016 fair value loss of 0.2 million.
Forward exchange contracts At 31 December 2017 the Groups portfolio of forward exchange contracts at fair value amounted to a net asset of 0.1 million 2016 0.5 million.
The notional value of the portfolio amounted to 10.9 million comprising US and Chinese Renminbi forward exchange contracts with notional values of US8.5 million and RMB40.0 million respectively.
These contracts have a range of maturities up to 22 May 2018.
During the year a fair value loss of 0.4 million 2016 fair value gain of 0.3 million was recognised directly in the income statement.
Taxation
The Group reported an income tax charge of 3.3 million 2016 8.6 million comprising a current tax charge of 15.0 million 2016 11.4 million and a deferred tax credit of 11.7 million 2016 2.8 million.
The deferred tax credit includes a 6.9 million credit in respect of the revaluation of the Groups net deferred tax liabilities following the reduction in the US Federal tax rate.
As this credit is exceptional in nature it has been excluded from the Groups Underlying tax charge.
The Underlying tax charge was 20.6 million 2016 18.1 million representing an Underlying effective tax rate for the year of 30.1 per cent 2016 29.2 per cent.
During 2016 the Group paid corporation tax of 15.1 million 2016 12.7 million which equates to a cash tax rate on Underlying Profit before Taxation of 22.1 per cent 2016 20.4 per cent.
US tax legislation and impact on the future Groups Underlying effective tax rate As the majority of the Groups operations are in the US there will be a significant impact on the Underlying effective tax rate from the US tax legislation which came into force on 1 January 2018.
The most significant change is to the US Federal tax rate which has reduced from 35.0 per cent to 21.0 per cent.
The reduced rate applies to a broader tax base under the new legislation as certain credits and deductions are removed most notably the s199 domestic production activities deduction.
In 2018 Tyman will benefit from the lower tax rate applied to its US taxable profits however will lose the benefit of the s199 deduction.
Exports from the US account for approximately 10.0 per cent of AmesburyTruths US sales so the Group can expect to gain a small benefit from changes to the taxation of foreign sourced income.
In aggregate Tyman expects a reduction in the Underlying effective tax rate in 2018 compared with 2017 of approximately 400 bps to between 26.0 and 27.0 per cent.
It is not yet clear what incremental tax laws or regulations may be introduced in the US and Tymans Underlying effective tax rate will be sensitive to further changes to tax legislation or changes to US state tax rates.
The final Underlying effective tax rate for the year will also depend on the Groups geographical mix of taxable profits.
Earnings per share Basic Earnings Per Share increased by 47.0 per cent to 17.61 pence 2016 11.98 pence.
Diluted Earnings Per Share increased to 17.49 pence 2016 11.93 pence.
Underlying Earnings Per Share increased by 5.9 per cent to 26.91 pence 2016 25.41 pence.
Underlying Diluted Earnings Per Share increased to 26.73 pence 2016 25.31 pence.
The increase in Earnings Per Share measures reflects the improvement in Underlying Operating Profit offset by higher finance costs in the year and the higher Underlying effective tax rate for the Group.
Intellectual property defence The Group incurred higher than normal intellectual property defence costs in 2017 of 1.5 million 2016 0.9 million.
1.2 million of these costs related to the successful litigation defence of a significant intellectual property claim made against AmesburyTruth concerning the Truth casement operator product line.
The claim looked back to 2005 and accordingly 0.8 million of the defence costs have been accounted for through the utilisation of specific provisions created on the acquisition of Truth to cover preexisting intellectual property and warranty claims.
The balance of the defence costs was taken to exceptionals.
Tyman has a portfolio of 1148 patents trademarks and designs.
Where intellectual property is threatened or compromised by third parties the Group will seek to defend its position in order to protect the interests of both customers and shareholders.
Find out more at site 29 Taxation policy The Groups tax affairs are managed in accordance with relevant laws and regulations in each jurisdiction in which the Group operates.
The policy ensures that the approach to taxation is aligned with Tymans commercial activities worldwide.
Tyman follows the terms of double taxation treaties and relevant OECD guidelines in dealing with issues such as transfer pricing repatriation of profits and the establishment of a taxable presence in countries where it trades.
The Group seeks to engage proactively with tax authorities in each of its key jurisdictions to ensure that the Groups tax affairs are clearly communicated.
Tyman aims to maintain straightforward legal and commercial structures to reduce risk and minimise compliance costs.
Investments made in tax reporting systems and personnel across the Group have ensured tax reporting compliance and disclosure that is more accurate and reliable.
The Groups key transfer pricing arrangements comprise commercial agreements relating to trade between Group entities intragroup financing and the recharging of sharedservice administrative costs.
Where Group entities trade with each other transfer pricing arrangements are appropriate for the territories involved and are enacted on a consistent basis.
Several factors impact the Groups taxation charge or credit in the income statement including The international nature of the Groups operations.
In 2017 72.0 per cent of Tymans Underlying operating profits before central cost allocations were generated in North America 12.3 per cent in the UK and 15.7 per cent in SchlegelGiesses territories outside the
The Groups effective tax rate is therefore a function of the interaction of currency movements with different country state and local taxation rates and allowances.
The proactive capital investment programme in each of the Groups
These investments are amortised for tax purposes in accordance with the laws relating to capital allowances in each country which may not match the Groups depreciation policy.
The footprint rationalisation project taking place in North America.
The
Group will not receive tax relief for a large portion of the exceptional costs accrued for in 2017 until a later period.
As the costs are largely incurred in the US the delay in relief represents a tax cost to the Group as tax will be relieved at the reduced Federal rate of 21.0 per cent.
Taxable losses generated by Group companies.
Where these losses can be relieved or carried forward to be relieved in future periods Tyman does so in accordance with the relevant laws.
This treatment is however broadly dependent on sufficient eligible taxable profits being generated in the relevant jurisdiction.
Certain expenses which cannot be relieved against taxable profits.
Such expenses most notably relate to the amortisation and impairment of intangible assets and the writeoff of goodwill arising on acquisition.
As the Group has developed through acquisition these charges have a material impact on the Groups statutory tax charge as a proportion of pretax profits.
The changing attitude of tax authorities under the OECD BEPS Project.
Under
Action 2 of the OECD BEPS Project the UK government introduced new rules the consequence of which is that more financing income is brought into the Groups UK taxable income.
Pricing on intercompany sales within SchlegelGiesse inherited on the acquisition of Giesse require a transfer pricing adjustment that will increase the taxable profits in Italy.
Group share options and LTIPs will generate varying levels of tax relief to the Group dependent on the vesting outcomes of awards and the share price as at the date of vesting.
The Group does not at present make material use of special incentive arrangements that might impact the tax charge such as research and development tax credits or patent box structures however will keep this under review.
Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 30 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements Financial review continued Cash generation investment funding and liquidity Cash and cash conversion m 2017 2016 Net cash generated from operations 51.9 67.3 Add Pension contributions 1.2 0.9 Add Income tax paid 15.1 12.6 Less Purchases of property plant and equipment 15.4 12.6 Less Purchases of intangible assets 1.1 2.8 Add Proceeds on disposal of PPE 3.8 0.2 Operational Cash Flow after exceptional cash costs 55.5 65.6 Exceptional cash costs 10.2 8.3 Operational Cash Flow 65.7 73.9 Less Pension contributions 1.2 0.9 Less Income tax paid 15.1 12.6 Less Net interest paid 7.5 7.0 Less Exceptional cash costs 10.2 8.3 Free Cash Flow 31.7 45.1 Operational Cash Flow decreased by 11.1 per cent to 65.7 million 2016 73.9 million.
The decrease is principally driven by the year on year investment in trade working capital.
Exceptional cash costs settled in the year were 10.2 million 2016 8.3 million.
Free Cash Flow in the year decreased by 13.4 million to 31.7 million 2016 45.1 million due to the 8.2 million decrease in Operational Cash Flow 2.5 million higher level of taxation payments on account see Taxation on page 28 and the increase in exceptional cash costs see Exceptional items on page 27.
The Groups Operating Cash Conversion in 2017 decreased to 85.6 per cent 2016 105.9 per cent.
Over the past five years a period which has seen significant capital investment made in the Group Operating Cash Conversion has averaged 92.9 per cent and each Division remains targeted on delivery of 100.0 per cent cash conversion of Underlying Operating Profit.
Bank facilities and US private placement notes Total facilities available to the Group as at 7 March 2018 were as follows Facility Maturity Currency Committed Uncommitted 2018 Facility Feb 2023 Multicurrency 240.0m 70.0m 4.97% USPP Nov 2021 US US55.0m 5.37% USPP Nov 2024 US US45.0m Other facilities Various  2.2m On 19 February 2018 the Group entered into the 2018 Facility and incurred upfront financing costs of 2.
1 million.
The 2018 Facility gives the Group access to up to 310.0 million of borrowings with seven relationship banks and comprises a 240.0 million committed revolving credit facility and a 70.0 million uncommitted accordion facility.
The 2018 Facility expires in February 2023 although has provision for an extension to February 2024.
On signing the 2018 Facility the 2014 Facility was repaid in full and cancelled.
Liquidity
At 31 December 2017 the Group had gross outstanding borrowings of 206.2 million 2016 217.7 million cash balances of 42.6 million 2016 40.9 million and committed but undrawn facilities of 50.0 million 2016 46.5 million.
The 2018 Facility increases the Groups committed but undrawn facilities to 111.4 million as at 7 March 2018 together with potential access to the uncommitted 70.0 million accordion facility.
Underlying Net Debt at the year end was 163.7 million 2016 176.7 million.
Under IFRS which reduces gross debt by the unamortised portion of finance arrangement fees net debt was 162.9 million 2016 175.6 million.
Find out more at site 31 Covenant performance At 31 December 2017
Covenant performance
Headroom % Leverage 3.0x 1.83x 35.5 39.0 Interest Cover 4.0x 11.38x 58.9 64.9 Calculated covenant performance consistent with the Groups banking covenant test.
The approximate amount by which EBITDA would need to decline before the relevant covenant is breached.
The Group continues to retain significant headroom on its banking covenants.
Leverage which is measured on an average exchange rate basis across the trailing twelve months decreased slightly over the year to 1.83x 2016 1.89x.
Leverage at the year end was comfortably within the Groups core target range of 1.50x to 2.00x.
Interest Cover decreased to 11.38x from 11.41x in 2016 driven by the marginally higher average cost of funds in the second half of 2017.
Property
As part of the footprint projects taking place across the Group a number of property transactions took place during the year.
The significant transactions are detailed below.
Significant new properties Date Location Sq. ft.
Tenure Expiry Jan 2017 Sioux Falls US 167000 Leasehold Jan 2037 Mar 2017 Harrogate UK 21000 Leasehold Mar 2032 Aug 2017 Statesville US 242000 Leasehold Aug 2037 Oct 2017 Wolverhampton UK 136000 Leasehold Oct 2042 Exited properties Date Location Sq. ft.
Tenure Expiry Proceeds Feb 2017 Gistel Belgium 158000 Freehold na 0.9m Mar 2017 Harrogate UK 9000 Leasehold Dec 2021 na Mar 2017 Sioux Falls US 112000 Leasehold Dec 2021 US0.9m May 2017 Canton US 78000 Freehold na US1.2m Oct 2017 Coventry UK 25000 Leasehold Mar 2018 na Dec 2017 Silver End UK 348000 Leasehold Dec 2017 na Dec 2017 Statesville US 113000 Leasehold Dec 2017 na Dec 2017 Statesville US 32000 Leasehold Jul 2018 na Dec 2017 Wolverhampton UK 20000 Leasehold Rolling na 1 Cash incentive received for early termination of the lease.
Cash Generating Units The Groups CGUs are defined as three operating Divisions.
In the opinion of the Directors the Divisions represent the smallest groups of assets that independently generate cash flows for the Group consistent with the approach adopted in 2016.
During the year ERA acquired Howe Green and assumed responsibility for the Bilco UK business.
These businesses have been substantially integrated with the existing ERA business and are now included in the ERA reporting segment.
The 2016 comparatives have been restated for the AmesburyTruth and ERA segments in respect of the Bilco UK reallocation.
Capital expenditure Gross capital expenditure increased by 1.0 million to 16.4 million 2016 1 5.4 million or 1.27x Depreciation 2016 1.32x.
Property plant and equipment gross expenditure increased by 2.8 million to 15.4 million 2016 12.6 million reflecting the Groups continued programme of targeted capital development across the Divisions most notably expenditures on the construction and fit out of new facilities in the ERA and AmesburyTruth Divisions.
Intangible assets gross expenditure decreased by 1.7 million to 1.1 million reflecting the conclusion of the AmesburyTruth ERP project at the end of Q4 2016.
Net capital expenditure decreased in the year to 12.6 million 2016 15.3 million or 0.98x Depreciation 2016 1.31x.
Balance sheet  assets and liabilities Goodwill and intangible assets At 31 December 2017 the carrying value of Group goodwill and intangible assets was 427.2 million 2016 restated 475.6 million.
Amortisation of intangible assets through the income statement during the year was 24.2 million 2016 22.7 million.
Of the movement in carrying values 6.0 million related to the acquisition of Howe Green and 31.0 million to exchange movements.
The exchange movement reflects the average appreciation of Sterling against the US Dollar over the year impacting the translation of the underlying USdenominated carrying values of intangible assets into the Groups functional currency at the year end.
Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 32 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements restated Mvt Acqns Fx 2017 Inventories 71.1 8.1 0.1 4.0 75.3 Trade receivables 55.3 3.0 0.7 1.9 57.1 Trade payables 37.8 0.7 0.1 0.8 37.8 Trade working capital 88.6 10.4 0.7 5.1 94.6 The fair value of working capital items assumed at the acquisition date less IFRS 3 exceptional inventory fair value adjustments.
Pension and post retirement medical benefit obligations At 31 December 2017 the Group had four postretirement pension schemes and one postretirement medical benefit scheme in operation.
Apart from the Italian pension scheme all schemes originate from the US.
Excluding the Bilco scheme there was a 32.9 per cent reduction in the Groups net effective postretirement benefit obligation in the year.
At 31 December 2017 the Groups gross pension and postretirement medical benefit obligations under IAS 19 were 42.8 million 2016 52.7 million.
Net obligations at 31 December 2017 were 12.4 million 2016 17.1 million.
The AmesburyTruth schemes are closed to new entrants.
Gross obligations under the AmesburyTruth schemes at the year end were US35.4 million 2016 US39.3 million with US4.2 million of the reduction due to the expected closure of the Rochester New York postretirement medical benefit plan at the end of 2018.
The Italian scheme relates to TFR termination obligations payable to employees of the Groups Italian operations.
As at 31 December 2017  the Groups TFR termination obligations amounted to 3.4 million 2016 3.7 million.
TFR payments made to former Italian employees in the year were 0.2 million 2016 0.2 million.
TFR termination obligations are unfunded.
Cash contributions made to the schemes during the year were 1.2 million 2016 0.9 million.
Favourable exchange movements of 4.2 million were mostly offset by interest expense of 1.9 million and remeasurement losses of 2.1 million.
2017 Total Group Bilco 2017 Group ex Bilco 2016 Group ex Bilco Postretirement pensionTFR 12.1 1.6 10.5 11.9 Postretirement medical 0.3  0.3 4.2 Net postretirement benefit obligation 12.4 1.6 10.8 16.1 The Bilco retirement benefit plan is fully recoverable and indemnified by the previous owners of Bilco with a proportion held in escrow.
The Bilco postretirement pension plan is expected to terminate in 2018.
Provisions restated
PandL Utilised
Expected utilisation date Property 3.8  0.7 0.4 3.5 2042 Restructuring 1.1 7.7 0.4 0.4 8.0 2021 Warranty 1.9 0.1 0.9  0.9 2025 Other 5.9 0.2 0.2 0.5 5.0 2021 Financial review continued Working capital At the year end trade working capital net of provisions was 94.6 million 2016 restated 88.6 million.
Of the increase 0.7 million relates to working capital assumed on the acquisition of Howe Green and 10.4 million relates to the net cash outflow of trade working capital across the year offset by 5.1 million exchange movements.
Inventories increased by 4.2 million to 75.3 million 2016 restated 71.1 million.
The majority of the movement relates to temporary investment in inventory at AmesburyTruth to support service levels offset by exchange rate movements of 4.0 million.
Trade receivables increased by 1.8 million to 57.1 million 2016 55.3 million.
There was a cash benefit of 0.6 million following the full settlement with interest of a long outstanding Italian trade receivable which had previously been fully provided for.
As with the 2016 year bad debts written off in the year as a percentage of Revenue were negligible.
Trade payables remained flat at 37.8 million with all movements in the year being offset by the impact of foreign exchange.
Properties marketed for sale At the year end the following freehold properties were being marketed for sale by the Group.
The Statesville freehold property was sold in February 2018 for a consideration of US1.4 million and so has been classified in the 2017 financial statements as an asset held for sale at the year end.
Location Sq. ft.
Tenure Proceeds Amesbury US 83000 Freehold tba Fossatone IT 145000 Freehold tba Statesville US 53000 Freehold US1.4m Willenhall UK 64000 Freehold tba Find out more at site 33 Property related Property provisions include provisions for onerous leases of 2.1 million 2016 2.8 million and leasehold dilapidations of 1.4 million 2016 1.0 million.
The utilisation in the year principally relates to costs associated with the Silver End Essex property.
Restructuring
Restructuring provisions include provisions for ongoing employee redundancy costs at certain restructured European business units as well as restructuring provisions raised in the year relating to the closures of the Rochester New York and Amesbury Massachusetts properties.
The utilisation in the year principally relates to the ongoing costs associated with business unit closures.
Warranty
Warranty provisions include provisions for the ultimate cost of settling product warranty claims which arose from the Groups MandA activities.
The utilisation in the year primarily relates to the costs associated with US product litigation applied against provisions recognised on the acquisition of Truth Hardware see Intellectual property defence on page 28.
Balance sheet  equity Shares in issue At 31 December 2017  the total number of shares in issue was 178.6 million 2016 178.6 million.
In addition the Group held 0.5 million shares in Treasury 2016 0.5 million.
The basic weighted average number of shares at the year end was 177.2 million 2016 173.0 million.
The diluted weighted average number of shares was 178.4 million 2016 173.8 million.
Employee Benefit Trust purchases At the year end the Tyman Employees Benefit Trust held 0.8 million shares 2016 1.0 million.
On 9 March 2017 the Trust purchased 267752 shares in Tyman plc at a total cost of 0.8 million to satisfy certain share awards vested in March 2017 as well as future obligations under the Groups various share plans.
Dividends
Dividend policy Tyman plc the Parent Company of the Group is a nontrading investment holding company that derives its distributable reserves principally from dividends received from subsidiary companies.
The Groups dividend policy targets a dividend cover of between 2.00x to 2.50x underlying earnings per share while being mindful of the Groups near term capital requirements.
The objective of this policy is to align shareholder returns with growth in the Groups profitability reinforce capital discipline and help ensure that the Groups shares appeal to a wide range of investors.
While the Boards aim is to deliver progressive growth in dividends year on year application of the Group dividend policy may lead to dividends paid to shareholders reducing in years where business performance has been weaker than expected or where other near term capital priorities are considered to be of greater importance.
The application of this policy has meant that the Group has delivered consistent dividend growth over the last five years see Dividend growth KPI on page 16 as the Groups Underlying Earnings Per Share has increased.
The Board considers a number of factors that influence the level of dividend in any given year.
These include the cyclical nature of the industry in which the Group operates the near term capital requirements of the business the level of distributable reserves in the Parent Company and the availability of liquid cash resources across the Group.
See pages 38 and 41 for the Groups principal risks and uncertainties which may have a negative impact on the performance of the Group and may influence how the dividend policy is implemented.
Dividends are paid biannually.
The interim dividend which is typically set at around onethird of that years total dividend is paid to shareholders in
The final dividend is paid to shareholders in May following the conclusion of the Annual General Meeting.
A final dividend of 7.75 pence per share 2016 7.50 pence equivalent to 13.7 million based on the shares in issue as at 31 December 2017 will be proposed at the Annual General Meeting 2016 13.3 million.
The total dividend declared for the 2017 financial year is therefore 1 1.25 pence per share 2016 10.50 pence an increase of 7 .1 per cent.
This equates to a Dividend Cover of 2.40x towards the upper end of the Groups target range of 2.00x to 2.50x.
The exdividend date will be 19 April 2018 and the final dividend will be paid on 18 May 2018 to shareholders on the register at 20 April 2018.
Dividend payments continue to be well funded and covered by cash generated across the Group.
See commentary on the Groups cash generation funding and liquidity on page 30 as well as details on its continuing viability and going concern on pages 42 and 43.
Only dividends paid in the year have been charged against equity in the 2017 financial statements.
In aggregate 19.5 million 2016 15.6 million of dividend payments representing 61.4 per cent of 2017 Free Cash Flow were made to shareholders during 2017.
At 31 December 2016 the Companys reserves available for distribution to shareholders were 199.9 million.
Total dividends paid during 2017 utilised approximately 9.8 per cent of the estimated reserves available for distribution at the beginning of the year.
Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 34 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements Other financial matters Returns on Capital ROCE decreased by 20 bps to 13.6 per cent 2016 13.8 per cent and ROCCE decreased by 60 bps to 49.6 per cent 2016 50.2 per cent.
The fall in both measures is principally due to increases in the average capital and controllable capital employed following the 2016 acquisitions.
The Group continues to target a ROCE of 15.0 per cent over the medium term.
At 31 December 2017 average capital employed was 563.6 million 2016 505.8 million and average controllable capital employed was 154.8 million 2016 139.0 million.
The Group continues to target a ROCE of 15.0 per cent over the medium term.
Returns on Acquisition Investment
Acquisition date
Acquisition
Investment
ROAI
Annualised
ROAI since acquisition Giesse Mar 2016 56.7m 28.0% 22.6% Bilco Jul 2016 US64.9m 14.0% 12.7% Howe Green Mar 2017 6.2m 19.2% 23.5% See Alternative Performance Measures on page 146.
The Group targets a run rate ROAI in excess of 15.0 per cent two years postcompletion of an acquisition.
The
ROAI takes account of all the costs of an acquisition together with the costs of integration and any material capital investment required.
The target ROAI is designed to ensure that each acquisition delivers a return significantly in excess of the Groups Acquisition Enterprise Value see Alternative Performance Measures on page 146.
Translational exposure Currency US Euro AUS CA Other
4.9% 6.8% 7.9% 6.9% m Revenue impact 15.9 4.4 0.7 0.5 1.0 20.5 m Profit impact 1c decrease impact 1 Impact of other currencies is immaterial.
Percentage movement in average exchange rate Dec 2017 to Dec 2016.
3 Underlying Operating Profit impact.
Defined as the approximate favourable translation impact on the Groups Underlying Operating Profit of a 1c decrease in the Sterling exchange rate of the respective currency.
The net effect of currency translation caused Revenue and Underlying Operating Profit from ongoing operations to increase by 21.5 million and 3.7 million respectively compared with 2016.
This result is driven by a combination of the increase in the proportion of the Group reporting in currencies other than Sterling as well as average Sterling exchange rates compared with major currencies being lower than in 2016.
Transactional exposure Divisions that purchase or sell products in currencies other than their functional currency will potentially incur transactional exposures.
For purchases by ERA from the Far East these exposures are principally SterlingUS Dollar or Chinese Renminbi.
For purchases by SchlegelGiesses Australian business from the US and the Far East these exposures are principally Australian DollarUS Dollar or Chinese Renminbi.
The Groups policy is to recover adverse transactional currency movements through price increases or surcharges.
Divisions typically buy currency forward to cover expected future purchases for up to around six months.
The objective is to achieve an element of certainty in the cost of landed goods and to allow sufficient time for any necessary price changes to be implemented.
The 2017 transactional impact of weakness in Sterling against the US Dollar and Chinese Renminbi on the Operating Profit of ERA was approximately a cost of 3.2 million 2016 1.5 million.
In the year ERA benefited from surcharge recoveries of 3.7 million 2016 0.7 million and gains on hedges of 0.2 million 2016 0.8 million.
The Groups other transactional exposures generally benefit from the existence of natural hedges or are immaterial.
Currency in the consolidated balance sheet The Group aims to mitigate the translational impact of exchange rate movements by denominating a proportion of total borrowings in those currencies where there is a material contribution to Underlying Operating Profit.
Tymans banking facility allows for funds to be drawn in many different currencies.
Giesse has made a significant contribution to the Group since its acquisition in March 2016 and has materially exceeded the Groups minimum target return threshold on both a run rate and annualised basis.
The ROAI for Bilco has increased as synergy benefits have started to be realised in the year.
Bilco is expected to exceed the minimum run rate target return threshold within two years of acquisition.
Howe Green has been owned by the Group for ten months at the yearend and has performed encouragingly since acquisition.
Currency
Currency in the consolidated income statement The principal foreign currencies that impact the Groups results are the US Dollar the Euro the Australian Dollar and the Canadian Dollar.
On average in 2017  each of these currencies were materially stronger than Sterling.
Financial review continued Find out more at site 35 The Groups gross borrowings are denominated in the following currencies 2017 2016 Gross borrowings % Gross borrowings % Sterling 38.0 18.4 9.8 4.5 Gross borrowings 206.2 217.7 New IFRS unaudited The following IFRS which have not been adopted in the 2017 financial statements were in issue but not yet effective Standard Name Effective date
IFRS 9 financial instruments 1 Jan 2018 Immaterial IFRS 15 Revenue from contracts with customers 1 Jan 2018 Immaterial IFRS 16 Leases 1 Jan 2019 Relatively significant IFRS 9 Financial instruments IFRS 9 provides revised guidance on the classification impairment and measurement of financial assets and hedge accounting.
Tyman is in the process of assessing the impact of adopting IFRS 9 with the main areas of consideration being hedge accounting impairment of accounts receivable and refinancing transactions.
Based on the work undertaken to date the adoption of IFRS 9 is not expected to have a material impact on the Group financial statements.
IFRS 15 Revenue from contracts with customers IFRS 15 provides revised guidance on revenue recognition and establishes principles for the reporting of information about the nature timing amount and uncertainty of revenue and cash flows from contracts with customers.
Tyman is in the process of assessing the impact of adopting IFRS 15 and notes that Revenue of the Group is transactional in nature with limited judgement applied in recognising the amounts recorded.
In addition contracts with customers are predominantly based on standard terms and conditions.
Based on the work undertaken to date the adoption of IFRS 15 is not expected to have a material impact on the Group financial statements.
IFRS 16 Leases IFRS 16 requires lessees to recognise almost all lease contracts on the balance sheet with optional exemptions for certain leases of a short term or lowvalue nature.
Instead
The adoption of IFRS 16 is expected to be relatively significant to the Groups financial statements and the Groups assessment of the likely impact is ongoing.
2018 summary guidance Exceptional costs are expected to be c.
4.05.0 million reflecting MandA and integration costs associated with Ashland Hardware and footprint projects.
The IFRS 3 change in respect of the proposed Ashland acquisition has yet to be estimated.
Exceptional costs cash paid in 2018 are expected to be c.
9.010.0 million.
Interest payable on borrowings for the full year is expected to be c.
10.011.0 million.
The actual amount payable will be dependent on Leverage and the currency of borrowing.
The noncash amortisation and accelerated amortisation of capitalised borrowing costs is expected to be c.
1.1 million.
The Underlying effective tax rate for Tyman in 2018 is expected to be c.
26.0 to 27.0 per cent reflecting the reduced US Federal tax rate that will apply to the Groups US profits.
2018 cash taxation rates are expected to be broadly in line with the Groups 2018 Underlying effective tax rate.
Trade working capital trough to peak for the year is expected to be c. occurring around the half year.
Maintenance and investment capital expenditure for the year for the Group is expected to be c.
18.020.0 million.
Share purchases by the Employee Benefit Trust to satisfy LTIP and other share plan awards are expected to be c.
2.03.0 million.
The sharebased payments charge will be c.
1.1 million.
Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 36 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements Risk ownership and control
Risk management
Employee whistleblowing Tyman Board Executive Directors Audit Committee
Risk Management Committee
AmesburyTruth divisional management ERA divisional management
Managing risk Risk management structure Internal auditors External auditors Identifying and managing risk The Group has policies and procedures in place to ensure that risks are properly identified evaluated and managed at the appropriate level within the business.
The identification of risks and opportunities the development of action plans to manage the risks and maximise the opportunities and the continual monitoring of progress against agreed plans are integral parts of the business process and core activities throughout the Group.
Oversight and independent assurance Independent advisers Find out more at site 37 Responsibilities for and structure of risk management Responsible body Areas of responsibility
Overall responsibility for risk management.
Defines the Groups risk appetite and culture.
Reviews principal risks and uncertainties every six months and provides direction and tone of risk management.
Audit Committee Assurance of the internal control and risk management systems.
Risk Management Committee
Regular review of risk registers and implementation of mitigation plans.
Executive and divisional management Daytoday operational management and management of risk.
Design and implementation of the necessary systems of risk assessment and internal control.
Each Division maintains a comprehensive risk register which assesses all pertinent risks relevant to that Division including operational financial compliance and strategic risks.
These risk registers are reviewed on a regular basis by the functional heads within each Division.
As a result of these reviews the assessment of each risk is monitored and where necessary updated using a scoring system which seeks to assess the likelihood and the financial effect of the relevant risks.
Against this an assessment is made of the controls that are in place to mitigate the relevant risk.
The Risk Management
Committee formally reviews each Divisions risk register four times a year.
A shorter register of principal risks is specifically reserved for review by the Board.
This is mainly but not exclusively comprised of risks after mitigation and above a certain threshold.
These principal risks and uncertainties are reported in the Annual Report.
The Board has overall responsibility for reviewing the effectiveness of the risk management and internal control systems in the Group.
The Audit Committee on behalf of the Board reviews the overall system of risk management details of which are described below.
Risk management and internal control The Board has overall responsibility for the Groups system of internal control and for reviewing its effectiveness.
The internal control systems are designed to meet the particular needs of the Group and to manage rather than eliminate the risk of failure to achieve business objectives.
Such systems can only provide reasonable and not absolute assurance against material misstatement or loss.
Through the work of the internal and external auditors and the reports to the Audit Committee the Committee is satisfied that any audit issues raised by either the internal or external auditors are managed and resolved effectively by management.
Key elements of internal control and risk management systems Tyman response There is a clearly defined management structure.
A framework of policies and procedures covering authority levels responsibilities and accountabilities is in use throughout the Group.
A three year strategic plan is prepared for the Boards consideration each year.
The strategic plan is appraised in light of the strategic and other relevant risks and uncertainties faced by the Group the resources available and its objectives.
Managers are responsible for the identification and evaluation of significant risks in their area of business together with the design and operation of suitable internal controls.
The Group has a detailed risk management process which identifies the key risks faced by each Division and the Group as a whole and the actions and controls required to manage and mitigate these risks.
Divisional risk registers are reviewed each quarter by the Risk Management Committee which reports back to the Audit Committee.
The Board approves the annual financial budget.
Performance against these targets is monitored monthly and reported on at Board meetings and reasons for divergences are discussed.
There are established procedures for planning approving and monitoring capital expenditure and major projects.
Board approval is required for all major investment divestment and strategic plans and projects.
The Group operates an effective Group reporting and consolidation system.
Written monthly reports management accounts and key performance indicators analysing performance by operating unit are reviewed with each Division every month by senior management.
An annual review is performed on the effectiveness of the system of internal control.
The Committee receives regular reports throughout the year to assure itself that the Groups internal control systems comply with the requirements of the Code.
Divisional management is required to implement base financial and other controls in line with a clear set of detailed Group policies relating to financial reporting and other accounting matters and to act in accordance with the Group Code of Conduct.
Each
Division completes a biannual selfcertification of compliance and implementation of internal controls by its businesses which is submitted to the Committee for review.
The internal and external audits test various aspects of internal controls including their adequacy and effectiveness.
The findings of internal and external audits together with improvement recommendations and management responses are shared with the Committee.
Operating units produce plans to improve controls relating to key risks and any significant weaknesses identified by internal and external audits.
The Audit Committee monitors the progress against these plans to ensure that any corrective actions to the internal control procedures are made in a timely manner.
The internal control regime is supported by the operation of independent whistleblower reporting functions.
A whistleblowing system is operated by specialist external third party service providers and allows employees to report concerns anonymously and in confidence.
All reports are received by the Group Company Secretary.
A full investigation is carried out following the receipt of each report with the results of the investigation being reported directly to the Board.
Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 38 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements Principal risks and uncertainties Principal risks The Directors confirm they have carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Company including those that would threaten its business model future performance solvency or liquidity.
The table on pages 39 and 41 sets out the principal risks and uncertainties facing the Group at the date of this report and how they are being managed or mitigated.
The principal risks do not comprise all the risks that the Group may face.
In accordance with the provisions of the Code the Board has taken into consideration the principal risks in the context of determining whether to adopt the going concern basis of accounting and when assessing the prospects of the Company for the purpose of preparing the Viability statement.
The going concern statement can be found on page 43 and the Viability statement can be found on page 42 of the Strategic report.
Main developments in risk The Group has recognised information security as a new principal risk reflecting the increased level frequency and sophistication of IT threats that the Group currently faces.
Business integration is no longer considered to be a principal risk as at 31 December 2017 .
The integrations of the three businesses acquired in 2016 Bilco Giesse and Response have substantially been completed.
Howe Green acquired in March 2017 continues to be integrated according to plan and is immaterial in the context of the Group.
Should the Group acquire further material business during the course of 2018 then business integration will be reinstated as a principal risk.
While the UKs vote to leave the European Union continues to create uncertainty in the UK economy this is not expected to have a material impact on the Group.
Heat map The heat map below shows the relative positioning of the Groups principal risks by the severity of their impact and the probability of occurrence.
The heat map shows the Boards assessment of the principal risks before any mitigating controls and actions.
The Group has adopted strategies to reduce these inherent risks to an acceptable level and more details of this are set out in the table on pages 39 to 41.
Principal risks before mitigation Principal risks 1 Market conditions 2 Competitors 3 Loss of major customers 4 Raw material costs and supply chain failures 5 Footprint rationalisation 6 Financial risks 7 Information security new 8 Key executives and personnel 9 Liquidity and credit risks New risk in 2017 Less likely More likely High Medium Low
Probability
Find out more at site 39 Market conditions Competitors Loss of major customers Impact on strategy A B C D E Risk assessment
Trend
Impact on strategy A B C D E Risk assessment
Trend
Impact on strategy A B C D E Risk assessment
Trend
A Market share gain B Pricing discipline C Process scrutiny D Focus on capital allocation E Focus on cash generation Our strategy
Demand in the building products sector is dependent on levels of activity in new construction and residential and commercial RMI markets.
This demand is cyclical and can be unpredictable and the Group has a low visibility of future orders from its customers.
Description
The Group may face significant competition in its markets including competition from global competitors with large capital resources.
Competition in the industry is based on range and quality of products offered geographical reach product development reputation and customer relationships.
Demand may also be impacted by competitor disruptive behaviour.
Description
The success of the Group is dependent on the continuation of satisfactory commercial relationships with its major customers.
In 2017 the top five customers accounted for 22.1 per cent of total Group Revenue.
Mitigation
In previous cyclical downturns Tyman has proved effective in responding to events maintaining appropriate headroom and tenor in the Groups available borrowing facilities the geographic spread of the Groups business the ability to flex the Groups cost base pricing and gross margin management planning budgeting and forecasting processes and offering industryleading customer service.
As part of its process for assessing the ongoing viability of the Group the Board regularly stress tests the Groups financial and cash flow forecasts.
Mitigation
Some of the Groups markets are relatively concentrated with two or three key players while others are highly fragmented and offer significant opportunities for consolidation and penetration.
Tyman continues to differentiate itself through its wide range of products its focus on setting industryleading standards for delivery on time and in full its technical support and its geographical spread new product development strategic focus and reputation.
The Group aims to minimise the impact of aggressive pricing by competitors through a lowcost manufacturing strategy supported by its programmes of new product development continual process improvements and building long term relationships with its customers based on value quality service and added value technical support.
Mitigation
Each Division develops strategic customer plans which include high level engagement through business review meetings to identify service issues and product development opportunities on a timely basis.
Management continues to invest in training for its sales teams.
The Divisions aim to provide a speedy response to substandard OTIF performance or product quality.
Where a Division identifies a broader category of customer that may be at risk specific mitigation plans are put in place such as the changes made in 2017 to the AmesburyTruth route to market for smaller customers.
Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 40 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements Principal risks and uncertainties continued Raw material costs and supply chain failures Footprint rationalisation Financial risks A Market share gain B Pricing discipline C Process scrutiny D Focus on capital allocation E Focus on cash generation Our strategy
The raw materials used in the Groups businesses include commodities that experience price volatility such as oil derivatives steel aluminium and zinc.
The
Groups ability to meet customer demands depends on obtaining timely supplies of high quality components and raw materials on competitive terms.
Product or raw material may become unavailable from a supplier due to events beyond our control.
Description
Rationalisation of the Group footprint is expected to produce more efficient manufacturing processes shorter development times for bringing new products to market a reduction in internal freight costs a more efficient deployment of personnel and a reduction in divisional overheads.
There is a risk that changes will be disruptive and that these projects may cost more than originally planned and may not deliver the expected benefits.
Description
The Group operates internationally and is therefore exposed to transactional and translational foreign exchange movements in currencies other than Sterling.
In particular the Groups translated Underlying Operating Profit is impacted by the Sterling exchange rate with the US Dollar and the Euro.
The Group is also exposed to interest rate risks on its external translated borrowings.
In 2017  77 .7 per cent of the Groups Underlying Operating Profit was derived from North American operations.
Mitigation
The Group continues to invest in and improve its sourcing and procurement capability with dedicated supply chain resources.
The Group manages supply chain risk through strong long term relationships with suppliers risk assessment and audit of key suppliers review of make or buy policies economies of purchasing dual sourcing adequate safety stock and inventory management.
The
Group maintains product quality by ongoing testing up to and beyond the industry standards.
Commodity price inflation continues to be a risk for the Group.
In response the Group will increase selling prices or apply surcharges to recover unavoidable input cost increases.
Mitigation
The Group mitigates this risk by extensive upfront analysis planning and risk assessment with multidisciplined project teams supported by dedicated professional project management resources.
During 2017 ERA has completed the substantial part of its move to i54 a consolidated distribution site in the West Midlands.
AmesburyTruth completed moves to new greenfield sites in Sioux Falls and Statesville and has completed a substantial expansion of its Juarez plant.
Schlegel has completed the footprint consolidation resulting from the Giesse acquisition.
Mitigation
The Group denominates a proportion of its debt in foreign currency to align its exposure to the translational balance sheet risks associated with overseas subsidiaries.
Ancillary bank facilities are utilised to manage the foreign exchange transactional risks and interest rate exposure through the use of derivative financial instruments.
Where possible the Group will recover the impact of adverse exchange movements on the cost of imported products and materials from customers.
Impact on strategy A B C D E Risk assessment
Trend
Impact on strategy A B C D E Risk assessment
Trend
Impact on strategy A B C D E Risk assessment
Trend Find out more at site 41 Information security New risk Key executives and personnel Liquidity and credit risks
Information and data systems are fundamental to the successful operation of Tymans businesses.
The Groups digital assets are under increasing risk from hacking viruses and phishing threats.
Sensitive employee customer banking and other data may be stolen and distributed or used illegally.
The new GDPR could increase the cost of failures to protect the Groups digital assets.
Description
The Groups future success is substantially dependent on the continued services and performance of its Executive Directors and senior management and its ability to continue to attract and retain highly skilled and qualified personnel throughout the Divisions.
Description
The Group must maintain sufficient capital and financial resources to finance its current financial obligations and fund the future needs of its growth strategy.
Mitigation
The Group continues to develop and test regularly disaster recovery plans for all sites.
The Group undertakes regular penetration testing of data systems and maintains up to date versions of software and firewalls.
The Group periodically reviews IT system controls with the help of tailored internal audit programmes developed by BDO.
The
Group engages specialist resources to review its plans for GDPR.
Mitigation
The Remuneration Committee and the Nominations Committee mitigate the risk of losing key personnel through robust succession planning strong recruitment processes long term management incentives and retention initiatives.
Each Division maintains talent development and succession plans supported by adequately funded training.
Mitigation
The Group maintains adequate cash balances and credit facilities with sufficient headroom and tenor to mitigate credit availability risk.
The Group monitors forecast and actual cash flows to match the maturity profiles of financial assets and liabilities.
The Group aims to operate within its target leverage range of 1.50x to 2.00x EBITDA at the year end throughout the cycle.
Since the year end the Group has increased and extended its banking facilities to at least February 2023.
Impact on strategy A B C D E Risk assessment
Trend
Impact on strategy A B C D E Risk assessment
Trend
Impact on strategy A B C D E Risk assessment
Trend Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 42 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements Viability statement Strategy and appetite for risk The Groups strategy details of which are set out on pages 12 to 13 aims to create shareholder value through offering residential and commercial customers the complete range of door and window components across hardware seals and extrusions.
Tymans business model details of which are set out on pages 10 and 11 is flexible and adaptable and aims to ensure that the Group is able to service its customers effectively and provide them with a differentiated product offering at an appropriate price supported by high standards of quality and service.
Both the business model and the strategy are central to understanding the future prospects for the Group.
This strategy has been in place for several years and is subject to regular monitoring and development by the Board.
Decisions relating to major investment projects including all MandA transactions are approved by the Board.
The Board is prepared to adopt an appropriate amount of risk and would characterise the Groups risk appetite as moderate.
The Board continues to take a conservative approach to the assessment of less certain future benefits such as those derived from integration and rationalisation projects.
Assessment of prospects Tymans longer term prospects are assessed through the Groups strategic planning process.
This process includes a review of Divisional threeyear rolling strategic plans by the Executive Directors in conjunction with the Tyman Management Committee and functional leaders within each Division.
The
Board participates in the process through regular meetings with the Divisional senior management visits to Divisional facilities and strategic updates including strategy away days.
The output of this assessment is a consolidated set of financial projections for the Group that takes account of Tymans principal risks see pages 39 and 41 and explicitly covers the period of the next three years.
A central review of forecast debt covenant compliance and debt headroom is also completed.
The annual Group budget is compiled in the autumn of each year and generates a detailed forecast for the year ahead.
As part of this process the strategic plan financial projections are refreshed.
The strategic plan reviewed as part of the assessment of prospects in this report therefore covers the threeyear period ending 31 December 2020.
Since the year end the Group has renewed extended and increased its committed banking facilities to at least February 2023 which provides Tyman with significant financial headroom to achieve its objectives and extends beyond the life of the strategic plan.
Key assumptions The key assumptions underpinning the 2017 to 2020 strategic plan include average market growth forecasts in line with local consensus no loss of significant customers conservative forecasts of market share growth selling price increases and the impact of new product development conservative forecasts of the benefits from existing major rationalisation projects and no impact from future acquisitions or disposals.
Assessment of viability In accordance with provision C.2.2 of the Code the Directors have assessed the viability of the Group over a threeyear period.
This assessment takes account of the Groups current trading position and the potential impact of the principal risks and the mitigating actions documented on pages 39 to 41 of the Annual Report.
Consistent with 2016 the Directors have determined that three years is an appropriate timeframe over which to provide a viability statement as this is the timeframe currently adopted by the Board as its strategic planning period.
A threeyear period aligns with the Groups typical investment time horizon and with the performance measurement period for the Tyman Long Term Incentive Plan under the Remuneration Policy.
In addition the Directors consider that demand in the Groups business is ultimately driven by consumer confidence and discretionary spending patterns which are difficult to project accurately beyond a threeyear time horizon.
The strategic plan therefore reflects the Directors best estimate of the future prospects of the business over the threeyear period.
In order to assess the Groups viability over this period the strategic plan has been flexed by overlaying the cumulative financial impact of a number of downside scenarios to represent severe but plausible circumstances that the Group might experience.
These scenarios are based on the potential financial outcomes of certain of the Groups principal risks crystallising such as a severe deterioration in market conditions loss of business to competitors and loss of major customers.
Assessment of prospects Find out more at site 43 The downside scenarios applied to the strategic plan are summarised below Severe but plausible scenarios Strategic plan flexed for combinations of the following scenarios Link to principal risks and uncertainties Level of severity tested Conclusion Severe downturn in market conditions Aggressive competitor actions resulting in a severe loss of market share The loss of major customers Market conditions
Loss of major customers 22.0 per cent fall in Revenue in year one followed by flat revenues in the following two years 15.0 million oneoff exceptional cash cost in year one This cumulative scenario is significantly worse than the reductions experienced by the Group during the last downturn in 2007 to 2009.
Tyman after undertaking mitigating actions should be able to withstand the impact of these severe but plausible scenarios.
Reverse stress test scenarios Strategic plan flexed for combinations of the following scenarios Link to principal risks and uncertainties Level of severity tested Conclusion Extreme downturn in market conditions Aggressive competitor actions resulting in extreme loss of market share The loss of major customers Market conditions
Loss of major customers 27.0 per cent fall in Revenue in year one followed by 8.0 per cent fall in revenues in each of the following two years 15.0 million oneoff exceptional cash cost in year one This level of performance deterioration is considered extreme and highly implausible and would make the future viability of the Group less certain.
The flexed models take account of the availability and likely effectiveness of mitigating actions available to the Group including the flexing of working capital capital expenditure and discretionary spend as well as Tymans ability to change its capital structure if necessary through refinancing existing debt facilities andor raising equity finance.
Viability statement Based on their assessment of the prospects for the Group and principal risks and the viability assessment above the Directors confirm that they have a reasonable expectation that the Group will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the period to 31 December 2020.
Going concern As a consequence of the work undertaken to support the Viability statement above the Directors have continued to adopt the going concern basis in preparing the financial statements see note 2.2 Going concern in the notes to the financial statements.
Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 44 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements
Focusing on our responsibilities
The Group employs nearly 4000 people and through their expertise experience and contribution Tyman is able to deliver operational excellence.
The sustainability of the Groups business is dependent upon attracting people of the right quality skills and behaviours that match with the Tyman Code of Conduct and in developing each individual by recognising the contribution they make through ongoing development and appropriate reward.
The Code of Conduct was developed to provide common principles and best practice standards to an increasingly large and geographically diverse organisation.
The
Code of Conduct covers the overarching principles by which every employee working in the Group is expected to behave and how Tyman expects its customers suppliers and other stakeholders to operate to an equivalent standard.
The Code of Conduct is now included in each Divisions handbook which ensures every new recruit is fully aware of the standards expected of them.
Each of the Groups Divisions operates in accordance with its own policies and procedures which are consistent with the principles and values set out in this Code.
Employees
The Board recognises delivery of the Group strategy is dependent on providing operational efficiencies through process scrutiny delivered by talented and skilled employees.
Please see page 12 for more information on this aspect of Group strategy.
The loss of key personnel is a recognised risk see page 41 and therefore to mitigate this each Division has policies on recruitment processes talent development and succession plans supported by adequately funded training and long term management incentives and retention initiatives.
People
Ethics and compliance Health and safety Environment Community The Group understands the critical role that environmental ethical legal and social dimensions play in its long term sustainability.
Find out more at site 45 Each Division seeks to develop every member of its workforce by providing them with the right level of ongoing training.
Each Division seeks to develop every member of its workforce by providing them with the right level of ongoing training whether this is product knowledge manufacturing process development or policy and management training.
During the year the Group invested in a wide variety of training programmes to support both stated strategy and risk mitigation.
AmesburyTruth engaged external providers to provide focused OGSM 4.3 management level training and development programmes for selected employees together with an online training platform for all areas of the business providing wide coverage on a variety of training areas via a training portal.
As part of succession planning and talent management a number of high potential individuals have been selected to participate in team building exercises and tailored development training programmes.
An internship programme selected seven interns who participated in job training during 2017.
Participants were recruited from universities across the Midwest of America and gained experience in engineering sales supply chain and operations.
AmesburyTruth continued its tuition reimbursement programme where employees can pursue a degree course which is directly related to their employment.
SchlegelGiesse focused on NVQ training in a number of product and production related areas including direct product training creativity in innovation and marketing and communications.
As part of its apprenticeship schemes SchlegelGiesse renewed its collaboration with the University of Bologna Engineering Department and hosted students for research programmes within the business.
ERA supported skills training through the UK Apprenticeship Schemes for customer services and business administration.
Management development programmes were completed for senior managers in project management.
Apprentices were also recruited for the Howe Green business.
More informal training is carried out via individual product training tool box talks and notice boards populated when necessary to provide news and information.
Employees are reviewed annually to assess performance against established goals and as part of this process development opportunities are considered.
The importance of frequent and consistent communications to everyone within the Group is recognised and therefore each Division participates in frequent staff engagement on a number of levels in different mediums and on a variety of topics.
Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 46 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements People continued Employees continued The aim of these communications is to ensure everyone is kept informed of progress being made by their own unit and the Division as a whole.
The frequency of communications ranges from monthly newsletters and site meetings with all employees to quarterly team meetings and staff group representations.
Topics include information of recent personnel changes health and safety updates and community activities.
During the year AmesburyTruth conducted an employee engagement survey throughout the US facilities the results of which will be shared with all employees including the actions and responses to the results.
Diversity
Tymans employment policies and practices require that an individuals skills experience and talent are the sole determinants in recruitment and career development rather than age beliefs disability ethnic origin gender marital status religion and sexual orientation.
The Group is committed to supporting employment policies and practices that make provision for equal opportunities and nondiscrimination and that comply with relevant local legislation and accepted employment practice codes.
Within the Group local diversity and unconscious bias training has been conducted during the year.
All salaries are linked to job evaluations to promote equality of opportunity.
As at 31 December 2017 the Board had female representation of 33.0 per cent.
Female representation at senior management level was 21.0 per cent 2016 29.0 per cent.
Across the global workforce there was 41.0 per cent female representation 2016 40.0 per cent.
The change in female representation at senior management level reflects a slightly enlarged management structure with those moving into these positions being primarily male.
These figures reflect the challenges faced by the Group operating in a manufacturing environment.
As part of the work of the Nominations Committee on succession planning together with the Remuneration Committees continued review of the gender pay gap analysis this topic will receive further scrutiny during 2018.
Gender pay gap reporting Under UK legislation all organisations with 250 employees or more are required to publish data which demonstrates the pay differential between male and female employees.
In the UK Tyman has two operational divisions ERA and SchlegelGiesse and a small Group head office.
None of these entities have a payroll that exceeds 250 employees.
At present there is no legal requirement for any one of these employing companies to publish their pay differential data.
However it is recognised there are benefits to Tyman in compiling and publishing this information.
In addition Tyman expects that in future years it may have a legal requirement to report this data this will in part be determined by the size of the payrolls within any one Division.
The results show the mean difference between male and female pay is 21.0 per cent and the median difference is 11.0 per cent.
This data demonstrates that despite the high number of males in each pay quartile in comparison to the number of female employees both results compare favourably to the national gender pay gap median of gross hourly earnings which is 21.9 per cent for all employees in manufacturing industry.
The data highlights the challenges Tyman faces when looking to attract females into a traditionally male manufacturing organisation.
The proportion of female employees in the Tyman workforce in the UK is 26.0 per cent with the majority of females employed by the Group working in support light assembly or warehousing activities.
The full statement on gender pay reporting can be found on the Groups website.
Sustainability continued Health and safety The Board recognises its responsibility for the health and wellbeing of everyone employed by the Group part of which is providing a safe environment in which to work free from accident or incident.
As can be seen by the performance of the Groups overall health and safety statistics for 2017 there has been a deterioration in the injury and lost time rates including in the severity rates of accidents that have occurred.
This is highly disappointing to everyone concerned in all aspects of health and safety throughout the Group as there has been considerable time effort and focus on this topic during the year.
This result is primarily caused by a deteriorating rate in Mexico in part caused by the rapid expansion of the Juarez workforce.
A number of initiatives are underway including engagement with all employees to develop an improved health and safety culture in this facility.
As part of the continued focus on health and safety during the year each Division has engaged with every member of staff to further embed the Tyman health and safety culture.
ERA supported regular health and safety training for all staff including managers in areas such as manual handling DSE assessments and driver awareness training for all mobile workers.
ERA also conducted a Division wide staff health and safety culture questionnaire with the results being communicated with the staff at specific team briefings.
The move to the new i54 site in Wolverhampton has provided management the opportunity of combining three locations into one site and bringing health and safety focus into one dedicated role for all UK staff.
All ERA sites are ISO 9001 accredited.
SchlegelGiesse has embarked on a threeyear programme Creating a Safer Working Environment of safety initiatives which aims to establish and embed a new organisational structure with roles and responsibilities aligned with health and
Lost time
Near miss Total incidents  8188 Total incidents  8205 Lost time incidents by reason
Slips trips and falls Burns and scalds
Cuts and pinches
Find out more at site 47 safety with a newly appointed Divisional Health and Safety Manager.
AmesburyTruth is well advanced with safety programmes and used the US National Safety Week to reinforce the safety message with a video communication to all employees.
Followup facility audits have been carried out by an external third party at five sites with recommended actions being taken.
Adhoc site audits are also carried out by the Divisional Health and Safety Manager to ensure ongoing compliance with safety systems.
Further initiatives carried out during the year included the identification of health and safety champions for each site to keep health and safety at the forefront of all operations.
Should an incident occur a fourperson panel independent of the operations carries out an internal review of the causes of the accident actions required to prevent a repeat occurrence and lessons learnt to assist with an improved safety culture.
The Health and Safety Manual was also updated distributed and signed by all employees including new employees as part of the onboarding process.
A number of other initiatives are also underway including occupational athletics a programme designed to help staff get fit for their roles and reduce repetitive strain injuries.
One of the Groups key performance indicators is the health and safety performance statistics the results of which may be seen on page 17.
This measurement is used to provide focus on one of the Groups key performance measures process scrutiny.
The target is to reduce the overall lost time injuries year on year.
As a result of the disappointing health and safety performance during 2017 all Divisions will be looking at alternative ways in which to further engage with employees to continue the development of the health and safety culture at all levels.
Stakeholders
Engagement with all our stakeholders is important and ensures there is a sound basis upon which our business is conducted.
Each
Division has a relationship management programme with their customers and suppliers which provides the appropriate forum for open and transparent discussions.
CEO reports to the Board on the Groups health and safety performance at each Board meeting.
Divisional CEOs report on their health and safety performance to the Tyman CEO at weekly TMC meetings.
Local management report on health and safety performance to Divisional CEOs at least weekly.
Board of Directors Health and safety management systems provide feedback to local management as to the success of system implementation.
Overall responsibility for the health and safety performance of the Group.
Chief Executive Officer
Members of the Tyman Management Committee meet formally four times per year as a Risk Management Committee to report discuss and develop the risk management and health and safety focus within the Group supported by the Group Company Secretary reporting directly to the Audit Committee.
CEO responsibility discharged to local management through the TMC Divisional CEOs.
Risk Management Committee
Tyman Management
Local management accountable for its health and safety performance adherence to the Groups health and safety policies and compliance with local health and safety regulations.
Local responsibilities are managed through the implementation of local health and safety management systems.
Local management Health and safety management systems identify assess and take action to reduce risks mandate health and safety training and development of all employees and develop safe working practices.
Health and safety management systems Health and safety management system Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 48 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements Sustainability continued Tyman Sourcing Asia In October 2017 the Risk Management Committee visited the Tyman Sourcing Asia office in Ningbo China.
As part of this visit the Committee received a briefing on the work of TSA and visited the TSA offices which included logistics projects engineering and quality management which includes a testing laboratory CMM and training rooms.
The Committee also visited a number of suppliers in the region which provided the opportunity to meet local management teams and see production facilities and processes first hand.
The Committee was particularly interested in seeing the facilities afforded the production staff including health and safety measures provided.
This visit coincided with the first supplier conference which was attended by TSAs leading suppliers and provided the opportunity for the Risk Management Committee to meet with local manufacturers and to provide them with some further background to the work of each of the Tyman Divisions.
Ethics and compliance The Group is committed to conducting its business with integrity.
High standards of professional and ethical conduct are expected throughout its operations acting in compliance with the laws and regulations in jurisdictions in which the Group operates.
Employees and persons acting on behalf of the Group are expected to implement the Groups policies and procedures such that the legitimate interests of the Group are advanced having regard to the Groups values and standards.
All employees are expected to engage in ethical conduct.
As part of the work of the Risk Management Committee a number of other Group policies have been developed during the year and these are now in full operation throughout the Divisions.
These policies include antibribery and anticorruption Supplier Code of Conduct and the prevention of the facilitation of tax evasion.
The Group is committed to conducting its business with integrity.
These policies are clearly communicated to all staff.
Training programmes in these areas in some cases provided by external providers continued during the year with key members of staff from each Division completing relevant modules.
Internal review of systems and internal audits provide assurance there is no significant risk in these areas.
The Risk Management Committee manages the programme of work which supports the implementation and compliance with these policies reporting regularly to the Audit Committee on these issues.
Product integrity The Group seeks to be honest and fair in its relationships with customers and suppliers and to source and supply goods and services in an efficient manner in accordance with specifications without compromising quality and performance.
Each Division is responsible for negotiating the terms and conditions of trade with suppliers.
In doing so each Division is expected to maintain high standards of integrity in all business dealings with suppliers and is encouraged to use the services of those suppliers whose values and standards are equivalent to Tymans quality management standards.
Operating units are encouraged to gain and maintain accreditation to specific standards required by the markets they serve with quality and production accreditations gained throughout the operations.
ISO 9001 certification ensures operations adopt and maintain efficient quality management systems that save time and cost whilst improving efficiency and delivering high quality products to their customers.
Modern slavery The Group is committed to respecting human rights across all its operations and aims to work at the highest international standards as well as complying with local legislation.
The Group fully supports the Modern Slavery Act 2015 and seeks to ensure the Groups activities and activities within its supply chain do not infringe or encourage abuses of any human rights.
The UK Modern Slavery Act 2015 requires Tyman plc and its subsidiaries to make an annual statement on the steps taken to identify and prevent modern slavery throughout its supply chain.
Each of the Divisions manufactures products primarily in North America and Western Europe distributing and selling products to markets globally.
A proportion of the Groups products are sourced from third party suppliers primarily in China.
Responsibility for the management of the supply chain in Asia rests with the TSA.
Through the Divisions sourcing arrangements it is recognised there is a risk of the occurrence of modern slavery practices.
Each Division is therefore committed to ensuring any indication of such practices is investigated immediately with the appropriate actions being taken if necessary.
During the year a number of actions have been carried out to minimise the possibility of modern slavery within the Groups supply chain.
Each of the Divisions has carried out training for all relevant staff in the appropriate language to educate them to be vigilant for any signs of malpractice.
Audit and site visits of suppliers particularly in low cost regions have been completed and revised supplier agreements have been implemented.
Find out more at site 49 A revised Modern Slavery Statement for the financial year ended 31 December 2017 can be found on the Groups website.
Each Division is responsible for the ethical sourcing of all products used in the production of finished goods.
As part of the work of the sourcing teams there is a strong emphasis on ensuring the integrity of the supply chain including verification of their suppliers.
Supply chain teams seek to reengineer products reworking them to reduce the materials used or to take advantage of improved production methods using more environmentally sound materials.
The Group operates a confidential whistleblowing telephone help line which is available for all employees and any external person associated with providing goods or services to any of the Divisions.
During the year eight calls were received by the Group Company Secretary.
Each call was fully investigated by an appropriate person independent of the claim being made.
Each of these claims was fully resolved with the necessary actions being taken.
These claims were reported to the Board which was kept apprised of all actions being taken and the final outcomes.
There is nothing material to report in respect of any of these claims.
Community
The Divisions do not have policies on the social and community activities in which their employees participate on behalf of the
In keeping with the decentralised nature of the Tyman Group each operating unit participated in a number of local initiatives and charitable causes either associated with the unit or to which an employee has a personal connection.
AmesburyTruth
As in previous years AmesburyTruth has taken pride in being actively involved in local and national charitable initiatives through monetary donations as well as providing hours of community service.
Big Brothers and Big Sisters Make A Wish United Way and Junior Achievement are all national programmes with which the Company has partnered financially and through volunteer hours.
Several of the sites support employee fundraising campaigns with United Way which helps raises additional funds outside of the Company.
AmesburyTruth participates financially and with physical involvement at the local Chambers of Commerce in Cannon Falls Owatonna Sioux Falls and Statesville.
During the holiday season and winter months AmesburyTruth runs collection campaigns at the sites collecting winter wear clothing and supplies for the needy.
Many employees are active with the local school districts and support sport teams.
Each site has a WAVE Committee Wellness Activity Volunteerism Events which plans coordinates and interacts with the community on programmes and opportunities.
Monetary value of donations made during the 2017 year totalled US77908.
ERA
In 2017 ERA supported a charity voted for by their employees and were delighted to raise over 14000 for Birmingham Childrens Hospital.
Birmingham Childrens Hospital is a leading UK specialist paediatric centre offering expert care to over 90000 children and young people from across the country every year.
Delivering some of the most advanced treatments complex surgical procedures and cuttingedge research and development the hospital treats one in five children from Birmingham and one in eight from the wider West Midlands.
SchlegelGiesse
Reflecting the international nature of this Division the community activities in which each unit is involved ranges from hosting Macmillan coffee mornings and participation in the Muddy Race for breast cancer to sponsorship of the local Budrio theatre.
As in prior years as part of the Group Management Conference funds were raised for a local charity.
This year the conference was held in Budrio home of the SchlegelGiesse Group head office and the nominated charity was in support of the first Wheelchair Tennis Tournament at the Budrio Tennis
The SchlegelGiesse contribution was aimed at the removal of architectural barriers in the club to help people of all abilities participate in this sport.
With matching contributions from Tyman plc the charitable giving raised 5200.
Each operating unit participated in a number of local initiatives and charitable causes.
Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 50 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements
Each Division has policies in place for managing the environment including compliance with local regulations.
The policies cover areas such as the use of materials including the principles of use reuse and recycle.
These policies support the ongoing energy efficiency programmes carried out during the year as part of the continued drive for increasing efficient methods of production including the minimisation of waste materials.
All Divisions have programmes for the ongoing maintenance of plants and investment in new processes including the improvement of recycling facilities in all locations.
The Divisions actively promote the reduction of materials used in all aspects of production.
The actions taken in compliance with these policies support the efficient use of natural resources for both operational efficiencies and the sound use of natural resources.
As part of the footprint rationalisation the move to energy efficient buildings is part of the Groups drive for operational excellence in all areas of its operations for the benefit of everyone working in these premises and for production and energy efficiencies.
Some of the actions taken during the year which support the Divisions environmental policies were AmesburyTruth completed a number of environmental audits with follow up actions which have improved energy usage including the reduction of compressed air leakages and the replacement of old equipment with energy efficient units for the reduction of energy and air consumption the replacement of lighting systems including fluorescent lighting with LED for reduced energy usage installation of water conditioning equipment to the process water systems reducing the frequency of filter replacement and the reduction of landfill products by 90 per cent installation of movement sensors for lighting systems to reduce energy use installation of new energy efficient electric injection moulding machines reducing energy consumption by 20 per cent installation of new energy efficient heating ventilation and air conditioning systems in new buildings and construction of a storm water prevention system and settling pond to contain and filter water before discharge into the local ecosystem.
The focus on the new AmesburyTruth centres of excellence is on creating stateoftheart facilities for employees which support efficient and environmentally aware production methods.
Following the amalgamation of the Italian sites SchlegelGiesse completed an energy audit at the start of 2017 which mapped all energy consumption to provide the basis on which energy reduction programmes can target key areas.
Other actions taken during the year were as part of an ongoing sustainable buildings initiative 1100m of asbestos roof was replaced with energy efficient thermal insulation which was restructured to provide additional light to this area of the building improved waste separation with follow up audits to ensure compliance installation of energy efficient lighting in some older premises turbocharged direct injection monitoring system was changed replacing nylon mixing heads with steel units resulting in reduced water use and environmental disposal initiated reel recycle system as part of the supply of polycarbonate inserts and various production processes have moved to paperless systems reducing paper use.
ERAs consolidation of three plants into a new purpose built facility has provided the Division the opportunity to operate in an energy efficient building with features that include a targeted air permeability of 3m h. walling scheme.
This is a measure relating to the reduction in solar gain louvres outside office windows to reduce solar gains heat recovery ventilation units air source heat pumps for heating and cooling of office space low energy LED lighting daylight dimming controls for lights close to the windows present detection lighting and storm water runoff swales have been installed for sound water treatment.
Sustainability continued Total CO e by scope 4Tonnes Scope 1 Scope 2 Total CO e by Division Scope 1 Scope 2tel 2017 AmesburyTruth ERA SchlegelGiesse 2016 2017 Tonnes Find out more at site 51 Total water usage by Division Cubic metresteltel AmesburyTruth ERA SchlegelGiesse GHG emissions tonnes CO
Scope 1 11711 11157 11423 Scope 2 34931 33598 31062 Total direct and indirect emissions 46642 44755 42485 Intensity ratio tonnes Data for acquisitions is included for the postacquisition period.
Data for disposals is included up to the date of disposal.
Emissions that arise directly from our operations and comprise the combustion of fuels and process emissions.
2 Indirect emissions that arise from our use of electricity.
3 CO e per m of Revenue.
Greenhouse gas emissions The Group applies the GHG Protocol as the basis for reporting its emissions.
Emissions reporting includes the facilities over which the Group has operational control.
This is the internationally recognised standard for corporate carbon reporting.
Scope 1 and Scope 2 emissions data has been collected from all material locations operated or controlled by the Group.
Emission sources falling outside the Groups operational control and other Scope 3 emissions have not been collated or reported.
Emissions data for businesses acquired during the year has only been included from the date of acquisition.
The Group has used Revenue as the denominator for its intensity ratio as this is the most appropriate and relevant factor associated with the Groups activities and should provide an appropriate basis on which to compare trends over time.
Greenhouse gas emissions generated by the Groups operations present considerable risks to both the Group and the environment including the agricultural impact of the Groups dependence on extraction and use of raw materials the potential disruption of the Groups operations and those of its customers and suppliers and changes in the nature or distribution of consumer demand.
These risks can be mitigated through the Groups conscious efforts to minimise its release of GHG through environmental initiatives.
Our GHG emissions measured as the quantity of CO e generated by the Groups activities for the year ended 31 December 2017 are presented in the table below.
The performance at the end of 2017 shows a positive trend over the past three years helped by the Groups footprint rationalisation and in particular the continued investment in new built for purpose manufacturing and warehouse facilities.
Water usage The Group started monitoring water usage in 2015 as an acknowledgement of the expansion of the Group and its use of natural resources and the wish to ensure the efficient use of this resource.
The increased production in both the AmesburyTruth and SchlegelGiesse Divisions during the year has caused the resultant increase in the use of water throughout their operations.
Water consumption 2017 2016 Cubic metres 71402 54998 Intensity ratio cubic metres 136 120 Water per m of Revenue.
Data for acquisitions is included for the postacquisition period.
Data for disposals is included up to the date of disposal.
GHG emissions The Divisions actively promote the reduction of materials used in all aspects of production.
The majority of greenhouse gas emissions used arise from the manufacturing processes throughout the Group together with the running of the Group and divisional offices and an element of air travel.
Where possible alternative technologies are used to minimise the use of travel between sites with video conference calls used extensively by colleagues to communicate outside of scheduled meeting times.
Each Division seeks to reduce emissions wherever possible and to review and improve the recycling facilities in all locations.
As part of the footprint rationalisation the move to purpose built facilities has provided a number of opportunities to operate more in energy efficient premises and to upgrade and improve production processes.
All facilities undertake energy efficiency programmes during the year as part of a continual drive for increasing efficient methods of production including the minimisation of waste materials.
Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 52 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements Board of Directors Martin Towers Nonexecutive Chairman Committee membership Committee membership Committee membership Louis Eperjesi attends the Audit Nominations and Remuneration Committees at the invitation of the Committee Chairs.
Committee membership James Brotherton attends the Audit Nominations and Remuneration Committees at the invitation of the Committee Chairs.
Louis Eperjesi
Chief Executive Officer
Angelika Westerwelle Nonexecutive Director James Brotherton Chief Financial Officer A A R R N N Date of appointment December 2009 Martin Towers became a Nonexecutive Director and Chairman of the Audit Committee in December 2009.
On 12 May 2017 he was appointed Chairman of the Board and Chairman of the Nominations Committee.
Qualifications
Fellow of the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales and began his career with Coopers and Lybrand now PwC.
Skills
Extensive financial and general management experience in the public markets at companies with significant overseas interests in manufacturing.
Relevant past experience Group finance director of Kelda Group plc from 2003 until February 2008 and has served as group finance director of McCarthy and Stone plc The Spring Ram Corporation plc and Allied Textile Companies plc and was chief executive of Spice plc until its sale to Cinven in December 2010.
Martin was a nonexecutive director of Homestyle Group plc from 2004 to 2006 and of KCOM Group plc from 2009 to July 2015.
External appointments Nonexecutive chairman of Restore plc and Norcros plc and the senior independent nonexecutive director of RPC Group plc.
Martin will be stepping down from RPC during 2018.
Date of appointment November 2012
Graduated in business administration from the Aachen Institute of Technology and holds masters degrees from the University of Cambridge and Harvard University.
Angelika received her doctorate in economics from the Aachen Institute of Technology.
Skills
Angelika has extensive operational experience in managing companies with wide international sales procurement and manufacturing networks.
Her consulting experience focused on strategy MandA postmerger integration and restructuring.
Relevant past experience Chief executive officer of the Weidemann Group GmbH RMG Regelund Messtechnik GmbH and Karlie Group GmbH.
Angelika has also worked as a management consultant for several years with The Boston Consulting Group and Alix Partners GmbH.
External appointments Angelika is managing partner of LANAX Management GmbH a nonexecutive director of Pinova Capital GmbH and commissioner of the German Monopolies Commission.
Date of appointment February 2010
Louis has extensive knowledge and experience of the manufacture and supply of building products in international markets.
He has a strong commercial marketing and product background through which he has successfully driven strategy development change management programmes and MandA activity.
Relevant past experience Prior to joining Tyman plc Louis was divisional managing director of Kingspan Panels Ltd the largest division within Kingspan Group Plc where he was also a main board executive director.
He started his career within Caradon Plc and Redland Plc.
Since
1999 Louis has held leadership roles in Lafarge SA Baxi Group and Kingspan Group Plc.
External appointments Trustee of The Cheltenham Trust.
Date of appointment May 2010
Graduate of Loughborough University and an ICAEW Chartered Accountant.
Skills
Financial experience as an accountant and CFO of a listed international manufacturing business.
Extensive knowledge of MandA transactions and integrations equity and debt capital markets investor relations and business development.
Relevant past experience Qualified as an accountant with EY and subsequently worked for HSBC and Citigroup in investment banking specialising in MandA restructurings and capital raisings.
External appointments Director of the Quoted Companies
He sits as the QCAs alternate member on the Takeover Panel.
Find out more at site 53 Committee membership Committee membership Committee membership Committee membership
A R N Helen Clatworthy Nonexecutive Director Carolyn Gibson Group Company Secretary Pamela Bingham Nonexecutive Director A R N Mark Rollins Nonexecutive Director and Senior Independent Director A R N Date of appointment April 2015 as Nonexecutive Director and Remuneration Committee Chairman.
Mark Rollins became Senior Independent Director in November 2016.
Qualifications
Chartered Accountant and holds a degree in civil and structural engineering from the University of Bradford.
Skills
Mark has considerable financial commercial and general management experience of mainly listed engineeringmanufacturing companies both as an Executive and Nonexecutive Director.
Relevant past experience Chief executive officer of Senior plc retiring from this role on 31 May 2015.
Mark joined Senior plc in 1998 from Morgan Crucible plc and became group finance director in 2000 and chief executive officer in 2008.
He was formerly a nonexecutive director of WSP Group from 2006 to 2012.
External appointments Nonexecutive director of Carclo plc and its nonexecutive chairman from July 2018 Nonexecutive director of The Vitec Group plc until 2 April 2018 and nonexecutive chairman of Sigma Components Limited an aerospace business owned by private equity.
Date of appointment January 2017 Helen Clatworthy was appointed Chair of the Audit Committee in May 2017.
Qualifications
Fellow of the Chartered Institute of Management Accountants.
Skills
Helen has significant operational and corporate experience particularly in cost management acquisition integration and change management.
Relevant past experience Helen has spent most of her career with Imperial Brands plc in a number of financial roles including finance director Western Europe and in general management positions including supply chain director and business transformation director and since 2009 was a member of the plc executive committee.
External appointments Chair of the Imperial Tobacco Pension Fund and a trustee and treasurer of Disability Snowsports UK.
Date of appointment January 2018
Formerly practised as a solicitor with a law degree from the University of Edinburgh and a MBA from Warwick Business School and is a Lean Six Sigma Black Belt.
Skills
Pamela has a broad range of skills including negotiation of complex international contracts business development and operational management.
Proven track record as a commercial leader focusing on strategic direction and leading crosscultural teams to deliver growth and business expansion.
Relevant past experience Pamela started her career as a solicitor before moving into general management.
Previous positions include group business development director and then divisional managing director at Rotork plc previously having worked at David Brown Group Ltd CSEServelec Ltd and English Welsh and Scottish Railways.
External appointments Managing director of Weir Minerals Europe.
Date of appointment September 2016
Fellow of ICSA with a Masters degree in business administration from Kingston Business School.
Skills
Carolyn joined Tyman in September 2016 as Group Company Secretary.
In this role she is Secretary to the Group Board and its constituent Committees as well as Secretary to the Groups Risk Management
In addition her responsibilities include the coordination and development of Tymans corporate governance whistleblowing and compliance processes.
Relevant past experience Gained extensive experience in a number company secretarial roles including with Thomas Cook Group plc ICAP plc esure Group plc and International Power plc.
External appointments
A Audit Committee N Nominations Committee R Remuneration Committee Chair of Committee Committee membership Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 54 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements Tyman Management Committee Louis Eperjesi has an extensive and successful track record in the building materials and manufacturing sectors most recently at Kingspan Group plc the international building products business where he was an executive director on the main board and divisional managing director of Kingspan Insulated Panels the groups largest division.
Prior to joining Kingspan he held a range of senior management positions at subsidiaries of Baxi Group plc Lafarge Redland plc and Caradon plc.
Jeff Graby was appointed President and Chief Executive Officer of AmesburyTruth in January 2014 following the acquisition and integration of Truth Hardware with Amesbury.
He was appointed President and Chief Executive Officer of Truth Hardware in April 2012.
Before joining Truth Hardware he was president of FES Systems a company owned by GEA Group AG and presidentCOO of RAM Industries LLC a company owned by Schneider Electric.
Mark Turner joined ERA in 2014.
A graduate of the University of Leicester and a qualified Chartered Accountant he has experience in finance director and general management roles in subsidiaries of Caparo and Associated British Foods.
He was previously finance director at SPS Technologies Ltd in Leicester.
James Brotherton joined Tyman as Head of Corporate Development in 2004.
He was previously a director in the investment banking division of Citigroup having also worked for HSBC and Ernst and Young.
He is a Chartered Accountant.
Peter Santo joined the Group in January 2012 as Chief Executive Officer of SchlegelGiesse.
Previous roles include senior management positions with Pilkington plc BP Chemicals Sentrachem Ltd South Africa and Kingspan
Peter has a degree in chemical engineering.
Kevin OConnell joined Tyman as Group Financial Controller in February 2008.
Prior to this he worked at Datamonitor plc from July 2005 as group financial controller and company secretary.
He has many years experience working in a plc head office environment.
He is a Chartered Accountant having trained with PwC.
Darren Waters joined ERA in March 2012.
He has a strong background in the building products sector.
Having graduated in chemistry from Nottingham University he spent the early part of his career with Mobil Oil Corporation before moving on to senior management positions with RMC Group and Tarmac.
As Chief Executive Officer of ERA he is responsible for developing the Groups brands within the UK and Irish markets.
Mark Horobin joined SchlegelGiesse in April 201 7 .
He was most recently Vice president finance for Total Safety a leading global provider of safety services and equipment based in Dubai.
Prior to that he held several finance director positions for SPX.
He is a Chartered Accountant having trained with KPMG.
Louis Eperjesi
Chief Executive Officer
Jeff Graby President and Chief Executive Officer
Mark Turner Chief Financial Officer
James Brotherton Chief Financial Officer Peter Santo
Chief Executive Officer
SchlegelGiesse
Kevin OConnell Group Financial Controller and
Darren Waters
Chief Executive Officer
ERA
Mark Horobin Chief Financial Officer
Jeff Johnson was appointed Chief Financial Officer of AmesburyTruth in January 2015.
He was recently treasurer and vice president of investor relations for NYSEtraded Deluxe Corp.
He has extensive CFO and controller experience and began his career at KPMG.
He is a Certified Public Accountant and earned his MBA from London Business School.
Jeff Johnson Vice President and Chief Financial Officer
The Tyman Risk Management Committee comprises the members of the Tyman Management Committee.
Find out more at site 55
Chairmans introduction to governance Dear Shareholder On behalf of the Board I am pleased to report to you on the progress made on the governance arrangements during the year.
The governance of an organisation starts with the tone at the top and so I took the opportunity of the Boards planned externally facilitated evaluation to extend this review process to take into account the views of senior management.
Pleasingly the results of the evaluation were very positive and demonstrated the unity of the Board.
However there is always room for improvement and the results which are noted in more detail in the following Statement of governance showed as the Group continues to grow the Boards focus should move to more Groupbased discussions including the wider influences upon Group performance such as competitor and customer developments.
To address this the Boards agenda has been restructured to strengthen this aspect of the Boards work.
As the Group continues to grow it is essential that sound practices and behaviours are further embedded into the culture of the Group as a whole.
The Board and Committees receive updates on all areas of governance which provide the necessary assurance that the appropriate platforms are provided from which everyone can operate.
One key area of focus which did not provide the outcome on which the Board has worked hard to deliver is health and safety performance across the Group.
This result shows the continued investment in this area must be supported by alternative ways of embedding world class practices in every area of the business.
This will be a continuing theme during the year ahead.
I am pleased with the smooth transition in the Audit Committee as Helen Clatworthy took over as Chair of this Committee.
The results of the performance evaluation show this Committee is well run and provided with the necessary information.
The Committees work has developed with the focus on a number of key areas including improvements in risk management systems and changes in forthcoming changes in accounting standards and in light of the FRCs Lab project report on risk and viability reporting reviewed and approved the Groups Viability statement.
The Remuneration Committee is committed to aligning remuneration with the delivery of long term shareholder value and therefore spent time reviewing the roles of the Executive Directors and associated remuneration both of which have been realigned to take into account the Executives contribution to the Group and in the case of James Brotherton the extension of his responsibilities.
The work of the Nominations Committee developed during the year as it commenced a full succession planning programme which considered the skills and capabilities of all senior management and other high potential individuals.
This process gave the Committee an indepth view of the human talent within the Group and where there are development opportunities.
This programme will continue into 2018 combined with a review of the diversity within the Group.
The Board also appointed a new Nonexecutive Director Pamela Bingham who has extensive experience in international manufacturing businesses which includes business development and the implementation of strategies for business growth through product development and MandA.
Her current operational experience will provide an additional dimension to the work of the
Angelika Westerwelle will be stepping down from the Board at the conclusion of the 2018 AGM.
I am pleased to report that following these changes in Board membership the Board continues to have 33 per cent female representation as recommended by the Hampton Alexander review for FTSE 350 companies by 2020.
The Board remains committed to developing operational excellence throughout the Group which includes the governance arrangements for the Board and the Group as a whole which will continue to be a focus for the Board for the year ahead.
More details on the membership of the Board and the Board Committees and the work carried out during the year can be found in the following pages.
This Governance and Directors report together with the following Audit Committee report Nominations Committee report and Remuneration report sets out how the governance arrangements for the Group have been implemented during the year and I am pleased to confirm that Tyman has complied with the provisions of the Code.
As noted in my Chairmans statement the Companys AGM will be held at the ERA Divisions new facility in Wolverhampton on Thursday 10 May 2018 providing our shareholders with the opportunity to see one of Tymans centres of excellence first hand.
I do hope as many shareholders as possible will be able to attend.
Martin Towers Nonexecutive Chairman 7 March 2018 Martin Towers Nonexecutive Chairman Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 56 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements The Board Statement of compliance with the UK Corporate Governance Code In accordance with the Listing Rules this Governance and Directors report the Strategic report the Sustainability report and the Remuneration report describes how the Company has applied the principles contained in the Code which is available at www. rc.
Guidance and Transparency Rules.
The Company has applied the main principles of the Code and complied with its detailed provisions throughout the period under review.
This statement details how in practice the Company has applied these principles and complied with the detailed provisions.
Role of the Board The Board is responsible for the overall leadership strategy development and control of the Group in order to achieve its strategic objectives of continued earnings growth and to enhance shareholder value.
The Board also ensures that there is an effective system of controls to safeguard the Companys assets and to enable risks to be properly assessed and managed.
The Board is the body responsible for making decisions on all significant matters as detailed in the schedule of matters reserved for the Board and is accountable to shareholders for creating the sustainable long term success of the business.
The areas for specific consideration by the Board include setting the Groups values and standards approval of the Groups strategic aims and objectives ensuring maintenance of a sound system of internal control and risk management including approval of the Groups risk appetite statements responsibility for the review of the Groups corporate governance arrangements and ensuring the Group has the necessary financial and human resources processes and controls to deliver the long term strategy of the Group.
Matters not specifically reserved for the Board including the daytoday management of the Group are delegated to the Executive Directors.
Governance framework A schedule of Board meeting dates is set a year in advance to ensure the Board meets at regular intervals throughout the year at times that align with the operations of the different business divisions and the financial and reporting requirements of the Group as a whole.
To ensure relevant topics are given appropriate consideration the Board has delegated certain roles to three principal Committees Audit Remuneration and Nominations.
Membership of these Committees is made up of the Nonexecutive Directors.
The Chairman is also a member of the Nominations and Remuneration committees.
The work of these Committees in 2017 is explained in more detail on pages 61 to 82.
Each of the Committees terms of reference can be found on the Groups website.
All Directors have access to the services of the Group Company Secretary who is responsible for ensuring the Groups governance framework is observed and the Board and Committees receive the necessary support in fulfilling their responsibilities.
If thought appropriate Directors may obtain independent professional advice in respect of their responsibilities at the Companys expense.
No such advice was sought in the year.
Board composition The names and biographical details of all the current Directors as at the date of this report are set out on pages 52 and 53 and on the Group website.
The following Directors served during the year ended 31 December 2017 Board member Appointed James Brotherton May 2010 Helen Clatworthy January 2017 Louis Eperjesi February 2010 Jamie Pike November 2009 Mark Rollins April 2015 Martin Towers December 2009 Angelika Westerwelle November 2012 1 Stepped down as Chairman May 2017.
2 Appointed Chairman May 2017.
At 31 December 2017 the Board comprised one Nonexecutive Chairman two Executive Directors and three independent Nonexecutive Directors.
Pamela Bingham was appointed to the Board on 18 January 2018.
At the date of this report the Board now comprises a Nonexecutive Chairman two Executive Directors and four Nonexecutive Directors.
As previously announced Angelika Westerwelle will be stepping down from the Board at the conclusion of the Annual General Meeting to be held in May 2018.
The Group is committed to supporting employment policies and practices that make provision for equal opportunities and nondiscrimination and that comply with relevant local legislation and accepted employment codes of practice.
Group employment policies and practices must ensure that an individuals skills experience and talent are the sole determinants in recruitment.
Further information of the Groups diversity policies can be found on page 46 of the Strategic report.
Adherence to Group employment policies including diversity is seen as an effective way in which the composition of the Board can continue to be well balanced and appropriate for the needs of the Group as a whole.
Through the work of the Nominations Committees succession planning programme the composition of the Board and its Committees is regularly reviewed to ensure there is an appropriate mix of skills experience industry background and diversity to enable the Board and Committees to fulfil their responsibilities.
As a result of this review the Nominations Committee carried out an external search to recruit a Nonexecutive Director which resulted in the appointment of Pamela Bingham to the Board in January 2018.
Further details of the work of the Nominations Committee can be found on pages 67 to 68.
At 31 December 2017 the percentage of female representation on the Board was 33 per cent which will remain the case following the Annual General Meeting in May 2018.
Statement of governance Find out more at site 57 Board and Committee attendance The following table shows the attendance record of the Directors at the Board and relevant Committee meetings held during the year.
Board member Board Audit Remuneration Nominations James Brotherton 88 Helen Clatworthy 88 44 55 44 Louis Eperjesi 88 Jamie Pike Martin Towers Chairman from May 2017 88 11 55 44 Mark Rollins 88 44 55 44 Angelika Westerwelle 88 44 55 44 1 Jamie Pike stepped down as Chairman of the Board on 12 May 2017.
He attended all Board and Committee meetings during his tenure.
2 Martin Towers was Chairman of the Audit Committee until he was appointed Chairman of the Board on 12 May 2017  at which time he stepped down from the Audit Committee.
Chairman
The roles of the Chairman and the
Chief Executive Officer are clearly
The Chairman is responsible for the leadership and effective running of the Board and its decisionmaking processes for setting the highest standards of corporate governance for setting the Board agenda and for the style and tone of Board discussions.
The Chairmans role includes leading the Board in determining the strategy and the overall objectives of the Group while ensuring that the Board determines the nature and extent of the principal risks associated with implementing this strategy.
Chief Executive Officer
The CEO is responsible for the daytoday management of the Group providing leadership for the executive team and developing and implementing the Groups strategic objectives.
He is assisted by the Tyman Management Committee.
Chief Financial Officer The CFO is responsible for the financial reporting and management of the Group in addition to the finance audit tax and treasury functions.
As announced in July 2017 the CFOs role has been extended to take Board responsibility for Group strategy corporate development and MandA supported by the CEO.
The CFO role remains responsible for investor relations.
The Senior Independent Director The Senior Independent Director is available for shareholders to voice any concerns which may not be appropriate for discussion through the normal channels of Chairman CEO or CFO.
The Senior Independent Director also leads the Chairmans appraisal serves as an intermediary for the other Directors with the Chairman as necessary and acts as a sounding board for the Chairman as required.
Independence of Nonexecutive Directors Through the work of the Nominations Committee the Board has ensured that its members have an appropriate mix of skills and relevant industry experience and that each Nonexecutive has sufficient knowledge of the Company which has enabled them to discharge their duties and responsibilities during the year.
As part of the performance evaluation the Board reviewed the independence of the Directors.
Having reviewed the other positions held by the Nonexecutive Directors and the possibility of any potential conflicts of interest the Board continues to consider that each of the Nonexecutive Directors is independent as defined against the independence criteria as set out in the Code believing each to be independent of character and judgement.
Director induction Upon appointment all new Directors receive a comprehensive and tailored induction programme providing them the opportunity to learn about the operations making specific site visits and meeting Divisional and local management.
Work of the Board during 2017 The Boards key activities and achievements during 2017 and in respect of the 2017 year end are summarised below.
Health and safety Received details of all health and safety events which are discussed in full including the remedial actions taken lessons learnt and future preventative measures.
Received updates from each of the Divisional CEOs on progress of health and safety programmes within their divisions including results of staff surveys and feedback received.
Received a presentation from the CEO of ERA regarding the outcome of supplier audits.
Key achievement Despite the disappointing results of the health and safety performance of the Divisions during the year including the increased accident severity rate the Board remains as committed as ever to developing a health and safety culture and environment which is world class.
Controls and governance Received reports from the Audit Remuneration and Nominations Committees providing updates on the work of these Committees.
Received reports from the Company Secretary on general governance updates Group policies and all reported whistleblowing events.
Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 58 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements Work of the Board during 2017 continued Controls and governance continued Through the work of the Audit Committee reviewed the divisional risk registers the principal risks facing the Group and the Group Risk Register.
Received an update on legal and governance matters from Pinsent Masons.
Key achievement The development of an overall Group Risk Register has provided the Board with closer oversight of the Groups key and emerging risks with particular emphasis on cyber security.
Strategy
Received briefing from the CEO and CFO on proposed acquisitions divestments and progress being made in respect of these projects.
Received updates from the CEO on progress being made in respect of previous acquisition and the results of ongoing integration work.
Received presentations from Divisional management on the development of their strategies and discussed the impact of these plans including the assessment of synergy with Group strategy.
Received presentations from each of the Divisions on new product development.
Key achievement The Board participated in a full strategy review and development session which has helped inform the Board on the future direction and prospects of the Group.
People
Received presentations from the Divisional CEOs on their senior management succession plans including discussions on development plans and talent management.
Considered the work of the Nominations Committee in developing the succession plans for the Board.
Key achievement Furthered the Boards knowledge and understanding of the Groups talent pool.
Progressed the Boards own succession plans with the appointment of a new Nonexecutive Director.
Financial
Received and reviewed financial reports from the CFO regularly assessing the Groups performance against budget and analysts expectations.
Reviewed and approved the 2018 Budget.
Reviewed and approved the Groups dividend policy.
Reviewed and approved the 2016 preliminary results 2017 half year results and 2016 Annual Report and Accounts.
Received and approved the 2017 preliminary results announcement and the 2017 Annual Report and Accounts.
Key achievement Ensured the delivery of a sound financial performance overcoming previously reported operational issues in the US.
Shareholder engagement Received reports on meetings held by the CEO and CFO with shareholders analysts and potential investors from the CFO as well as general market updates.
Reviewed detailed reports on feedback received from investor roadshows and capital markets presentations.
The Board as a whole met with shareholders at the Companys Annual General Meeting.
Board visits to the operations As part of the Boards work the Directors visit operating units to meet with divisional management and to see these businesses first hand.
A Board and a Nominations Committee meeting were held in Bologna Italy in early October where the Board in conjunction with the Nominations Committee received presentations from Divisional CEOs in respect of succession planning.
At this time the Board also participated in the Group Conference where the Chairman Martin Towers addressed a delegation of the Groups 60 most senior managers and gave an update on the work of the Board.
During late October the Board also visited two plants in Juarez Mexico where they met local management teams and were able to make first hand assessments of progress being made following recent expansion.
AmesburyTruth Juarez Mexico The Board visited the AmesburyTruth plant in Juarez.
This site opened in 2008 as a 40000 sq. ft. as a Maquiladora.
In 2016 this site was expanded to the current 157000 sq. ft. fulfilling phase I of the footprint project.
There are now 750 people employed at this site compared with c.
200 at the start of 2015.
The expansion allowed space for the additional functions of die cast injection moulding small parts assembly and spring manufacturing and is now operating as a fullservice manufacturing unit.
The Board was keen to meet with local management and to see this extended facility and to understand what progress was being made in all aspects of production and supply chain management.
Bilco Juarez Mexico The Board also took the opportunity to visit the Bilco manufacturing site in
Bilco opened a small plant in 1994 which contained two welding stations one assembly station and one paint booth.
The current facility was opened in 2007 and is a purpose built 41000 sq. ft. plant.
This expansion provided additional space for stamping capabilities which now produce the majority of the roof access hatches for the Bilco Division.
There are 65 people employed in this plant with the majority having over 20 years of experience with Bilco.
The Board was pleased to meet local management and to see these operations first hand.
Performance evaluation During the year the Board participated in an externally facilitated Board evaluation in conjunction with Independent Audit a leading specialist governance consultancy specialising in Board performance evaluation with which the Company has no other connection.
The evaluation made use of an online questionnaire followed up with interviews with all Board members.
At the request of the Chairman these questionnaires and interviews were extended to the Group Financial Controller and the Divisional CEOs to provide a broader perspective of the Boards performance and to encourage debate on the key recommendations for the work of the Board and Committees for the following year.
The report was generally complimentary about the Group the Board and the way the Board is run.
It was agreed there were certain areas upon which the Board should focus which would provide an appropriate forum for further discussion on relevant topics.
Statement of governance continued Find out more at site 59 The results of the review and actions taken are shown below Board evaluation commentary Response Actions Tyman has a clear strategy and objectives of which all Board members are aware.
However it was felt that further discussion and understanding of how the respective Divisions implement the Group strategy in their differing markets would be beneficial It was considered that the Group strategy although well understood was not sufficiently profiled when discussing Divisional performance at Board meetings.
Board papers have been restructured to provide the CEO additional opportunity to provide the Board with a greater overview of matters such as current trading industry developments around customers markets and competitors and other topical matters of significance that could affect the implementation of Group strategy including the impact upon MandA.
External understanding of customers markets and competitors It was agreed that the majority of information provided to the Board was internally sourced and that it would be useful to receive an external perspective of the Group.
The Board received a presentation from Rothschild the Groups financial advisors at the January 2018 meeting.
Further presentations from external advisers are planned for later in the year.
Divisional CEOs to be available to answer questions at Board meetings It was agreed further input from the Divisional CEOs would provide a greater understanding of the operational aspects of these Divisions.
Presentations were received from Jeff Graby and his senior management team during the Board visit to Juarez Mexico.
Further presentations have been received from the Divisional CEOs on a number of topics including health and safety succession planning strategy and MandA.
2018 will see further presentations made by the Divisional CEOs to the Board.
As part of the Board evaluation process the Chairman reviewed the performance of each Director these reviews were followed up with onetoone meetings.
Following these reviews the Chairman has confirmed that each of the Directors has demonstrated their continued commitment to their roles by the time spent on Company business and through their full participation in Board and Committee meetings.
Led by the Senior Independent Director Mark Rollins the other Directors carried out a review of the Chairmans performance.
Feedback from these personal reviews was discussed on a onetoone basis with the
Taking these reviews into consideration the evaluation confirmed the Chairman continues to fully discharge his duties and demonstrates full commitment to the role as evidenced by the time spent on Company business.
Directors insurance cover The Company maintains at its expense a directors and officers liability insurance policy to afford an indemnity in certain circumstances for the benefit of Group personnel including as recommended by the Code the Directors.
This insurance policy does not provide cover where the Director or officer has acted fraudulently or dishonestly.
Shareholder engagement The Companys Annual General Meeting is a key date for the Board as it provides the Directors the opportunity to meet with all shareholders and private and institutional investors and the Board welcomes their participation.
At the 2017 Annual General Meeting which was held in the London offices of Pinsent Masons a number of members representing smaller shareholdings attended and used the occasion to discuss a variety of aspects of the business with both Executive and Nonexecutive Directors in a very informal setting.
The 2018 Annual General Meeting will be held at the Groups new ERA premises in
As noted in the Chairmans statement on page 7  shareholders are invited to attend and to see first hand one of the Groups centres of excellence.
Details of resolutions to be proposed at the Annual General Meeting can be found in the Directors report.
For those shareholders unable to attend the Companys Annual General Meetings electronic proxy voting is available through the Companys registrars Link Asset Services portal site The Executive Directors engage with institutional shareholders and sellside financial analysts as well as potential shareholders and other interested parties covering the Groups strategy and trading results.
The Executive Directors also presented at the full and halfyear results presentations as well as investor conferences in the UK and US.
The Executive Directors also hosted a capital markets event which this year included presentations from the divisional executive management of AmesburyTruth.
Feedback from these events meetings with shareholders and analysts reports are provided to the Board at each meeting.
The Chairman and Nonexecutive Directors make themselves available to attend meetings with major shareholders at their request.
Further to the changes to the CFOs role and responsibilities the Chairman of the Remuneration Committee Mark Rollins wrote to principal shareholders to keep them informed of the Boards decision.
Responses received showed shareholders were fully supportive of the changes in responsibilities and salary.
The Senior Independent Director is also available to attend meetings if requested by shareholders concerning matters they consider they are unable to discuss with the
No such meetings have been requested during the year.
Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 60 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements Shareholder engagement continued The Group website may be accessed by current and prospective shareholders investors and other interested parties.
The website permits users to download copies of published financial reports presentations press releases and stock exchange announcements.
A table setting out the Companys major shareholders may be found on page 69 of the other statutory information.
Internal control and risk management The Directors acknowledge that they are responsible for the Groups internal control and risk management systems and for reviewing their effectiveness.
Details of this review process are set out in the Audit Committee report on page 63.
Directors responsibilities statement The Directors are responsible for preparing the Annual Report and the financial statements in accordance with applicable law and regulation.
Company law requires the Directors to prepare financial statements for each financial year.
Under that law the Directors have prepared the Group financial statements in accordance with IFRS as adopted by the European Union and Company financial statements in accordance with UK GAAP.
Under company law the Directors must not approve the financial statements unless they are satisfied that they give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Group and Company and of the profit or loss of the Group and Company for that period.
In preparing the financial statements the Directors are required to select suitable accounting policies and then apply them consistently state whether applicable IFRSs as adopted by the European Union have been followed for the Group financial statements and United Kingdom Accounting Standards comprising FRS 101 have been followed for the Company financial statements subject to any material departures disclosed and explained in the financial statements make judgements and accounting estimates that are reasonable and prudent and prepare the financial statements on the going concern basis unless it is inappropriate to presume that the Group and Company will continue in business.
The Directors are responsible for keeping adequate accounting records that are sufficient to show and explain the Group and Companys transactions and disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the financial position of the Group and Company and enable them to ensure that the financial statements and the Directors remuneration report comply with the Companies Act 2006 and as regards the Group financial statements Article 4 of the IAS Regulation.
The Directors are also responsible for safeguarding the assets of the Group and Company and hence for taking reasonable steps for the prevention and detection of fraud and other irregularities.
The Directors are responsible for the maintenance and integrity of the Companys website.
Legislation in the United Kingdom governing the preparation and dissemination of financial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
The Directors consider that the Annual Report and Accounts taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Group and Companys performance business model and strategy.
Each of the Directors whose names and functions are listed in the Annual Report and Accounts confirm that to the best of their knowledge the Company financial statements which have been prepared in accordance with UK GAAP give a true and fair view of the assets liabilities financial position and profit of the Company the Group financial statements which have been prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and applicable law give a true and fair view of the assets liabilities financial position and profit of the Group and the Directors report includes a fair review of the development and performance of the business and the position of the Group and Company together with a description of the principal risks and uncertainties that the Group faces.
By order of the Board Martin Towers Nonexecutive Chairman 7 March 2018 Statement of governance continued Find out more at site 61 Audit Committee report Monitoring the control environment Dear Shareholder I am pleased to present to you the Committees report for the financial year ended 31 December 2017 which is my first as Committee Chair.
This report covers the activities of the Committee during the year and how it has applied its oversight of the Groups control environment.
Key highlights I would like to thank Martin Towers for his assistance in ensuring a smooth transition as I assumed responsibility for this Committee.
The work of the Risk Management Committee is gaining momentum and the reports received by the Audit Committee demonstrate improvements are being made across all aspects of risk management throughout the Divisions.
The Committee spent some time understanding the implications of the forthcoming changes to accounting standards including the new revenue and financial instrument standards to be implemented in 2018 and the new leasing standards to be implemented no later than 2019.
In light of the FRCs Lab project report on risk and viability reporting the Committee approved the threeyear period for the Groups Viability statement.
The Committee ensured the mandatory rotation of the external audit partners in the UK and US did not compromise the effectiveness of the external audit function and welcomed Richard Porter and Jonathan Friese to the Tyman audit.
The level of materiality for the fullyear audit agreed at five per cent of Underlying Operating Profit before Taxation was reviewed and agreed with the external auditors.
Committee membership The members of the Committee during the year ended 31 December 201 7 were as follows Audit Committee member Appointed Helen Clatworthy January 2017 Mark Rollins April 2015 Martin Towers December 2009 Angelika Westerwelle November 2012 1 Helen Clatworthy was appointed Chair in May 2017.
Martin Towers stepped down from the Committee in May 2017.
All members are independent Nonexecutive Directors.
During the year Martin Towers served as Chairman of the Audit Committee until May 2017.
At the 2017 Annual General Meeting he was appointed Chairman of the Board and consequently stepped down from the Audit Committee.
I joined the Committee in January 2017 and was appointed Chair in May 2017 taking over this role from Martin Towers.
Pamela Bingham joined the Committee upon appointment to the Board on 18 January 2018.
Under provisions of the Code the Committee should have at least one member of the Committee with recent and relevant financial experience and competence in accounting andor auditing and that the Audit Committee as a whole should have competence relevant to the sector in which the Company operates.
The Board considers that Mark Rollins and I have recent and relevant financial experience and that each member of the Committee is independent in accordance with the Code.
Members of the Committee between them possess significant international commercial operational and financial skills which are relevant to an international manufacturer and distributor of building products.
How the Committee operates During the year the Committee met four times with meetings timed to coincide with key dates in the financial reporting and audit cycles of the Company.
Meetings typically take place on the same day as a Board meeting to promote the efficient working of the Committee.
An annual schedule of Committee activity is set out a year in advance to provide the appropriate focus on key priorities.
Helen Clatworthy Chair Audit Committee Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 62 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements How the Committee operates continued In addition to the Committee members the Chairman the Chief Executive Officer and the Chief Financial Officer regularly attend Committee meetings at the invitation of the Committee Chair.
Other attendees include the Group Financial Controller and members of the finance team senior representatives from the external auditors PwC as well as the Head of Internal Audit employed by BDO with which company the internal audit function is cosourced.
In advance of meetings the Committee is provided with reports from the Chief Financial Officer the Group finance function PwC and BDO as well as minutes of the Risk Management Committee.
These minutes provide the Committee with detailed information on the progress the Divisions are making in respect of risk management activities.
The Committees terms of reference were reviewed during the year and updated to take into account revisions to the Code and the updated FRC Guidance on Audit Committees both published in April 2016 and follow the revised guidance from the
The Committees terms of reference can be found on the Group website.
The Committee meets separately with the external auditors and the internal auditors during the course of the year without Executive management being present.
I have also met with PwC outside of Committee meetings to keep appraised of the yearend audit process and audit matters in general.
The Committee is authorised to seek independent advice should it wish to do so however this was not required during the year.
Work of the Committee in 2017 Below is a schedule of the work carried out by the Committee during 2017 and in respect of the financial year ended 31 December 2017.
Control
Approve the external audit plan for the 2017 year end.
Approve the annual plan for internal audit.
Receive and review internal audit reports.
Review the work of the Risk Management Committee including the Divisional and Group risk registers.
Financial results Review the 2016 results announcement and 2016 Annual Report and Accounts.
Consider the PwC full year report to the Committee.
Review the 2017 half year results and announcement.
Approval of the Audit Committee report.
Review the 2017 results announcement and 2017 Annual Report and Accounts.
Governance
Review of PwCs fees and engagement letter.
Consider the results of the Committees external effectiveness evaluation.
Consider the effectiveness of the external audit.
Consider the effectiveness of the internal audit function.
Review the Committee terms of reference and nonaudit fee policy.
Viability
Review and confirm the Groups going concern statements at the half year and full year results Approve the Groups Viability statement at the year end.
Committee effectiveness During the year the Committee participated in an externally facilitated effectiveness evaluation in conjunction with Independent Audit.
The results of the evaluation showed the Committee was well run and management was very responsive with regard to providing the Committee with information.
One recommendation was that it was thought appropriate to carry out a full review of the cosourced internal audit function which has been in place with BDO since 2013 to provide the Committee with a deeper understanding of how this function operates and assurance of the functions effectiveness.
It was also recommended that representatives from BDO should attend the Committee meetings on a more frequent basis.
Both of these recommendations have been agreed by the Committee and will be implemented during 2018.
External audit The Committee is responsible for managing the relationship with and the performance of external auditors which includes making recommendations in respect of the appointment reappointment and if necessary removal of the external auditors.
Following a competitive tender process PwC were appointed the Groups auditors in December 2011 and have therefore served as the Groups auditors since the conclusion of the 2012 AGM.
Accordingly the 2017 audit is PwCs sixth consecutive audit.
Although Tyman is not a FTSE 350 company and is therefore not required to comply with the provisions of the CMA Order the Audit Committee considered that it was appropriate for the Company to follow these recommendations.
As previously reported the Committee confirms that it would expect to implement a formal competitive audit tender process during the financial year ending December 2021 or sooner if felt necessary.
The Audit Committee confirms Tyman has complied with the provisions of the CMA Order for the financial year under review.
The Committee confirms there are no contractual restrictions on the Group with regard to PwCs appointment.
Accordingly the Committee has recommended to the Board that PwC should be reappointed as the Groups auditors at the 2018 Annual General Meeting.
Audit Committee report continued Find out more at site 63 Audit Committee priorities in 2017 The priorities for the Audit Committee in 2017 are summarised below together with the work carried out during the year in respect of these priorities 2017 Work carried out Outcome Review the potential impact on the Group of the new accounting standards IFRS 9 Financial Instruments IFRS 15 Revenue from contracts with customers and IFRS 16 Leases The Group carried out a provisional assessment of the impact of these standards on the consolidated financial statements.
The adoption of IFRS 9 and IFRS 15 is not expected to have a material impact on the financial statements of the Group in future periods.
The adoption of IFRS 16 is expected to have a relatively significant impact on the Groups reported results and balance sheet and the Groups assessment of the likely impact is ongoing.
Keep under review the risks associated with the footprint rationalisation as it expands across more locations The Committee was kept informed of the changes to the risk environment associated with the footprint rationalisation through regular updates to the Divisions risk registers.
Further detailed updates were discussed at Board meetings in conjunction with Board visits to plants in Bologna and Juarez during the year.
A number of operational issues were highlighted regarding the ongoing work of the footprint rationalisation with remedial actions implemented.
Keep under review the internal control function and subsidiarys plans to implement recommended improvements The Committee received full reports from each internal audit conducted and reviewed the Divisional response to action recommendations.
The Committee was pleased with the progress made during the year by all Divisions particularly the improved efficiency with which outstanding actions are being completed.
A full effectiveness review of the internal audit function will be carried out during the year.
Assess the effectiveness of the risk management and internal controls during 2017 During the year the Committee reviewed improvements to the quality of the Groups internal control system made in response to internal audit recommendations and Divisional management selfassessment.
The
Committee reviewed the risk management structure risk appetite and principal risks and uncertainties facing the Group including how those risks had evolved during the year.
The Committee confirms that they have carried out their annual review of the effectiveness of the system of internal control as operated throughout the year ended 31 December 2017 and up to the date of approval of the Annual Report and Accounts.
The Committee also confirms that no significant failings or weaknesses have been identified from that review.
Review the impact on the Group of the changes in tax regulations in the US In 2017  72.0 per cent of the Groups operating profits before central cost allocations were generated in North America.
Accordingly the US tax rates have a material impact on the Groups effective tax rate.
At the end of 2017  the US Federal tax rate was reduced from 35.0 per cent to 21.0 per cent as part of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act.
A detailed presentation was made by the Group tax function in January 2018 to members of the Committee and the rest of the Board concerning the likely impact of the reductions in the US Federal tax rate and associated changes to the US tax code on the Group.
Following discussion the Committee is satisfied that the Groups effective tax rate has been appropriately calculated and that the disclosure of the impact of the reductions in the US Federal tax rate and associated changes to the US tax code on the Group in the 2017 Annual Report is appropriate.
Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 64 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements External audit effectiveness A key responsibility of the Committee is ensuring the continued effectiveness of the external audit.
Following the completion of the Group audit all Group finance teams are asked to participate in a questionnaire which rates PwCs performance with questions relating to audit approach and quality including areas such as planning resources technical knowledge scope of audit and understanding of the business.
The results of this survey for the 2016 Annual Report were presented to the Committee following which the Committee confirms it remains satisfied that PwC continues to provide an effective audit.
It has been decided to conduct an externally facilitated questionnaire in respect of the 2017 audit to gain a different perspective of the work of the external audit.
The results of this review will be presented to the Committee during 2018 and will be used to assist the Committee in informing its view of the effectiveness of the external audit.
Auditor independence and objectivity The Committee recognises the importance of auditor independence and receives reports from PwC during the year in respect of their compliance with the fundamental principles of objectivity integrity and professional behaviour including independence.
PwC has provided their annual assurance independence letter to the Audit Committee in March 2018.
The Committee reviews the policy on auditor independence and nonaudit services annually and takes into consideration the nature scope and appropriateness of nonaudit services annually supplied by the external auditors whilst taking into account that the provision of certain nonaudit services can be most efficiently provided by the Groups external auditors.
The Committee has requested that where practicable nonaudit services should generally be contracted from firms other than PwC including firms that are not members of the Big Four.
The Committee continues to be satisfied with the external auditors independence and objectivity.
Audit and nonaudit fees The Committee regularly reviews the audit fees to ensure these are appropriate to enable an effective and highquality audit to be conducted.
The fee for the 2017 Group audit is 772000 2016 775000.
Although there has been a slight increase in the base audit fee this is mitigated by the reduction of the overall fee reflecting the absence of acquisition and merger audit work as required in previous years.
Further information in respect of the audit fee can be found in note 4 to the Group financial statements.
In line with policy the Committee also reviews any nonaudit services provided by the external auditors and such fees and services are regularly reported to the Committee to ensure this work does not exceed 50 per cent of the audit fee for any one year.
Preapproved audit and audit related services to a maximum of 100000 are permitted without reference to the Audit Committee.
Any nonaudit work performed by the external auditors with fees expected to be in excess of 100000 in aggregate in any one year are subject to Audit Committee approval.
A schedule of prohibited work includes bookkeeping and accounting internal audit services design and implementation of financial information systems and payroll and actuarial and recruitment services.
During 2017 nonaudit fees paid to PwC were 3.9 per cent 2016 11.4 per cent of the annual Group audit fee.
This work related mainly to the provision of assurance related audit services for the interim results.
The Committee is satisfied that the provision of such services does not in any way prejudice the objectivity and independence of the external auditors.
The Groups policy on nonaudit fees was reviewed during the year and can be found on the Group website.
Internal audit Internal audit has been cosourced with BDO since 2013 providing independent assurance and a level of resource that is not available in house.
An annual internal audit plan is reviewed by the Committee following discussions with management in consideration of the areas requiring review.
During 2017 BDO completed all planned internal audits and reported to the Committee on the results of these audits and management response to the reported actions.
In light of the Groups growth and increasing footprint a fiveyear internal audit strategic plan has been developed covering all subsidiaries.
The internal audit strategic plan for 20182022 and the 2018 annual plan have taken into consideration the turnover of each subsidiary risks reported in the Divisional risk registers internal audit findings from previous reviews and any changes to the current risk environment.
Planning meetings have taken place with Divisional CFOs and the Group Financial
The plan for 2018 covers riskbased audits for larger entities whilst continuing to use the standard internal control programme where appropriate.
The Committee expects that each Group subsidiary will be visited at least once by internal audit over a fiveyear cycle with higher risk and more material subsidiaries potentially visited more than once.
The Committee is responsible for ensuring the continued effectiveness of the internal audit function.
In 2017 and prior years this overview has been completed through the receipt of internal audit plans audit reports and discussions with management.
In response to the recommendations made following the Committees external effectiveness evaluation a full effectiveness review will be carried out during the year as one of the Committees key priorities.
This review will be carried out through an externally facilitated questionnaire and will be used to gain a deeper insight of the work of the internal audit function from a number of key stakeholders throughout the Group including comments made by respondents covering the functions quality of planning communication understanding of the business engagement and resourcing.
The results of this work will be reported to the Committee during 2018 and will be used as part of the internal audit effectiveness review.
Having reviewed the work of the internal audit function and results achieved during the year the Committee considers that overall the internal audit programme has improved the way the Group operates with the programme evolving positively over time.
The Committee is satisfied the internal audit programme continues to be effective and this work is complementary to the work carried out by PwC.
Audit Committee report continued Find out more at site 65 Financial reporting and significant judgements The Committee is responsible for monitoring the integrity of the financial statements including significant judgements.
In undertaking this review the following critical accounting policies and judgements were discussed with management and the external auditors.
Audit Committee review Conclusions Carrying value of goodwill and intangibles The Committee reviewed the work carried out in respect of the carrying value of goodwill and intangible assets including the assumptions used over which there is a high degree of judgement and which significantly impact the calculated value in use.
Further information can be found in note 10 to the Group financial statements.
The Committee was satisfied that the assumptions used by managements impairment testing were appropriate and that there was sufficient impairment headroom on all CGUs and that no impairment charge was required.
Carrying value of provisions The Group holds a number of provisions related to restructuring properties warranty claims and tax exposures.
There is a high degree of judgement involved in assessing the level of provision required.
Further information can be found in note 19 to the Group financial statements.
The Committee discussed with management and with PwC the key elements of judgement to assure themselves as to the adequacy and appropriateness of the provisions.
The Committee was satisfied that the judgements exercised were appropriate and that the provisions were fairly stated in the annual accounts.
Exceptional items During the year the Group incurred exceptional items which primarily related to the North American footprint project costs associated with MandA activity and integration costs associated with acquisitions.
Separate presentation of these items as exceptional provides an improved understanding of the underlying trends in financial performance and a better comparison with prior periods.
Further information can be found in note 6 to the Group financial statements.
The Committee reviewed managements plans for the related programmes and following discussions with PwC concluded that the items were material by their size and nonrecurring in nature and consequently in accordance with the Groups accounting policy met the criteria for disclosure as exceptional.
The
Committee considered that the accounting treatment and disclosures in the financial statements were appropriate and consistent.
The Committee noted that 8.6 million of exceptional credits had been booked during the year and was satisfied that there were no other credits that should be classified as exceptional.
Acquisition accounting Depending on the level of MandA activity during the year acquisition accounting can be considered a significant risk.
Acquisitions during 2017 have been smaller and less complex than previous years so this is not considered to be significant.
Further information can be found in note 24 to the Group financial statements.
The Committee reviewed the fair value exercise for the Howe Green acquisition and following discussion with PwC it concluded that the assumptions used were appropriate and the resultant fair values and the estimates of the economic useful lives of the intangible assets identified were reasonable.
Carrying value of accounts receivable Provision against trade receivables is made when there is objective evidence that the Group will not be able to collect all amounts due to it in accordance with the original terms of those receivables.
Group management exercises judgement in assessing the amount of any write downs required which is based on current assessments of the creditworthiness of current customers.
Further information can be found in note 13 to the Group financial statements.
The Committee reviewed the ageing of accounts receivable and the basis of the provisions made by management.
Following discussion with PwC on their review of trade receivables the Committee was satisfied that the book value of trade receivables was consistent with the Groups accounting policy and previous practice and that the resultant valuation was reasonable.
Carrying value of inventory Inventories are stated at the lower of cost and net realisable value with due allowance for excess obsolete or slowmoving items.
Group management exercises judgement in assessing net realisable value and provisions for slowmoving and obsolete inventory which is based on current assessments of future demand market conditions and new product development initiatives.
Further information can be found in note 12 to the Group financial statements.
The Committee considered the basis for the provisions made for obsolete and slowmoving inventory by management.
The Committee also discussed with PwC the results of their review of inventories and was satisfied that the inventory valuation was consistent with the Groups accounting policy and previous practice and that the resultant valuation was reasonable.
Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 66 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements 2017 Annual Report and Accounts Following discussions with the auditors and the deliberations set out above the Committee was satisfied that the financial statements dealt appropriately with each of the areas of significant judgement.
PwC also reported to the Committee on any misstatements that they had found in the course of their work and confirmed that no material amounts remained unadjusted.
Throughout 2017 and up to the date of approval of this Annual Report and Accounts there has been in place an established ongoing process for identifying evaluating and managing the significant risks faced by the Group which has been regularly reviewed by the Committee and the Board and is in accordance with Guidance on Risk Management Internal Control and Related Financial and Business Reporting.
The Groups assessment of its principal risks and uncertainties is set out on pages 36 and 41.
The key elements of risk management and internal controls are detailed on page 37 of the Risk management section of this Annual Report.
In accordance with the Code the Committee reviewed the Annual Report and was able to confirm to the Board that the Committee considered the Annual Report and Accounts taken as a whole was fair balanced and understandable and provided the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Groups performance business model and strategy.
Audit Committee priorities for 2018 Following the results of the Committees effectiveness review the priorities for the Committee for 2018 are set out below continue to review and refine the assessment of the potential impact on the Group of the new accounting standard IFRS 16 Leases continue to promote a process of continuous improvement in the Groups systems of internal control and risk management provide sufficient time for extended riskbased discussions in the Committees timetable provide greater level of contact with the internal audit function including more regular attendance of BDO at Committee meetings establish focused training time into the Committee schedule and conduct a full internal audit effectiveness review.
The results of the work on these priorities will be reported in the 2018 Annual Report.
On behalf of the Audit Committee Helen Clatworthy Chair Audit Committee 7 March 2018 Audit Committee report continued Find out more at site 67 Nominations Committee report Evaluating skills and experience Dear Shareholder I am pleased to present to you my first Nominations Committee report and to report on the main activities of the Committee during the financial year ended 31 December 2017.
Role of the Committee The Board has delegated responsibility to the Committee for reviewing and making recommendations to the Board on the size structure and composition of the Board and that its succession plans are appropriate for both its current and future strategic needs of the Group.
In addition the Committee must evaluate the balance of skills diversity knowledge and experience of the Board.
In doing so the Committee is responsible for the identification and nomination of candidates to fill Board positions recommending the reappointment of Nonexecutive Directors and the reelection of Directors.
The Committee ensures all Board appointments are made in line with the Groups stated employment policies and practices.
These make provision for equal opportunities and nondiscrimination and aim to ensure that an individuals skills experience and talent are the sole determinants in recruitment and career development.
Committee membership The members of the Nominations Committee during the year ended 31 December 2017 were as follows Nominations Committee members Appointed Helen Clatworthy January 2017 Jamie Pike November 2009 Mark Rollins April 2015 Martin Towers Chairman December 2009 Angelika Westerwelle November 2012 1 Jamie Pike stepped down from the Board in May 2017 .
Martin Towers was appointed Chairman of the Board in May 2017.
Pamela Bingham joined the Committee on her appointment to the Board in January 2018.
All members are independent Nonexecutive Directors.
Activities of the Committee during 2017 During the year the Committee held four scheduled meetings to consider Board and senior management succession planning the appointment and reappointment of Directors and the results and recommendations of the Committee performance evaluation.
The Committee also reviewed the induction programme of Helen Clatworthy ensured the Directors received both formal and informal training updates and reviewed the Committees terms of reference to ensure these remained relevant for the future needs of the Board.
These may be found on the Groups website.
In 2017 the key focus of the Committees work was to carry out a full succession planning review looking at the Board the Tyman Management Committee and senior management throughout the Group with particular emphasis on the current skills and experience within the management teams and the potential each individual has to develop within the Group.
Succession planning Nonexecutive Directors Following my appointment as Chairman of the Board in May 2017 the Board had a total of four Nonexecutive Directors.
As part of the Committees annual review of the Boards composition the Committee concluded that The Zygos Partnership an external executive search agency with which the Board has no other connection should be appointed to recruit another Nonexecutive Director.
As part of this recruitment process a longlist of candidates was prepared which was reviewed by the Chairman and Senior Independent Director.
Following this review a shortlist of candidates was interviewed by the Committee and the Executive Directors.
Martin Towers Chairman Nominations Committee Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 68 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements Succession planning continued Nonexecutive Directors continued The Committee was keen to ensure the Board was representative of as broad a base as possible and therefore paid particular attention to the level and type of experience of the candidates.
All role specifications are drafted to ensure the best candidate for the role whilst ensuring as diverse a Board as possible including diversity of gender.
The Committee was keen to ensure the candidate would fit with the cultural style of the Board.
Having taken all these matters into consideration the Committee was able to formulate its recommendation to the Board confirming the appointment of Pamela Bingham with effect from 18 January 2018.
In line with policy Pamela will offer herself for election at the forthcoming Annual General Meeting.
As announced in January 2018 Angelika Westerwelle who joined the Board in 2012 will step down from the Board at the conclusion of the Companys AGM.
Executive Directors As disclosed in the Groups half year results announcement in July 2017 as part of normal Board succession planning the Committee decided that James Brothertons role should be enhanced with exposure to additional areas of experience particularly strategy.
Accordingly it was agreed that James Brotherton would take Board responsibility for Group strategy corporate development and MandA in addition to his existing duties as Chief Financial Officer.
This change was made with effect from 1 August 2017.
Senior management team The Committee in conjunction with the Board reviewed the senior management team assisted by presentations and discussions with the Divisional CEOs as part of senior talent management.
The review covered the skills experience and potential of each member of the team to provide a sound evaluation of the current skills mix to ensure it remained appropriate for the future strategic needs of the Group.
This work is ongoing and a further review will be conducted during 2018 to assure the Committee these plans are being effectively managed and the appropriate development plans are in place.
Evaluation
Committee evaluation During the year the Committee participated in an externally led performance evaluation in conjunction with Independent Audit.
The results of the report were very positive and found the Committee had made significant progress and gained considerable momentum in the past twelve months as its work had focused on its key priorities in taking forward succession planning for the Board and the review of the senior management team and talent management of the Group as a whole.
Director evaluation As part of the evaluation process each Director had onetoone performance reviews with the Chairman which included any development or training needs which may be required to support them in making further contributions to the work of the Board.
The Committee considers the results of these performance reviews prior the proposal for reelection to ensure the Director has demonstrated the required contribution and commitment to the role.
Diversity of the Board The aim of the Committee is to ensure that the Board is well balanced and appropriate for the needs of the business and the achievement of its strategy comprising Directors who are appropriately experienced and are independent in character and judgement.
Before recommending new candidates to the Board the Nominations Committee takes account of the balance of skills knowledge experience diversity of background and cultural fit.
The Committee is mindful of the HamptonAlexander Review targets in respect of gender diversity and keeps this under review when considering appointments to the Board and is pleased to confirm continued adherence to these recommendations.
Although T yman is not a member of the FTSE 350.
The Committee is also aware of the Parker Review recommendation that each Board should have at least one Director of colour on the Board by 2024.
The Committee will ensure all aspects of diversity are considered in the years ahead.
Following the AGM held in May 2016 the Board had two female Nonexecutive Directors representing 33.0 per cent of the Board.
On the appointment of Pamela Bingham the female representation has increased to 42.0 per cent but will reduce back to 33.0 per cent after the 2018 AGM when Angelika Westerwelle steps down from the Board.
Committee priorities for 2018 The priorities for the Committee for 2018 are set out below continue with the review of succession planning and talent management for senior management throughout the divisions consider the overall diversity of the Board the Board Committees and senior management when reviewing succession planning within the business and facilitate a full induction programme for the newly appointed Nonexecutive Director including a training update for all Directors.
On behalf of the Nominations Committee Martin Towers Chairman Nominations Committee 7 March 2018 Nominations Committee report continued Find out more at site 69 Other statutory information Principal activities The Group is a leading international supplier of engineered components to the door and window industry.
These activities remain unchanged from the prior year.
The
Company is the ultimate holding company of the Tyman group of companies.
A full list of subsidiaries may be found on pages 135 to 136.
Articles of Association The Companys Articles of Association may be found on the Companys website and may only be amended by a special resolution put to shareholders at general meeting.
The powers of the Directors are set out in the Companys Articles of Association.
Strategic report Pages 2 to 88 inclusive of this Annual Report comprise the Strategic report Governance and Directors report and the Remuneration report and have been written and presented in accordance with English law and the liabilities of the Directors in connection with this report shall be subject to the limitations and restrictions provided accordingly.
The Directors are required under the Disclosure Guidance and Transparency Rules to include a management report containing a fair review of the business and a description of the principal risks and uncertainties facing the Group and the Company.
The management report disclosures can be found in the Strategic report on pages 2 to 51.
A description of the main features of the Groups internal control and risk management systems in relation to the process for preparing the consolidated accounts continues further on pages 3638 of the Strategic report.
Pursuant to Section 414c of the Companies Act 2006 the Strategic report on pages 2 to 51 contains disclosures in relation to future developments dividends finance and financial risk management the disclosures relating to the Groups greenhouse gas emissions and environmental policy and performance.
A full description of the Groups activities relating to our employees their involvement with the Company our employment and health and safety practices and policies may be found on pages 44 to 51 of the Strategic report.
Share transfer restrictions There are no restrictions on the transfer of fully paid up shares in the Company.
Directors insurance Details of Directors insurance may be found on page 59.
Share capital The Companys shares are listed in the premium segment of the Official List and are traded on the Main Market of the London Stock Exchange.
The Companys share capital consists of ordinary shares of 5 pence each carrying the right to attend vote and speak at general meetings of the
The ordinary shares also have the right to profits of the Company which are available for distribution and the return of capital on winding up.
During the year the issued share capital of the Company was unchanged with 178582513 ordinary shares of 5.00 pence each in issue at 31 December 2017.
Further information on the Companys share capital may be found in note 21.2 to the financial statements.
Financing
The Group finances its operations through a mixture of retained profits equity and borrowings.
The Group does not trade in financial instruments.
Full details of the Groups borrowing facilities are set out in note 17 to the financial statements.
The main risks arising from the Groups borrowings are market risk interest rate risk liquidity risk foreign currency risk and credit risk.
The Board reviews and agrees policies for managing each of these risks and the policies which have been applied throughout the year are set out in note 18 to the financial statements.
Waiver of dividends As required under Listing Rule 9.8.4 1213 reporting of waiver of dividends.
Dividend waivers are in place from Tyman plc in respect of the 529183 shares held in treasury as at 31 December 2017 and all but 0.01 of the total dividend to the Tyman Employee Benefit Trust which held 779746 ordinary shares in Tyman plc.
Further information on the Employee Benefit Trust may be found on page 33.
Substantial shareholders The Company has been notified of or has identified the following direct or indirect interests comprising 3.0 per cent or more of its voting share capital the issued share capital less shares held by the Company in Treasury in accordance with DTR 5.
The Companys substantial shareholders do not have different voting rights from those of other shareholders
31 December 2017 %
7 March 2018 % Wellington Management Co 21528467 12.09 21528467 12.09 Alantra Asset Management 13563118 7.62 13563118 7.62 Aberdeen Standard Investments 12168944 6.83 12168944 6.83 GVQ Investment Management 10317910 5.79 10317910 5.79 Columbia Threadneedle Investments 9737491 5.47 9737491 5.47 Hargreave Hale 7402557 4.16 7402557 4.16 T Rowe Price International 7067815 3.97 7067815 3.97 Royal London Asset Management 5873583 3.30 5873583 3.30 Notz Stucki Europe 5625579 3.16 5625579 3.16 Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 70 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements Other statutory information continued Financial reporting The Annual Report and Accounts are intended to provide a balanced and clear assessment of the Groups past performance present position and future prospects.
A statement by the Directors on their responsibility for preparing the financial statements is given on page 60 and a statement by the auditors on their responsibilities is given on pages 89 to 95.
Auditors and disclosure of information to auditors The Directors who held office at the date of approval of this Directors report confirm that so far as they are aware there is no relevant audit information of which the Companys auditors are unaware and each Director has taken all the steps that they ought to have taken as a Director to make themselves aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that the Companys auditors are aware of that information.
The auditors PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP have indicated their willingness to continue in office and a resolution that they be reappointed will be proposed at the Annual General Meeting.
Going concern As a consequence of the work undertaken to support the Viability statement which can be found on pages 42 to 43 the Directors have continued to adopt the going concern basis in preparing the financial statements see note 2.2 in the financial statements.
Political donations The Company did not make any political donations during the year 2016 Nil.
Disclosure of information under Listing Rule 9.8.4 Reporting requirements under LR 9.8.4R 4 5 and 6 and LR 9.8.6 1 if applicable have been included in the Remuneration report on pages 71 to 88.
All other information required to be disclosed under LR 9.8.4R 1 2 and 7 to 14 if applicable is covered in this report.
There is no further information to disclose.
Events after the reporting year
On 19 February 2018 the Group entered into the 2018 Facility which comprises a 240.0 million committed revolving credit facility and a 70.0 million uncommitted accordion facility.
Further details can be found in note 17 and 29 to the financial statements.
Share capital As announced on 7 March 2018 Tyman entered into a conditional agreement to acquire Ashland Hardware a North American manufacturer of hardware for residential windows and doors for an Enterprise Value of US101.0 million.
The Acquisition and associated expenses are to be funded through a drawdown of the Groups committed banking facilities together with the net proceeds of a Placing of up to 10.0 per cent of the existing issued share capital of the Company utilising consents granted at the 2017 AGM to raise c.
50.0 million net of expenses.
Details of the number of shares issued in respect of this Placing were not available at the time of this report but can be found on the Companys website.
Directors
The names of the Directors who served during the year are on pages 52 to 53 along with the biographical details of the Directors serving at the date of signing of this report.
Further information regarding the Directors who served during the year can be found on pages 71 to 82 in the Remuneration report.
Reelection of Directors With the exception of Angelika Westerwelle who will be stepping down from the Board each Director will stand for election or reelection at the AGM.
Accordingly
James Brotherton Helen Clatworthy Louis Eperjesi Mark Rollins and Martin Towers will offer themselves for reelection at the 2017 AGM.
As this is Pamela Binghams first year of appointment she will offer herself for election to the Board.
Annual General Meeting At the Companys 2017 AGM the Directors were authorised to allot shares equal to approximately onethird of the issued share capital of the Company as at 12 May 2017 or a further onethird of the issued share capital in connection with a preemptive offer by way of a rights issue.
The Directors were also given the authority to allot shares for cash representing up to 5.0 per cent of the Companys issued share capital as at 12 May 2017 without first offering these shares to existing shareholders in the proportion to their existing holding.
The
Directors confirmed there was no intention to issue more than 7 .5 per cent of the issued share capital of the Company on a nonpreemptive basis in any rolling threeyear period other than in connection with an acquisition as contemplated by the PreEmption Groups Statement of Principles without prior consultation with the relevant investor groups.
Shareholders also approved an additional authority for the Directors to issue ordinary shares or sell treasury shares for cash in connection with an acquisition or capital investment of the kind contemplated by the PreEmption Groups Statement of Principles up to an additional aggregate amount being approximately 5.0 per cent of the issued ordinary share capital as at 12 May 2017.
At the 2017 AGM the Company was also authorised to make market purchases of its own shares of up to approximately 14.99 per cent of the shares in issue as at 12 May 2017.
The
Board had no immediate intention of exercising this authority but wished to retain the flexibility to do so should it be needed in the future.
This authority was not used during the year and therefore remained in full at the year end.
The Directors believe that it is in the best interests of the Company that these powers are renewed and as in previous years resolutions to renew these authorities will be put to shareholders at the Companys AGM to be held on 10 May 2018.
The Notice of the Companys AGM and related explanatory notes accompany this Annual Report and Accounts.
Other than elections to the Board the principal business to be considered at the AGM is to renew the Directors authority to allot shares to disapply preemption rights in certain limited circumstances and to purchase its own shares revisions to the LTIP Rules and other routine matters.
Further information on these resolutions is given in the explanatory notes to the Notice of AGM which may also be found on the Group website.
By order of the Board Carolyn Gibson Group Company Secretary 7 March 2018 Company registration number  Find out more at site 71
Remuneration report
Annual statement
Dear Shareholder On behalf of the Board I am pleased to present our Remuneration report for the year ended 31 December 2017.
The Remuneration report is split into three sections My annual statement summarising the activities of and decisions made by the Remuneration Committee during the past twelve months pages 71 to 73.
The Annual Report on Remuneration which sets out the remuneration paid to Directors in 2017 and provides details on how the Committee intends to implement the Remuneration Policy in 2018.
The
Annual Report on Remuneration will be put to shareholders for an advisory vote at the 2018 AGM pages 74 to 82.
A summary of the Remuneration Policy.
The Remuneration Policy was approved by nearly 97.0 per cent of shareholders voting at the 2017 Annual General Meeting and sets out the Companys policy on Directors remuneration for the three years from May 2017 to May 2020 pages 83 to 86.
Group performance in 2017 Tyman delivered a sound financial performance for 2017 with reported Revenue and Underlying Operating Profit increasing by 14.2 and 10.0 per cent respectively.
Growth was aided by the successful 2016 acquisitions of Bilco and Giesse and favourable exchange rates on the translation of overseas results.
On a constant currency like for like basis Revenue increased by 1.7 per cent whereas Underlying Operating Profit decreased by 1.5 per cent.
Underlying earnings per share increased by 5.9 per cent in the year to 26.91 pence for 2017.
Cash generation was healthy but lower than operating profit due to targeted investment in working capital and continued investment in the balance sheet including gross capital expenditure at 1.27x Depreciation.
Leverage at the year end of 1.83x was again comfortably back within the Groups core yearend target range of 1.50x to 2.00x.
ROCE decreased slightly in the year to 13.6 per cent principally as a result of the 2016 acquisition activity.
The
Group continues to target achieving a ROCE of 15.0 per cent over the medium term.
Work of the Committee in 2017 The Committee dealt with the following matters during the past twelve months
Seeking and receiving approval from shareholders at the 2017 AGM for a new Remuneration Policy.
Salaries
Consideration and approval of the salary increase for the CFO which was made on 1 August 2017 following a broadening of his responsibilities.
Conducting a review of the CEOs remuneration package.
Approval of the level of base salaries to be paid to the Executive Directors and other senior managers from 1 January 2018.
Bonus
Determining the level of bonus payable for 2017 to the Executive Directors and other senior managers.
Establishing the basis of the 2018 bonus arrangements and bonus thresholds for the Executive Directors and other senior managers.
Share plans Confirming the earnings per share thresholds nature of the ROCE underpin and comparator group of companies for the TSR underpin for Tymans LTIP share award made on 14 March 2017.
Approval of those participating and the number of shares awarded to each participant.
Approval of the terms of the UK US and international employee Sharesave Plans.
Mark Rollins Chairman Remuneration Committee Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 72 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements Remuneration report continued Annual statement Work of the Committee in 2017 continued Share plans continued Reviewing and approving the extent to which the 2015 LTIP awards whose performance period was the three years ended 31 December 2017 would vest.
Considering and approving in March 2018 the proposed list of participants for the forthcoming 2018 LTIP award and the approximate number of shares proposed to be awarded to each participant.
Compliance
Ensuring the Group complied with its obligations under gender pay gap reporting.
Committee performance Participating in an externally led evaluation of the Committees performance.
Monitoring the progress of the Committee in achieving its 2017 objectives and setting new objectives for 2018.
Reviewing and updating as required the terms of reference of the Committee.
Consultation
Writing to shareholders regarding the change in the CFOs responsibilities and salary.
Governance and market Considering market trends and corporate governance developments in listed company remuneration.
This exercise included presentations and input from Tymans remuneration consultants New Bridge Street.
Reporting
Overseeing the preparation of this 2017 Remuneration report.
Performance and reward in 2017 Full details of the Directors remuneration for 2017 are set out in the Annual Report on Remuneration on pages 74 to 82.
Annual bonus The annual bonus scheme for the Executive Directors was based on stretching targets 70.0 per cent on underlying profit targets and 30.0 per cent on free cash flow targets.
The awards were weighted across four categories profit growth over prior year profit performance versus target the ratio of operating cash generated to operating profit and absolute cash generation versus target.
The targets were increased during the year to ensure they remained appropriately stretching following the acquisition of Howe Green.
The specific targets and outcomes of each element of the bonus scheme for 2017 are set out in a table on page 75 of the Remuneration report.
This shows the Executive Directors earned a total bonus of 51.3 per cent of salary 2016 91.25 per cent in respect of 2017  with strong year on year growth in profits and healthy cash conversion but lesser success in achieving the stretching profit and cash generation targets.
Long Term Incentive Plan The LTIP awarded in 2015 was subject to a performance condition of cumulative threeyear underlying earnings per share of between 69.60 pence 25.0 per cent vesting and 78.45 pence 100.0 per cent vesting.
In addition the award was made subject to a discretionary TSR underpin.
The actual cumulative underlying earnings per share outcome for the three years 2015 to 2017 was 71.57 pence a healthy compound annual growth of 13.1 per cent per annum over the threeyear performance period.
With the Remuneration Committee being satisfied that the discretionary TSR underpin had been met it consequently approved a 2015 LTIP vesting of 41.69 per cent.
Changes in CFO responsibilities and salary As set out in the Nominations Committee report during the year the Board made the decision to assign executive responsibility for strategy corporate development and MandA to James Brotherton with effect from 1 August 2017.
In light of these additional responsibilities his salary was increased from 251200 to 297500 from the same date.
His salary will remain unchanged for at least 17 months with his salary not being reviewed again until 1 January 2019.
The Committee decided that to allow time for the impact of his additional responsibilities to feed through to performance and to mitigate any ratchet effect of the base salary increase on variable pay his pre1 August 2017 salary of 251200 would be used in calculating his 2017 annual bonus and an intermediate amount of 275000 would be used for 2018 LTIP and annual bonus purposes.
His 2019 salary will then be used in 2019 for LTIP and annual bonus awards.
At the increased level his salary is around the median level for chief financial officers for companies of similar size and complexity to
The principal shareholders were kept informed of the Committees decisions at the time and were fully supportive of the changes in responsibility and salary.
Remuneration in 2018
The Committee completed a review in late 2017 in respect of the CEOs remuneration package together with undertaking an assessment of Louis Eperjesis performance during 2017 and his record of leading the Group over a number of years.
The Groups performance during this time has been highly impressive as can be seen in the chart of Tyman total shareholder return relative to that of the FTSE All Share Index set out on page 78.
Whilst this assessment indicated that a more significant increase in Louis salary might be justified the Committee decided to award him an increase of 3.2 per cent taking his salary from 407000 to 420000 having taken into account the more modest increases being awarded throughout the Group and the increase in variable pay opportunity he now had for 2018.
As discussed above James Brothertons salary is to remain at 297500 for 2018.
The salaries of the Groups senior management team were also reviewed in December 2017 and in general were awarded an increase to their base salaries of 2.0 per cent these being in line with the average increases for all UKbased employees excluding exceptional increases reflecting local operating or market conditions in the various geographies where Tyman operates.
Annual bonus The overall structure of the annual bonus scheme for Executive Directors and other senior managers in 2018 remains unchanged from that operated in 2017.
In line with the revised Remuneration Policy approved by shareholders the maximum rewards available for the Executive Directors in 2018 increase to 125 per cent of salary.
As noted in the 2016 Annual Report it was the Committees intention to introduce at least one other performance measure in addition to the challenging profit and cash flow measures already in place at the time the maximum award was increased.
Accordingly 20.0 per cent of Louis Eperjesis 2018 annual bonus 25.0 per cent of salary is to be linked to the achievement of certain personal objectives related to progress made in the delivery of the Groups strategy.
More specifically these personal objectives are to be set with regard to the Groups progress during 2018 in delivering and embedding the Groups plans in relation to strategy deployment 10.0 per cent of base salary health and safety 7.5 per cent of base salary and succession planning 7.5 per cent of base salary.
The remaining Find out more at site 73 80.0 per cent 100.0 per cent of base salary of Louis Eperjesis annual bonus will continue to be determined by the performance against financial targets linked to profitability 70.0 per cent of base salary and cash generation 30.0 per cent of base salary.
James Brothertons 2018 annual bonus where the opportunity is also a maximum of 125.0 per cent of salary will continue to be based entirely on financial measures being the same measures as for Louis Eperjesi.
Consistent with prior years the precise financial bonus targets which the Committee considers to be commercially sensitive will be disclosed in detail in the 2018 Annual Report along with details on the personal objectives of the CEO.
Long Term Incentive Plan In line with the revised Remuneration Policy approved by shareholders the maximum rewards available for the Executive Directors in 2018 under the LTIP increases to 125.0 per cent of salary.
The Committee intends that LTIP awards made in 2018 will be subject to the same performance measures underpins and holding periods as those awarded in 2017 namely the financial performance measure will be cumulative underlying earnings per share over the threeyear performance period subject to discretionary TSR and ROCE underpins.
The Committee plans to determine the minimum EPS threshold performance for 25.0 per cent vesting for the period 2018 to 2020 and the maximum EPS threshold full vesting shortly after the announcement of the 2017 results.
It is intended these performance measures will be disclosed in advance of the 2018 AGM as these had not been determined at the time of completing this report.
Other matters UK Corporate Governance Code The Committee is cognisant of the proposed changes to the Code relating to Directors remuneration which are currently going through the final consultation stages with a view to coming into force for accounting periods beginning on or after 1 January 2019.
Any new requirements necessary to comply with the provisions of the revised Code will be considered and actioned in the appropriate timescale by the Committee.
Annual General Meeting The Committee remains committed to ensuring executive remuneration is fully aligned with driving the right behaviours to deliver long term shareholder value through the setting of appropriate targets and individuals receiving rewards commensurate with performance.
The Committee looks forward to your continued support at the 2018 AGM where I and the other members of the Committee will be happy to answer questions or receive feedback on any aspect of the Groups remuneration.
Mark Rollins Chairman Remuneration Committee 7 March 2018 Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 74 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements Remuneration report continued Annual Report on Directors Remuneration The Annual Report on Remuneration set out below together with the Remuneration Committee Chairmans Annual Statement will be put to a single advisory shareholder vote at the 2018 AGM.
The information below reports on the pay outcomes in respect of the 2017 financial year and explains how the Committee intends to operate the approved Remuneration Policy in 2018.
The information from the single total remuneration figures for Directors on page 74 to the end of the section on loss of office payments on page 77 has been audited.
The remainder of the Annual Report on Remuneration is unaudited.
Role of the Remuneration Committee The Remuneration Committee is responsible for setting and implementing the remuneration policy for the Executive Directors and the Companys Chairman.
In addition the Committee considers the remuneration arrangements for the Tyman Management Committee and for other senior managers.
This ensures a consistent application of remuneration policy across the Group and aligns all senior managers remuneration to the Groups strategic objectives.
Remuneration received reflects the contribution made by senior executives to the business the performance of the Group the size and complexity of the Groups operations and the need to attract retain and incentivise executives of the highest quality.
Committee membership The members of the Committee during the year ended 31 December 2017 were as follows Remuneration Committee member Appointed Helen Clatworthy January 2017 Jamie Pike November 2009 Mark Rollins Chairman April 2015 Martin Towers December 2009 Angelika Westerwelle November 2012 1 Jamie Pike stepped down from the Committee in May 2017.
All members of the Committee are independent Nonexecutive Directors.
Pamela Bingham joined the Committee on her appointment to the Board in January 2018.
Angelika Westerwelle will be stepping down from the Committee at the conclusion of the AGM to be held in May 2018.
The meetings are often but not always attended by the Chief Executive and Chief Financial Officer at the invitation of the Committee Chairman.
The Group Company Secretary is Secretary to the Committee.
Other individuals such as external advisers may be invited to attend all or part of any meeting as and when appropriate and necessary.
None of these individuals were present or participated in any discussion in respect of their own remuneration.
The Committee held four scheduled meetings during the year at which there was full attendance timed to coincide with the reporting cycle of the Company including the approval of the Annual Report and the management of the Executive Directors remuneration and incentive plans. further meeting was held to consider the remuneration implications following the changes to Executive roles and responsibilities.
The Committees terms of reference were reviewed during the year to ensure these remained relevant for the aims of the Committee and continued to meet the requirements of the business the Groups shareholders and other stakeholders.
The terms of reference are available on the Groups website.
External advisers The Committee is advised by NBS part of Aon plc.
NBS is a signatory of the Remuneration Consultants Group Code of Conduct and any advice received is governed by that Code which sets out guidelines to ensure that its advice is independent and free of undue influence.
NBS did not provide any other service to the Group during the year.
Total fees for advice provided to the Committee during the year were 50706 2016 11080.
The Committee also took advice from the Groups legal advisers Pinsent Masons as well as advice from a number of law firms around the world relating to local laws and regulations surrounding the granting vesting and exercise of awards made to senior divisional management and other employees under the Companys Sharesave Plans.
Total fees for legal advice provided to the Committee during the year were 27 641 2016 5500.
Remuneration outcomes for 2017 Single figure of total remuneration audited The following table sets out the single figure of total remuneration for Directors for the financial years ended 31 December 2016 and 2017
Annual bonus cash Annual bonus deferred shares
Benefits
Vested
LTIP awards
Directors remuneration for the year ended 31 December Executive Directors Louis Eperjesi 40tel 1tel1052 James Brotherton  1tel669 Nonexecutive Directors Helen Clatworthy Jamie Pike Mark Rollins 55 51           55 51 Martin Towers Angelika Westerwelle 47 46           47 46 Find out more at site 75 With effect from 1 January 2017 Louis Eperjesi and James Brotherton each received a base salary increase of 2.5 per cent these increases were broadly in line with those received by the wider workforce.
Following a review of Executive Director roles as announced in July 2017 James Brothertons salary was increased from 251200 to 297500 with effect from 1 August 2017.
Louis Eperjesi and James Brotherton received cash in lieu of pension amounting to 20.0 per cent and 15.0 per cent of base salary respectively.
The Executive Directors are not members of any of the Group pension schemes.
The benefits provided to the Executive Directors included private medical insurance permanent health insurance life assurance and car allowance.
There were no changes to the benefits policies during the year.
The estimated value of the LTIP awards vesting by reference to performance in 2017 granted in 2015 which vests on 9 March 2018 is based on the average share price over the three months ended 31 December 2017 of 3.3428 including the dividend equivalent shares.
The comparative value of LTIP awards for 2016 has been restated using the actual share price at vesting on 9 March 2017 and so it is different to the value shown in the 2016 Remuneration report.
Helen Clatworthy was appointed to the Board in January 2017.
6 Jamie Pike stepped down from the Board and as Chairman in May 2017.
Martin Towers became Chairman of the Group in May 2017.
Determination of the 2017 Group Bonus Plan The maximum bonus opportunity for both Executive Directors for the 2017 financial year was 100.0 per cent of annual salary of which 50.0 per cent is to be paid in cash and 50.0 per cent in ordinary shares in Tyman plc whose vesting is deferred for three years.
Relevant
Divisional and Group bonus targets for both profit and cash were increased during the year to take into account the acquisition of Howe Green and to ensure an equivalent level of difficulty.
The outcome of the 2017 bonus alongside the performance targets set is shown below Performance Bonus as Measure Threshold 0% Target 50% Exceeds 100% achieved % of salary Profit growth over prior year 25% weighting 62.1m 65.2m 68.3m 68.3m 25.0 Profit performance versus target 45% weighting Cash conversion of operating profit 15% weighting 75% 85% 95% 91% 12.2 Cash generation versus target 15% weighting 1 Calculation is performed on the basis of targets and performance in 000 rounded to one decimal percentage place.
2 Profit performance versus target is measured on a constant currency basis.
3 Cash conversion targets were increased by 500 bps at each level compared with 2016.
Cash generation targets for the Group exclude the investment impact of major projects.
The Group recorded an Operational Cash Flow in the year of 65.7 million and the investment impact of major projects in the year was 4.3 million 0.1 million rounding difference.
Straightline vesting occurs between target and stretch performance.
In total 51.30 per cent of salary was earned as a bonus by the Executive Directors 2016 91.25 per cent.
The monetary amounts are payable in cash and deferred shares as set out below
Bonusable salary
Achievement % of award
Cash bonus
Louis Eperjesi 407000 100 51.3 208791 104395 104395 James Brotherton 251200 100 51.3 128866 64433 64433 Bonuses in respect of 2017 performance are subject to recovery and withholding provisions covering the exceptional circumstances of a material misstatement of the accounts a material miscalculation of the performance of the Company or gross misconduct before the vesting date.
DSBP awards granted during the year The table below details the deferred shares granted in 2017 in respect of the 2016 annual bonus award
Number of shares Share price fiveday average
Vesting date Louis Eperjesi 58581 3.092 181132 March 2020 James Brotherton 36152 3.092 111782 March 2020 1 Shares are deferred for three years.
2 The actual value will be the value at the vesting date and will include dividend equivalent award shares.
Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 76 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements Remuneration report continued Annual Report on Directors Remuneration continued LTIP awards vesting in respect of 2017 LTIP awards were made to Executive Directors on 14 June 2015 subject to performance measured over three years ending 31 December 2017.
Awards were measured against targets outlined below dependent upon underlying EPS from continuing operations EPS targets 100% weighting Cumulative EPS target over the three years ending December 2017 Threshold  25% award 69.60p Maximum  100% award 78.45p 1 Straightline vesting between these points.
No award is made if performance is below threshold.
Performance year
2016 25.41p 2017 26.91p Underlying cumulative EPS 71.57p The 2015 Underlying Earnings Per Share was restated in the 2016 accounts to 19.33 pence.
However for the purposes of the performance measurement the Committee has elected to use the lower number of 19.25 pence reported in 2015.
In addition to the targets above vesting is subject to financial underpins which consider relative TSR actual EPS achieved in 2017 and whether the threeyear cumulative EPS target has been achieved through increased and inappropriate gearing of the balance sheet.
The Remuneration Committee was satisfied that the Underlying Earnings Per Share performance in 2017 of 26.91 pence was a fair reflection of the performance of the Group and undue risk was not taken in its achievement.
Further with the Groups TSR being broadly in line with the TSR of a comparator group of UK listed companies the Committee determined that the financial underpin was satisfied.
Accordingly with the level of award being calculated on a straightline basis between the threshold and maximum targets 41.69 per cent of the 2015 awards will vest on their threeyear anniversary date in March 2018.
Vested shares after the sale of the necessary number of shares to cover tax and NI payments are retained by the Executive Directors for a minimum of two years following the date of vesting.
Details of the Directors awards which vested are shown below Director Date of grant Earliest date for vesting
Number of shares vesting Average share price 1 October 30 December
Louis Eperjesi 22 June 2015 March 2018 121131 50499 3.3428 168808 James Brotherton 22 June 2015 March 2018 74181 30926 3.3428 103379 Calculated on a straightline basis.
In accordance with the regulations the estimated value of the award is based on the average share price over the last quarter of the financial year.
The actual value at the vesting date 9 March 2018 will also include the value of the dividends that have accrued on those shares over the vesting period.
LTIP awards granted during the financial year LTIP awards were granted to both Executive Directors on 14 March 2017 with a face value of 100 per cent of salary.
Director Award scheme Date of award
Number of shares awarded Face value of award Share price 30day average Number of shares receivable for threshold performance Louis Eperjesi LTIP 14 March 2017 14 March 2020 140661 407 2.8934 35165 James Brotherton LTIP 14 March 2017 14 March 2020 86816 251 2.8934 21704 1 The award is subject to a twoyear holding period after normal vesting.
Performance will be measured against EPS targets as set out below EPS targets 100% weighting Cumulative EPS target over the three years ending December 2019 CAGR of EPS over 2016 EPS required to meet target Threshold  25% award 89.10p 8.0% Maximum  100% award 103.30p 16.0% In 2017 the Remuneration Committee introduced a discretionary ROCE underpin as an additional measure to ensure the performance conditions remain suitably challenging and fully aligned with shareholder interests.
The ROCE underpin operates in addition to the existing financial underpin with the Committee having the discretion to reduce LTIP awards in the event that ROCE does not meet certain predetermined targets over the performance period.
In 2017 the first year of operation of the ROCE underpin it is intended that the discretion to reduce the LTIP award would apply if ROCE had not increased by at least 100 bps over the threeyear performance period.
ROCE for 2016 the base year for the performance period was 13.6 per cent as set out on page 15.
Find out more at site 77 Directors interests in shares The interests of each person who was a Director of the Company as at 31 December 2017 together with interests held by his or her connected persons were
Restricted shares
Ordinary shares at 31 Dec 2016 James Brotherton 418039 24678 442717 200% 540% Yes 418039 Helen Clatworthy   15000 Louis Eperjesi 574340 33156 607496 200% 542% Yes 574340 Mark Rollins   25000    15000 Martin Towers   62984    62984 Angelika Westerwelle   131318    131318 1 Shares held for two years post vesting of LTIP 2014 award.
2 From 31 December 2017 to 7 March 2018 there were no changes to the above stated holdings.
Pamela Bingham did not hold Tyman plc shares on either date.
3 Base salary as at 31 December 2017.
4 Based on the closing price of a Tyman plc ordinary share of 3.63 on 29 December 2017.
Directors interests in shares under allshare plans LTIP DSBP and SAYE audited Shares over which awards granted vested lapsed Earliest held at during during during held at Exercise vesting Award scheme Award date 1 Jan 2017 the year the year the year 3 1 Dec 20 1 7 price date Louis Eperjesi DSBP 110314 44736  44736   Mar 2017 LTIP 260614 118912  58648 60264  Mar 2017 DSBP 100315 16057    16057 Mar 2018 LTIP 220615 121131    121131 Mar 2018 DSBP 080316 40099    40099 Mar 2019 LTIP 090316 151442    151442 Mar 2019 DSBP 230317  58581   58581 Mar 2020 LTIP 140317  140661   140661 Mar 2020 James Brotherton DSBP 110314 34001  34001   Mar 2017 LTIP 260614 88508  43653 44855  Mar 2017 DSBP 100315 10865    10865 Mar 2018 LTIP 220615 74181    74181 Mar 2018 UK ESSP 240915 2608    2608 2.7612 Nov 2018 DSBP 080316 24557    24557 Mar 2019 LTIP 090316 93459    93459 Mar 2019 UK ESSP 220916 2750    2750 2.6177 Nov 2019 DSBP 230317  36152   36152 Mar 2020 LTIP 140317  86816   86816 Mar 2020 UK ESSP 290917  1101   1101 3.2685 Nov 2020 1 LTIPs are subject to a mandatory twoyear holding period upon vesting after the sale of the necessary number of shares to cover tax and National Insurance payments.
2 All awards lapse 10 years from the date of grant.
Payments to past Directors There were no payments to past Directors during the year.
Loss of office No payments in respect to loss of office were made to Directors during the year.
Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 78 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements Remuneration report continued Annual Report on Directors Remuneration continued Service contracts Service contracts were entered into between the Company and the Executive Directors as follows Commencement date
Louis Eperjesi 07 March 2014 12 months James Brotherton 07 March 2014 12 months Details of the letters of appointment of the Nonexecutives are shown below Nonexecutive Director Date of appointment Latest date of appointment reappointment Expiry date Notice period in months Pamela Bingham 18 January 2018 18 January 2018 18 January 2021 One Helen Clatworthy 9 January 2017 9 January 2017 9 January 2020 One Mark Rollins 1 April 2015 1 April 2018 1 April 2021 One Martin Towers 17 December 2009 12 May 2017  One Angelika Westerwelle 30 November 2012 8 November 2016 30 November 2018 One 1 Martin Towers succeeded Jamie Pike as Chairman following the AGM held on 12 May 2017.
2 Angelika Westerwelle intends to step down from the Board at the Companys forthcoming AGM to be held on 10 May 2018.
3 Approved by the Nominations Committee on 2 March 2018.
Copies of service contracts and letters of appointment are available to view at the Companys registered office.
External appointments of Executive Directors James Brotherton became a director of the Quoted Companies Alliance on 17 January 2017 this is an unpaid position.
Louis Eperjesi was appointed a trustee of the Cheltenham Trust on 2 February 2018 this is an unpaid position.
Performance graph and table The graph below shows the total shareholder return for Tyman plc and the FTSE AllShare Index over the past nine years.
The Committee considers the FTSE AllShare Index relevant to the Company since it is a recognised benchmark for companies of Tymans size.
The graph shows the value of 100 invested in Tyman plc on 31 December 2008 compared with the value of 100 invested in the FTSE AllShare Index at the same time.
Points are plotted at each year end.
Total shareholder return
December
December
December
December
December
December
December
December
December
Tyman plc FTSE AllShare Source Datastream Thomson Reuters Find out more at site 79 Historical Chief Executive remuneration outcomes The table below sets out the single figure for the total remuneration paid to the Chief Executive Officer together with the annual bonus payout expressed as a percentage of the maximum opportunity and the LTIP payout expressed as a percentage of the maximum opportunity for the current year and previous eight years.
Year CEO Single figure of total remuneration Annual bonus payout %
2017 Louis Eperjesi 896 51% 42% 2016 Louis Eperjesi 1052 91% 49% 2015 Louis Eperjesi 1026 58% 100% 2014 Louis Eperjesi 1137 31% 94% 2013 Louis Eperjesi 1821 90% 100% 2012 Louis Eperjesi 493 68% Nil 2011 Louis Eperjesi 338 22% Nil 2010 Louis Eperjesi 394 100% Nil Denis Mulhall 438  Nil Keith Taylor 73 ne ne 2009 Keith Taylor 572 100% ne Greg Hutchings 713  Nil 1 The LTIP awards for 2016 have been recalculated using the actual exercise share price.
2 Executive Chairman. ne not eligible  individual was employed during the year but was not eligible to participate in the bonus or LTIP scheme as appropriate that year.
Relative spend on pay The table below sets out for the years ended 31 December 2017 and 31 December 2016 the total cost of employee remuneration for the Group together with the total distributions made to shareholders by way of dividends.
Relative spend on pay 000 2017 2016 Year on year % change Total employee remuneration for the Group excluding sharebased payments 136965 127655 6.8% Dividends paid in the financial year 19497 15578 20.11% The increase in employee remuneration paid in the year reflects the increased size of the Group at the end of 2017 compared with the start of 2016 along with promotion and inflation related salary increases.
Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 80 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements Remuneration report continued Annual Report on Directors Remuneration continued Statement of implementation for the 2018 financial year Statement of implementation of remuneration for the 2018 financial year In line with the Remuneration Policy report approved by shareholders at the 2017 AGM a number of amendments to the Directors Remuneration Policy were approved to be implemented from 2018 onwards.
Details of the Directors remuneration for the 2018 financial year are set out in the table below Salary CEO  420000 2017 407000  3.2 per cent increase CFO  297500 2017 received 270400  7.64 per cent increase 18.43 per cent change over 1 January 2017 salary of 251200 Pension allowance CEO  20 per cent of base salary CFO  15 per cent of base salary Benefits Life assurance cover critical illness cover private medical and dental cover car allowance and professional tax and financial advice.
The Directors to receive a car allowance of 16500 per annum with effect from 1 January 2018.
Annual bonus 125 per cent of base salary with half in cash and half in shares deferred for three years.
The CEO bonus will be calculated 80 per cent 100 per cent of base salary on financial measures and 20 per cent 25 per cent of base salary on personal objectives linked to delivery of the Groups strategy.
The personal objectives are to be set in relation to the Groups progress during 2018 in delivering and embedding the Groups plans in relation to strategy deployment 10 per cent of base salary health and safety 7.5 per cent of base salary and succession planning 7.5 per cent of base salary.
The CFO bonus will be based entirely on financial measures being the same measures as for the CEO.
The financial measures for both Executive Directors will remain 70 per cent linked to profitability PBTA and 30 per cent linked to cash generation.
Consistent with prior years the precise bonus targets will be disclosed in detail in the 2018 Annual Report and Accounts together with further details concerning the personal objectives of the CEO.
LTIP Nilcost options of 125 per cent of base salary.
Performance metrics based on cumulative underlying EPS measured over a threeyear period and subject to discretionary relative total shareholder return and absolute ROCE underpins.
25 per cent vests for threshold performance with 0 per cent below threshold increasing pro rata to full vesting for stretch performance.
LTIP awards to be retained for two years after vesting.
The performance targets will be based on cumulative EPS over the threeyear period with the threshold and maximum targets for the period 20182020 to be set shortly after the results for the 2017 year are announced and when the effect of the recent changes in US tax legislation are fully understood.
The salaries of the Groups senior management team were reviewed in December 2017 and in general were awarded an increase to their base salaries of 2.0 per cent these being in line with the average increases for all UKbased employees excluding exceptional increases reflecting local operating or market conditions in the various geographies where Tyman operates.
The average increase for the general worldwide workforce was 2.5 per cent.
Salary
CEO remuneration In light of the Groups progress including its increase in size and complexity the Committee undertook a review of the CEOs remuneration package in December 2017.
As part of the review the Committee considered Louis Eperjesis level of experience individual performance and impact on the continuing success of the Group.
Subsequently it was determined that an increase of 3.2 per cent to Louis Eperjesis base salary effective from 1 January 2018 was warranted.
CFO remuneration As reported in the Groups halfyear results announcement in July 2017 the Board reviewed the Executive Directors roles and with effect from 1 August 2017 James Brotherton took up responsibility for Group strategy corporate development and MandA in addition to his existing duties as CFO.
In light of these additional responsibilities it was agreed to increase his salary to 297500 from 1 August 2017 with no further review to his salary until 1 January 2019.
In addition and being fully cognisant of shareholder opinions the Remuneration Committee mitigated the effect of the ratchet of the salary increase on variable pay by setting the base salary for the purposes of bonus and LTIP awards at 251200 for 2017 and 275000 for 2018.
Find out more at site 81 LTIP awards In line with the approved Remuneration Policy it is expected that an award of shares will be made under Tymans Long Term Incentive Plan in midMarch 2018 shortly after the release of the Groups financial results for 2017 the 2018 Awards with the two Executive Directors being awarded shares to the value of 125 per cent of their respective base salaries in line with the Policy approved at the 2017 AGM.
The measurement period for the 2018 Awards will be from 1 January 2018 to 31 December 2020.
These awards will be subject to two years post vesting holding period and three years post vesting recovery provisions.
The 2018 Awards will be made under the rules of the 2010 Long Term Incentive Plan the 2010 LTIP under which awards with a face value of up to 100 per cent of salary may be granted in normal circumstances.
To enable the awards to be granted in advance of the 2018 AGM where shareholders will be asked to confirm a change to the existing normal limit to bring it into line with the approved Policy the exceptional circumstances provision of the current Rules which permit awards with a fair value of up to 150 per cent of salary to be granted in circumstances which the Committee deems to be sufficiently exceptional will be used.
Revised LTIP Plan Rules including the already approved increased maximum award level will be put to shareholders for approval at the 2018 AGM.
The table below shows the performance period and corresponding targets of the outstanding LTIP awards.
LTIP awards granted in Performance period Vesting date Cumulative EPS target range over the performance period Number of shares outstanding as at 31 Decembertel2017 March 2018 69.6078.45p 638tel2018 March 2019 67.0078.50p 702tel2019 March 2020 89.10103.30p 764977 20182020 March 2021  803933 It is anticipated that awards under the LTIP will be awarded in midMarch 2018.
At the time of completing this report targets had not been determined.
It is intended these will be disclosed in advance of the 2018 AGM.
2 The estimated number of shares to be awarded using an average share price of 3.30.
Nonexecutive Director fees The Chairman is paid a fee of 132600 per annum with no additional fee for chairing the Nominations Committee.
Nonexecutive Directors are paid an annual basic fee plus an additional fee for chairing a Board Committee.
Position
Annual fee Annual fee Chairman 132600 130000 Nonexecutive Director 47750 46800 Annual fee for the Chair of the Audit or Remuneration Committees 7000 5200 Annual fee for the Senior Independent Director 6000 5200 Nonexecutive Director basic fees together with the fee for the Chairman were reviewed in December 2017 and increased by 2.0 per cent from January 2018 in line with the general UK pay award for 2018.
The Board reviewed the fees paid to the Chairs of the Audit and Remuneration Committees in December 2017 and considered these were not commensurate with the amount of time required and responsibility taken for these roles and awarded an increase to 7000 per annum with effect from 1 January 2018.
An incremental fee was paid to the Senior Independent Director for the first time in 2017 to reflect the increasing size of the Group and the contribution this role makes to the Board.
It was initially felt appropriate that this fee should be set at broadly the same level as that of a Committee Chair or at 50 per cent of the fee for a Committee Chair where the Senior Independent Director is also Chair of a Committee and in receipt of a Committee Chair fee.
This fee was reviewed in December 2017 and it was agreed the full fee for this role should be 6000 for the 2018 financial year.
Mark Rollins who is Chair of the Remuneration Committee will therefore receive an additional fee of 3000 as Senior Independent Director.
During 2018 the Committee intends to carry out a full review of the Chairmans and Divisional Directors remuneration packages.
In conjunction with this work the Board will also review the Nonexecutive and Committee Chairmanship fees.
Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 82 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements Remuneration report continued Annual Report on Directors Remuneration continued Other items Details of share plans During the year awards were made under the following plans Tyman Sharesave Plans in the form of options totalling 115450 shares at a price of 3.2685 to 3.0794 vesting over a one or threeyear period depending on jurisdiction.
The total number of awards outstanding as at 31 December 2017 is 288524.
Deferred Share Bonus Plan in the form of deferred share awards totalling 194214 shares.
Awarded as a nilcost option in respect of deferred bonus.
Vesting over a threeyear period.
The total number of share awards outstanding as at 31 December 2017 is 384901.
Tyman Long Term Incentive Plan awards totalling 792477 shares.
Awarded with performance conditions vesting over a threeyear period with a further twoyear holding period.
The total number of share awards outstanding as at 31 December 2017 is 2107191.
The total number of shares outstanding under all share plans as at 31 December 2017 is 2780616 shares.
Dilution
The Group operates the general principle that the vesting of share awards under Executive and Employee Share Plans should be satisfied either by the issue of shares out of treasury or subject to Trustee consent through shares acquired on the market by the Tyman Employee Benefit Trust.
Certain jurisdictions require that new shares are issued to employees to settle vesting under share arrangements.
Where new shares are issued in these circumstances it is the Groups intention to match the new shares issued with an equal purchase of shares on the market either into treasury or into the Tyman Employee Benefit Trust.
As at 31 December 2017 shares equivalent to 1.6 per cent of the Groups issued share capital excluding Treasury shares would be required to settle all outstanding awards under employee and Executive share plans assuming maximum vesting.
Statement of voting at Annual General Meetings The table below sets out the results of the 2017 AGM in respect of the Remuneration Policy and Directors remuneration report respectively Votes for Votes at discretion Votes against Total number of votes cast Total number of votes withheld Remuneration Policy 2017 AGM 138245599 48673 4546304 142840576 1436928 96.79% 0.03% 3.18% 100% Directors remuneration report 2017 AGM 144004446 48673 144035 144197154 80350 99.87% 0.03% 0.10% 100% During the year the Committee wrote to major shareholders representing over 50 per cent of the Groups shareholder base following the changes to James Brothertons responsibilities and resultant increase in base salary as announced in July 2017.
These changes were received positively acknowledging James Brothertons contribution to the continued success of the Group and his further development within the Company.
The Committee is grateful to the Groups shareholders for their support as shown in the voting levels at the 2017 AGM and looks forward to receiving their continued support in 2018.
This Annual remuneration report has been approved by the Remuneration Committee and is signed on its behalf by Mark Rollins Chairman Remuneration Committee 7 March 2018 Find out more at site 83 Remuneration Policy table This section of the Directors remuneration report has been prepared in accordance with The Large and Mediumsized Companies and Groups Accounts and Reports Amendment Regulations 2013 and sets out the Remuneration Policy which was approved by shareholders at the AGM on 12 May 2017.
The policy took formal effect from the date of approval and is intended to apply until the 2020 AGM.
Please note that some of the information shown has been updated to take account of the fact that the policy is now approved and enacted rather than proposed.
A full version of the original shareholder approved policy can be found in the Annual Report for the year ended 31 December 2016 available on the Group website.
Link to strategy Operation Maximum opportunity Metrics Base salary To pay Executive Directors at a level commensurate with their contribution to the Company and appropriately based on skill experience and performance achieved.
The level of salary paid is considered appropriate for motivation and retention of the calibre of executive required to ensure the successful formation and delivery of the Groups strategy and the management of its business in the international environment in which it operates.
Base salary is paid monthly in cash.
The Executive Directors salaries are set having regard to typical pay levels at companies of a similar size internationality and complexity.
Salaries are normally reviewed annually and are typically effective from 1 January each year.
When reviewing salaries the Committee considers all relevant factors including prevailing market and economic conditions scope and responsibilities of the role the level of increase for other roles within the business and Company and individual performance.
There is no prescribed maximum salary.
Salary increases will normally be broadly in line with the general annual salary increase received by Group employees in the relevant Directors country of residence.
The Committee retains the discretion to award larger increases for example to reflect a change in role development and performance of a Director or to reflect an increase in complexity of the Group.
While there are no performance targets attached to the payment of salary Company and individual performance is a factor considered in the salary review process.
Benefits
To provide a range of marketcompetitive benefits to facilitate the recruitment of high calibre individuals and encourage their retention.
Executive Directors are eligible for a range of benefits that may include life assurance cover critical illness cover private medical and dental cover car allowance and professional tax and financial advice.
Additional benefits may also be provided in certain circumstances which may include relocation and associated expenses.
Other benefits may be offered if considered appropriate reasonable and necessary by the Committee and any reasonable business related expenses can be reimbursed including tax thereon if determined to be a taxable benefit.
Executive Directors are eligible for other benefits introduced for the wider workforce on broadly similar terms.
No overall maximum level has been set since some costs may change in accordance with market conditions.
Benefits are reviewed by the Committee on an annual basis and set at an appropriate market rate.
No performance metrics apply.
Remuneration report continued Policy report Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 84 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements Remuneration report continued Policy report continued Link to strategy Operation Maximum opportunity Metrics
To provide a marketcompetitive benefit for retirement to facilitate the recruitment of high calibre individuals and encourage their retention.
Executive Directors are eligible to participate in the relevant pension arrangements offered by the Group or to receive a cash salary supplement in lieu of pension entitlement.
The Committee may amend the form of any Executive Directors pension arrangements in response to changes in legislation or similar developments provided that the amendment does not materially increase the cost to the Company of the pension provision.
The maximum opportunity either by way of a contribution to a Group pension arrangement or payment of a cash salary supplement is 20 per cent of base salary.
The maximum cash salary supplement for any new Executive Director would be limited to 15 per cent of base salary.
No performance metrics apply.
Annual bonus To incentivise and reward achievement of annual goals consistent with the strategic direction of the business.
To create further alignment with shareholders interests via the delivery and retention of deferred equity.
Rewards annual performance against targets set and assessed by the Committee.
Any bonus payable under the annual bonus scheme is paid 50 per cent in cash and 50 per cent in shares deferred for three years under the DSBP and is not pensionable.
A dividend equivalent provision allows the payment of dividends at the Committees discretion on vested shares at the time of vesting.
Threeyear recovery and withholding provisions apply.
The normal maximum annual bonus opportunity for the Executive Directors is 125 per cent of salary.
Performance metrics are selected annually based on the objectives of the business at the time with the majority of the bonus linked to financial metrics.
Annual financial performance targets have historically been focused on profit and cash generation metrics.
Performance below threshold results in zero payment.
Payments normally rise from 0 per cent to 100 per cent of the maximum opportunity for performance between the threshold and maximum targets.
Long Term Incentive Plan To align the interests of senior executives to those of shareholders in developing the long term growth of the business and execution and delivery of the Groups strategy.
To facilitate share ownership.
Consists of awards of shares that vest subject to the achievement of performance conditions.
Participation and individual award levels will be determined at the discretion of the Committee and within the approved limits of the policy.
The Committee reviews the LTIP performance measures in advance of each grant to ensure their ongoing appropriateness and where material changes to performance measures are proposed it consults with shareholders.
Awards made under the LTIP are nonpensionable and will normally require Executive Directors to retain any awards that vest net of tax whether held as shares or options for a minimum of two further years from the date of vesting.
Threeyear recovery and withholding provisions apply.
Dividend equivalents may be paid.
125 per cent of salary or 200 per cent in exceptional circumstances such as the recruitment or retention of critical talent on a targeted basis.
Awards are subject to the achievement of defined targets measured over three financial years starting at the beginning of the financial year in which the award is made.
In respect of each performance measure performance below threshold results in zero vesting.
The starting point for the vesting of each performance element will be no higher than 25 per cent of the maximum opportunity and will rise a straightline basis to 100 per cent of maximum opportunity for attainment of levels of performance between threshold and maximum.
Awards will be granted subject to performance conditions that measure the long term success of the Company.
The Committee may introduce or reweight performance measures so that they are directly aligned with the Companys strategic objectives for each performance period.
Remuneration policy table continued Find out more at site 85 Link to strategy Operation Maximum opportunity Metrics Shareholding requirement To motivate and reward the creation of long term shareholder value.
To ensure alignment with shareholders interests.
Executive Directors are expected to retain a minimum shareholding equivalent to 200 per cent of basic salary.
Executive Directors are required to retain 50 per cent of shares vesting after any disposals necessary to pay associated tax charges under both the Deferred Share Bonus Plan and the LTIP until the minimum shareholding is reached.
Chairman and Nonexecutive Director fees To attract and retain high calibre Nonexecutive Directors.
Nonexecutive Director fees are set by the Board.
Fees are normally reviewed annually but not necessarily increased.
Reviews take into account the time commitment responsibilities and fees paid by companies of a similar size and complexity.
Fee increases if applicable for Nonexecutive Directors take effect from 1 January.
Additional fees may be paid to Chairmen of Board Committees and to the Senior Independent Director.
If there is a temporary yet material increase in the time commitments for Nonexecutive Directors the Board may pay extra fees on a prorata basis to recognise the additional workload.
No eligibility to receive bonuses or retirement benefits or to participate in the Groups long term incentive plans or employee share plans.
Any reasonable business related expenses can be reimbursed including tax thereon if determined to be a taxable benefit.
Aggregate annual fees to Directors are limited to 500000 under the Companys Articles of Association.
No performance metrics.
Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 86 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements Remuneration report continued Policy report continued Remuneration policy table continued Notes to the Remuneration policy table Recovery and withholding provisions may be applied to LTIP and DSBP awards in the exceptional circumstances of a material misstatement gross misconduct or a material misjudgement of the performance of the Company.
For the avoidance of doubt by approval of the policy authority has been given to the Company to honour any commitments entered into with current or former Directors that have been disclosed to shareholders in previous Directors remuneration reports.
Details of any payments to former Directors where required by relevant regulations will be set out in the Annual Report on Remuneration as they arise.
The Remuneration Committee retains discretion over the operation of certain elements of pay particularly variable pay.
This includes the discretion to adjust either the annual bonus or LTIP if the outcome is not considered to be reflective of Company performance.
In addition the Committee may adjust elements of the plan including but not limited to participation the timing of the grant andor payment the size of an award up to plan limits andor payment discretion relating to the measurement of performance in the event of a change of control determination of a good leaver for incentive plan purposes adjustments required in certain circumstances e. in certain circumstances to grant andor settle bonus or LTIP awards in cash.
In practice this will only be used in exceptional circumstances for Executive Directors revise any formulaic bonus award downwards or upwards in the event that an exceptional negative or positive event occurs during the bonus year in question however in practice the Committee would not normally expect to revise any formulaic bonus upwards and the ability to recognise exceptional events within the existing performance conditions.
Annual bonus performance metrics are determined at the start of each year based on the key business priorities for the year.
The majority will be based on clear financial targets that include a significant weighting towards profit and cash generation as when combined these are often strong indicators of sustainable growth.
LTIP performance metrics are determined at the time of grant.
Performance measures may include measures of profitability such as EPS measures of capital allocation discipline such as ROCE and other measures of long term success such as relative TSR.
These measures align with the Companys goal of value creation for shareholder through financial growth and above market returns.
Performance against targets may also be subject to appropriate discretionary underpins.
Executive Directors service agreements and exit payment policy The service agreements of the Executive Directors provide for a notice period of 12 months from either party.
On termination of their contract by Tyman and during the period of notice Executive Directors would be eligible to be paid their salary pension contributions and other employment benefits but not annual bonus or grants under long term incentive plans until the earlier of 12 months from notice of termination or the Director obtaining full time employment with an obligation on the part of the Director to mitigate.
Payments will normally be made monthly although the Committee retains discretion to agree settlement terms.
These may include a prorata bonus in respect of the period worked by the Executive Director up until the date of termination.
Bonuses in the final year of employment may also be settled in cash.
The Committee may pay reasonable outplacement and legal fees where considered appropriate.
The Committee may pay any statutory entitlements or settle or compromise claims in connection with a termination of employment where considered in the best interests of the Company.
Executive Directors who are categorised as Good Leavers by the Committee will generally be eligible to receive outstanding awards under the Executive Share Plans as they vest in future years.
Awards that vest under the LTIP postemployment will normally be prorated to reflect the fact that the Executive Director was not employed for the entire period under measurement.
For LTIP awards made after the 2014 AGM the Committee retains discretion to waive the postvesting holding period requirement for Good Leavers depending on circumstances.
Similar provisions apply in the event of a change of control.
In the event that an Executive Director is dismissed for reasons constituting gross misconduct all unvested awards under Executive Share Plans lapse and the Committee retains no discretion in this regard.
Find out more at site 87 Nonexecutive Directors letters of appointment and shareholding guidelines The Chairman and Nonexecutive Directors do not have service agreements but the terms of their appointment including the time commitment expected are recorded in letters of appointment.
Nonexecutive Directors are employed for terms of three years duration terminable on a months notice by the Company or the Director.
All Nonexecutive Directors are required to undertake that they will submit themselves for reelection at each Annual General Meeting occurring during their term of office and no Nonexecutive Director will serve more than three terms of three years without prior shareholder approval.
Nonexecutive Directors do not have a minimum shareholding requirement however they are expected to acquire and retain a shareholding in the Group for the duration of their appointment.
Other policies Recruitment of Executive Directors The Committees general policy on recruitment remuneration is that new Executive Directors should be offered a contract on similar terms to the existing Executive Directors except for pension contributions which would be capped at 15 per cent of salary.
The Committee may agree that the Company will meet certain relocation and associated expenses of a new Executive Director subject to circumstances.
For a new Executive Director their annual bonus framework and LTIP awards will be in line with the limits set out in the Remuneration Policy table.
Depending on the timing of the appointment the Committee may deem it appropriate to set different annual bonus performance conditions to the current Executive Directors for the first year of appointment.
An LTIP award can be made shortly following an appointment assuming the Company is not in a Closed period.
Where individuals are promoted to the Board from within the Group their existing share grants or awards will be allowed to pay out on their original terms.
In certain circumstances and in order to secure the services of an outstanding candidate it may be necessary to make an award to a new Executive Director to buy out unvested performance plan share or cash awards forfeited on leaving their previous employment.
Any such reimbursement would be subject to independent confirmation of the existence forfeiture on departure and probability of these historical awards vesting had the new Executive Director remained in post.
In doing so the Committee will seek to do no more than match the fair value of the awards forfeited taking account of performance conditions attached to these awards the likelihood of those conditions being met and the proportion of the vesting period remaining.
Such awards may be made using existing arrangements or using the flexibility provided by the Listing Rules to make awards without prior shareholder approval.
Any such reimbursement would be made in cash or in shares in Tyman plc and may be subject to performance conditions attached to Tyman.
No such incentives were paid in connection with the recruitment of Louis Eperjesi or for the promotion of James Brotherton to their respective roles both of which occurred in 2010.
Recruitment of Nonexecutive Directors New Nonexecutive Directors recruited to the Board will be paid the same rates and be subject to the same provisions concerning annual reelection and shareholdings as the then current Nonexecutive Directors.
Policy on external appointments Executive Directors are allowed to accept external appointments as Nonexecutive Directors.
In respect of quoted companies this is limited to one other quoted company subject to Board approval provided that these are not with competing companies and are not likely to lead to conflicts of interest.
Executive Directors would normally be allowed to retain the fees paid from these appointments.
Executive Directors may not serve as the Nonexecutive Chairman of another quoted company.
Other share plans The Executive Directors may participate in any allemployee share plans on the same basis as other employees in their country of residence.
The maximum level of participation is subject to the limits imposed by HMRC or a lower cap set by the Company.
Employment conditions elsewhere in the Group The Remuneration Policy for Executive Directors is consistent with that for other employees save lower levels of incentive opportunity based on seniority and market norms.
All senior management employees of the Group participate in bonus arrangements with all permanent UK US and other international employees eligible to participate in one or more share schemes.
Employees in certain other jurisdictions are also eligible to participate in allemployee share plans.
Although the Committee does not consult directly with employees on the Directors Remuneration Policy the Committee does consider the general basic salary increase remuneration arrangements and employment conditions for the broader employee population when determining remuneration policy for the Executive Directors.
Consultation with shareholders and shareholder bodies The Committee is committed to regular engagement with shareholders and governance bodies.
During the year the Committee wrote to shareholders representing over 50 per cent of the Groups issued shares and a number of governance bodies advising them of the changes to the CFO role and resultant increase in base salary at the time of the announcement.
Overall the responses received were positive and acknowledged the Committees restraint in the phasing impact on variable pay of the base salary increase together with the fact that the base salary would not be reviewed again until 1 January 2019.
In advance of implementing any material future changes to the Executive Directors remuneration the Committee would normally engage in consultation with shareholders.
All Committee members attend the Annual General Meeting and may also be contacted through the Groups registered office to answer any questions shareholders or shareholder bodies may have in relation to the Groups Remuneration Policy.
Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 88 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements Remuneration report continued Policy report continued Illustrative performance scenarios The table below sets out performance scenarios for each Executive Director for the financial year 2018 showing an indication of the level of remuneration that would be received following the implementation of the revised Policy which is the first full year to which the new policy will apply.
The above charts provide an illustration of the proportion of total remuneration made up of each component of the Remuneration Policy and the value of each component.
The assumptions noted for ontarget performance and maximum in the graph above are provided for illustration purposes only.
Three scenarios have been illustrated for each Executive Director 2018 Threshold performance Fixed remuneration No annual bonus No vesting of LTIP awards
Fixed remuneration 50 per cent annual bonus payout 62.50 per cent of salary 25 per cent of LTIP awards vest 31.25 per cent of salary
Fixed remuneration 100 per cent annual bonus payout 125 per cent of salary 100 per cent of LTIP awards vest 125 per cent of salary The fixed pay element is based on the following elements Base salary is the base salary effective for the year ended 31 December 2018 as set out on page 80.
Benefits are the value of benefits paid in the year ended 31 December 2017 as set out in the table of Directors remuneration on page 74.
Cash contribution in lieu of pension of 20 per cent of base salary for the CEO and 15 per cent of base salary for the CFO.
800 1000 1400 1200 1600
Target
Maximum
100% 522 n Fixed n Short term incentives annual bonus n LTIP
29% 57% 14% 916 33% 33% 34% 1572 tel000 800 1000 1400 1200 1600
Target
Maximum
100% 360 n Fixed n Short term incentives annual bonus n LTIP
29% 56% 15% 639 33% 33% 34% 1104 Find out more at site 89 Report on the audit of the group financial statements Our opinion In our opinion Tyman plcs group financial statements the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the groups affairs as at 31 December 2017 and of its profit and cash flows for the year then ended have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006 and as regards the group financial statements Article 4 of the IAS Regulation.
We have audited the financial statements included within the Annual Report and Accounts the Annual Report which comprise the consolidated balance sheet as at 31 December 2017 the consolidated income statement and statement of comprehensive income the consolidated cash flow statement and the consolidated statement of changes in equity for the year then ended and the notes to the financial statements which include a description of the significant accounting policies.
Our opinion is consistent with our reporting to the Audit Committee.
Basis for opinion We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing UK ISAs UK and applicable law.
Our responsibilities under ISAs UK are further described in the Auditors responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements section of our report.
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion.
Independence
We remained independent of the group in accordance with the ethical requirements that are relevant to our audit of the financial statements in the UK which includes the FRCs Ethical Standard as applicable to listed public interest entities and we have fulfilled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with these requirements.
To the best of our knowledge and belief we declare that nonaudit services prohibited by the FRCs Ethical Standard were not provided to the group.
Other than those disclosed in the Directors report we have provided no nonaudit services to the group in the period from 1 January 2017 to 31 December 2017.
Independent auditors report To the members of Tyman plc Our audit approach
Materiality
Audit scope Key audit matters The scope of our audit As part of designing our audit we determined materiality and assessed the risks of material misstatement in the financial statements.
In particular we looked at where the directors made subjective judgements for example in respect of significant accounting estimates that involved making assumptions and considering future events that are inherently uncertain.
We gained an understanding of the legal and regulatory framework applicable to the group and the industry in which it operates and considered the risk of acts by the group which were contrary to applicable laws and regulations including fraud.
We designed audit procedures at group and significant component level to respond to the risk recognising that the risk of not detecting a material misstatement due to fraud is higher than the risk of not detecting one resulting from error as fraud may involve deliberate concealment by for example forgery or intentional misrepresentations or through collusion.
We focused on laws and regulations that could give rise to a material misstatement in the group and parent company financial statements including but not limited to the Companies Act 2006 the Listing Rules UK tax legislation and equivalent local laws and regulations applicable to significant component teams.
Our tests included but were not limited to review of the financial statement disclosures to underlying supporting documentation review of correspondence with legal advisors enquiries of management review of significant component auditors work and review of internal audit reports in so far as they related to the financial statements.
Overall group materiality 3.8 million 2016 3.3 million based on 5% of underlying operating profit before tax.
9 operating units subject to full scope audits on the basis of financial significance.
Specific procedures over certain classes of transactions and balances at 1 further operating units where the particular balances were financially significant.
Rotational procedures performed at 1 further operating unit which was in a remote location.
73% of Group revenue accounted for by reporting units where full scope audit work or specific audit procedures performed over revenue.
84% of Group underlying operating profit before taxation accounted for by the reporting units where full scope audit work performed.
Specific audit procedures on certain balances and classes of transactions provided additional coverage.
Goodwill and intangible assets impairment assessment.
Carrying value of provisions Exceptional items Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 90 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements Independent auditors report continued To the members of Tyman plc Report on the audit of the group financial statements continued Our audit approach continued The scope of our audit continued There are inherent limitations in the audit procedures described above and the further removed noncompliance with laws and regulations is from the events and transactions reflected in the financial statements the less likely we would become aware of it.
We did not identify any key audit matters relating to irregularities including fraud.
As in all of our audits we also addressed the risk of management override of internal controls including testing journals and evaluating whether there was evidence of bias by the directors that represented a risk of material misstatement due to fraud.
Key audit matters Key audit matters are those matters that in the auditors professional judgement were of most significance in the audit of the financial statements of the current period and include the most significant assessed risks of material misstatement whether or not due to fraud identified by the auditors including those which had the greatest effect on the overall audit strategy the allocation of resources in the audit and directing the efforts of the engagement team.
These matters and any comments we make on the results of our procedures thereon were addressed in the context of our audit of the financial statements as a whole and in forming our opinion thereon and we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters.
This is not a complete list of all risks identified by our audit.
Key audit matter How our audit addressed the key audit matter Goodwill and intangible assets impairment assessment Refer to page 65 Audit Committee Report page 111 notes.
There is 324 million of goodwill and 103 million of intangible assets recognised on the balance sheet predominantly arising from past acquisitions.
The Group operates in the building products market and therefore future results are impacted by fluctuations in the housing market and wider economy.
We focused on these balances because the determination of whether or not an impairment charge was necessary involved significant judgements about the future results of the business and the allocation of assets to cash generating units CGUs.
We also focused on the estimated value in use calculations of the Schlegel International and AmesburyTruth CGUs as these units have the most significant carrying values.
The Groups other CGU ERA operates in the United Kingdom and has significant headroom relative to the CGU carrying value.
The value in use calculation to support the carrying value of goodwill and intangibles includes the impact of some anticipated improvement in housing markets and realisation of the benefits of synergies arising from acquisitions the footprint rationalisation project investment made by the Group and closure of lossmaking business units.
We evaluated the appropriateness of the allocation of acquired assets to CGUs.
We considered the level of integration of acquisitions made during the year to assess the level at which cash flows were independently generated.
We were satisfied that the level of integration was such that the cash flows of acquired entities are not independently generated and therefore the allocation to CGUs was appropriate.
For all CGUs namely AmesburyTruth ERA and Schlegel International we evaluated the reasonableness of managements future cash flow forecasts and tested the underlying value in use calculations.
We agreed managements forecast to the latest Board approved strategic plan.
We also compared historic actual results to those budgeted to assess the quality of managements forecasting.
Where performance was below budget we assessed why this was the case.
Based on this evaluation we considered managements ability to forecast was fair.
The key assumptions in the calculations were growth in revenue and EBITDA margins.
In assessing these assumptions we considered external construction industry outlook reports and economic growth forecasts from a variety of sources as these were good indicators of building product sales.
Where managements growth assumptions were in excess of these external forecasts we evaluated managements rationale being the benefit of acquisition synergies and restructuring activities undertaken and as a result we considered the forecasts to have been prepared on a supportable basis.
We also tested managements assumption in respect of the long term growth rates in the forecasts by comparing them to long term average growth rates of the economies in the relevant territories and the discount rate by assessing the cost of capital for the company and comparable organisations.
We were satisfied these assumptions were appropriate.
Management also performed sensitivity analysis in respect of the key assumptions which were flexed to determine at what level this would eliminate the headroom in the model.
There were no changes in the key assumptions that were considered reasonably possible which would eliminate headroom as outlined in the disclosure in note 10.
Find out more at site 91 Report on the audit of the group financial statements continued Our audit approach continued Key audit matters continued Key audit matter How our audit addressed the key audit matter Carrying value of provisions Refer to page 65 Audit Committee Report page 125 notes.
The Group holds a number of provisions which are inherently judgemental including Property related provisions 2.9 million The Group has been built up through acquisition and is in the process of going through a footprint rationalisation programme which has resulted in the exit and consolidation of manufacturing and warehouse facilities.
Consequently there are a number of manufacturing and warehouse sites which are no longer used.
Provisions have therefore been made in relation to onerous leases.
In addition a number of leasehold properties require the Group to reinstate them to their original state of repair for which dilapidation provisions have been made.
We focused on these because there is inherent judgement in assessing the minimum expected costs of onerous leases as well as the cost of repairs at the end of a lease term.
Restructuring provisions 8.0 million Restructuring provisions are comprised mainly of provisions for the closure of the Rochester and Amesbury plants 7.6 million.
Warranty provisions 0.9 million The provision is based on the estimated costs of warranty claims on products sold.
We focused on this provision as the estimation and timing of costs in respect of future warranty claims requires judgement and as such there is a risk that the provision may be understated.
Other provisions 6.0 million Other provisions are comprised mainly of provisions for potential tax exposures 3.3 million and onerous contracts 0.8 million.
We focused on these provisions as there is inherent judgement in assessing the amount and timing of settlement of these liabilities.
Property related provisions Onerous lease provisions are based on the residual lease period and contractual lease payments discounted for the time value of money.
Our approach included agreeing remaining rental costs to lease agreements and assessing the reasonableness of discount rates applied against the risk free interest rate in each applicable country.
We were satisfied the onerous lease provisions were made on a reasonable basis.
The Group has implemented a rolling programme of obtaining updated external valuations for costs of reinstating leasehold properties to their original state of repair.
Where applicable we read available external valuation reports assessed the competence and objectivity of the valuation expert by reviewing qualifications and agreed their estimate to managements calculation.
Where no external valuations were available we considered the reasonableness of the items included in the calculation being the estimated removal costs of equipment and repair costs considering the relative size and complexity of work across sites.
We also compared the provisions made by management in prior years to the external valuations to assess the accuracy of managements estimations noting that there was no significant difference between managements previous estimate and the external valuation.
Restructuring provisions The provision for the closure of the Rochester and Amesbury plants is predominantly for severance costs to employees and cleanup costs of the plants to get them into a saleable condition.
We examined the communication to employees of the plant closure and tested a sample of severance payments and assessed the reasonableness of the valuation of the cleanup costs performed by an independent external valuation expert.
Warranty provisions We tested the accuracy of managements calculation of forecast claims which contain an element based on historic claims experience and specific elements for known warranty issues and compared the level of historic warranty claims to that forecast.
Based on the work performed we were satisfied that the provision was made on a reasonable basis.
Other provisions The provisions for potential tax exposures identified are based on either calculations performed by management considering the potential risks identified and historic settlement values or specific advice received from external tax advisers.
We assessed the reasonableness of the estimates made and were satisfied that whilst judgemental the provisions have been made on a reasonable basis.
Provisions for onerous contracts are based on the minimum contractual cost of terminating lossmaking contracts.
We examined the terms of the contract and considered the appropriateness of treating it as onerous.
We verified that the cost of termination is calculated in line with the terms of the contract and were therefore satisfied that the provision was made on a reasonable basis.
Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 92 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements Independent auditors report continued To the members of Tyman plc Key audit matter How our audit addressed the key audit matter Exceptional items Refer to page 65 Audit Committee Report page 105 notes.
The Group has recognised 10.0 million net exceptional costs in the year the classification of which is subject to judgement.
The exceptional items relate to Footprint restructuring 16.4 million charge and 5.7 million credit These costs relate to the footprint rationalisation programme across the Group predominantly in North America.
15.2 million of the 16.4 million costs relate to the North American project where the costs relate to plant closures severance and cleanup costs other employee expenses and other cash expenses.
The remaining 0.8 million relates to footprint projects in ERA and SchlegelGiesse.
The credit predominantly relates to 1.8 million relating to the disposal and exit from the Canton South Dakota and Sioux Falls facilities and 3.3 million past service costs relating to the closure of the Rochester postretirement benefit medical plans.
The North American footprint project is expected to conclude by 2020.
MandA and integration 2.2 million charge and 2.9 million credit There are integration costs of 2.2 million that relate to Legal financial taxation and consultancy costs associated with the acquisition of Howe Green in the year IP defence costs relating to preacquisition periods and Integration of businesses acquired in prior years.
This is offset by a credit of 2.9 million of which 2.3 million relates to the pension liability recoverable from and indemnified by the previous owners of Bilco.
The remaining 0.6 million relates to the release of surplus nontrading provisions no longer required.
There is also a small amount recognised in relation to the write off of inventory fair value adjustments.
We have evaluated the appropriateness of recognising the income and charges as exceptional items and considered the impact of them on the underlying results.
Specifically we have understood the criteria for and governance over the footprint restructuring and MandA and integration projects and the costs associated with them that management deem to be exceptional items.
Accordingly we have tested the costs associated with such projects to underlying evidence to support the amounts recognised and challenged management on the rationale of classifying these amounts as exceptional.
We have also assessed the adequacy of the disclosure of the exceptional items within the financial statements and we are satisfied that the accounting treatment and disclosure is appropriate.
How we tailored the audit scope We tailored the scope of our audit to ensure that we performed enough work to be able to give an opinion on the financial statements as a whole taking into account the structure of the group the accounting processes and controls and the industry in which it operates.
We tailored the scope of our audit to ensure that we performed enough work to be able to give an opinion on the financial statements as a whole taking into account the geographic structure of the Group the accounting processes and controls and the industry in which the Group operates.
The Group is structured along three business lines being AmesburyTruth ERA and Schlegel International along with centralised functions covering Group treasury and central costs.
The Group financial statements are a consolidation of 65 reporting units for the Groups operating businesses which map into the three business lines and centralised functions.
Of the Groups 65 reporting units we identified 9 which in our view required an audit of their complete financial information due to their size.
The units were based in the United Kingdom UK the United States US and Italy.
Specific audit procedures on certain balances and classes of transactions were performed at a further 1 reporting unit as while overall the units were not financially significant certain classes of transactions and balances were material or considered to be higher risk including cash borrowings and interest expense.
The UK engagement team also undertook specific procedures on 1 small reporting unit in Dubai in line with our plan of rotating visits to different financially insignificant units to incorporate unpredictability and provide evidence over the units not subject to audit of their complete financial information.
Report on the audit of the group financial statements continued Our audit approach continued Key audit matters continued Find out more at site 93 Report on the audit of the group financial statements continued Our audit approach continued How we tailored the audit scope continued In establishing the overall approach to the Group audit we determined the type of work that needed to be performed at each of the reporting units either by us as the Group engagement team or the component auditors in the US or Italy operating under our instruction.
Where work was performed by the US and Italian component auditors the UK engagement leader and senior manager visited the US engagement leader only and Italian component teams reviewed audit work papers related to areas of focus and participated in the US and Italian component clearance meetings.
In addition to the site visits we held regular phone calls with the US and Italian teams and obtained formal reporting.
The US engagement leader also attended the Group Audit Committee meeting in the UK.
73% of the Groups revenue is accounted for by reporting units where we performed full scope audit work or performed specific audit procedures over revenue.
84% of the Groups underlying operating profit before taxation is accounted for by the 9 reporting units where we performed full scope audit work on the complete financial information.
Audit procedures were performed at a further 1 reporting units as explained above.
We considered the quantitative and qualitative characteristics of the remaining reporting units which comprise a large number of small units in which we considered the risk of material misstatement to the Group to be low.
The Group team performed appropriate analytical procedures over these remaining units.
Together with additional procedures performed at the Group level on balances such as goodwill intangible assets and taxation this gave us the evidence we needed for our opinion on the Group financial statements as a whole.
Materiality
The scope of our audit was influenced by our application of materiality.
We set certain quantitative thresholds for materiality.
These together with qualitative considerations helped us to determine the scope of our audit and the nature timing and extent of our audit procedures on the individual financial statement line items and disclosures and in evaluating the effect of misstatements both individually and in aggregate on the financial statements as a whole.
Based on our professional judgement we determined materiality for the financial statements as a whole as follows Overall Group materiality 3.8 million 2016 3.3 million.
How we determined it 5% of underlying operating profit before tax.
Rationale for benchmark applied Underlying operating profit before tax is the key measure used internally by management in assessing the performance of the Group externally by analysts and is the measure disclosed as a key performance indicator in the annual report.
This measure provides us with a consistent year on year basis for determining materiality based on trading performance and eliminates the impact of nonrecurring items.
Underlying operating profit excludes net finance costs exceptional items amortisation of acquired intangible assets and impairment of acquired intangible assets and goodwill.
For each component in the scope of our group audit we allocated a materiality that is less than our overall group materiality.
The range of materiality allocated across components was between 11000 and 3.7 million.
Certain components were audited to a local statutory audit materiality that was also less than our overall group materiality.
We agreed with the Audit Committee that we would report to them misstatements identified during our audit above 200000 2016 165000 as well as misstatements below that amount that in our view warranted reporting for qualitative reasons.
Going concern In accordance with ISAs UK we report as follows Reporting obligation Outcome We are required to report if we have anything material to add or draw attention to in respect of the directors statement in the financial statements about whether the directors considered it appropriate to adopt the going concern basis of accounting in preparing the financial statements and the directors identification of any material uncertainties to the groups ability to continue as a going concern over a period of at least twelve months from the date of approval of the financial statements.
We have nothing material to add or to draw attention to.
However because not all future events or conditions can be predicted this statement is not a guarantee as to the groups ability to continue as a going concern.
We are required to report if the directors statement relating to Going Concern in accordance with Listing Rule 9.8.6R3 is materially inconsistent with our knowledge obtained in the audit.
We have nothing to report.
Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 94 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements Independent auditors report continued To the members of Tyman plc Report on the audit of the group financial statements continued Reporting on other information The other information comprises all of the information in the Annual Report other than the financial statements and our auditors report thereon.
The directors are responsible for the other information.
Our opinion on the financial statements does not cover the other information and accordingly we do not express an audit opinion or except to the extent otherwise explicitly stated in this report any form of assurance thereon.
In connection with our audit of the financial statements our responsibility is to read the other information and in doing so consider whether the other information is materially inconsistent with the financial statements or our knowledge obtained in the audit or otherwise appears to be materially misstated.
If we identify an apparent material inconsistency or material misstatement we are required to perform procedures to conclude whether there is a material misstatement of the financial statements or a material misstatement of the other information.
If based on the work we have performed we conclude that there is a material misstatement of this other information we are required to report that fact.
We have nothing to report based on these responsibilities.
With respect to the Strategic Report and Directors report we also considered whether the disclosures required by the UK Companies Act 2006 have been included.
Based on the responsibilities described above and our work undertaken in the course of the audit the Companies Act 2006 CA06 ISAs UK and the Listing Rules of the Financial Conduct Authority FCA require us also to report certain opinions and matters as described below required by ISAs UK unless otherwise stated.
Strategic Report and Directors report In our opinion based on the work undertaken in the course of the audit the information given in the Strategic Report and Directors report for the year ended 31 December 2017 is consistent with the financial statements and has been prepared in accordance with applicable legal requirements.
CA06
In light of the knowledge and understanding of the group and its environment obtained in the course of the audit we did not identify any material misstatements in the Strategic Report and Directors report.
CA06
The directors assessment of the prospects of the group and of the principal risks that would threaten the solvency or liquidity of the group We have nothing material to add or draw attention to regarding The directors confirmation on page 38 of the Annual Report that they have carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the group including those that would threaten its business model future performance solvency or liquidity.
The disclosures in the Annual Report that describe those risks and explain how they are being managed or mitigated.
The directors explanation on page 42 of the Annual Report as to how they have assessed the prospects of the group over what period they have done so and why they consider that period to be appropriate and their statement as to whether they have a reasonable expectation that the group will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the period of their assessment including any related disclosures drawing attention to any necessary qualifications or assumptions.
We have nothing to report having performed a review of the directors statement that they have carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the group and statement in relation to the longerterm viability of the group.
Our review was substantially less in scope than an audit and only consisted of making inquiries and considering the directors process supporting their statements checking that the statements are in alignment with the relevant provisions of the UK Corporate Governance Code the Code and considering whether the statements are consistent with the knowledge and understanding of the group its environment obtained in the course of the audit.
Listing Rules Other Code Provisions We have nothing to report in respect of our responsibility to report when The statement given by the directors on page 66 that they consider the Annual Report taken as a whole to be fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for the members to assess the groups position and performance business model and strategy is materially inconsistent with our knowledge of the group obtained in the course of performing our audit.
The section of the Annual Report on page 61 describing the work of the Audit Committee does not appropriately address matters communicated by us to the Audit Committee.
The directors statement relating to the parent companys compliance with the Code does not properly disclose a departure from a relevant provision of the Code specified under the Listing Rules for review by the auditors.
Find out more at site 95 Report on the audit of the group financial statements continued Responsibilities for the financial statements and the audit Responsibilities of the directors for the financial statements As explained more fully in the Directors responsibilities statement set out on page 60 the directors are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements in accordance with the applicable framework and for being satisfied that they give a true and fair view.
The directors are also responsible for such internal control as they determine is necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error.
In preparing the financial statements the directors are responsible for assessing the groups ability to continue as a going concern disclosing as applicable matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless the directors either intend to liquidate the group or to cease operations or have no realistic alternative but to do so.
Auditors responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error and to issue an auditors report that includes our opinion.
Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with ISAs UK will always detect a material misstatement when it exists.
Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if individually or in the aggregate they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these financial statements.
A further description of our responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements is located on the FRCs website at www. rc. iteauditorsresponsibilities.
This description forms part of our auditors report.
Use of this report This report including the opinions has been prepared for and only for the parent companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006 and for no other purpose.
We do not in giving these opinions accept or assume responsibility for any other purpose or to any other person to whom this report is shown or into whose hands it may come save where expressly agreed by our prior consent in writing.
Other required reporting Companies Act 2006 exception reporting Under the Companies Act 2006 we are required to report to you if in our opinion we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit or certain disclosures of directors remuneration specified by law are not made.
We have no exceptions to report arising from this responsibility.
Appointment
Following the recommendation of the audit committee we were appointed by the members in May 2012 to audit the financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2012 and subsequent financial periods.
The period of total uninterrupted engagement is 6 years covering the years ended 31 December 2012 to 31 December 2017.
Other matter We have reported separately on the parent company financial statements of Tyman plc for the year ended 31 December 2017 and on the information in the Directors Remuneration Report that is described as having been audited.
Richard Porter Senior Statutory Auditor for and on behalf of PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP Chartered Accountants and Statutory Auditors
7 March 2018 Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 96 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements Consolidated income statement For the year ended 31 December 2017
Revenue 3 522700 457644 Cost of sales 3 331831 290385 Gross profit 190869 167259 Administrative expenses 146962 130069 Operating profit 4 43907 37190 Analysed as
Exceptional items 6 9976 10900 Amortisation of acquired intangible assets 10.3 22934 21713 Operating profit 4 43907 37190 Finance income 7 224 853 Finance costs 7 9597 8667 Net finance costs 7 9373 7814 Profit before taxation 3 34534 29376 Income tax charge 8 3334 8641 Profit for the year 31200 20735 Basic earnings per share 9 17.61p 11.98p Diluted earnings per share 9 17.49p 11.93p NonGAAP Alternative Performance Measures
Underlying profit before taxation 9 68284 62079 Basic underlying earnings per share 9 26.91p 25.41p Diluted underlying earnings per share 9 26.73p 25.31p Before amortisation of acquired intangible assets deferred taxation on amortisation of acquired intangible assets impairment of goodwill exceptional items unwinding of discount on provisions gains and losses on the fair value of derivative financial instruments amortisation of borrowing costs and the associated tax effect.
See definitions on page 146 for nonGAAP Alternative Performance Measures.
The notes on pages 100 to 136 are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
Find out more at site 97 Consolidated statement of comprehensive income For the year ended 31 December 2017
Profit for the year 31200 20735 Other comprehensive expenseincome Items that will not be reclassified to profit or loss Remeasurements of postemployment benefit obligations 20 1366 489 Total items that will not be reclassified to profit or loss 1366 489 Items that may be reclassified subsequently to profit or loss Exchange differences on translation of foreign operations 24069 48751 Effective portion of changes in value of cash flow hedges 16 16 206 Total items that may be reclassified to profit or loss 24053 48545 Other comprehensive expenseincome for the year net of tax 25419 48056 Total comprehensive income for the year 5781 68791 Items in the statement above are disclosed net of tax.
The income tax relating to each component of other comprehensive income is disclosed in note 8.
The notes on pages 100 to 136 are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
Consolidated statement of changes in equity For the year ended 31 December 2017
Share premium
Treasury reserve
Translation reserve
Total equity At 1 January 2016 8505 63256 8920 4321 85 31384 198572 306231 Total comprehensive expenseincome restated     206 48751 20246 68791 Profit for the year       20735 20735 Other comprehensive expenseincome restated     206 48751 489 48056 Transactions with owners 424 18151  983   17489 2069 Sharebased payments Dividends paid       15578 15578 Issue of shares 424 18151      18575 Issue of own shares from Employee Benefit Trust    2843   2843 Purchase of own shares for Employee Benefit Trust    1860    1860 At 31 December 2016 restated 8929 81407 8920 3338 291 80135 201329 377091 Total comprehensive incomeexpense     16 24069 29834 5781 Profit for the year       31200 31200 Other comprehensive incomeexpense     16 24069 1366 25419 Transactions with owners    562   18919 18357 Sharebased payments 1987 1987 Dividends paid       19497 19497 Issue of own shares from Employee Benefit Trust    1409   1409 Purchase of own shares for Employee Benefit Trust    847    847 At 31 December 2017 8929 81407 8920 2776 275 56066 212244 364515 1 Other reserves are nondistributable capital reserves which arose on previous acquisitions.
Sharebased payments include a tax credit of 0.5 million 2016 deferred tax debit 0.3 million and a release of the deferred sharebased payment bonus accrual of 0.4 million 2016 0.2 million.
3 On 21 June 2016 the Group issued 8478128 shares by way of a placing with institutional investors.
The notes on pages 100 to 136 are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 98 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements Consolidated balance sheet As at 31 December 2017
ASSETS
Noncurrent assets Goodwill 10.2 323799 344873 Intangible assets 10.3 103393 130684 Property plant and equipment 11 68424 71459 Other receivable 13 1112 Deferred tax assets 8 11851 15933 508579 562949 Noncurrent assets held for sale 25 1275 509854 562949 Current assets Inventories 12 75341 71091 Trade and other receivables 13 70062 67254 Cash and cash equivalents 14 42563 40917 Derivative financial instruments 16 94 506 188060 179768 TOTAL ASSETS 697914 742717
Current liabilities Trade and other payables 15 65916 71197 Derivative financial instruments 16 29 Borrowings 17 1108 Current tax liabilities 3964 4337 Provisions 19 11024 4544 82041 80078 Noncurrent liabilities Borrowings 17 204309 216470 Derivative financial instruments 16 275 291 Deferred tax liabilities 8 24949 42658 Retirement benefit obligations 20 12407 17108 Provisions 19 6435 8124 Other payables 15 2983 897 251358 285548 TOTAL LIABILITIES 333399 365626 NET ASSETS 364515 377091
Capital and reserves attributable to owners of the Company Share capital 21 8929 8929 Share premium 21 81407 81407 Other reserves 8920 8920 Treasury reserve 2776 3338 Hedging reserve 275 291 Translation reserve 56066 80135 Retained earnings 212244 201329 TOTAL EQUITY 364515 377091 The notes on pages 100 to 136 are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
The financial statements on pages 96 to 136 were approved by the Board on 7 March 2018 and signed on its behalf by Louis Eperjesi James Brotherton
Chief Executive Officer
Chief Financial Officer Tyman plc Company registration number  Find out more at site 99
Cash flow from operating activities Profit before taxation 3 34534 29376 Adjustments 26 50443 47994 Changes in working capital excluding the effects of acquisition and exchange differences on consolidation Inventories 8104 2368 Trade and other receivables 3884 16647 Trade and other payables 2668 8230 Provisions utilised 19 2184 2543 Pension contributions 20 1171 940 Income tax paid 15078 12651 Net cash generated from operations 51888 67285 Cash flow from investing activities Purchases of property plant and equipment 11 15353 12615 Purchases of intangible assets 10.3 1076 2818 Proceeds on disposal of property plant and equipment 3803 172 Acquisitions of subsidiary undertakings net of cash acquired 24 5136 96383 Proceeds on disposal of subsidiary undertakings  250 Purchase of other investment 1164 Interest received 416 330 Net cash used in investing activities 18510 111064 Cash flow from financing activities Interest paid 7973 7339 Dividends paid 23 19497 15578 Net proceeds on issue of shares 21  18575 Purchase of own shares for Employee Benefit Trust 847 1860 Refinancing costs paid  12 Proceeds from drawdown of revolving credit facility 48623 132630 Repayments of revolving credit facility 51531 72740 Net cash used ingenerated from financing activities 31225 53676 Net increase in cash and cash equivalents 2153 9897 Exchange lossesgains on cash and cash equivalents 507 1045 Cash and cash equivalents at the beginning of the year 14 40917 29975 Cash and cash equivalents at the end of the year 14 42563 40917 The notes on pages 100 to 136 are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
Consolidated cash flow statement For the year ended 31 December 2017 Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 100 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements Notes to the financial statements For the year ended 31 December 2017 General information Tyman plc and its subsidiaries is a leading international manufacturer and supplier of engineered components to the door and window industry.
At 31 December 2017 the Group had 23 manufacturing sites in nine countries along with a further 14 sourcing and distribution sites across North America Europe South America Asia and Australasia with its products being found in homes and buildings worldwide.
Tyman plc is a public limited company listed on the London Stock Exchange incorporated and domiciled in England and Wales.
The address of the Companys registered office is 29 Queen Annes Gate London SW1H 9BU.
Accounting policies and basis of preparation The accounting policies in this section relate to the financial statements in their entirety.
Accounting policies including critical accounting judgements and estimates used in the preparation of the financial statements that relate to a particular note are described in the specific note to which they relate.
The accounting policies have been consistently applied to all the years presented unless otherwise stated.
Certain comparatives have been restated for fair value adjustments made in respect of business combinations completed in the 2016 financial year.
See note 24.
2.1 Basis of preparation The consolidated financial statements of Tyman plc have been prepared in accordance with IFRS as adopted by the European Union and the Companies Act 2006 applicable to companies reporting under IFRSs.
The consolidated financial statements are principally prepared on the basis of historic cost.
Where other bases are applied these are identified in the relevant accounting policy.
2.2 Going concern The Directors are confident on the basis of current financial projections and the banking facilities available and after considering sensitivities that the Company and the Group have sufficient resources for its operational needs that will enable the Group to remain in compliance with its financial covenants in its bank facilities for at least the next 12 months.
Accordingly the Directors continue to adopt the going concern basis.
Further details on the Groups Viability statement is set out on page 42 of the Report and Accounts.
2.3 Accounting judgements and estimates The preparation of financial statements requires management to exercise judgement in applying the Groups accounting policies.
It also requires the use of certain critical accounting estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets liabilities income and expenses.
Actual results may differ from these estimates.
The estimates and underlying assumptions are reviewed on an ongoing basis.
Revisions to accounting estimates are recognised in the period in which the estimate is revised and in any affected future periods.
The areas representing the critical judgements made by management in the preparation of the Groups financial statements are listed below and in more detail in the related notes exceptional items note 6 the carrying amount of goodwill and intangible assets note 10 the carrying amount of inventories note 12 the carrying amount of trade receivables note 13 provisions note 19 and business combinations note 24.
The areas involving key assumptions concerning the future and other key sources of estimation uncertainty that are significant to the financial statements are listed below and in more detail in the related notes deferred tax assets note 8 and defined benefit pension and postretirement benefit schemes note 20.
Find out more at site 101 Accounting policies and basis of preparation continued 2.4 Changes in accounting policy and disclosures 2.4.1 New revised and amended EUendorsed accounting standards There were no new or amended accounting standards relevant to the Groups results that are effective for the first time in 2017 that have a material impact on the Groups consolidated financial statements.
2.4.2 New revised and amended accounting standards currently EUendorsed but not yet effective A number of new revised and amended accounting standards and interpretations are currently endorsed but are effective for annual periods beginning after 1 January 2018 and have not been applied in preparing these consolidated financial statements.
None of these are expected to have a material impact on the consolidated financial statements of the Group except the following Accounting standard Requirement IFRS 9 Financial instruments IFRS 9 addresses the classification measurement and recognition of financial assets and financial liabilities.
It replaces the guidance in IAS 39 that relates to the classification and measurement of financial instruments.
IFRS 9 establishes three primary measurement categories for financial assets amortised cost fair value through other comprehensive income and fair value through profit or loss.
The basis of classification depends on the entitys business model and the contractual cash flow characteristics of the financial asset.
Investments in equity instruments are required to be measured at fair value through profit or loss with the irrevocable option at inception to present changes in fair value in other comprehensive income nonrecycling.
The standard is effective for accounting periods beginning on or after 1 January 2018.
Tyman is in the process of assessing the impact of adopting IFRS 9 with the main areas of consideration being hedge accounting impairment of accounts receivable and refinancing transactions.
Based on the work undertaken to date the adoption of IFRS 9 is not expected to have a material impact on the Group financial statements.
IFRS 15 Revenue from contracts with customers IFRS 15 deals with revenue recognition and establishes principles for reporting useful information to users of financial statements about the nature amount timing and uncertainty of revenue and cash flows arising from an entitys contracts with customers.
Revenue is recognised when a customer obtains control of a good or service and thus has the ability to direct the use and obtain the benefits from the good or service.
The standard replaces IAS 18 Revenue and IAS 11 Construction contracts and related interpretations.
IFRS 15 will be effective for the first time for the year beginning on or after 1 January 2018.
Tyman is in the process of assessing the impact of adopting IFRS 15 and notes that Revenue of the Group is transactional in nature with limited judgement applied in recognising the amounts recorded.
In addition contracts with customers are predominantly based on standard terms and conditions.
Based on the work undertaken to date the adoption of IFRS 15 is not expected to have a material impact on the Group financial statements.
IFRS 16 Leases Under the previous guidance in IAS 17 a lessee had to make a distinction between a finance lease on balance sheet and an operating lease off balance sheet.
The new standard requires lessees to recognise almost all lease contracts on the balance sheet the only optional exemptions are for certain short term leases and leases of lowvalue assets.
An interest expense on the lease liability and depreciation on the rightofuse asset will also have to be recognised.
IFRS 16 will be effective for the first time for the year beginning on or after 1 January 2019.
The adoption of IFRS 16 is expected to be relatively significant to the Groups financial statements and the Groups assessment of the likely impact is ongoing.
There are no other IFRSs that are not yet effective that would be expected to have a material impact on the Group.
2.5 Consolidation Subsidiaries are entities that are directly or indirectly controlled by the Group.
Control exists when the Group is exposed to or has rights to variable returns from its involvement with the entity and has the ability to affect those returns through its power over the entity.
Subsidiaries are fully consolidated from the date on which control is transferred to the Group.
They are deconsolidated from the date that control ceases.
Intercompany transactions balances and unrealised gains on transactions between Group companies are eliminated.
Unrealised losses are also eliminated.
Where necessary amounts reported by subsidiaries have been adjusted to conform to the Groups accounting policies.
2.6 Foreign exchange 2.6.1 Functional and presentation currency Items included in the financial statements of each of the Groups entities are measured using the currency of the primary economic environment in which the entity operates the functional currency.
The consolidated financial statements are presented in Sterling which is the functional currency of the Company and the presentation currency of the Group.
2.6.2 Transactions and balances Foreign currency transactions are translated into the functional currency using the exchange rates prevailing at the dates of the transactions.
Foreign exchange gains and losses resulting from the settlement of such transactions and from the translation at yearend exchange rates of monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are recognised in the income statement except when deferred in other comprehensive income as qualifying cash flow hedges and qualifying net investment hedges.
Other than the ineffective element these are recognised directly in equity until the disposal of the net investment at which time they are recognised in the income statement.
2.6.3 Group companies On consolidation assets and liabilities of Group companies denominated in foreign currencies are translated into Sterling at the exchange rate prevailing at the balance sheet date.
Income and expense items are translated into Sterling at the average rates throughout the year.
Exchange differences arising on the translation of opening net assets of Group companies together with differences arising from the translation of the net results at average or actual rates to the exchange rate prevailing at the balance sheet date are taken to other comprehensive income.
On disposal of a foreign entity the cumulative translation differences recognised in other comprehensive income relating to that particular foreign operation are recognised in the income statement as part of the gain or loss on disposal.
Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 102 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements Notes to the financial statements continued For the year ended 31 December 2017 Segment reporting 3.1 Accounting policy 3.1.1 Revenue recognition Revenue is measured at the fair value of the consideration received or receivable.
Revenue represents the amounts receivable for goods supplied stated net of discounts returns rebates and valueadded taxes.
Revenue is recognised to the extent that it is probable that future economic benefits will flow to the Group and when the amount of revenue can be reliably measured.
Revenue from the sale of goods is recognised when the risks and rewards of ownership of the goods have been substantially transferred to the buyer.
This is usually on dispatch of goods or on receipt of goods by the customer.
3.1.2 Segment reporting Operating segments are reported in a manner consistent with the internal reporting provided to the Chief Operating Decision Maker.
The
Chief Operating Decision Maker defined as the Board of Directors of the Group is responsible for allocating resources and assessing performance of the operating segments.
3.2 Segment information The reporting segments reflect the manner in which performance is evaluated and resources are allocated.
The Group operates through three clearly defined divisions AmesburyTruth ERA and SchlegelGiesse.
AmesburyTruth comprises all the Groups operations within the US Canada and Mexico.
ERA comprises the Groups UK and Ireland hardware business together with Ventrolla and Tyman Sourcing Asia.
During the year ERA acquired Howe Green and assumed responsibility for the Bilco UK business.
These businesses are now included in the ERA reporting segment with the 2016 comparatives restated for the AmesburyTruth and ERA segments in respect of the reallocation of Bilco UK.
SchlegelGiesse comprises all the Groups other businesses outside of the US Canada and Mexico as well as the two UK seal manufacturing plants.
Centrally incurred functional costs that are directly attributable to a Division are allocated or recharged to the Division.
All other centrally incurred costs and eliminations are disclosed as a separate line item in the segment analysis.
Each reporting segment broadly represents the Groups geographical focus being the North American UK and international operations respectively.
In the opinion of the Board there is no material difference between the Groups operating segments and segments based on geographical splits.
Accordingly the Board does not consider geographically defined segments to be reportable.
For completeness the Group discloses certain financial data for business carried on in the UK that is not accounted for in ERA in notes 3.2.1 and 3.2.4.
The following tables present Group revenue and profit information for the Groups reporting segments which have been generated using the Group accounting policies with no differences of measurement applied other than those noted above.
3.2.1 Revenue restated AmesburyTruth 332746 290051 ERA 80252 73016 SchlegelGiesse 109702 94577 Total revenue 522700 457644 Included within the SchlegelGiesse segment is revenue attributable to the UK of 17.8 million 2016 restated 17.3 million.
No revenue from any single customer exceeds 10 per cent of total revenue from continuing operations.
3.2.2 Profit before taxation
AmesburyTruth 59714 54635 ERA 10229 11735
12778 9413 Operating segment result 82721 75783 Centrally incurred costs 5904 5980 Underlying operating profit 76817 69803 Exceptional items 6 9976 10900 Amortisation of acquired intangible assets 10.3 22934 21713 Operating profit 43907 37190 Net finance costs 7 9373 7814 Profit before taxation 34534 29376 Find out more at site 103 Segment reporting continued 3.2 Segment information continued 3.2.3 Operating profit disclosures Cost of sales Depreciation Amortisation restated restated AmesburyTruth 218324 191137 8267 7651 19380 17482 ERA 52058 45705 817 690 2247 3193 SchlegelGiesse 61449 53543 2515 2360 2622 1987 Total 331831 290385 11599 10701 24249 22662 3.2.4 Segment assets and liabilities Segment assets Segment liabilities Noncurrent assets restated restated restated AmesburyTruth 445643 505081 76932 119491 354464 410469 ERA 103642 97517 22428 24020 68464 60588 SchlegelGiesse 142888 136952 44500 42797 73800 75959 Unallocated 5741 3167 189539 179318 Total 697914 742717 333399 365626 496728 547016 Included within unallocated segment liabilities are borrowings of 186.3 million 2016 173.9 million provisions of 0.4 million 2016 1.2 million and other liabilities of 2.8 million 2016 4.2 million.
2 Noncurrent assets exclude amounts relating to deferred tax assets and noncurrent assets held for sale.
Noncurrent assets of the SchlegelGiesse segment include 13.0 million 2016 restated 12.2 million attributable to the UK.
3.2.5 Capital expenditure Property plant and equipment Intangible assets restated restated AmesburyTruth 9062 9090 321 2052 ERA 4261 1240 81 373 SchlegelGiesse 2030 2285 674 393 Total 15353 12615 1076 2818 3.2.6 Other disclosures Goodwill Intangible assets Retirement benefit obligations restated restated AmesburyTruth 240829 265078 70944 97656 9355 13984 ERA 52573 49414 7761 7152 SchlegelGiesse 30397 30381 24688 25876 3052 3124 Total 323799 344873 103393 130684 12407 17108 Operating profit Operating profit is stated after charging the following
Depreciation of property plant and equipment 11 11599 10701 Amortisation of acquired intangible assets 10.3 22934 21713 Amortisation of other intangible assets 10.3 1315 949 Operating lease rentals 8237 6843 Foreign exchange loss 1460 27 Employee costs 5 138058 128702 Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 104 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements Notes to the financial statements continued For the year ended 31 December 2017 Operating profit continued Analysis of auditors remuneration Audit of Parent Company and consolidated financial statements 164 200 Audit of subsidiaries 608 575 Total audit 772 775 Audit related assurance services 26 25 Other assurance services Total assurance services 798 800 Tax compliance services 4 43 Tax advisory services Total tax services 4 43 Corporate finance services Other nonaudit services  20 Total nonaudit services 30 88 Total fees 802 863 Employees and employee costs 5.1 Accounting policy 5.1.1 Wages and salaries Wages and salaries are recognised in the income statement as the employees services are rendered.
5.1.2 Termination benefits Termination benefits are payable when employment is terminated by the Group before the normal retirement date or whenever an employee accepts voluntary redundancy in exchange for these benefits.
The Group recognises termination benefits at the earlier of the following dates when the Group can no longer withdraw the offer of those benefits and when the entity recognises costs for a restructuring that is within the scope of IAS 37 and involves the payment of termination benefits.
In the case of an offer made to encourage voluntary redundancy the termination benefits are measured based on the number of employees expected to accept the offer.
Benefits falling due more than 12 months after the end of the reporting period are discounted to their present value.
5.1.3 Profit sharing and bonus plans The Group recognises a liability and an expense for bonuses and profit sharing based on the expected level of payment to employees in respect of the relevant financial year.
The Group recognises a provision where contractually obliged or where there is a past practice that has created a constructive obligation.
5.2 Number of employees The average monthly number of employees during the financial year and total number of employees as at 31 December 2017 was Average Totaltel 2016 Administration 42telOperations 3110 2883 3168 2931 Sales 37tel3904 3568 3964 3697 The analysis above includes Directors.
5.3 Employment costs Employment costs of employees including Directors remuneration during the year were as follows
Wages and salaries 122626 113990 Social security costs 10426 10344 Sharebased payments 22 1093 1047 Pension costs  defined contribution schemes 6723 1946 Pension costs  defined benefit schemes 20 279 1186 Postemployment medical costs 20 3089 189 138058 128702 Full details of Directors remuneration are set out in the Remuneration report on pages 71 to 88.
Find out more at site 105 Exceptional items 6.1 Accounting policy Where certain income or expense items recorded in the period are material by their size or incidence the Group presents such items as exceptional within a separate line on the income statement except for those exceptional items that relate to net finance costs and tax.
Separate presentation provides an improved understanding of the elements of financial performance during the year to facilitate comparison with prior periods and to assess the underlying trends in financial performance.
Exceptional items include oneoff redundancy and restructuring costs transaction costs and integration associated with merger and acquisition activity as well as credits relating to profit on disposal of business pension remeasurements and property provision releases.
6.1.1 Key sources of estimation uncertainty Exceptional items The Group aims to be both consistent and clear in its recognition and disclosure of exceptional gains and losses.
Management judgement is required in assessing the nature and amounts of transactions that satisfy the conditions for classification as an exceptional item.
6.2 Exceptional items Footprint restructuring  costs 16414 3487 Footprint restructuring  credits 5718 815 Footprint restructuring  net 10696 2672 MandA and integration  costs 2189 2994 MandA and integration  credits 2931 MandA and integration  net 742 2994 Writeoff of inventory fair value adjustments 22 5698 Profit on disposal of business  250 Property provision releases and disposals  214 9976 10900 Footprint restructuring As announced in March 2015 and reported in previous periods footprint restructuring principally relates to directly attributable costs incurred in the ongoing North American footprint project.
Gross costs attributable to footprint restructuring in the year amounted to 16.4 million of which 15.2 million 2016 2.6 million relates to the North American project.
Credits relating to footprint restructuring include 1.8 million relating to the respective disposal and exit from the Canton South Dakota and Sioux Falls South Dakota facilities and a reduction of 3.3 million in past service costs relating to the expected closure of the Rochester postretirement benefit medical plans on 31 December 2018 see note 20.3.
The North American footprint project is expected to conclude by 2020.
The remaining 0.6 million of exceptional costs relates footprint projects in ERA and SchlegelGiesse.
MandA and integration The MandA and integration credit of 0.7 million comprises gross costs of 2.2 million offset by credits of 2.9 million.
The gross costs relate to the net legal financial taxation and consultancy costs associated with the Howe Green acquisition intellectual property defence costs relating to preacquisition periods as well as the integration of businesses acquired in prior years.
The credits principally comprise 2.3 million associated with the pension liability recoverable from and indemnified by the previous owners of Bilco together with 0.6 million surplus provisions created on acquisition no longer required.
Writeoff of inventory fair value adjustments Writeoff of inventory fair value adjustments relate to the IFRS 3 requirement that finished goods held in inventory must be revalued to their market value on acquisition.
The equivalent revaluation for Howe Green inventory acquired in March 2017 was immaterial.
Profit on disposal of business Profit on disposal of business relates to the net deferred consideration for EWS received in 2016.
Property provision releases and disposals Property provision releases and disposals comprises surplus onerous lease provisions released during the 2016 year.
Finance income and costs
Finance income Interest income from short term bank deposits 224 525 Gain on revaluation of fair value hedge 16  328 Finance costs Interest payable on bank loans private placement notes and overdrafts 8204 7760 Amortisation of borrowing costs 400 412 Unwinding of discount on provisions 19  6 Pension interest cost 20 553 489 Loss on revaluation of fair value hedge 16 440 9597 8667 Net finance costs 9373 7814 Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 106 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements Notes to the financial statements continued For the year ended 31 December 2017
8.1 Accounting policy Income tax charge comprises current and deferred tax.
Tax is recognised in the income statement except to the extent that it relates to items recognised in other comprehensive income or directly in equity in which case it is recognised in the relevant statement.
The Groups liability for current tax is calculated using tax rates that have been enacted or substantively enacted at the balance sheet date in the countries where the Company and its subsidiaries operate and generate taxable income.
Deferred income tax is recognised on temporary differences arising between the tax bases of assets and liabilities and their carrying amounts in the consolidated financial statements.
No deferred tax liabilities are recognised if it arises from the initial recognition of goodwill or an asset or liability in a transaction other than a business combination that at the time of the transaction affects neither accounting nor taxable profit or loss.
Deferred income tax is determined using tax rates that have been enacted or substantively enacted at the balance sheet date and are expected to apply when the related deferred income tax asset is realised or when the deferred income tax liability is settled.
Deferred income tax liabilities are provided on taxable temporary differences arising on investments in subsidiaries except for deferred income tax liabilities where the timing of the reversal of the temporary difference is controlled by the Group and it is probable that the temporary difference will not reverse in the foreseeable future.
Deferred income tax assets are recognised only to the extent that it is probable that future taxable profit will be available against which the temporary differences can be utilised.
Deferred income tax assets are recognised on deductible temporary differences arising from investments in subsidiaries only to the extent that it is probable the temporary difference will reverse in the future and there is sufficient taxable profit against which the temporary difference can be utilised.
Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are offset when there is a legally enforceable right to offset current tax assets against current tax liabilities and where the deferred income tax assets and liabilities relate to income taxes levied by the same taxation authority.
Offset may be applied either within same tax entity or different taxable entities where there is an intention to settle tax balances on a net basis.
8.1.1 Key source of estimation uncertainty deferred tax assets Estimation is required of temporary differences between the carrying amount of assets and liabilities and their tax base.
Deferred tax liabilities are recognised for all taxable temporary differences but where deductible temporary differences exist managements judgement is required as to whether a deferred tax asset should be recognised based on the availability of future taxable profits.
The deferred tax assets recoverable may differ from the amounts recognised if actual taxable profits differ from managements estimates.
8.2 Taxation  income statement and other comprehensive income 8.2.1 Tax on profit on ordinary activities
Current taxation Current tax on profit for the year 18522 12203 Prior year adjustments 3503 812 Total current taxation 15019 11391 Deferred taxation Origination and reversal of temporary differences 6529 3147 US Federal tax rate change adjustment 6907 Prior year adjustments 1751 397 Total deferred taxation 8.3 11685 2750 Income tax charge in the income statement 3334 8641 Total creditcharge relating to components of other comprehensive income Current tax credit on translation 1478 Current tax credit on sharebased payments 185 Deferred tax chargecredit on actuarial gains and losses 8.3 1181 267 Deferred tax creditcharge on sharebased payments 8.3 267 316 Deferred tax credit on translation 8.3 1939 Income tax creditcharge in the statement of other comprehensive income 2688 49 Total current taxation 13356 11391 Total deferred taxation 12710 2701 Total taxation 646 8690 Find out more at site 107 Taxation continued 8.2 Taxation  income statement and other comprehensive income continued 8.2.1 Tax on profit on ordinary activities continued The standard rate of corporation tax in the UK changed from 20.0 per cent to 19.0 per cent with effect from 1 April 2017.
Accordingly the Groups UK profits for this accounting period are taxed at an effective rate of 19.25 per cent 2016 20.0 per cent.
A further reduction to the UK corporation tax rate to 17.0 per cent was introduced in the Finance Act 2016 with effect from 1 April 2020.
The deferred tax balances have been remeasured to reflect the future change of rate.
Under the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act 2017 the US Federal tax rate reduced from 35.0 per cent to 21.0 per cent with effect from 1 January 2018.
The Act was substantively enacted on 22 December 2017 and so the deferred tax balances that will be settled with the United States tax authorities have been remeasured to reflect the reduced rate.
The impact of the deferred tax change has been disclosed separately as a component of the income tax charge for the year.
Taxation for other jurisdictions is calculated at rates prevailing in those respective jurisdictions.
8.2.2 Reconciliation of the total tax charge The tax assessed for the year differs from the standard rate of tax in the UK of 19.25 per cent 2016 20.0 per cent.
The differences are explained below Profit before taxation 34534 29376 Rate of corporation tax in the UK of 19.25% 2016 20.00% 6648 5875 Effects of Expenses not deductible for tax purposes 1034 245 Overseas tax rate differences 4311 2936 US Federal tax rate change adjustment 6907 Prior year adjustments 1752 415 Income tax charge in the income statement 3334 8641 8.3 Taxation  balance sheet The analysis of deferred tax assets and deferred tax liabilities is as follows Deferred tax assets 11851 15933 Deferred tax liabilities 24949 42658 Net deferred tax liabilities 13098 26725 The net movement in deferred tax is as follows
At 1 January 26725 14451 Income statement credit 8.2 4778 2750 US Federal tax rate change adjustment 8.2 6907 Acquisitions of subsidiaries 24 483 7951 Tax creditcharge relating to components of other comprehensive income 8.2 1025 49 Exchange difference 1400 7024 At 31 December 13098 26725 Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 108 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements Notes to the financial statements continued For the year ended 31 December 2017 Taxation continued 8.3 Taxation  balance sheet continued The movement in deferred tax assets and liabilities during the year is as follows Deferred tax assets Accelerated tax depreciation
Purchased goodwill
Total
At 1 January 2016 293 3883 4611 4157 12944 Income statement chargecredit 66 68 548 6564 7110 Acquisitions of subsidiaries 189 1156 628 6169 8142 Tax creditcharge relating to components of other comprehensive income  267  316 49 Exchange difference 129 1022 615 498 2006 At 31 December 2016 287 6396 5306 3944 15933 Income statement creditcharge 142 2334 795 2324 663 US Federal tax rate change adjustment 12 110 550 1248 1920 Acquisitions of subsidiaries 16   41 25 Tax chargecredit relating to components of other comprehensive income  1181  267 914 Exchange difference 52 376 155 131 610 At 31 December 2017 453 2395 3806 5197 11851 Deferred tax liabilities Accelerated tax depreciation Intangible assets on acquisition
Total
At 1 January 2016 5159 21173 1063 27395 Income statement creditcharge 1406 9141 687 9860 Acquisitions of subsidiaries 576 14570 947 16093 Exchange difference 946 4379 3705 9030 At 31 December 2016 5275 30981 6402 42658 Income statement chargecredit 4126 8300 1267 5441 US Federal tax rate change adjustment 3357 5808 338 8827 Acquisitions of subsidiaries  508  508 Tax credit relating to components of other comprehensive income   1939 1939 Exchange difference 490 1285 235 2010 At 31 December 2017 5554 16096 3299 24949 The deferred tax asset arises from temporary differences in the US the UK Greece Spain Argentina China and Australia.
Given both recent and forecast trading the Directors are of the opinion that the level of profits in the foreseeable future is more likely than not to be sufficient to recover these assets.
Deferred tax liabilities of 19.0 million 2016 33.1 million are expected to fall due after more than one year and deferred tax assets of 6.8 million 2016 11.7 million are expected to be recovered after more than one year.
8.3.1 Factors that may affect future tax charges The estimated tax losses within the Group are as follows Capital losses 3992 3992 Trading losses 21884 19782 25876 23774 In accordance with the Groups accounting policy as the future use of these losses is uncertain none of these losses have been recognised as a deferred tax asset.
Find out more at site 109 Taxation continued 8.3 Taxation  balance sheet continued 8.3.1 Factors that may affect future tax charges continued The tax effect of the unrecognised tax losses within the Group are as follows Capital losses 719 734 Trading losses 5611 4633 6330 5367 No deferred tax liability is recognised on temporary differences of 98.1 million 2016 68.0 million relating to the unremitted earnings of overseas subsidiaries.
As a result of UK legislation which largely exempts from UK tax the overseas dividends received the temporary differences arising on unremitted profits are unlikely to lead to additional UK corporate taxes.
Furthermore although the remittance to the UK of those earnings could still result in a tax liability arising as a result of withholding taxes levied by some overseas tax jurisdictions in which those subsidiaries operate such jurisdictions provide currently for zero dividend withholding tax in their tax agreements with the UK.
Earnings per share 9.1 NonGAAP Alternative Performance Measures accounting policy The Directors believe that the underlying profit and earnings per share measures provide additional useful information to shareholders on the underlying performance of the business.
These measures are consistent with how business performance is measured internally.
The underlying profit before tax measure is not recognised under IFRS and may not be comparable with underlying profit measures used by other companies see Alternative Performance Measures on page 146.
9.2 Earnings per share Profit for the year 31200 20735 Basic earnings per share 17.61p 11.98p Diluted earnings per share 17.49p 11.93p Basic earnings amounts are calculated by dividing net profit for the year attributable to ordinary equity holders by the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding during the year.
Diluted earnings per share amounts are calculated by dividing the net profit attributable to ordinary equity holders by the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding during the year plus the weighted average number of ordinary shares that would be issued on the conversion of all the diluted potential ordinary shares into ordinary shares.
9.2.1 Weighted average number of shares The weighted average number of shares was Weighted average number of shares including treasury shares 178583 174598 Treasury and Employee Benefit Trust shares 1361 1585 Weighted average number of shares  basic 177222 173013 Effect of dilutive potential ordinary shares  LTIP awards and options 1203 741 Weighted average number of shares  deferred 178425 173754 Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 110 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements Notes to the financial statements continued For the year ended 31 December 2017 Earnings per share continued 9.2 Earnings per share continued 9.2.2 NonGAAP Alternative Performance Measure underlying earnings per share The Group presents an underlying earnings per share measure which excludes the impact of exceptional items certain noncash finance costs amortisation of acquired intangible assets and certain nonrecurring items.
Underlying earnings per share has been calculated using the Underlying profit before taxation and using the same weighted average number of shares in issue as the earnings per share calculation.
See Alternative Performance Measures on page 146.
Underlying profit after taxation is derived as follows
Profit before taxation 34534 29376 Exceptional items 6 9976 10900 GainLoss on revaluation of fair value hedge 16 440 328 Amortisation of borrowing costs 7 400 412 Unwinding of discount on provisions 19  6 Amortisation of acquired intangible assets 10.3 22934 21713 Underlying profit before taxation 68284 62079 Income tax charge 8 3334 8641 Add back US Federal rate change adjustment 8 6907 Add back Underlying tax effect 10345 9469 Underlying profit after taxation 47698 43969 Tax effect of exceptional items amortisation of borrowings costs amortisation of acquired intangible assets gain or loss on revaluation of fair value hedge and unwinding of discount on provisions.
Underlying earnings per share is summarised as follows 2017 2016 Basic underlying earnings per share 26.91p 25.41p Diluted underlying earnings per share 26.73p 25.31p Goodwill and intangible assets 10.1 Accounting policy 10.1.1 Goodwill Goodwill arises on the acquisition of subsidiaries and represents the excess of the consideration transferred over the Groups interest in the net fair value of the identifiable assets liabilities and contingent liabilities of the acquiree.
For the purpose of impairment testing goodwill acquired in a business combination is allocated to each of the CGUs that are expected to benefit from the synergies of the combination.
Each unit or group of units to which the goodwill is allocated represents the lowest level within the entity at which the goodwill is monitored for internal management purposes.
Goodwill is monitored at the operating segment level.
Goodwill impairment reviews are undertaken annually or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate a potential impairment.
The carrying amount of goodwill is compared to the recoverable amount which is the higher of value in use and the fair value less costs of disposal.
Any impairment is recognised immediately as an expense and is not subsequently reversed.
Find out more at site 111 Goodwill and intangible assets continued 10.1 Accounting policy continued 10.1.2 Intangible assets Intangible assets are stated at cost less accumulated amortisation and impairment.
On acquisition of businesses by the Group the Group recognises any separately identifiable intangible assets separately from goodwill initially measuring the intangible assets at fair value.
Purchased intangible assets acquired through a business combination including purchased brands customer relationships trademarks and licences are initially measured at fair value and amortised on a straightline basis over their estimated useful economic lives as follows Acquired brands  5 to 20 years Customer relationships  9 to 15 years Internally developed computer software  5 to 10 years Purchased computer software  3 to 4 years Development costs that are directly attributable to the design and testing of identifiable and unique software products controlled by the Group are recognised as intangible assets when the following criteria are met it is technically feasible to complete the software product so that it will be available for use management intends to complete the software product and use it or sell it there is an ability to use or sell the software product it can be demonstrated how the software product will generate probable future economic benefits adequate technical financial and other resources to complete the development and to use or sell the software product are available and the expenditure attributable to the software product during its development can be reliably measured.
Directly attributable costs capitalised as part of the software product include the software development employee costs and an appropriate portion of relevant overheads.
Other development expenditures that do not meet these criteria are recognised as an expense as incurred.
Development costs previously recognised as an expense are not recognised as an asset in a subsequent period.
Computer software development costs recognised as assets are amortised when the intangible assets are in the location and condition necessary for it to be capable of operating in the manner intended by management.
The estimated useful lives of acquired intangible assets are reviewed whenever events or circumstances indicate that there has been a change in the expected pattern of consumption of the future economic benefits embodied in the asset.
Any amendments to the estimated useful lives of intangible assets are recorded as a change in estimate in the period the change occurred.
10.1.3 Impairment of goodwill and intangible assets Intangible assets including goodwill that have an indefinite useful life or intangible assets not ready to use are not subject to amortisation and are tested annually for impairment.
Assets that are subject to amortisation are reviewed for impairment whenever events or circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable.
An impairment loss is recognised for the amount by which the assets carrying amount exceeds its recoverable amount.
The recoverable amount is the higher of the assets fair value less costs of disposal and value in use.
For the purposes of assessing impairment assets are grouped at the lowest levels for which there are largely independent cash inflows.
Prior impairments of nonfinancial assets other than goodwill are reviewed for possible reversal at each reporting date.
Goodwill previously impaired cannot be reversed at a later date.
10.1.4 Critical accounting estimates and judgements carrying amount of goodwill and intangibles As at 31 December 2017 the Group had goodwill of 323.8 million with intangible assets amounting in total to 103.4 million.
An impairment review using a value in use calculation has been performed for each CGU.
There is significant judgement involved in determining the appropriate assumptions to use in the calculations including the forecasted cash flows of each CGU and appropriate discount rates relative to the Companys cost of capital.
These assumptions have been subjected to sensitivity analyses.
Details of estimates used and sensitivities in the impairment reviews are set out in this note.
Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 112 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements Notes to the financial statements continued For the year ended 31 December 2017 Goodwill and intangible assets continued 10.2 Carrying amount of goodwill Note 000 Net carrying value At 1 January 2016 253718 Acquisitions of subsidiaries restated 24 41196 Exchange difference restated 49959 At 31 December 2016 restated 344873 Acquisitions of subsidiaries 24 3158 Exchange difference 24232 At 31 December 2017 323799 Goodwill is monitored principally on an operating segment basis and the net book value of goodwill is allocated by CGU as follows restated AmesburyTruth 240829 265078 ERA 52573 49414 SchlegelGiesse 30397 30381 323799 344873 10.2.1 Impairment tests for goodwill
The Groups CGUs have been defined as each of the Groups three operating Divisions.
In the opinion of the Directors the Divisions represent the smallest groups of assets that independently generate cash flows for the Group consistent with the approach adopted in 2016.
The recoverable amounts of CGUs are determined from VIU calculations.
VIU is determined by discounting the future pretax cash flows generated from the continuing use of the CGU using a pretax discount rate.
Cash flow projections which have been reviewed and approved by the Board are derived from fiveyear forecasts produced by each Division comprised of a detailed bottom up budget for 2018 and a forecast based on the Divisions strategic plan for 2019 to 2022.
The fiveyear period cash flows were extrapolated using a long term growth rate of 1.5 per cent in order to calculate the terminal recoverable amount.
Discount rates are estimated using pretax rates that reflect current market assessments of the time value of money and the risk profiles of the CGUs.
The key assumptions used in the VIU calculations in each of the Groups CGUs at 31 December are as follows Average pretax discount rate Average EBITDA years one to fivetel 2016 AmesburyTruth 11.8% 12.2% 23.4% 22.0% ERA 8.6% 8.9% 18.1% 13.2% SchlegelGiesse 11.6% 12.5% 17.1% 13.4% Impairment review results 2017 A review of the carrying amount of goodwill and intangible assets across the Group has been carried out at year end in light of current trading conditions and future prospects.
The annual impairment review did not result in any impairment losses being recognised in 2017.
The ERA CGU has significant headroom such that a permanent diminution of the VIU to below the carrying value of goodwill is considered by the Board to be highly unlikely.
AmesburyTruth is the CGU with the lowest relative VIU headroom.
If the average EBITDA margin for AmesburyTruth for the five years from 2018 to 2022 was to decrease by 830 basis points from 23.4 per cent to 15.1 per cent and continue at that reduced level in perpetuity the VIU headroom for AmesburyTruth would be zero.
Given that the EBITDA margin achieved in 2017 was 20.7 per cent and considering the margin uplift potential of the footprint rationalisation project once completed this scenario is unlikely to occur.
SchlegelGiesse is the CGU with the smallest absolute VIU headroom.
If the average EBITDA margin for SchlegelGiesse for the five years from 2018 to 2022 was to decrease by 240 basis points from 17.1 per cent to 8.9 per cent and continue at that reduced level in perpetuity the VIU headroom of SchlegelGiesse would be zero.
Given that the EBITDA margin in 2017 was 14.0 per cent and the margin uplift potential for the enlarged Division once realised this scenario is unlikely to occur.
Impairment review results 2016 The annual impairment review did not result in any impairment losses being recognised in 2016.
Find out more at site 113 Goodwill and intangible assets continued 10.3 Carrying amount of intangible assets
Computer software
Customer relationships
Cost
At 1 January 2016 8019 46125 171201 225345 Additions 2661 157  2818 Acquisitions of subsidiaries restated 24 272 20214 25011 45497 Exchange difference restated 2139 10103 32797 45039 At 31 December 2016 restated 13091 76599 229009 318699 Additions 984 92  1076 Acquisitions of subsidiaries 24  462 2361 2823 Transfers to property plant and equipment 11 184   184 Exchange difference 899 3682 14710 19291 At 31 December 2017 12992 73471 216660 303123 Accumulated amortisation At 1 January 2016 1195 29301 108077 138573 Amortisation charge for the year 4 949 4120 17593 22662 Exchange difference 772 6052 19956 26780 At 31 December 2016 2916 39473 145626 188015 Amortisation charge for the year 4 1315 4366 18568 24249 Exchange difference 155 2263 10116 12534 At 31 December 2017 4076 41576 154078 199730 Net carrying value At 1 January 2016 6824 16824 63124 86772 At 31 December 2016 restated 10175 37126 83383 130684 At 31 December 2017 8916 31895 62582 103393 The amortisation charge for the year has been included in administrative expenses in the income statement and comprises 22.9 million 2016 21.7 million relating to amortisation of acquired intangible assets and 1.3 million 2016 1.0 million relating to amortisation of other intangible assets.
No impairments of intangible assets were recognised in 2017 and 2016.
Property plant and equipment 11.1 Accounting policy Property plant and equipment are stated at cost less accumulated depreciation and impairment.
Cost includes expenditure that is directly attributable to the acquisition of the assets.
Subsequent costs are included in the assets carrying amount or recognised as a separate asset as appropriate only when it is probable that future economic benefits associated with the specific asset will flow to the Group and the cost of the subsequent item can be measured reliably.
The carrying amount of the replaced part is derecognised from the date of replacement.
All other repairs and maintenance are charged to the income statement during the financial period in which they are incurred.
Freehold land is not depreciated.
Depreciation is provided on all other property plant and equipment at rates calculated to write off the cost less estimated residual value of each asset on a straightline basis over its expected useful life at the following annual rates Freehold buildings  2.0 to 5.0 per cent Plant and machinery  7.5 to 33.0 per cent The carrying amounts of property plant and equipment are reviewed for impairment periodically if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable.
The assets residual values useful lives and methods of depreciation are reviewed and adjusted if appropriate at the end of each reporting period.
Gains and losses on disposals are determined by comparing the proceeds with the carrying amount and are recognised in the income statement.
Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 114 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements Notes to the financial statements continued For the year ended 31 December 2017 Property plant and equipment continued 11.2 Carrying amount of property plant and equipment
Freehold land and buildings Plant and machinery
Cost
At 1 January 2016 18921 56868 75789 Additions 299 12316 12615 Acquisitions of subsidiaries restated 24 12512 6223 18735 Disposals  4587 4587 Reclassification between categories 156 156 Exchange difference restated 6328 27743 34071 At 31 December 2016 restated 37904 98719 136623 Additions 442 14911 15353 Acquisitions of subsidiaries 24  170 170 Dilapidation provision 19  675 675 Disposals 3190 12140 15330 Reclassified as held for sale 2045 996 3041 Transfers from intangible assets 10.3  184 184 Exchange difference 105 11239 11344 At 31 December 2017 33006 90284 123290 Accumulated amortisation At 1 January 2016 4663 28281 32944 Depreciation charge for the year 4 1058 9643 10701 Disposals  4352 4352 Impairment 712 395 1107 Exchange difference 2937 21827 24764 At 31 December 2016 9370 55794 65164 Depreciation charge for the year 4 966 10633 11599 Disposals 1512 10893 12405 Impairment 23 91 114 Reclassified as held for sale 737 969 1706 Exchange difference 459 8359 7900 At 31 December 2017 8569 46297 54866 Net carrying value At 1 January 2016 14258 28587 42845 At 31 December 2016 restated 28534 42925 71459 At 31 December 2017 24437 43987 68424 Depreciation of 11.6 million 2016 10.7 million is included in administrative expenses in the income statement.
The 2017 impairment charge of 0.1 million is included in administrative expenses in the income statement.
The 2016 impairment charge related to the writeoff of items of property plant and equipment associated with the SchlegelGiesse footprint restructuring project and was included in exceptional items in the income statement see note 6.
Inventories
12.1 Accounting policy Inventories are valued at the lower of cost and net realisable value.
Cost is determined in accordance with the firstin firstout method.
Cost includes the cost of materials determined on a purchase cost basis direct labour and an appropriate proportion of manufacturing overheads based on normal levels of activity.
It excludes borrowing costs.
Net realisable value is the estimated selling price in the ordinary course of business less the estimated costs of completion and the estimated costs necessary to make the sale.
Where necessary a provision is made to reduce cost to no more than net realisable value having regard to the nature and condition of inventory as well as its anticipated saleability.
12.1.1 Critical accounting estimates and judgements carrying amount of inventories The carrying amounts of inventories are stated with due allowance for excess obsolete or slowmoving items.
Group management exercises judgement in assessing net realisable value.
Provisions for slowmoving and obsolete inventory are based on managements assessment of the nature and condition of the inventory including assumptions around future demand market conditions and new product development initiatives.
Find out more at site 115 Inventories continued 12.2 Carrying amount of inventories restated Raw materials and consumables 22706 20245 Work in progress 10275 9587 Finished goods 42360 41259 75341 71091 The cost of materials charged to the income statement during the year was 222.0 million 2016 187.5 million.
Inventories are stated net of an allowance for excess obsolete or slowmoving items of 12.9 million 2016 restated 13.5 million.
An impairment charge of 1.7 million 2016 2.4 million was recognised in respect of inventories during the year.
There were no borrowings secured on the inventories of the Group 2016 Nil.
Trade and other receivables 13.1 Accounting policy Trade receivables are amounts due from customers for goods sold in the ordinary course of business.
If collection is expected in one year or less they are classified as current assets otherwise they are presented as noncurrent assets.
Trade receivables are recognised initially at fair value plus transaction costs and subsequently measured at amortised cost using the effective interest rate method less appropriate allowances for estimated irrecoverable amounts provision for impairment.
13.1.1 Critical accounting estimates and judgements carrying amount of trade receivables Provision against trade receivables is made when there is objective evidence that the Group will not be able to collect all amounts due to it in accordance with the original terms of those receivables.
The amount of the write down is determined as the difference between the carrying amount and present value of estimated future cash flows.
Group management exercises judgement in assessing the amount of any write downs required which is based on current assessments of the creditworthiness of current customers the ageing profile of receivables and historical experience.
13.2 Carrying amounts of trade and other receivables restated Trade receivables 59995 59326 Less Provision for impairment of trade receivables 2918 3999 Trade receivables  net 57077 55327 Other receivables  net 10006 8059 Accrued income 48 57 Prepayments 4043 3811 71174 67254 Analysed as Current assets 70062 67254 Noncurrent assets 1112 71174 67254 All trade and other receivables are current.
The net carrying amounts of trade and other receivables are considered to be a reasonable approximation of their fair values.
Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 116 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements Notes to the financial statements continued For the year ended 31 December 2017 Trade and other receivables continued 13.2 Carrying amounts of trade and other receivables continued The ageing of net trade receivables is as follows restated Within normal payment terms Fully performing 48654 49264 Not fully performing  518 Past due receivables not impaired Within three months 7645 5184 Three to twelve months 745 240 Over twelve months 33 121 Trade receivables  net 57077 55327 All of the Groups trade and other receivables have been reviewed for impairment at 31 December 2017.
Net trade receivables of 8.4 million 2016 5.5 million were past due but not impaired.
These relate to customers for whom there is no recent history of default.
Trade receivables of 2.9 million 2016 4.0 million were determined to be specifically impaired and provided for.
The individually impaired receivables mainly relate to customers affected by difficult economic circumstances.
Movement in the provision for impairment of trade receivables is as follows
At 1 January 3999 1977 Provision for receivables impairment 169 796 Receivables written off during the year  75 Unused amounts reversed 1080 401 Acquisitions of subsidiaries 24 69 1296 Exchange difference 101 406 At 31 December 2918 3999 Provisions for impairment of trade receivables are charged to administrative expenses in the income statement.
Ageing of impaired trade receivables is as follows Within normal payment terms Not fully performing 146 71 Past due receivables not impaired Within three months 1280 1431 Three to twelve months 484 555 Over twelve months 1008 1942 Provision for impairment of trade receivables 2918 3999 The carrying amounts of trade and other receivables are denominated in the following currencies restated Sterling 14322 13359 US Dollars 30910 29612 Euros 18146 16588 Other currencies 7796 7695 71174 67254 Find out more at site 117 Cash and cash equivalents 14.1 Accounting policy In the consolidated statement of cash flows and balance sheet cash and cash equivalents includes cash in hand deposits held at call with banks other short term highly liquid investments with original maturities of three months or less and bank overdrafts.
14.2 Carrying amounts of cash and cash equivalents Cash at bank and in hand 47088 52258 Short term deposits 255 466 Bank overdrafts 4780 11807 42563 40917 The carrying amounts of cash and cash equivalents are denominated in the following currencies Sterling 8614 10352 US Dollars 12519 17453 Euros 13298 5314 Other currencies 8132 7798 42563 40917 Trade and other payables 15.1 Accounting policy Trade payables are obligations to pay for goods or services that have been acquired in the ordinary course of business from suppliers.
Accounts payable are classified as current liabilities if payment is due within one year or less.
If not they are presented as noncurrent liabilities.
Trade payables are recognised initially at fair value and subsequently measured at amortised cost using the effective interest method.
15.2 Carrying amounts of trade and other payables restated Trade payables 37761 37837 Other taxes and social security costs 5000 3648 Accruals 23421 30073 Deferred income 2717 536 68899 72094 Analysed as Current liabilities 65916 71197 Noncurrent liabilities 2983 897 68899 72094 The carrying amounts of trade and other payables are considered to be a reasonable approximation of their fair values.
The carrying amounts of trade and other payables are denominated in the following currencies restated Sterling 16859 14461 US Dollars 28613 34532 Euros 16305 15925 Other currencies 7122 7176 68899 72094 Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 118 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements Notes to the financial statements continued For the year ended 31 December 2017 Derivative financial instruments 16.1 Accounting policy Derivative financial instruments are initially recognised at fair value on the date on which a derivative contract is entered into and are subsequently remeasured at fair value.
Derivatives are carried as assets when fair value is positive and as liabilities when fair value is negative.
The Group designates certain derivatives as either hedges of the fair value of recognised assets or liabilities or a firm commitment fair value hedge hedges of a particular risk associated with a recognised asset or liability or a highly probable forecast transaction cash flow hedge or hedges of a net investment in a foreign operation net investment hedge.
For those instruments designated as hedges the Group documents at the inception of the transaction the relationship between hedging instruments and hedged items as well as its risk management objectives and strategy for undertaking various hedging transactions.
The Group also documents its assessment both at hedge inception and on an ongoing basis of whether the derivatives that are used in hedging transactions are highly effective in offsetting changes in fair values or cash flows of hedged items.
The full fair value of a hedging derivative is classified as a noncurrent asset or liability when the remaining hedged item is more than twelve months and as a current asset or liability when the remaining maturity of the hedged item is less than twelve months.
For derivatives that do not qualify for hedge accounting any gains or losses arising from changes in fair value are recognised immediately in the income statement.
16.1.1 Fair value hedges Changes in the fair value of derivatives designated and qualifying as fair value hedges are recorded in the income statement together with any changes in fair value of the hedged asset or liability that are attributable to the hedged risk.
16.1.2 Cash flow hedges The effective portion of changes in the fair value of the derivatives that are designated and qualify as cash flow hedges is recognised in other comprehensive income.
The gain or loss relating to the ineffective portion is recognised immediately in the income statement.
Amounts accumulated in equity are reclassified to the income statement in the period in which the hedged item affects profit or loss.
When a hedging instrument expires or is sold or when a hedge no longer meets the criteria for hedge accounting any cumulative gain or loss existing in equity at that time remains in equity and is recognised when the forecast transaction is ultimately recognised in the income statement.
When a forecast transaction is no longer expected to occur the cumulative gain or loss that was reported in equity is immediately transferred to the income statement.
16.1.3 Net investment hedge Hedges of net investments in foreign operations are accounted for similarly to cash flow hedges.
Any gain or loss on the hedging instrument relating to the effective portion of the hedge is recognised in other comprehensive income.
The gain or loss relating to the ineffective portion is recognised in the income statement.
Gains and losses accumulated in equity are included in the income statement when the foreign operation is partially disposed of or sold.
16.2 Carrying amount of derivative financial instruments 2017 2016
Liabilities
Assets
Liabilities
Forward exchange contracts  fair value hedges 94 29 506 Interest rate swaps  cash flow hedges  275  291 Less Noncurrent portion Interest rate swaps  cash flow hedges  275  291 Current portion 94 29 506 The carrying amounts of derivative financial instruments are denominated in the following currencies 2017 2016
Liabilities
Assets
Liabilities
Sterling  134  208 US Dollars  170 312 83 Euros 6 Other currencies 88  194 94 304 506 291 Find out more at site 119 Derivative financial instruments continued 16.2 Carrying amount of derivative financial instruments continued 16.2.1 Fair value hedges The notional principal amounts of the outstanding forward foreign exchange contracts at 31 December 2017 were 10.9 million 2016 12.5 million.
During the year a loss of 0.4 million 2016 gain of 0.3 million was recognised in the income statement for the changes in value of the fair value hedges.
The hedged highly probable forecast transactions denominated in foreign currency are expected to occur at various dates during the next 12 months.
16.2.2 Cash flow hedges The notional principal amounts of the outstanding interest rate swap at 31 December 2017 were 18.2 million 2016 19.4 million.
During the year a loss of Nil 2016 loss of 0.2 million was recognised in the statement of comprehensive income and Nil 2016 Nil in the income statement for the ineffective portion of changes in the value of cash flow hedges.
Details of the interest rate swaps are as follows
Fixed interest rate paid
Fair value At 31 December 2017 Swaps  Sterling 6000 1.7490% 0.4906% 134 Swaps  US Dollar 16500 1.7225% 1.3906% 190 At 31 December 2016 Swaps  Sterling 6000 1.7490% 0.5408% 208 Swaps  US Dollar 16500 1.7225% 1.3227% 103 The maximum exposure to credit risk at the reporting date is the fair value of the derivative assets on the balance sheet.
Refer to note 18.4 for the fair value measurement methodology.
16.2.3 Net investment hedges The Group uses foreign currencydenominated debt to hedge the value of its US Dollar and Eurodenominated net assets which may change due to respective movements in US Dollar and Euro exchange rates.
At 31 December 2017 the value of the net investment hedge was 168.2 million 2016 207.9 million.
This hedge is considered highly effective and no ineffective portion has been recognised in the income statement.
Interestbearing loans and borrowings 17.1 Accounting policy Interestbearing loans and borrowings are recognised initially at fair value net of transaction costs incurred.
Interestbearing loans and borrowings are subsequently carried at amortised cost using the effective interest method.
17.2 Carrying amounts of interestbearing loans and borrowings Unsecured borrowings at amortised cost Bank borrowings 132098 136637 Senior notes 74115 81029 Capitalised borrowing costs 796 1196 205417 216470 Analysed as Current liabilities 1108 Noncurrent liabilities 204309 216470 205417 216470 There were no defaults in interest payments in the year under the terms of the existing loan agreements.
Noncash movements in the carrying amount of interestbearing loans and borrowings relate to the amortisation of borrowing costs see note 7.
The carrying amounts of interestbearing loans and borrowings are denominated in the following currencies Sterling 37244 8604 US Dollars 104921 146272 Euros 63252 61594 205417 216470 Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 120 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements Notes to the financial statements continued For the year ended 31 December 2017 Interestbearing loans and borrowings continued 17.2 Carrying amounts of interestbearing loans and borrowings continued 17.2.1 Bank borrowings Multicurrency revolving credit facility On 10 June 2014 the Group entered into a banking facility of up to 240.0 million comprising a 180.0 million committed multicurrency revolving credit facility and a 60.0 million uncommitted accordion facility.
The banking facility extended to 10 June 2019 and was unsecured and guaranteed by Tyman plc and its principal subsidiary undertakings.
As at 31 December 2017 the Group has the following undrawn amounts committed under the multicurrency revolving credit facility Floating rate Expiry beyond 12 months 49980 45370 On 19 February 2018 the Group entered into the 2018 Facility see note 29.
Giesse borrowings The Group acquired bank borrowings as part of the acquisition of Giesse see note 24.
At 31 December 2017 the remaining facilities have a total value of 2.2 million a carrying value of 2.2 million and an undrawn value of Nil.
These facilities have a maturity ranging between 31 December 2018 and 10 September 2020 and are unsecured.
17.2.2 Private placement notes On 19 November 2014 the Group issued private debt placement notes with US financial institutions totalling US100.0 million.
The debt placement is unsecured and comprises US55.0 million debt with a sevenyear maturity at a coupon of 4.97 per cent and US45.0 million with a 10year maturity at a coupon of 5.37 per cent.
Financial risk management and financial instruments 18.1 Accounting policy Financial assets and liabilities are recognised in the Groups balance sheet when the Group becomes a party to the contractual provisions of the instrument and are generally derecognised when the contract that gives rise to it is settled sold cancelled or expires.
18.1.1 Loans and receivables Loans and receivables are nonderivative financial assets with fixed or determinable payments that are not quoted in an active market.
They are included in current assets except for maturities greater than twelve months after the end of the reporting period.
These are classified as noncurrent assets.
The Groups loans and receivables comprise trade and other receivables note 13 and cash and cash equivalents note 14 in the balance sheet.
18.1.2 Financial liabilities held at amortised cost Financial liabilities held at amortised cost comprise trade and other payables see note 15 and interestbearing loans and borrowings see note 16.
18.2 Financial instruments by category Assets as per balance sheet 31 December 2017 31 December 2016 Loans and receivables Derivatives used for hedging
Loans and receivables restated Derivatives used for hedging
Trade and other receivables 58189  58189 55327  55327 Cash and cash equivalents 42563  42563 40917  40917 Derivative financial instruments  94 94  506 506 Total financial assets 100752 94 100846 96244 506 96750 Liabilities as per balance sheet 31 December 2017 31 December 2016
Other financial liabilities at cost
Derivatives used for hedging Other financial liabilities at cost restated
Borrowings
206213 206213  217666 217666 Derivative financial instruments 304  304 291  291 Trade and other payables 61182 61182  67910 67910 Total financial liabilities 304 267395 267699 291 285576 285867 1 Excludes nonfinancial assets.
2 Excludes capitalised borrowing costs of 0.8 million 2016 1.2 million.
3 Excludes nonfinancial liabilities.
Find out more at site 121 Financial risk management and financial instruments continued 18.3 Financial instruments risk profile 18.3.1 Capital risk management The Group manages its capital structure to ensure that it will be able to continue as a going concern.
The capital structure of the Group consists of cash and cash equivalents note 14 interestbearing loans and borrowings see note 17 and equity attributable to the shareholders of the Parent as disclosed in the consolidated statement of changes in equity.
18.3.2 Financial management The Groups principal financial instruments comprise bank loans private debt and cash and short term deposits.
The Group has various other financial instruments such as trade receivables and trade payables that arise directly from its operations.
No trading in financial instruments is undertaken.
The Board reviews and agrees policies for managing each financial instrument risk and they are summarised below.
18.3.3 Liquidity and credit risk The Group maintains sufficient cash and marketable securities and the availability of funding through an adequate amount of credit facilities.
Management monitors rolling forecasts of the Groups liquidity on the basis of expected cash flow.
The Group manages liquidity risk by the pooling of cash resources and depositing funds available for investment in approved financial instruments with financial institutions.
Counterparty risk with respect to cash and cash equivalents is managed by only investing in banks and financial instruments with independently assessed credit ratings of at least A2 as published by Standard and Poors.
Individual risk limits are assessed by management based on the external ratings.
Management does not expect any losses from the nonperformance of these counterparties.
Credit risk is also attributable to the Groups exposure to trade receivables due from customers.
Management assesses the credit quality of customers taking into account their financial position past experience and other factors.
In order to mitigate credit risk the Group utilises credit insurance in those areas of its operations where such insurance is available.
In areas where such insurance is not available or it is uneconomical to purchase management monitors the utilisation of credit limits by customers identified either individually or by group and incorporates this information in credit risk controls.
The diverse nature of the Groups customer base means that the Group has no significant concentrations of credit risk.
Trade receivables are presented in the balance sheet net of allowances for doubtful receivables estimated by the Groups management based on prior experience and their assessment of the current economic environment.
The Groups exposure to credit risk is limited to the carrying amount of financial assets recognised at the balance sheet date.
Management considers all financial assets that are not impaired for each of the reporting dates under review are of good credit quality including those that are past due.
During the year ended 31 December 2017 the Group operated within its borrowing facilities.
The table below analyses the present value of the Groups financial liabilities into relevant maturity groupings based on the remaining period at the balance sheet date to the contractual maturity date.
Not later than one year Later than one year but not later than two years Later than two years but not later than five years Later than five years
Borrowings
132098  77932 210030 Derivative financial instruments 29  275  304 Trade and other payables 60664 518   61182 At 31 December 2017 60693 132616 275 77932 271516
136637 85202 221839 Derivative financial instruments   291  291 Trade and other payables restated 67132 778   67910 At 31 December 2016 restated 67132 778 136928 85202 290040 1 Excludes capitalised borrowing costs of 0.8 million 2016 1.2 million.
2 Excludes nonfinancial liabilities.
Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 122 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements Notes to the financial statements continued For the year ended 31 December 2017 Financial risk management and financial instruments continued 18.3 Financial instruments risk profile continued 18.3.4 Interest rate risk The interest rate profile of the Groups borrowings as at 31 December 2017 was as follows Floating rate borrowings Fixed rate borrowings
Sterling 38041  38041 US Dollars 30805 74115 104920 Euros 63252  63252 At 31 December 2017 132098 74115 206213 Sterling 9800  9800 US Dollars 65243 81029 146272 Euros 61594  61594 At 31 December 2016 136637 81029 217666 1 Excludes capitalised borrowing costs of 0.5 million 2016 0.9 million.
2 Excludes capitalised borrowing costs of 0.3 million 2016 0.3 million.
The interest rate on the floating bank loans is linked to LIBOR.
The Board periodically reviews any exposure the Group may have to interest rate fluctuations.
The Group has used interest rate swaps to fix the cost of a proportion of these floating rate borrowings.
Floating rate borrowings Covered by swaps Swap fixed rate Sterling 38041 6000 1.7490% US Dollars 30805 12229 1.7225% Euros 63252  na At 31 December 2017 132098 18229 Sterling 9800 6000 1.7490% US Dollars 65243 13370 1.7225% Euros 61594  na At 31 December 2016 136637 19370 1 Excludes capitalised borrowing costs of 0.5 million 2016 0.9 million.
Interest rate sensitivity The impact of a 50 basis point movement in floating interest rates on borrowings would have a c.
0.7 million 2016 0.6 million impact on profits.
This impact would be reduced by the tax effect on such a change.
Interest rate risk of financial assets The weighted average interest rate received on deposited funds was 0.6 per cent during the year 2016 1.2 per cent.
18.3.5 Foreign currency risk The Group operates internationally and is exposed to foreign exchange risk arising from various currency exposures primarily with respect to the US Dollar and the Euro.
Foreign exchange risk arises from future commercial and financing transactions recognised assets and liabilities denominated in a currency that is not the Groups functional currency and net investments in overseas entities.
The Group has many overseas subsidiaries whose net assets are subject to currency translation risk.
The Group borrows in local currencies as appropriate to minimise the impact of this risk on the balance sheet.
Find out more at site 123 Financial risk management and financial instruments continued 18.3 Financial instruments risk profile continued 18.3.5 Foreign currency risk continued Foreign currency exchange rate sensitivity Foreign currency financial assets and liabilities translated into Sterling at the closing rate are as follows At 31 December 2017
US Dollars
Other
Total
Financial assets Trade and other receivables 12285 25810 14710 5384 58189 Cash and cash equivalents 8614 12519 13298 8132 42563 Derivative financial instruments   6 88 94 Total financial assets 20899 38329 28014 13604 100846 Financial liabilities
38041 104920 63252  206213 Derivative financial instruments 134 170   304 Trade and other payables 12978 28185 14554 5465 61182 Total financial liabilities 51153 133275 77806 5465 267699 Potential impact on profit or loss  lossgain 10% increase in functional currency 2367 205 348 2920 10% decrease in functional currency 2893 251 425 3569 Potential impact on other comprehensive income  gainloss 10% increase in functional currency 8732 4527 684 12575 10% decrease in functional currency 10673 5532 835 15370 At 31 December 2016
US Dollars
Other
Total
Financial assets restated Trade and other receivables 11158 26241 12207 5721 55327 Cash and cash equivalents 10352 17453 5314 7798 40917 Derivative financial instruments  312  194 506 Total financial assets restated 21510 44006 17521 13713 96750 Financial liabilities restated
9800 146272 61594  217666 Derivative financial instruments 208 83   291 Trade and other payables 13301 33994 14100 6515 67910 Total financial liabilities restated 23309 180349 75694 6515 285867 Potential impact on profit or loss  lossgain 10% increase in functional currency 1727 294 245 1678 10% decrease in functional currency 2110 162 300 2248 Potential impact on other comprehensive income  gainloss restated 10% increase in functional currency 12423 5288 598 17113 10% decrease in functional currency 15184 6464 731 20917 1 Excludes nonfinancial assets.
2 Excludes capitalised borrowing costs of 0.8 million 2016 1.2 million.
3 Excludes nonfinancial liabilities.
The 10 per cent movements in exchange rates are considered to be indicative of the historic average movements in exchange rates.
Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 124 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements Notes to the financial statements continued For the year ended 31 December 2017 Financial risk management and financial instruments continued 18.3 Financial instruments risk profile continued 18.3.6 Capital management The Groups capital management objectives are to safeguard the Groups ability to continue as a going concern so as to provide returns to shareholders and benefits to stakeholders.
The Group defines its capital as total equity plus net debt.
In maintaining the capital structure the Group may adjust the amount paid as dividends to shareholders issue new shares or dispose of assets to reduce debt.
The Group monitors its financial capacity by reference to its financial covenant ratios including Leverage and interest cover.
If the Group fails to meet its key financial ratios required by its lenders this could impact the Groups average interest rate of borrowings and the future availability of credit to the Group.
The Group is in compliance with the financial covenants contained within its credit facilities and has been in compliance throughout the financial year.
Note restated Total borrowings 206213 217666 Less Cash and cash equivalents 14 42563 40917 Underlying net debt 163650 176749 Total equity 364515 377091 Total capital 528165 553840 1 Excludes capitalised borrowing costs of 0.8 million 2016 1.2 million.
18.4 Fair value estimation The Groups derivative financial instrument used for hedging is measured at fair value.
The Group uses the following hierarchy for measuring fair value Level 1 quoted prices unadjusted in active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
Level 2 inputs other than quoted prices included within level 1 that are observable for the asset or liability either directly or indirectly.
Level 3 inputs for the asset or liability that are not based on observable market data.
Derivatives shown at fair value in the balance sheet have been valued by reference to level 2 techniques described above.
There were no transfers between levels during the year.
18.4.1 Valuation techniques used to derive level 2 fair values Level 2 hedging derivatives comprise interest rate swaps fair valued using forward interest rates extracted from observable yield curves.
The effects of discounting are generally insignificant for level 2 derivatives.
The fair value of the derivative financial instruments at 31 December 2017 is a net liability of 0.2 million 2016 net asset of 0.2 million.
There were no changes in valuation techniques during the year.
18.4.2 Groups valuation process The Group has a team that performs the valuations of financial assets required for financial reporting purposes.
This team reports to the CFO and the Audit Committee.
18.4.3 Fair value of financial assets and liabilities measured at amortised cost The fair values of borrowings are as follows Current liabilities 1101 Noncurrent liabilities 204040 216763 205141 216763 The fair values of the following financial assets and liabilities approximate their carrying amounts trade and other receivables cash and cash equivalents and trade and other payables.
Find out more at site 125
19.1 Accounting policy Provisions are recognised when the Group has a present legal or constructive obligation as a result of a past event it is probable that an outflow of resources will be required to settle the obligation and a reliable estimate can be made of the amount of the obligation.
The amount recognised as a provision is the best estimate of the consideration required to settle the present obligation at the balance sheet date taking into account the risks and uncertainties surrounding the obligation.
Where a provision is measured using the cash flows estimated to settle the present obligation its carrying amount is the present value of those cash flows using a pretax rate that reflects current market assessments of the time value of money and the risks specific to the obligation.
The increase in the provision due to the passage of time is recognised in the income statement within net finance costs.
Provisions are not recognised for future operating losses.
19.1.1 Critical accounting estimates and judgements carrying amount of provisions Provisions by their nature are uncertain and highly judgemental.
Provisions are measured at the Directors best estimate of the expenditure required to settle the obligation at the balance sheet date based on the nature of the provisions the potential outcomes any developments relating to specific claims and previous experience.
19.2 Carrying amounts of provisions
Property related
Warranty
Other
Total
At 1 January 2016 4627 3504 1910 1414 11455 Chargedcredited to the income statement Additional provisions in the year 20 158  200 378 Unused amounts reversed 214 1342 563 202 2321 Utilised in the year 792 1656 95  2543 Acquisitions of subsidiaries restated 24   430 3790 4220 Unwinding of discount 7 6    6 Exchange difference restated At 31 December 2016 restated 3758 1090 1905 5915 12668 Chargedcredited to the income statement Additional provisions in the year 51 7905 11 305 8272 Unused amounts reversed 4tel932 Charged to property plant and equipment Additional provisions in the year 11 675    675 Utilised in the year 66tel2184 Acquisitions of subsidiaries 24 100  100  200 Reclassification to current tax    760 760 Reclassification between categories 330   330 Exchange difference At 31 December 2017 3535 8037 881 5006 17459 Analysed as restated Current liabilities 11024 4544 Noncurrent liabilities 6435 8124 17459 12668 Current liabilities are those aspects of provisions that are expected to be utilised within the next 12 months.
19.2.1 Property related Property provisions include provisions for onerous leases of 2.
1 million 2016 2.8 million and leasehold dilapidations of 1.4 million 2016 1.0 million.
Property provisions are expected to be utilised by 2042.
For onerous leases the Group has provided for the rental payments due over the remaining term of existing operating lease contracts where a period of vacancy is ongoing.
The provision has been calculated after taking into account both the periods over which properties are likely to remain vacant and any likely sublease income on a propertybyproperty basis.
The provision covers potential transfer of economic benefit over the full range of current lease commitments disclosed in note 27.
The provision for leasehold dilapidations relates to contractual obligations to reinstate leasehold properties to their original state of repair.
Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 126 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements Notes to the financial statements continued For the year ended 31 December 2017 Provisions continued 19.2 Carrying amounts of provisions continued 19.2.2 Restructuring Restructuring provisions include provisions for employee redundancy costs at restructured business units and are expected to be utilised by 2021.
19.2.3 Warranty Warranty provisions are calculated based on historical experience of the ultimate cost of settling product warranty claims and potential claims.
Warranty provisions are expected to be utilised by 2025.
19.2.4 Other Included in other provisions is 0.3 million 2016 1.3 million relating to the tax consequences of international intragroup transactions for which the fiscal authorities may be expected to adopt opposing treatments in respect of revenue and cost recognition.
The remaining 4.7 million 2016 restated 4.6 million relates to potential exposures arising from preacquisition tax audits by fiscal authorities at certain Giesse locations.
Other provisions are expected to be utilised by 2021.
Retirement benefit obligations 20.1 Accounting policy The Group operates both defined contribution and defined benefit pension plans and postemployment medical plans.
20.1.1 Pension obligations Defined contribution plans A defined contribution plan is a pension plan under which the Group pays fixed contributions into publicly or privately administered pension insurance plans on a mandatory contractual or voluntary basis.
The Group recognises contributions as an employee benefit expense when they are due and has no further payment obligations once the contributions have been paid.
The Group has no legal or constructive obligation to pay further contributions if the fund does not hold sufficient assets to pay all employees the benefits relating to employee service in the current or prior periods.
Prepaid contributions are recognised as an asset to the extent that a cash refund in the future is available.
Defined benefit plans A defined benefit plan is a pension plan that is not a defined contribution plan.
Typically defined benefit plans define an amount of pension benefit an employee will receive on retirement.
This amount is usually dependent on one or more factors such as age years of service and compensation.
The liability recognised in the balance sheet in respect of defined benefit pension plans is the present value of the defined benefit obligation at the end of the reporting period less the fair value of plan assets.
The defined benefit obligation is calculated annually by independent actuaries using the projected unit credit method.
The present value of the defined benefit obligation is determined by discounting the estimated future cash outflows using interest rates of high quality corporate bonds that are denominated in the currency in which the benefits will be paid and that have terms to maturity approximating to the terms of the related pension obligation.
In countries where there is no deep market in such bonds the market rates on government bonds are used.
Actuarial gains and losses arising from experience adjustments and changes in actuarial assumptions are charged or credited to equity in other comprehensive income in the period in which they arise.
Past service costs are recognised immediately in income.
20.1.2 Other postemployment obligations Some Group companies provide postretirement healthcare benefits to their retirees.
The entitlement to these benefits is usually conditional on the employee remaining in service up to retirement age and the completion of a minimum service period.
The expected costs of these benefits are accrued over the period of employment using the same accounting methodology as used for defined benefit pension plans.
Actuarial gains and losses arising from experience adjustments and changes in actuarial assumptions are charged or credited to equity in other comprehensive income in the period in which they arise.
These obligations are valued annually by independent qualified actuaries.
Find out more at site 127 Retirement benefit obligations continued 20.1 Accounting policy continued 20.1.3 Key source of estimation uncertainty defined benefit pension and postretirement benefit schemes Defined benefit obligations are calculated using a number of assumptions including future salary increases increases to pension benefits mortality rates and in the case of postemployment medical benefits the expected rate of increase in medical costs.
The plan assets consist largely of listed securities and their fair values are subject to fluctuation in response to changes in market conditions.
Effects of changes in the actuarial assumptions underlying the benefit obligation effects of changes in the discount rate applicable to the benefit obligation and effects of differences between the expected and actual return on the plan assets are classified as actuarial gains and losses and are recognised directly in equity.
Further actuarial gains and losses will be recognised during the next financial year.
An analysis of the assumptions that will be used by management to determine the cost of defined benefit plans that will be recognised in the income statement in the next financial year is presented in this note.
20.2 Defined contribution pension schemes The Group operates a number of defined contribution pension schemes the assets of which are held externally to the Group in separate trusteeadministered funds.
The costs of the Groups defined contribution pension schemes are charged to the income statement in the period in which they fall due.
The Group had unpaid pension contributions of 0.2 million 2016 Nil included within employee benefit liabilities.
20.3 Defined benefit pension schemes and postemployment medical benefit schemes The table below outlines where the Groups postemployment amounts and activity are included in the financial statements.
Note
Balance sheet obligation for Defined pension benefits 12144 12893 Postemployment medical benefits 263 4215 Net liability on the balance sheet 12407 17108 Income statement creditcharge for Defined pension benefits 5 279 1186 Postemployment medical benefits 5 3089 189 Total income statement creditcharge 2810 1375 Remeasurements for Defined pension benefits 688 685 Postemployment medical benefits 503 71 Total remeasurements 1 The income statement charge included within profit before taxation includes current service costs past service costs administrative costs and interest costs.
The Groups principal defined benefit pension schemes are operated in the US and Italy and the principal postemployment medical benefit scheme is operated in the US.
The defined benefit schemes provide benefits to members in the form of a guaranteed level of pension payable for life.
The level of benefits provided depends on members length of service and their salary in the final years leading up to retirement.
The Italian schemes relate to TFR termination obligations payable to employees of the Groups Italian operations.
Italian employers are required to make provision for a type of severance package to its employees equivalent to 6.9 per cent of each employees gross annual salary revalued on the basis of 75.0 per cent of inflation plus a fixed rate of 1.5 per cent during the period of accrual.
Upon termination of employment the employer is obliged to pay a lump sum to the employee.
TFR termination obligations are unfunded.
Net amounts payable under the Bilco postretirement benefit obligation are fully recoverable from and indemnified by the previous owners of Bilco with a proportion held in escrow.
The Bilco postretirement benefit obligation is expected to terminate in 2018.
For certain US plans pensions in payment do not receive inflationary increases.
The benefit payments are from trusteeadministered funds.
Plan assets held in trusts are governed by local regulations and practice in the US as is the nature of the relationship between the Group and the trustees and their composition.
Responsibility for governance of the plans including investment and contribution schedules lies jointly with the Group and the board of trustees.
The board of trustees must be composed of representatives of the Company and plan participants in accordance with the plans regulations.
Actuarial gains and losses from participant experience changes in demographic assumptions changes in financial assumptions and net return on plan assets are recognised net of the related deferred tax in the consolidated statement of comprehensive income.
Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 128 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements Notes to the financial statements continued For the year ended 31 December 2017 Retirement benefit obligations continued 20.3 Defined benefit pension schemes and postemployment medical benefit schemes continued The movement in the defined benefit obligation over the year is as follows Present value of obligations Fair value of plan assets Net defined liability
Balance at 1 January 52673 25429 35565 15502 17108 9927 Included in the income statement Current service creditcost 406 523   406 523 Past service credit 6 3287    3287 Administration costs   330 363 330 363 Interest expenseincome 7 1874 1483 1321 994 553 489 Subtotal in income statement 1819 2006 991 631 2810 1375 Included in other comprehensive income Remeasurement gainloss arising from Net gainloss on plan assets excluding amounts included in interest expense   1931 706 1931 706 Gain from change in demographic assumptions 1044 265   1044 265 Loss from change in financial assumptions 3811 253   3811 253 Experience gainloss 651 62   651 62 Subtotal in other comprehensive income 2116 50 1931 706 185 756 Employer contributions   1171 940 1171 940 Plan participant contributions 95 90 95 90 Benefit payments 6105 1551 6105 1551 Acquisitions of subsidiaries 24  19816  16231  3585 Exchange difference 4176 6833 3271 4428 905 2405 Balance at 31 December 42784 52673 30377 35565 12407 17108 The current service cost past service costs and expenses relating to the administration of the defined benefit schemes are included in the income statement within administrative expenses.
Also see note 5.3.
Net expense is included within net finance income and costs note 7.
A deferred tax debit of 1.2 million 2016 deferred tax credit of 0.3 million has been recognised in other comprehensive income in respect of remeasurements of the defined benefit obligation.
Also see note 8.
Defined benefit plan liabilities and assets by country are as follows Present value of obligations Fair value of plan assets Net defined liability United States 39732 49549 30377 35565 9355 13984 Italy 3052 3124   3052 3124 Balance at 31 December 42784 52673 30377 35565 12407 17108 Plan assets comprise the following asset classes 2017 2016 000 % 000 % Equity instruments 5325 17.5% 4916 13.8% Large US equity 3167 Smallmid US equity 577 543 International equity 1581 Balancedasset allocation 385 1.3% 382 1.1% Fixed income 24667 81.2% 30267 85.1% Balance at 31 December 30377 Equity instruments comprise listed investments.
Find out more at site 129 Retirement benefit obligations continued 20.3 Defined benefit pension schemes and postemployment medical benefit schemes continued Through its defined benefit pension plans and postemployment medical plans the Group is exposed to a number of risks the most significant of which are detailed below Asset volatility The plan liabilities are calculated using a discount rate set with reference to corporate bond yields if plan assets underperform this yield this will create a deficit.
The US plans hold a significant proportion of fixed income investments comprising a mixture of government and corporate bonds and provide an acceptable level of investment risk to better match liabilities.
The Group believes that given the long term nature of plan liabilities and the strength of the supporting Group a level of continuing equity investment is an appropriate element of the Groups long term strategy to manage the plans efficiently.
Equities are expected to outperform corporate bonds in the long term while providing volatility and risk in the short term.
As the plans mature the Group intends to reduce the level of investment risk by investing more in assets that better match the liabilities.
The Italian plans do not have plan assets.
Changes in bond yields A decrease in corporate bond yields will increase plan liabilities although this will be partially offset by an increase in the value of the plans bond holdings.
Inflation risk Some of the Groups pension obligations are linked to inflation and higher inflation will lead to higher liabilities although in most cases caps on the level of inflationary increases are in place to protect the plan against extreme inflation.
The majority of the plans assets are either unaffected by fixed interest bonds or loosely correlated with equities inflation meaning that an increase in inflation will also increase the deficit.
In the US plans the pensions in payment are not linked to inflation so this is a less material risk.
Life expectancies The majority of the plans obligations are to provide benefits for the life of the member so increases in life expectancy will result in an increase in the plans liabilities.
The significant actuarial assumptions were as follows 2017 2016 United States Italy United States Italy Discount rate 3.30% 1.29% 4.00% 1.40% Inflation 2.00% 1.50% 2.00% 1.50% Salary growth rate na 1.50% na 1.50% Pension growth rate na na na na Healthcare cost trend 4.5% to 7.0% na 4.5% to 7.0% na 1 The level of healthcare contributions is capped and adopting a higher trend rate does not materially affect the liability.
Assumptions regarding future mortality are set based on actuarial advice in accordance with published statistics and experience in each jurisdiction.
These assumptions translate into an average life expectancy in years for a pensioner retiring at age 65 United States Italy Retiring at the end of the reporting year Male 20.1 na Female 22.5 na Retiring 20 years after the end of the reporting year Male 21.7 na Female 24.1 na The sensitivity of the defined benefit obligation to changes in the weighted principal assumption is Change in discount rate assumption Impact of increase in assumption Impact of decrease in assumption Bilco 1.00% 8.3% 9.8% Other US 0.25% 3.0% 3.1% Italy 0.50% 5.9% 4.1% The above sensitivity analyses are based on a change in an assumption while holding all other assumptions constant.
In practice this is unlikely to occur and changes in some of the assumptions may be correlated.
When calculating the sensitivity of the defined benefit obligation to significant actuarial assumptions the same methodology has been applied as when calculating the pension liability recognised within the statement of financial position.
The methods and types of assumptions used in preparing the sensitivity analyses did not change compared to the previous year.
The US pension schemes are closed to new entrants as a result the service costs to the Group will rise in future years.
The expected level of contributions to the defined benefit pension scheme and postemployment medical benefits in the year to December 2018 is 2.8 million.
The weighted average duration of the defined benefit obligation is nine years for US plans and 10 years for Italian plans.
Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 130 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements Notes to the financial statements continued For the year ended 31 December 2017 Retirement benefit obligations continued 20.3 Defined benefit pension schemes and postemployment medical benefit schemes continued The expected maturity analysis of undiscounted postemployment pension and medical benefits is as follows
Post employment medical benefits
No later than one year 15721 278 15999 Between one and two years 1534  1534 Between two and five years 4808  4808 Later than five years 10368  10368 Total 32431 278 32709 The AmesburyTruth postemployment medical benefit plan is anticipated to close at the end of 2018.
Share capital and share premium 21.1 Accounting policy Ordinary shares are classified as equity.
Incremental costs directly attributable to the issue of new ordinary shares or options are shown in equity as a deduction net of tax from the proceeds received by the Company.
Where any Group company purchases the Companys equity share capital treasury shares the consideration paid including any directly attributable incremental costs net of income taxes is deducted from equity attributable to the Companys owners until the shares are cancelled or reissued.
Where such shares are subsequently reissued any consideration received net of any directly attributable incremental transaction costs and the related income tax effects is included in equity attributable to the Companys owners.
21.2 Share capital and share premium Number of shares
Share premium At 1 January 2016 170104 8505 63256 Shares issued in 2016 8478 424 18151 At 31 December 2016 and 31 December 2017 178582 8929 81407 Ordinary shares in the Company have a par value of 5.00 pence per share 2016 5.00 pence per share.
All issued shares are fully paid up.
On 21 June 2016 the Group issued 8478128 shares by way of a placing with institutional investors.
Sharebased payments 22.1 Accounting policy The Group operates the LTIP which is an equitysettled sharebased compensation plan for certain employees under which the entity receives services from employees as consideration for equity instruments share options of the Group.
The fair value of the employee services received in exchange for the grant of options is expensed on a straightline basis over the vesting period based on the Groups estimate of shares that will eventually vest.
The total amount to be expensed over the vesting period is determined by reference to the fair value of the options granted excluding the impact of any nonmarket vesting conditions.
Nonmarket vesting conditions are included in assumptions about the number of options that are expected to vest.
At each balance sheet date the entity revises its estimates of the number of options that are expected to vest with any changes in estimate recognised in the income statement with a corresponding adjustment in equity.
The fair value of awards granted under LTIP is measured using a probability model to predict target EPS levels.
The proceeds received net of any directly attributable transaction costs are credited to share capital nominal value and share premium when the options are exercised.
Find out more at site 131 Sharebased payments continued 22.2 LTIP The charge to the income statement in 2017 in relation to the LTIP was 1.1 million 2016 1.0 million.
LTIP
Conditional annual awards of shares are granted under the LTIP to the Executive Directors and certain senior managers at the discretion of the Remuneration Committee.
Provided the participant remains an employee of the Group and the performance conditions are met awards will vest three years after the date of the grant at no cost to the employee.
Further information on the LTIP and the performance conditions for each grant are given in the Remuneration report.
The fair value of the awards granted under the LTIP in 2017 and the assumptions used in the calculation of the sharebased payment charge are as follows Valuation model Probability model to predict EPS levels Date of grant 14 March 2017 Number granted 792477 Share price at date of award 319 pence Fair value pence 136 pence Exercise price pence Nil pence Expected life of award Three years Vesting conditions Continuous service and cumulative Underlying EPS over three years 2017 to 2019 in range of 89.10 to 103.30 pence Movements in the number of outstanding conditional awards of shares currently exercisable are as follows At 1 January 1996 2066 Exercised 290 800 Granted 792 770 Lapsed 392 40 At 31 December 2106 1996 22.3 Employee Benefit Trust purchases Details of shares purchased by the Employee Benefit Trust to satisfy certain share awards vested in the year as well as future obligations under the Groups various share plans are as follows Number of ordinary shares 268 659 Cost to Company 847 1860
Amounts recognised as distributions to owners in the year Final dividend for the year ended 31 December 2016 of 7.50 pence 2015 6.09 pence 13293 10266 Interim dividend for the year ended 31 December 2017 of 3.50 pence 2016 3.00 pence 6204 5312 Total amounts recognised as distributions to owners in the year 19497 15578 Amounts not recognised in the financial statements Final dividend proposed for the year ended 31 December 2017 of 7.75 pence 2016 6.09 pence 13739 13293 The proposed final dividend is subject to approval by the shareholders at the Annual General Meeting and has not been included as a liability in the financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017.
Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 132 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements Notes to the financial statements continued For the year ended 31 December 2017 Business combinations 24.1 Accounting policy The Group applies the acquisition method to account for business combinations.
The consideration transferred for the acquisition of a subsidiary is the fair values of the assets transferred the liabilities incurred to the former owners of the acquiree and the equity interest issued by the Group.
The consideration transferred includes the fair value of any asset or liability resulting from a contingent consideration arrangement.
Identifiable assets acquired liabilities assumed and contingent liabilities assumed in a business combination are measured initially at their fair values at the acquisition date.
Acquisition related costs are expensed as incurred.
Any contingent consideration to be transferred is recognised at fair value at the acquisition date.
Subsequent changes to the fair value of the contingent consideration that is deemed to be an asset or liability are recognised in accordance with IAS 39 either in profit or loss or as a change to other comprehensive income.
Contingent consideration that is classified as equity is not remeasured and its subsequent settlement is accounted for within equity.
The excess of the consideration transferred and the acquisitiondate fair value of any previous equity interest in the acquiree over the fair value of the identifiable net assets acquired is recorded as goodwill see note 10.2.
If the total of consideration transferred is less than the fair value of the net assets of the subsidiary acquired in the case of a bargain purchase the difference is recognised directly in the income statement.
24.1.1 Critical accounting estimates and judgements acquisition accounting IFRS 3 requires assets and liabilities acquired to be recorded at fair value and to identify intangible assets separately from goodwill initially measuring each group of intangible assets at fair value.
Groups of intangible assets include purchased brands and customer relationships.
There is judgement involved in estimating fair value particularly in relation to identifiable intangible assets which requires the Directors to estimate the useful economic life of each asset and the future cash flows expected to arise from each asset and to apply a suitable discount rate.
24.2 Acquisition of Howe Green On 3 March 2017 ERA acquired Howe Green a UK manufacturer of engineered floor and ceiling access hatches sold into the commercial and infrastructure markets.
ERA paid a cash consideration of 5.8 million with deferred consideration of 0.4 million payable within 12 months of the date of acquisition.
The following table summarises the consideration paid fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed for all acquisitions in the year at the respective acquisition dates
Acquisition of Howe Green Intangible assets 10.3 2823 Property plant and equipment 11 170 Inventories 95 Trade and other receivables 669 Cash and cash equivalents 689 Trade and other payables 420 Borrowings 46 Current tax liabilities 280 Deferred tax liabilities 8 483 Provisions 19 200 Total identifiable net assets 3017 Goodwill arising on acquisition 10.2 3158 Total consideration Satisfied by Cash 5825 Deferred consideration 350 Total consideration Net cash outflow arising on acquisition Cash consideration 5825 Net cash and cash equivalents acquired 689 Net cash outflow Acquisition related costs of 0.2 million have been included in exceptional costs in the Groups consolidated income statement see note 6.
Find out more at site 133 Business combinations continued 24.2 Acquisition of Howe Green continued The fair value of trade and other receivables is 0.7 million and is principally comprised of trade receivables with a fair and collectable value of 0.7 million.
The gross contractual amount for trade receivables due is 0.7 million of which Nil is expected to be uncollectable.
Revenue included in the consolidated income statement since 7 March 2017 contributed by Howe Green was 3.3 million.
Howe Green contributed 1.1 million to the profit before taxation over the same period.
Had the acquisition of Howe Green been completed on the first day of the financial year an additional 0.7 million of revenue and 0.1 million of profit before taxation would have been contributed to the Group.
Goodwill arising on acquisition is attributable to the expected profitability of the acquired business arising through savings and benefits from the development and extension of ERAs product portfolio into the commercial sector and access to the commercial and infrastructure customer base.
The estimated value of intangibles including goodwill deductible for tax purposes is Nil.
24.3 Fair value adjustments in respect of 2016 acquisitions The following table summarises the fair value adjustments made in the year in respect of business combinations completed in the 2016 financial year restated as at 31 December 2016.
Note
As reported at 31 December Fair value adjustment
Fair value adjustment
Restated at 31 December Intangible assets 10.3 45342 155  45497 Property plant and equipment 11 18992 257  18735 Inventories 19255 359 25 19589 Trade and other receivables 42452 968  41484 Cash and cash equivalents 6447   6447 Trade and other payables 37212 4485 41 32768 Borrowings 19251   19251 Current tax liabilities 1383   1383 Deferred tax liabilities 8 7951   7951 Retirement benefit obligations 20 3585   3585 Provisions 19 4711 491  4220 Total identifiable net assets 45501 4265 66 49700 Goodwill arising on acquisition 10.2 45395 4265 66 41196 Total consideration 90896   90896 Satisfied by Cash 89936   89936 Deferred consideration 960   960 Total consideration 90896   90896 Net cash outflow arising on acquisition Cash consideration 89936   89936 Net cash and cash equivalents acquired 6447   6447 Net cash outflow 96383   96383 No further fair value adjustments were made in respect of the Bilco acquisition.
Noncurrent assets held for sale 25.1 Accounting policy Noncurrent assets classified as held for sale are measured at the lower of carrying amount or fair value less costs to sell.
Noncurrent assets are classified as held for sale if their carrying amount will be recovered through a sale transaction rather than through continuing use.
This condition is met only when the sale is highly probable and the asset is available for immediate sale in its present condition.
Management must be committed to the sale which should be expected to qualify for recognition as a completed sale within one year from the date of classification.
25.2 Noncurrent assets classified as held for sale The Statesville North Carolina freehold property has been classified as an asset held for sale and was being actively marketed for sale at the yearend date following the Groups exit from the property.
On 7 February 2018 this property was sold for a consideration of US1.4 million see notes 11 and 29.
Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 134 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements Notes to the financial statements continued For the year ended 31 December 2017 Adjustments to cash flows from operating activities The following noncash and financing adjustments have been made to profit before taxation to arrive at operating cash flow
Net finance costs 7 9373 7814 Depreciation 11 11599 10701 Amortisation of intangible assets 10.3 24249 22662 Impairment of property plant and equipment 11 114 1107 Profit on disposal of property plant and equipment 878 63 Writeoff of inventory fair value adjustments 6 22 5698 Pension service credits and expected administration costs 20 3363 886 Noncash provision movements 19 7340 1943 Profit on disposal of business 6  250 Sharebased payments 1987 1047 Other noncash adjustments  209 50443 47994 Financial commitments 27.1 Capital commitments Property plant and equipment 585 5797 27.2 Operating lease commitments The Group has entered into commercial leases on certain properties.
There are no restrictions placed upon the lessee by entering into these leases.
The present values of future minimum rentals payable under noncancellable operating leases are as follows Land and buildings Other Not later than one year 7806 6956 1174 933 Later than one years but not later than five years 21009 20746 1930 1262 Later than five years 56137 50522 13 159 Total lease commitment 84952 78224 3117 2354 Contingent liabilities There are no contingent liabilities.
Events after the reporting year 29.1 2018 Facility On 19 February 2018 the Group entered into the 2018 Facility.
The 2018 Facility gives the Group access to up to 310.0 million of borrowings with seven relationship banks and comprises a 240.0 million committed revolving credit facility and a 70.0 million uncommitted accordion facility.
The 2018 Facility expires in February 2023 although has provision for an extension to February 2024.
On signing the 2018 Facility the 2014 Facility see note 17.2.1 was repaid in full and cancelled.
29.2 Property disposal On 7 February 2018 the Statesville North Carolina freehold property was sold for US1.4 million see note 25.2.
Related party transactions The following transactions were carried out with related parties of Tyman plc 30.1 Subsidiaries Transactions between the Company and its subsidiaries which are related parties are eliminated on consolidation.
There were no transactions between the Company and its subsidiaries apart from intercompany loans.
30.2 Key management compensation The Group considers its Directors to be the key management personnel.
Compensation for Directors who have the sole responsibility for planning directing and controlling the Group are set out in the Remuneration report on pages 71 to 88.
Full details of individual Directors remuneration are given in the Remuneration report on pages 71 to 88.
Find out more at site 135
Details of the subsidiaries of the Group as at 31 December 2017 are detailed below.
Unless otherwise indicated all subsidiaries are wholly owned.
Registered name and office address Country of incorporation Nature of business UK operations 29 Queen Annes Gate London SW1H 9BU Amesbury Holdings Limited United Kingdom Holding company Balance UK Limited United Kingdom Dormant Crompton Limited United Kingdom Dormant ERA Home Security Limited United Kingdom Building products ERA Products Limited United Kingdom Dormant ERA Security Hardware Limited United Kingdom Dormant Grouphomesafe Limited United Kingdom Dormant Howe Green Limited United Kingdom Building products Jasper Acquisition Holdings Limited United Kingdom Holding company Jasper Acquisition Limited United Kingdom Holding company Lupus Capital Limited United Kingdom Dormant Octroi Group Limited United Kingdom Holding company Octroi Investments Limited United Kingdom Dormant Otterburn Limited United Kingdom Dormant Response Electronics Limited United Kingdom Building products Schlegel Acquisition Holdings Limited United Kingdom Holding company Schlegel Building Products Limited United Kingdom Dormant Schlegel Limited United Kingdom Building products Tyman Equities Limited United Kingdom Dormant Tyman Financial Services Limited United Kingdom Financing company Tyman Investments United Kingdom Dormant Tyman Management Limited United Kingdom Holding company Ventrolla Limited United Kingdom Dormant Window Fabrication and Fixing Supplies Limited United Kingdom Dormant North American operations 333 Bay Street Toronto Ontario M5H 2T4 Amesbury Canada Inc Canada Holding company 8005 Dixie Road Unit 8043 Brampton Ontario L6T 3V1 Atlas Holdings Company Limited Canada Holding company Roberto Fierro 6351 Industrial Park Aero Juarez Juarez Chihuahua 32695 Amesbury Mexico S. e R.
De C.
Mexico Building products Deportistas 7820 Parque Industrial Gema Ciudad Juarez Chihuahua 32648 BHC de Mexico S. e R.
De C.
Mexico Building products Bilcomex Comercializadora S. e R.
De C.
Mexico Building products Bilcomex S. e R.
De C.
Mexico Building products 3600 Minnesota Drive Edina MN 55435 Amesbury Acquisition Holdings 2 Inc United States Holding company Amesbury Door Hardware Inc United States Building products Amesbury Finance Holdings LLC United States Holding company Amesbury Group Inc United States Holding company Amesbury Group Plastic Profiles Inc United States Building products Amesbury Industries Inc United States Holding company Balance Systems Inc United States Building products Bandlock Corporation Inc United States Building products Fastek Products Inc United States Building products Giesse Group North America Inc United States Building products Overland Products Company Inc United States Building products Schlegel Acquisition Holdings USA Inc United States Holding company Schlegel Systems Inc United States Building products The Bilco Company United States Holding company The Bilco Holding Company United States Holding company Truth Hardware Corporation United States Building products Tyman Venture Inc United States Holding company Unipoly Schlegel Holdings Inc United States Holding company 370 James Street Suite 201 West Haven CT 06513 Bilco U.
Limited
United States Building products Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 136 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements Notes to the financial statements continued For the year ended 31 December 2017 Registered name and office address Country of incorporation Nature of business European operations Nieuwpoortsesteenweg  Oostende Schlegel Belgium BVBA Belgium Building products Bredowstrasse 3322113 Hamburg Schlegel GmbH Germany Building products Kolonou 13 12131 Peristeri Giesse Group Hellas S.
Greece Building products Via Leonardo Da Vinci 320414 Fossatone 40059 Ville Fontana Di Medicina Bologna Giesse S.
Italy Building products 6 Rue Jean Monnet L2180 Tyman Finance S.
Luxembourg Financing company Havenkade 99B 1973 AK Ljmuiden Holland Tetchy Investments BV Netherlands Dormant Constitucion 84Poligono Industrial Les Grases 08980 Sant Feliu De Llobregat Barcelona Giesse Group Iberia S.
Spain Building products Schlegel Taliana SL Spain Building products Other international operations Enrique Becquerel 4873 Area de promocion el Triangulo CP 1615 Buenos Aires Giesse Group Argentina S.
Argentina Building products 44 Riverside Road Chipping Norton NSW 2170 Schlegel Australia Pty  Ltd Australia Holding company Schlegel Pty Limited Australia Building products Rua Rosa Kasinski 1109 Galpoes G02 G03 G04 Patio G01 do Condominio Empresarial Marino Lena Bairro Capuava 09.380128 Maua Sao Paolo Giesse Brasil Indstria e Comrcio de Ferragens e Acessrios Ltda.
Brazil Building products Alameda Itatinga 617 Galpoa 2 Bairro Joapiranga II CEP13278480 Cidade Valinhos Estado de Sao Paolo Schlegel Amrica Do Sul Vedao Para Construo Civil Ltda.
Brazil Building products Schlegel Amrica Latina  Vedao Esquadrias e Extruso Ltda.
Brazil Building products Room 810815 F8 CWE Building No.3 Guangqu East Road Chaoyang District  Beijing Giesse Hardware Beijing Co.
Ltd.
China Building products No 8 Xingye Road Pingyi Software Park Eastern Section Ningbo Free Trade Zone Ningbo City Zhejiang LSS Ningbo Limited China Building products Unit 142 New City Tower No 535 Qingshuiqiao Road Jiangdong District Ningbo City LSS Trading Ningbo Limited China Building products 1 Commonwealth Lane 618 One Commonwealth Singapore Schlegel Asia Pte.
Ltd
Singapore Building products 3rd Interchange Sheikh Zayed Road Al Quoz Industrial Area 1 Dubai Schlegel Middle East Building Materials Trading LLC United Arab Emirates Building products 1 Held by subsidiary.
2 Shareholding of 49 per cent held by the Group.
The Group has managerial control and is entitled to 100 per cent of the profits and cash generated by the business.
Subsidiaries continued Find out more at site 137 Our audit approach
Report on the audit of the parent company financial statements
In our opinion Tyman plcs parent company financial statements the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the parent companys affairs as at 31 December 2017 have been properly prepared in accordance with United Kingdom Generally Accepted Accounting Practice United Kingdom Accounting Standards comprising FRS 101 Reduced Disclosure Framework and applicable law and have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006.
We have audited the financial statements included within the Annual Report and Accounts the Annual Report which comprise the company balance sheet as at 31 December 2017 and the company statement of changes in equity for the year then ended and the notes to the financial statements which include a description of the significant accounting policies.
Our opinion is consistent with our reporting to the Audit Committee.
Basis for opinion We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing UK ISAs UK and applicable law.
Our responsibilities under ISAs UK are further described in the Auditors responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements section of our report.
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion.
Independence
We remained independent of the group in accordance with the ethical requirements that are relevant to our audit of the financial statements in the UK which includes the FRCs Ethical Standard as applicable to listed public interest entities and we have fulfilled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with these requirements.
To the best of our knowledge and belief we declare that nonaudit services prohibited by the FRCs Ethical Standard were not provided to the group or the parent company.
Other than those disclosed in the Directors report we have provided no nonaudit services to the group and its subsidiaries in the period from 1 January 2017 to 31 December 2017.
Overall materiality 3.1 million 2016 3.0 million based on 1 % of total assets.
We performed a full scope audit over the Company ledger providing us with 100 per cent coverage over the Company accounts.
We have no key audit matters to report.
Independent auditors report To the members of Tyman plc
Audit scope Key audit matters Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 138 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements Independent auditors report continued To the members of Tyman plc Report on the audit of the parent company financial statements continued Our audit approach continued The scope of our audit As part of designing our audit we determined materiality and assessed the risks of material misstatement in the financial statements.
In particular we looked at where the directors made subjective judgements for example in respect of significant accounting estimates that involved making assumptions and considering future events that are inherently uncertain.
We gained an understanding of the legal and regulatory framework applicable to the parent company and the industry in which it operates and considered the risk of acts by the parent company which were contrary to applicable laws and regulations including fraud.
We designed audit procedures to respond to the risk recognising that the risk of not detecting a material misstatement due to fraud is higher than the risk of not detecting one resulting from error as fraud may involve deliberate concealment by for example forgery or intentional misrepresentations or through collusion.
We focused on laws and regulations that could give rise to a material misstatement in the parent companys financial statements including but not limited to the Companies Act 2006 the Listing Rules UK tax legislation and equivalent local laws and regulations applicable to significant component teams.
Our tests included but were not limited to review of the financial statement disclosures to underlying supporting documentation review of correspondence with legal advisors enquiries of management review of significant component auditors work and review of internal audit reports in so far as they related to the financial statements.
There are inherent limitations in the audit procedures described above and the further removed noncompliance with laws and regulations is from the events and transactions reflected in the financial statements the less likely we would become aware of it.
We did not identify any key audit matters relating to irregularities including fraud.
As in all of our audits we also addressed the risk of management override of internal controls including testing journals and evaluating whether there was evidence of bias by the directors that represented a risk of material misstatement due to fraud.
Key audit matters Key audit matters are those matters that in the auditors professional judgement were of most significance in the audit of the financial statements of the current period and include the most significant assessed risks of material misstatement whether or not due to fraud identified by the auditors including those which had the greatest effect on the overall audit strategy the allocation of resources in the audit and directing the efforts of the engagement team.
We determined that there were no key audit matters applicable to the parent company to communicate in our report.
How we tailored the audit scope We tailored the scope of our audit to ensure that we performed enough work to be able to give an opinion on the financial statements as a whole taking into account the structure of the parent company the accounting processes and controls and the industry in which it operates.
We scoped the balances to be audited in line with the materiality determined for the year.
Materiality
The scope of our audit was influenced by our application of materiality.
We set certain quantitative thresholds for materiality.
These together with qualitative considerations helped us to determine the scope of our audit and the nature timing and extent of our audit procedures on the individual financial statement line items and disclosures and in evaluating the effect of misstatements both individually and in aggregate on the financial statements as a whole.
Based on our professional judgement we determined materiality for the financial statements as a whole as follows Overall materiality 3.1 million 2016 3.0 million.
How we determined it 1 % of total assets.
Rationale for benchmark applied As the parent entity Tyman plc is primarily a holding Company for the Group the materiality benchmark has been determined to be based on total assets which is a generally accepted auditing benchmark.
We agreed with the Audit Committee that we would report to them misstatements identified during our audit above 200000 2016 165000 as well as misstatements below that amount that in our view warranted reporting for qualitative reasons.
Going concern In accordance with ISAs UK we report as follows Reporting obligation Outcome We are required to report if we have anything material to add or draw attention to in respect of the directors statement in the financial statements about whether the directors considered it appropriate to adopt the going concern basis of accounting in preparing the financial statements and the directors identification of any material uncertainties to the parent companys ability to continue as a going concern over a period of at least twelve months from the date of approval of the financial statements.
We have nothing material to add or to draw attention to.
However because not all future events or conditions can be predicted this statement is not a guarantee as to the parent companys ability to continue as a going concern.
We are required to report if the directors statement relating to Going Concern in accordance with Listing Rule 9.8.6R3 is materially inconsistent with our knowledge obtained in the audit.
We have nothing to report.
Find out more at site 139 Report on the audit of the parent company financial statements continued Reporting on other information The other information comprises all of the information in the Annual Report other than the financial statements and our auditors report thereon.
The directors are responsible for the other information.
Our opinion on the financial statements does not cover the other information and accordingly we do not express an audit opinion or except to the extent otherwise explicitly stated in this report any form of assurance thereon.
In connection with our audit of the financial statements our responsibility is to read the other information and in doing so consider whether the other information is materially inconsistent with the financial statements or our knowledge obtained in the audit or otherwise appears to be materially misstated.
If we identify an apparent material inconsistency or material misstatement we are required to perform procedures to conclude whether there is a material misstatement of the financial statements or a material misstatement of the other information.
If based on the work we have performed we conclude that there is a material misstatement of this other information we are required to report that fact.
We have nothing to report based on these responsibilities.
With respect to the Strategic Report and Directors report we also considered whether the disclosures required by the UK Companies Act 2006 have been included.
Based on the responsibilities described above and our work undertaken in the course of the audit the Companies Act 2006 CA06 ISAs UK and the Listing Rules of the Financial Conduct Authority FCA require us also to report certain opinions and matters as described below required by ISAs UK unless otherwise stated.
Strategic Report and Directors report In our opinion based on the work undertaken in the course of the audit the information given in the Strategic Report and Directors report for the year ended 31 December 2017 is consistent with the financial statements and has been prepared in accordance with applicable legal requirements.
CA06
In light of the knowledge and understanding of the parent company and its environment obtained in the course of the audit we did not identify any material misstatements in the Strategic Report and Directors report.
CA06
The directors assessment of the prospects of the parent company and of the principal risks that would threaten the solvency or liquidity of the parent company We have nothing material to add or draw attention to regarding The directors confirmation on page 38 of the Annual Report that they have carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the parent company including those that would threaten its business model future performance solvency or liquidity.
The disclosures in the Annual Report that describe those risks and explain how they are being managed or mitigated.
The directors explanation on page 42 of the Annual Report as to how they have assessed the prospects of the parent company over what period they have done so and why they consider that period to be appropriate and their statement as to whether they have a reasonable expectation that the parent company will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the period of their assessment including any related disclosures drawing attention to any necessary qualifications or assumptions.
We have nothing to report having performed a review of the directors statement that they have carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the parent company and statement in relation to the longerterm viability of the parent company.
Our review was substantially less in scope than an audit and only consisted of making inquiries and considering the directors process supporting their statements checking that the statements are in alignment with the relevant provisions of the UK Corporate Governance Code the Code and considering whether the statements are consistent with the knowledge and understanding of the parent company and its environment obtained in the course of the audit.
Listing Rules Other Code Provisions We have nothing to report in respect of our responsibility to report when The statement given by the directors on page 66 that they consider the Annual Report taken as a whole to be fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for the members to assess the parent companys position and performance business model and strategy is materially inconsistent with our knowledge of the parent company obtained in the course of performing our audit.
The section of the Annual Report on page 61 describing the work of the Audit Committee does not appropriately address matters communicated by us to the Audit Committee.
The directors statement relating to the parent companys compliance with the Code does not properly disclose a departure from a relevant provision of the Code specified under the Listing Rules for review by the auditors.
Directors Remuneration In our opinion the part of the Directors Remuneration Report to be audited has been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 2006.
CA06 Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 140 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements Report on the audit of the parent company financial statements continued Responsibilities for the financial statements and the audit Responsibilities of the directors for the financial statements As explained more fully in the Directors responsibilities statement set out on page 60 the directors are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements in accordance with the applicable framework and for being satisfied that they give a true and fair view.
The directors are also responsible for such internal control as they determine is necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error.
In preparing the financial statements the directors are responsible for assessing the parent companys ability to continue as a going concern disclosing as applicable matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless the directors either intend to liquidate the parent company or to cease operations or have no realistic alternative but to do so.
Auditors responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error and to issue an auditors report that includes our opinion.
Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with ISAs UK will always detect a material misstatement when it exists.
Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if individually or in the aggregate they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these financial statements.
A further description of our responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements is located on the FRCs website at www. rc. iteauditorsresponsibilities.
This description forms part of our auditors report.
Use of this report This report including the opinions has been prepared for and only for the parent companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006 and for no other purpose.
We do not in giving these opinions accept or assume responsibility for any other purpose or to any other person to whom this report is shown or into whose hands it may come save where expressly agreed by our prior consent in writing.
Other required reporting Companies Act 2006 exception reporting Under the Companies Act 2006 we are required to report to you if in our opinion we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit or adequate accounting records have not been kept by the parent company or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or certain disclosures of directors remuneration specified by law are not made or the financial statements and the part of the Directors Remuneration Report to be audited are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns.
We have no exceptions to report arising from this responsibility.
Appointment
Following the recommendation of the audit committee we were appointed by the members in May 2012 to audit the financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2012 and subsequent financial periods.
The period of total uninterrupted engagement is 6 years covering the years ended 31 December 2012 to 31 December 2017.
Other matter We have reported separately on the group financial statements of Tyman plc for the year ended 31 December 2017.
Richard Porter Senior Statutory Auditor for and on behalf of PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP Chartered Accountants and Statutory Auditors
7 March 2018 Independent auditors report continued To the members of Tyman plc Find out more at site 141 Company balance sheet As at 31 December 2017
Fixed assets Investments in subsidiaries 4 311031 295529 Current assets Debtors  amounts receivable after more than one year 5 82190 87447 Cash and cash equivalents 677 11597 82867 99044 Creditors  amounts falling due within one year 6 17225 6861 Net current assets 65642 92183 Total assets less current liabilities 376673 387712 Creditors  amounts falling due after more than one year 6 81711 88569 Net assets 294962 299143
Called up share capital 9 8929 8929 Share premium 81407 81407 Other reserves 8920 8920 Treasury reserve 2776 3338 Retained earnings  carried forward 184306 185765 Retained earnings  profit for the year 14176 17460 Total shareholders funds 294962 299143 The notes on pages 143 to 145 are an integral part of these financial statements.
The financial statements on pages 141 and 145 were approved by the Board on 7 March 2018 and signed on its behalf by Louis Eperjesi James Brotherton
Chief Executive Officer Chief Financial Officer
Tyman plc Company registration number  Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 142 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements Called up share capital
Other
Treasury reserve
Total
At 1 January 2016 8505 63256 8920 4321 203253 279613 Total comprehensive income Profit for the year     17460 17460 Transactions with owners 424 18151  983 17488 2070 Sharebased payments Dividends paid     15578 15578 Issue of shares 424 18151    18575 Issue of own shares to Employee Benefit Trust    2843 2843 Purchase of own shares for Employee Benefit Trust    1860  1860 At 31 December 2016 8929 81407 8920 3338 203225 299143 Total comprehensive income Profit for the year     14176 14176 Transactions with owners    562 18919 18357 Sharebased payments 1987 1987 Dividends paid     19497 19497 Issue of own shares to Employee Benefit Trust    1409 1409 Purchase of own shares for Employee Benefit Trust    847  847 At 31 December 2017 8929 81407 8920 2776 198482 294962 1 Other reserves are nondistributable capital reserves which arose on previous acquisitions.
2 Sharebased payments include a deferred tax credit of 0.5 million 2016 deferred tax debit of 0.3 million.
The notes on pages 143 to 145 are an integral part of these financial statements.
Company statement of changes in equity For the year ended 31 December 2017 Find out more at site 143 Notes to the Company financial statements For the year ended 31 December 2017 Accounting policies 1.1 Basis of preparation The financial statements of Tyman plc have been prepared in accordance with FRS 101 Reduced Disclosure Framework.
The financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis under the historical cost convention and in accordance with the Companies Act 2006 applicable to companies reporting under FRS 101.
The accounting policies have been consistently applied.
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with FRS 101 requires the use of certain critical accounting estimates.
It also requires management to exercise its judgement in the process of applying the Companys accounting policies.
Areas involving a higher degree of judgement or complexity or areas where assumptions and estimates are significant to the financial statements are disclosed in note 2.3 of the Group financial statements.
1.1.1 FRS 101  reduced disclosure exemptions The following exemptions from the requirements of IFRSs have been applied in the preparation of these financial statements in accordance with FRS 101 paragraphs 45b and 46 to 52 of IFRS 2 Sharebased payments IFRS 7 Financial instruments disclosures paragraphs 91 to 99 of IFRS 13 Fair value measurement the following paragraphs of IAS 1 Presentation of financial statements comparative information requirements in respect of paragraph 79aiv paragraph 10d cash flow statements paragraph 16 statement of compliance with all IFRS paragraph 38A minimum of two primary statements including cash flow statements paragraphs 38B to 38D additional comparative information paragraphs 40A to 40D requirements for a third statement of financial position paragraph 111 cash flow statement information and paragraphs 134 to 136 capital management disclosures paragraphs 30 and 31 of IAS 8 Accounting policies changes in accounting estimates and errors IAS 7 Statement of cash flows paragraph 17 of IAS 24 Related party disclosures and the requirements of IAS 24 Related party disclosures to disclose related party transactions entered into between two or more members of a group.
1.2 Foreign currency translation 1.2.1 Functional currency and presentation currency The financial statements are presented in Sterling which is also the functional currency.
1.2.2 Transactions and balances Foreign currency transactions are translated into the functional currency using the exchange rates prevailing at the dates of the transactions.
Foreign exchange gains and losses resulting from the settlement of such transactions and from the translation at yearend exchange rates of monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are recognised in profit or loss.
1.3 Financial instruments Financial assets and liabilities are recognised when the Company becomes party to the contractual provisions of the instrument and are generally derecognised when the contract that gives rise to it is settled sold cancelled or expires.
1.3.1 Financial assets loans and receivables Loans and receivables are nonderivative financial assets with fixed or determinable payments that are not quoted on an active market.
They are included in current assets except for maturities greater than 12 months after the end of the reporting period.
These are classified as noncurrent assets.
The Companys loans and receivables comprise debtors see note 5 and cash and cash equivalents in the balance sheet.
1.3.2 Financial liabilities held at amortised cost Financial liabilities held at amortised cost comprise creditors see note 6.
1.4 Investments in subsidiaries Investments in subsidiaries are stated at cost less any accumulated impairment losses.
1.5 Borrowings Interestbearing loans and overdrafts are recognised initially at fair value net of transaction costs incurred.
Interestbearing loans are subsequently carried at amortised cost using the effective interest rate method.
All borrowing costs are expensed as incurred on an accruals basis to the income statement using the effective interest rate method.
Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 144 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements Notes to the Company financial statements continued For the year ended 31 December 2017 Accounting policies continued 1.6 Sharebased payments The Company operates an equitysettled sharebased compensation plan Long Term Incentive Plan LTIP for certain employees under which the entity receives services from employees as consideration for equity instruments share options of the Company.
The fair value of the employee services received in exchange for the grant of options is expensed on a straightline basis over the vesting period based on the Companys estimate of shares that will eventually vest.
The total amount to be expensed over the vesting period is determined by reference to the fair value of the options granted excluding the impact of any nonmarket vesting conditions.
Nonmarket vesting conditions are included in assumptions about the number of options that are expected to vest.
At each balance sheet date the entity revises its estimates of the number of options that are expected to vest with any changes in estimate recognised in the income statement with a corresponding adjustment in equity.
The fair value of awards granted under LTIP is measured using a probability model to predict EPS levels.
The proceeds received net of any directly attributable transaction costs are credited to share capital nominal value and share premium when the options are exercised.
The grant by the Company of options over its equity instruments to the employees of subsidiary undertakings in the Group is treated as a capital contribution.
The fair value of employee services received measured by reference to the grant date fair value is recognised over the vesting period as an increase to investment in subsidiary undertakings with a corresponding credit to equity in the parent entity accounts.
The social security contributions payable in connection with the grant of the share options are considered an integral part of the grant itself and the charge will be treated as a cashsettled transaction.
Details of sharebased payments are provided in note 22 of the Group financial statements.
Profit attributable to the shareholders of the Company The Company is an investment holding company.
It receives dividend income from subsidiaries and bank interest.
It pays loan interest to a subsidiary.
The majority of administrative expenses are paid by the Companys subsidiary Tyman Management Limited including the whole amount of relevant auditors remuneration and operating lease costs.
As permitted by Section 408 of the Companies Act 2006 the Company has elected not to present its own profit and loss account for the year.
The Company reported a profit for the financial year ended 31 December 2017 of 14.2 million 2016 17.5 million.
Employees
Other than the Directors there were no employees of the Company during the year 2016 Nil.
Directors emoluments are set out in the Directors remuneration report in the Groups Annual Report on pages 71 to 88.
Investments
Cost
At 1 January 2016 299875 Capital contribution relating to sharebased payments 1250 At 31 December 2016 301125 Additions 14000 Capital contribution relating to sharebased payments 1502 At 31 December 2017 316627
At 1 January 2016 31 December 2016 and 31 December 2017 5596 Carrying amount At 1 January 2016 294279 At 31 December 2016 295529 At 31 December 2017 311031 All of the above investments are in unlisted shares.
The Directors believe that the carrying value of the investments is supported by the recoverable amount of their underlying assets.
Debtors
Note
Amounts receivable after more than one year Amounts owed by Group undertakings 81576 86990 Corporation tax asset  260 Deferred tax asset 8 614 197 82190 87447 The amounts owed by Group undertakings are unsecured interest free and recoverable on demand but are unlikely to be repaid within one year.
Find out more at site 145
Note
Amounts falling due within one year Amounts owed to Group undertakings 16550 6380 Corporation tax liability 239 Other creditors 436 481 17225 6861 Amounts falling due after more than one year Private placement notes 7 73835 80693 Amounts owed to Group undertakings 7876 7876 81711 88569 The amounts owed to Group undertakings falling due within one year are interest free repayable on demand and unsecured.
The amounts owed to Group undertakings falling due after more than one year are between the Company and Octroi Group Limited a subsidiary and interest is charged at a fixed rate of 2.0 per cent per annum.
Private placement notes The senior notes relate to the issuance of a private debt placement with US financial institutions totalling US100000000.
Refer to note 17.2.2 of the Group financial statements.
Details of the private placement notes which are unsecured are as follows Wholly repayable in 2021 40763 44566 Wholly repayable in 2024 33352 36463 Capitalised borrowing costs 280 336 73835 80693 Deferred tax asset At 1 January 197 514 Income statement charge 150 Tax creditcharge relating to components of other comprehensive income 267 317 At 31 December 614 197 The deferred tax asset relates to sharebased payments.
There are no unused tax losses or unused tax credits.
Called up share capital The share capital of the Company is as set out in note 21 of the Group financial statements.
Financial commitments At 31 December 2017 the Company had future annual lease commitments on land and buildings under noncancellable operating leases as stated below.
These commitments were met on the Companys behalf by Tyman Management Limited a subsidiary.
Not later than one year 190 190 Later than one years but not later than five years 952 952 Later than five years 190 381 Total lease commitment 1332 1523
The dividends of the Company are set out in note 23 of the Group financial statements.
Related party transactions The Company has taken advantage of the exemption in accordance with FRS 101 as a wholly owned subsidiary not to disclose details of related party transactions in accordance with IAS 24 Related party disclosures required by this standard.
Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 146 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements Alternative Performance Measures used by the Group are Dividend Cover Free Cash Flow Interest Cover
Operating Cash Conversion Return on Acquisition Investment Returns on Capital Employed and Controllable Capital Employed Underlying EPS Underlying Net Debt Underlying Operating Margin Underlying Operating Profit Underlying Profit before Taxation and Underlying effective tax rate.
APMs provide additional useful information to shareholders on the underlying performance of the business.
These APMs are consistent with how business performance is measured internally by the Group.
Underlying profit is not recognised under IFRS and may not be comparable with underlying profit measures used by other companies.
APMs are not intended to be superior to or a substitute for GAAP measures.
The following adjustments are made to reported profit to derive underlying profit Exceptional items Exceptional items are largely one off and nontrading in nature and therefore create volatility in reported earnings.
Items accounted for by the Group as exceptional include MandA transaction costs IFRS 3 inventory revaluations and the costs of integrating acquired businesses as well as major restructuring initiatives.
These items are excluded from the underlying results of the Group due to their material nontrading andor nonrecurring nature.
The Group aims to be both consistent and clear in its recognition and disclosure of exceptional gains and losses.
Amortisation of acquired intangible assets and impairment of acquired intangible assets and goodwill The amortisation charge of intangible assets recognised on business combinations and any subsequent impairment of intangibles or goodwill is excluded from the underlying results of the Group as these are considered to be of a nontrading nature.
Other
Amortisation of borrowing costs accelerated amortisation of borrowing costs gains and losses on the fair value of derivative financial instruments and unwinding of discount on provisions are all accounted for as exceptional.
These are nontrading in nature and are not considered reflective of the core performance of the Group.
For all adjustments both the materiality and nature of the items are considered in determining presentation.
In addition the taxation effect of adjustments is excluded from Underlying Profit after taxation and earnings per share metrics.
Material tax effects are disclosed separately.
Alternative Performance Measures Find out more at site 147 Reconciliation of reported profit numbers to underlying profit numbers Reconciliation of Profit before taxation to the Underlying Profit after taxation APM m 2017 2016 Profit before taxation 34.5 29.4 Exceptional items 10.0 10.9 Amortisation of borrowing costs 0.4 0.4 LossGain on revaluation of fair value hedge 0.4 0.3 Amortisation of acquired intangible assets 23.0 21.7 Underlying profit before taxation 68.3 62.1 Income tax charge 3.3 8.6 Add back US Federal tax rate change adjustment 6.9 Add back Underlying tax effect Underlying profit after taxation 47.7 44.0 Tax effect of exceptional items amortisation of borrowing costs amortisation of acquired intangible assets gain or loss on revaluation of fair value hedge and unwinding of discount on provisions.
Underlying Operating Profit is reconciled to Operating Profit on the face of the Income Statement.
In their operational reviews the AmesburyTruth and SchlegelGiesse Divisions disclose Revenue and Underlying Operating Profit in US Dollars and Euros respectively translated at average exchange rates for the relevant period.
This is for the convenience of users and to reflect the principal currencies in which those Divisions transact.
Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 148 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements Additional information on APMs Additional information and definitions relating to the APMs used by the Group are provided below.
Where appropriate Underlying is defined as before Amortisation of acquired intangible assets deferred tax on Amortisation of acquired intangible assets Impairment of acquired intangible assets Impairment of goodwill Exceptional items Unwinding of discount on provisions Gains and Losses on the fair value of derivative financial instruments Amortisation of borrowing costs Accelerated amortisation of borrowing costs and the associated tax effect.
Acquisition Enterprise Value The gross consideration paid to the seller less cash acquired with the acquired business plus debt acquired with the acquired business plus the expenses of the acquisition excluding financing expenses plus any integration expenses booked as exceptional items.
Adjusted EBITDA Underlying Operating Profit with Depreciation and Sharebased payments expenses added back plus the preacquisition EBITDA of businesses acquired during the year covering the relevant preacquisition period less the EBITDA of businesses disposed of during the year.
Adjustments to cash flows from operating activities The add back of net finance costs depreciation amortisation of intangible assets impairment of PPE profit on disposal of PPE writeoff of inventory fair value adjustments pension service costs and expected administrative costs noncash provision movements profit on disposal of business and sharebased payments.
Constant Currency or CC Comparison with the comparative period translated at the current years average or closing exchange rate as applicable.
Dividend Cover Underlying Earnings Per Share divided by the total Dividend Per Share for the financial year.
Free Cash Flow Operational Cash Flow after deducting Pension contributions Income tax paid Net interest paid and Exceptional cash costs settled in the year.
Interest Cover Adjusted EBITDA divided by the net Interest payable on bank loans private placement notes and overdrafts and Interest income from short term bank deposits.
Leverage Underlying Net Debt translated at the average exchange rate for the year divided by Adjusted EBITDA.
Like for Like or LFL The comparison of Revenue or Operating Profit as appropriate excluding the impact of any acquisitions made during the current year and for acquisitions made in the comparative year excluding from the current year result the impact of the equivalent current year preacquisition period.
For disposals the results are excluded for the whole of the current and prior periods.
Net cash generated from operations Profit before taxation after changes in working capital provisions utilised pension contributions income tax paid and Adjustments to cash flows from operating activities.
Operating Cash Conversion Operational Cash Flow divided by Underlying Operating Profit.
Operational Cash Flow Net cash generated from operations before Income tax paid Exceptional costs cash settled in the year and Pension contributions and after Proceeds on disposal of property plant and equipment Payments to acquire property plant and equipment and Payments to acquire intangible assets.
Return on Acquisition Investment or ROAI Annualised Underlying Operating Profit attributable to the acquired business divided by the Acquisition Enterprise Value less the fair value of controllable capital employed as at the date of acquisition plus the value of controllable capital employed at the date of measurement.
The denominator is adjusted for seasonality where appropriate.
Return on Capital Employed or ROCE Underlying Operating Profit as a percentage of the 12month average capital employed.
Return on Controllable Capital Employed or ROCCE Underlying Operating profit as a percentage of the 12month average controllable capital employed.
Underlying Administrative
Administrative Expenses before Exceptional items Amortisation of acquired intangible assets Impairment of acquired intangible assets and Impairment of acquired goodwill.
Underlying Net Debt Interestbearing loans and borrowings net of cash and cash equivalents plus unamortised borrowing costs added back.
Alternative Performance Measures continued Find out more at site 149 Definitions and glossary of terms APM Alternative Performance Measure Bilco The Bilco Company acquired by AmesburyTruth on 1 July 2016 bps Basis points CGU Cash Generating Unit CMA Competition and Markets Authority Statutory Audit Services Order CMM Coordinate Measuring Machine DSBP Deferred Share Bonus Plan DSE Display Screen Equipment DTR Disclosure Rules and Transparency Rules of the UK Listing Authority EBITDA Earnings before Interest Taxation Depreciation and Amortisation EMEAI Europe Middle East and Africa and India region EPS Earnings per share ESSP Employee Sharesave Plan EU European Union FRC Financial Reporting Council FRS 101 Financial Reporting Standard 101 Reduced Disclosure Framework FY Full year GDPR General Data Protection Regulations GHG Green House Gas GHG Protocol World Resources InstituteWorld Business Council for Sustainable Development Greenhouse Gas Protocol.
A Corporate Accounting and Reporting Standard Giesse Giesse Group acquired by the Groups SchlegelGiesse Division on 7 March 2016 HMRC Her Majestys Revenue and Customs Howe Green Howe Green Limited acquired by the Group on 3 March 2017 ICSA Institute of Chartered Secretaries and Administrators IFRIC IFRS Interpretations Committee IFRS International Financial Reporting Standards including IFRIC Interpretations JCHS Joint Centre for Housing Studies of Harvard University KPI Key performance indicator LIRA Leading Indicator for Remodelling Activity published quarterly by JCHS Listing Rules Financial Conduct Authority UK Listing Rules Lost time injuries The absolute number of lost time injuries over the last 12 months Lost time injury rate The number of lost time incidents per 100000 hours worked LTIP Long Term Incentive Plan Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 150 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements LTM Last twelve months MandA Mergers and Acquisitions Maquiladora A factory in Mexico run by a foreign company and exporting its products to that companys country of origin NAHB The National Association of Home Builders NBS New Bridge Street NPD New Product Development NVQ National Vocational Qualifications OECD Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development OEM Original equipment manufacturer OGSM Objectives goals strategies and measures OTIF On time in full PBTA Profit Before Taxation and Amortisation PPE Property plant and equipment Response or Response Electronics Response Electronics Limited acquired by ERA on 3 March 2016 Revenue The gross inflow of economic benefits cash receivables other assets arising from the ordinary operating activities of the Group RMI Renovation maintenance and improvement SKU Stock Keeping Unit or Sterling The lawful currency of the United Kingdom TFR Trattamento di fine Rapporto The Act The Companies Act 2006 The Code The UK Corporate Governance Code 2016 TMC Tyman Management Committee TSA Tyman Sourcing Asia TSR Total shareholder return UK United Kingdom UK ESSP Tyman Sharesave Plan UK GAAP UK Generally Accepted Accounting Practice US United States of America US The lawful currency of the United States of America Definitions and glossary of terms continued Find out more at site 151 Roundings and exchange rates
Percentage numbers have been calculated using figures rounded to the nearest thousand from the financial statements which may lead to small differences in some figures and percentages quoted.
Exchange rates The following foreign exchange rates have been used in the financial information to translate amounts into Sterling Closing rates 2017 2016 US Dollar 1.3493 1.2341 Euro 1.1263 1.1729 Australian Dollar 1.7285 1.7136 Canadian Dollar 1.6936 1.6589 Brazilian Real 4.4695 4.0176 Average rates 2017 2016 US Dollar 1.2887 1.3554 Euro 1.1414 1.2243 Australian Dollar 1.6811 1.8252 Canadian Dollar 1.6717 1.7965 Brazilian Real 4.1154 4.7437 Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 152 Strategic report Governance and Directors report Financial statements Fiveyear summarytel 2014 2013 Revenue 522700 457644 353425 350899 298054 Underlying operating profit 76817 69803 51425 46077 32348 Net finance costs 9373 7814 6923 7033 3517 Profit before taxation 34534 29376 15576 11904 794 Taxation 3334 8641 7885 2573 162 Profit for the year 31200 20735 7691 9331 956 Underlying profit before taxation 68284 62079 45106 41629 28586 Underlying net debt 163650 176749 83179 90678 80947tel 2014 2013 Underlying basic earnings per share Underlying diluted earnings per share Dividends per share declared 11.25p 10.50p 8.75p 8.00p 6.00p Return on capital employed 13.6% 13.8% 12.5% 11.4% 9.0% Operating cash conversion 85.6% 105.9% 84.9% 71.8% 116.4%
Total number of shares in issue 000 178582 178582 170104 170104 170104 Average monthly number of employees 3904 3568 2947 2897 2317 1 See Alternative Performance Measures on page 146.
Tyman plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Tyman plc 29 Queen Annes Gate
