The UKs leading pawnbroker Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Significant growth from a wider customer base Hand T provides a range of simple and accessible financial products tailored for a customer base which has limited access to or is excluded from the traditional banking and finance sector.
John Nichols Chief Executive Cautionary Statement All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this document including without limitation those regarding the financial condition results operations and business of Hand T Group plc and its strategy plans and objectives and the markets in which it operates are forward looking statements.
Such forward looking statements which reflect the directors assumptions made on the basis of information available to them at this time involve known and unknown risks uncertainties and other important factors which could cause the actual results performance or achievements of Hand T Group plc or the markets in which it operates to be materially different from future results performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward looking statements.
Nothing in this document shall be regarded as a profit forecast and its directors accept no liability to third parties in respect of this report save as would arise under English law.
In particular section 463 of the Companies Act 2006 limits the liability of the directors of Hand T Group plc so that their liability is solely to Hand T Group plc.
Contents
Strategic report Highlights 2017 01 Chairmans statement 02 Our business 04 Our products 06 Our development 07 Chief executives review 08 Finance directors review 12 Principal risks and uncertainties 14 Financial risk management objectives and policies 16 Corporate social responsibility 17 Directors officers and advisers 20 Corporate governance 22 Directors report Directors report 27 Directors responsibilities statement 31
Independent Auditors Report
Financial statements Group statement of comprehensive income 37 Group statement of changes in equity 38 Group balance sheet 39 Group cash flow statement 40 Notes to the consolidated financial statements 41 Parent Company balance sheet 70 Parent Company statement of changes in equity 71 Notes to the Company financial statements 72 Store directory 74 For more information go to our website site Number of stores stores 2016 181 stores 189teltel Personal loan revenue less impairment m Up 62.9% 2016 3.5m 5.7tel Gross pledge book m Up 11.6% 2016 41.3m 46.1tel Retail gross profits m Up 15.2% 2016 11.2m 12.9tel Personal loan book m Up 94.7% 2016 9.4m 18.3tel Redemption of annual lending % 83.6% 2016 84.3% 83.6tel Annual Report and Accounts 2017  01 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Highlights 2017 Financial overview GROSS PROFIT 2016 57.1m EBITDA 2016 13.1m see note 3 page 47 for the definition of EBITDA PROFIT BEFORE TAX 2016 9.7m DILUTED EPS 2016 20.88p DIVIDEND PER SHARE 2016 9.2p Key performance indicators The selection of the KPIs has been revised to take account of the change in relative importance of product type to the Groups overall financial performance and position.
This is the actual percentage of lending in each year which was redeemed or renewed the 2017 figure is an estimate based on recent trend and early performance.
02  site
Chairmans statement
The Group has achieved growth in revenues from the core services of pawnbroking retail and personal loans.
We have improved store profitability and have also made progress in the development of our online channel although there is still considerable work to do. store network.
The opportunity to build on this concept for our core services is clear and will be a key part of our future strategy.
These activities have repositioned the business within the wider alternative credit market and allowed the Group to access a broader customer base.
The Board ensures that this growth is carefully managed with a clear focus on the changing risks both regulatory and financial that this diversification brings.
The growth in retail FX and buyback also provide a degree of resilience to changes in the marketplace.
Financial performance The Group delivered profit after tax of 11.3m 2016 7.6m and diluted earnings per share of 30.94 pence 2016 20.88 pence.
Subject to shareholder approval a final dividend of 6.2 pence per ordinary share 2016 5.3 pence will be paid on 1 June 2018 to those shareholders on the register at the close of business on 4 May 2018.
This will bring the full year dividend to 10.5 pence per ordinary share 2016 9.2 pence.
The Groups financial position is strong with growth in the combined personal loan and pawnbroking loan books net to 63.8m 31 December 2016 50.2m.
As a result net debt increased to 13.3m at 31 December 2017 31 December 2016 5.4m.
At year end the Group had available headroom of 8.0m on its 30m borrowing facilities.
I am pleased to report that in March 2018 the facility was increased by 5.0m.
Regulation
HandT is authorised and regulated by the Financial Conduct Authority FCA for all consumer credit business.
During the year the FCA conducted a consultation on creditworthiness and is expected to publish the results in 2018.
We engaged with the FCA through our trade associations and have analysed the proposals contained within the consultation.
The consultation provides helpful guidance on effective creditworthiness assessments and clarifies some of the specific exemptions in relation to pawnbroking.
Subject to the final policy statement we do not expect it to have an adverse impact on our business.
We fully support the higher standards that the consultation aims to deliver.
Strategy
We are developing our capabilities to address a changing market where we see pressures both on the high street in general and the core product of pawnbroking in particular.
We are focussed on maximising the potential from the core services while investing in the development of new products and channels.
This approach will allow us to improve profitability in the short term in the longer term we can access a wider customer base and provide those consumers with products appropriate to their needs.
We believe that our network of stores supports this development whether through clickandcollect from the est1897 website or by providing a facetoface underwriting decision for customers we cannot serve with an online loan.
This realworld presence supported by an effective online and mobile proposition creates an important distinction between HandT and a purely online business.
In developing our personal loan product we have a clear objective to provide our customers with a route to lower interest rate credit products as their relationship with HandT develops.
We believe that this progression is beneficial to the customer builds loyalty and meets the high standards required in this regulated marketplace.
Prospects
The overall weakness in sterling following the EU referendum result has continued to benefit the sterling gold price for much of the year this in turn provides an improvement in the Groups profits while it continues.
Demand for our services remains strong and the development in our products and distribution enables us to capture a larger share of the significant alternative credit market.
Our thoughtful approach to growth reflects our intention to provide our consumers with a service that maintains the highest standards of affordability and seeks to avoid any consumer detriment.
On behalf of the Board and our shareholders I would like to thank everyone at HandT for their hard work and dedication over the past year.
Peter D McNamara Chairman Annual Report and Accounts 2017  03 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements 04  site Our business Who we are Our status
Our
As at 31 December 2017 HandT was the largest pawnbroking business in the UK by size of pledge book.
HandT has existed in some form since the late 1800s and over the years has built or acquired some of the oldest and largest pawnbrokers in the UK.
Presence on the high street and excellent customer service to a localised customer base have always underpinned HandTs approach.
For example the store in Edinburgh has operated from the same building and served the same community for more than 150 years.
HandTs listing on AIM provided the Group with access to new sources of finance.
This has enabled its development by adding new products and services and bringing the store network to 181 at 31 December 2017.
HandT will be the premier provider of alternative credit in the UK through a range of services that help our customers rebuild their credit rating and return to the mainstream.
There are three elements to delivery of the strategy Maintain the performance of our core products and stores Develop a range of credit products to serve a wider customer base Enhance distribution by delivering services in store online and through mobile devices.
HandT operates across the UK in a fastmoving competitive environment.
It will continue to succeed by focussing on customer needs training developing and retaining key staff developing existing and new products and expanding its distribution channels.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017  05 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements
Personal service Our loan products are often used by people who cannot access mainstream credit.
Why The most common reason is that they may have experienced problems in the past which resulted in missed payment or defaults on their credit file.
Almost half of our personal loan customers are aged under 35 and generally have a thin credit file or a low credit score.
Our customers often need money to meet daytoday expenses and as such they need relatively small sums quickly this demand can be met very effectively by our instore products.
It is possible to complete a pawnbroking or personal loan in store within 30 minutes.
Customers often compare our rates with larger wellknown shortterm credit brands which is advantageous as we are often considerably cheaper.
We offer our services both online and in store and ensure that there is a member of staff available for our customers to speak to if they have any questions.
Our staff understand that each customer has different needs and they use our range of products to help them to find the best solution.
We believe that providing customers with the option of facetoface interaction instore helps to build trust and understanding and delivers genuine high quality service.
Customer feedback Est1897 Retail  Really great service from these guys Prompt when sending my watch.
I made an error with the address and they were able to sort it without hassle.
The watch arrived two days after I ordered and it is amazing Will certainly be telling all of my friends to buy from these guys. site  They were so helpful.
One quick phone call to verify some details and the money was in my account within a few hours.
Online personal loan  I applied on HandTs website on Saturday and it was processed and agreed on the following Monday.
I was surprised I was accepted as my credit rating isnt great but I still have credit.
HandT didnt just rely on credit scoring alone.
Thanks HandT.
Customer profile Pawnbroking 43% Personal Loans 58% Buyback 64% Gender split Age profile Pawnbroking 57% Personal Loans 42% Buyback 36%
1824 6% 2535 25% 3644 23% 4455 26% 56 20% Personal Loans 1824 13% 2535 33% 3644 26% 4455 19% 56 9%
1824 14% 2535 39% 3644 24% 4455 17% 56 7% 06  site Our products
A pawnbroking loan is secured on an item of value with a term of up to six months.
We will lend on any asset we can accurately value typically jewellery and watches.
The customer enters into a consumer credit agreement for a period of six months and the customer can redeem the goods at any point during this time providing that they repay the original loan amount plus any interest due.
If the customer chooses not to redeem or renew the loan HandT will take action to dispose of the goods.
The customer has no liability to us beyond the value of the goods.
PERSONAL LOANS HandTs personal loans are available in store and online.
They offer flexibility on the length of loan and regular repayment amount depending on the personal circumstances of each customer.
Before issuing a loan we establish the customers identity and complete a thorough affordability assessment.
If approved the customer enters into a consumer credit loan agreement and we will collect the repayments on the dates agreed with the customer.
JEWELLERY RETAIL HandT offers a range of new and secondhand jewellery and watches sourced from our pledge book purchased over the counter or purchased from suppliers.
All HandTs jewellery is professionally cleaned restored and valued before being redistributed for sale at stores across the country.
PURCHASING
Purchasing is a simple way for customers to use their unwanted items predominantly gold to raise some cash.
The process is straightforward with the store assessing the items agreeing a price with the customer and purchasing the goods for cash on the spot.
FOREIGN EXCHANGE HandT offers a foreign exchange service at competitive rates and with no commission charges further establishing one of our core strengths of offering great value to the customer.
BUYBACK
Increasingly a younger generation of customers is seeking the opportunity to raise cash from electronic items such as phones tablets and game consoles.
Customers can sell their electronic items to HandT for cash and buy the item back within 31 days.
This product is particularly popular with the younger generation 53% of our customers are aged under 35.
CHEQUE CASHING Cheque cashing is a service that allows customers to get cash for their cheques in a few minutes rather than banking the cheque.
Customers use HandT to speed up the cheque clearance some building societies can take almost two weeks to clear a cheque or to avoid banking the cheque into an overdrawn account.
Hand T provide a wide range of services but at the core is the provision of money to our customer base whether through a loan or by selling an asset to us.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017  07 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Our development
Our store estate is still the largest customer acquisition channel for all products.
We have streamlined a number of key processes making it easier for both our customers and staff to transact.
We have also made significant progress when developing our omnichannel approach including improvements to all customer journeys simplifying online to store processes and ensuring all customer touch points are easily accessible regardless of the customers browsing preferences desktop tablet or mobile.
Our plan is to capitalise on this by introducing a truly clicks to bricks offer during 2018.
A customer will be able to apply for any product HandT offers online and complete the transaction in store or vice versa.
There was significant improvement in the amount of traffic across our websites with both site and site experiencing nearly double the traffic than 2016.
Made for mobile Throughout 2017 we saw a continuation of the trend of customers viewing our websites on a mobile device.
In response to this we launched a revised version of our retail website along with a new mobile optimised online loans journey.
Customer relationship and engagement Our customer relationship programme has allowed us to communicate more effectively with our existing customers via both email and text message creating genuine lifetime value.
In 2017 we saw a continuation of strong demand for further borrowing from our existing customer base.
Product development We have made significant progress in developing a range of loan products which can help our customers return to mainstream credit.
Our loan products now have three distinct products.
This allows us to lend to a new customer who has a less than perfect credit history but also gives us the opportunity to maintain a relationship with the customer and potentially lend them more at an improved rate as they repair and rebuild their credit history with us.
Our best rate loan is typically offered to existing customers who have a strong history of repaying their loan.
We can now also lend up to 5000 to a new customer depending on their personal circumstances and affordability.
This allows us to serve a wider range of customers.
These customers are not necessarily customers we would have historically transacted with.
The new rates also allow us to compete in different markets and widen our distribution of product through our carefully selected portfolio of partners.
We are now presenting our product online to customers who are looking for a more traditional unsecured loan product.
08  site Chief executives review The Group delivered profit before tax of 14.1m 2016 9.7m as a result of improved gross profits in the key segments of pawnbroking retail and personal loans.
THE MARKET Our marketplace has undergone significant changes in the past four years experiencing peak competition a falling gold price and new regulation causing a number of our competitors to restructure their businesses or exit the market.
In comparison during 2017 we experienced far more stability allowing us to focus on developing our proposition.
OUR STRATEGY Our Vision Hand T will be the premier provider of alternative credit in the UK through a range of services that help our customers rebuild their credit rating and return to the mainstream.
The Groups strategy is to serve a customer base whose access to mainstream credit is limited and for whom smallsum loans can help to address shortterm financial challenges.
The Group will continue to deliver this strategy by developing a range of lending products both secured and unsecured offered in store and online.
In expanding our credit products we aim to genuinely help our customers and have updated our vision statement to reinforce that vital message within the business.
The development of a diversified suite of services including retail buyback and FX improves returns and reduces the Groups exposure to gold price volatility.
We continue to innovate and explore how to interact most effectively with our customers through the development of introducer channels our online capability and our brand.
This development is supported by our stores that provides our online customer with the opportunity to speak to a trained member of staff face to face or to collect an item that they reserved online.
REVIEW OF OPERATIONS
Gross profits from pawnbroking increased 4.5% to 29.7m 2016 28.4m and the gross pledge book increased 11.6% to 46.1m 31 December 2016 41.3m as a result of the higher gold price the concession format and an increase in loans on quality watches.
The riskadjusted margin revenue as a percentage of the average net pledge book was 68.3% 2016 72.5%.
The reduction in riskadjusted margin is a result of the changing business mix to higher value lower interest rate loans.
Redemption of annual lending was marginally lower at an estimated 83.6% for lending in 2017 2016 actual 84.3%.
The pawnbroking segment remains challenging with limited real growth in likeforlike stores.
There is shortterm opportunity as a result of the relatively higher gold price and in the medium term through further expansion in our concession format and lending on highend products.
The Group has benefitted from the expertise provided by the Expert Eye service.
This allows high quality images of assets in store to be assessed by our team of experts which in turn improves both the quality of decisions made and extends the range of assets on which we can lend.
This has assisted the development of watch and diamond lending during the year.
The Group is investing in software to assist the management of customer enquiries in respect of pawnbroking as well as the acquisition of new partners to introduce customers to the business.
This investment will allow an expansion to the broker and online channels in respect of pawnbroking during 2018.
Pawnbroking summary
Yearend net pledge book 45549 40806 11.6% Average net pledge book 43414 39155 10.9% Revenue 29670 28384 4.5% Riskadjusted margin 68.3% 72.5% Revenue as a percentage of the average net pledge book The Group has produced a strong trading performance and made good progress in its strategic development.
Our intention is to get the best possible result from our core operations develop a range of additional credit products and expand the online channel.
We have delivered against all of those objectives in the past year.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017  09 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements 10  site
Retail sales increased 16% to 35.4m 2016 30.5m gross profits to 12.9m 2016 11.2m and margin reduced to 36.3% 2016 36.8%.
The Group has invested in store inventories with average monthly balances being 12% higher during 2017 than 2016.
This coupled with control over targeted discounts has resulted in the significant improvements in gross profits despite margin pressure as a result of increased cost of goods reflecting the higher rates on both lending and purchasing activities.
The development of newjewellery sales has been particularly encouraging with sales increasing by 62% and gross profits of 1.3m 2016 0.9m as we identify key segments and lines to supplement our preowned offering.
The est1897 website has been enhanced during the year with improved templates photography and the number of items on the site.
There are now more than 2000 highquality watches online together with a range of high quality jewellery.
This enables us to present store inventories to a far wider audience and equally through the use of tablets we can present a far wider range of choice to instore customers.
While in the early stages of development we are encouraged by the results to date with almost 1m in sales originating on the website being completed during 2017 2016 0.1m.
We intend to enhance the website further during 2018 with greater integration with instore systems additional products online and improved functionality for the user.
Personal loans The net personal loans book has increased by 94.7% to 18.3m 31 December 2016 9.4m.
The Board considers revenue less impairment to be an important measure of the performance of personal loans as it represents the net profit derived directly from our lending activities.
Revenue less impairment has increased to 5.7m 2016 3.5m as a result of increased customer numbers and the expansion in our longer term lower interest rate loan product.
The reduction in the riskadjusted margin RAM to 44.9% 2016 55.1% is the result of the increased proportion of new customers expansion in online and the introduction of our lower APR products.
Impairment as a percentage of the average monthly net loan book has improved to 33.3% 2016 37.0% reflecting the increased mix of lower yield higher quality loans.
This is in line with management expectations for credit quality and collections performance.
In line with the strategy of providing larger loans over longer terms at a lower interest rate we launched our 49.9% APR product in May 2017.
This product is designed to provide a near prime option for our best customers.
The Group now has three distinct products offered both in store and online 100% APR loans falling into the highcost shortterm credit HCSTC definition of the FCA.
These loans are intended as the starting point of the customer journey with HandT and represent the highest volume of loans written as they tend to be lower value and shorter term.
At 31 December 2017 this segment represented approximately 50% of the personal loan book.
100% APR loans which are generally provided to customers who have established a track record of repayment with HandT.
At 31 December 2017 this segment represented approximately 46% of the personal loan book.
50% APR loans which are intended to be the final step of the journey for our customers as they rebuild their credit rating.
At 31 December 2017 this segment represented approximately 4% of the personal loan book.
As a result of these initiatives half of the personal loans loan book is now nonHCSTC.
The expansion in other channels of business continues the net online loan book doubled in the year to 1.4m and remains a key opportunity for the Group.
The broker to store channel is also beginning to show positive results as we enhance our customer relationship management systems.
The focus for the Group is to build these alternative sources for customers work is underway to reduce the costs of acquisition and processing whilst improving performance.
Personal loans summary
Yearend net loan book 18256 9356 95.1% Average monthly net loan book 12795 6348 101.6% Revenue 10012 5849 71.2% Impairment 4271 2351 81.7% Revenue less impairment 5741 3498 64.1% Interest yield 78.3% 92.1% Impairment % of revenue 42.7% 40.2% Impairment % of average monthly net loan book 33.3% 37.0% Riskadjusted margin 44.9% 55.1% Revenue as a percentage of average loan book Revenue less impairment as a percentage of average loan book Pawnbroking scrap Gross profits reduced to 1.9m 2016 2.1m.
The result in 2016 was enhanced as a result of the rapid increase in the sterling gold price following the EU referendum result.
The average gold price during 2017 was 976 per troy ounce 2016 926 a 5.4% increase.
The gold price directly impacts the revenue received on the sales of scrapped gold.
GROSS PROFIT BREAKDOWN Pawnbroking 46.5% Retail 20.2% Gold purchasing 5.3% Pawnbroking scrap 3.0% Personal loans 15.7% Other services 9.3% Chief executives review continued Annual Report and Accounts 2017  11 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Gold purchasing Gross profits reduced to 3.4m 2016 3.9m despite a higher volume of gold scrapped in the year.
HandT purchases gold to achieve a particular margin and it takes around two months to process items directly to scrap.
If the gold price increases during this processing period then our margins are enhanced if it reduces then our margins are compressed.
During 2016 the gold price increased by 29% from January to December whereas during the same period in 2017 it fell by 2.2%.
Accordingly our margins were considerably lower in 2017 vs 2016.
We estimate that the weight of fine gold purchased in 2017 increased by approximately 2.1% from 2016 to 2017.
Other services Other services principally comprises FX buyback cheque cashing and Western Union.
Gross profits from this segment increased to 5.9m 2016 5.6m as growth in FX and buyback was partially offset by declines in Western Union and cheque cashing.
The key growth components of FX and buyback improved in the year with gross profits from FX increasing to 2.9m 2016 2.7m and buyback increasing to 1.8m 2016 1.6m.
FX is a simple transactional product which attracts a new customer base to the business.
Improvements to currency holdings in store point of sale materials and the expansion of click and collect will enhance this product in the future.
Buyback enables the Group to service a customer base who may not have appropriate assets for a pawnbroking loan.
The principal assets purchased are mobile phones tablets and games consoles.
We have invested in system development to support the valuation and testing of the items in store.
Further work will be completed in 2018 to fully integrate those systems and support the clickstobricks customer journey.
PROSPECTS
The Group has enhanced its ability to serve a wider customer base both in store and online with growth in its wellestablished core products and the newer unsecured lending offering.
This diversified approach to growth reduces the risks inherent in any individual objective and positions the Group to capture share in this exciting market.
Current trading for 2018 is in line with management expectations.
I would also like to add my great thanks to those of the Chairman in recognising all of our people whose skills commitment and enthusiasm continue to drive our success and who give us confidence in the future.
John G Nichols Chief Executive STORE DEVELOPMENTteltel 2016 2017
New Stores
Estate Total 13tel19telEND OF PERIOD STERLING GOLD PRICE per troy oz 897.7teltel 1019.7 12  site Finance directors review FINANCIAL RESULTS For the year ended 31 December 2017 gross profit increased 11.7% from 57.1m to 63.8m driven by growth in the core segments of pawnbroking retail and personal loans.
Total direct and administrative expenses increased by 4.7% from 46.9m to 49.1m principally as a result of investment in staff to support business volumes in personal loans and new initiatives.
The Board considers the continued investment in people and systems to be vital in repositioning the business to take advantage of the market conditions.
Finance costs increased 20% to 0.6m 2016 0.5m reflecting the higher utilisation of the facility during 2017 following expansion in the pawnbroking and personal loan books.
Profit before tax increased by 4.4m to 14.1m up 45.4% from 9.7m in 2016.
CASH FLOW The growth in profit for the year resulted in an increase in operating cash flows before movements in working capital of 26.5% to 17.2m 2016 13.6m.
The Group accelerated the growth both in personal loans and pawnbroking during 2017 resulting in an increase in receivables of 14.2m in the year 2016 8.2m.
This growth partially offset by increased profits is the principal reason the Group produced a cash outflow from operating activities of 2.4m 2016 inflow of 1.3m.
BALANCE SHEET As at 31 December 2017 the Group had net assets of 107.6m 2016 98.8m with yearend net debt of 13.3m 2016 5.4m delivering an increase in gearing to 12.4% 2016 5.5% see note 27.
On 1 March 2018 the Group extended the existing facility with Lloyds Bank plc by 5m allowing for maximum borrowings of 35.0m subject to covenants at a margin of between 1.75% and 2.75% above LIBOR.
At year end 22.0m was drawn on the facility and the Group was well within the covenants with a net debt to EBITDA ratio of 0.76x and an EBITDA to interest ratio of 37.15 see note 3 for the definition of EBITDA.
The facility has a termination date of 30 April 2020.
The combination of low gearing and a secure longterm credit facility provides the Group with the ability to make selective investments in the future while maintaining appropriate headroom.
ACQUISITIONS AND DISPOSALS The Group acquired two pawnbroking loan books for 0.1m there have been no disposals of stores or loan books during the year.
IMPAIRMENT REVIEW The Group performs an annual review of the expected earnings of each acquired store and considers whether the associated goodwill and other property plant and equipment are impaired.
There was no impairment charge during 2017 2016 nilnone.
SHARE PRICE AND EPS At 31 December 2017 the share price was 335p 2016 259.75p and market capitalisation was 124.6m 2016 95.5m.
Basic earnings per share were 31.07p 2016 20.94p diluted earnings per share were 30.94p 2016 20.88p.
Stephen A Fenerty Finance Director Annual Report and Accounts 2017  13 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements 14  site Principal risks and uncertainties The directors of HandT Group plc have carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Group including those that could threaten its business model future performance solvency or liquidity.
The Board retains ultimate responsibility for the Groups risk management framework and appetite including reviewing its effectiveness and risk exposures measured through the Groups Key Risk Indicators.
The Board has delegated responsibility for annually reviewing the overall effectiveness of the risk management programme to the Audit Committee.
The internal audit function provides assurance to the Audit Committee on the effectiveness of the internal control procedures through completion of a risk based annual audit plan which takes into account the current risks faced by the Group.
The compliance function provides assurance to the Risk Committee on regulatory and reputational risk through the completion of the annual compliance monitoring plan.
The Groups risk management framework and appetite is embedded in the Groups management and governance processes and is overseen by the Board.
Risks are identified both at a Board and an operational level they are assessed and where appropriate individuals within the business are given responsibility for the management of that risk.
The Group has in place formal processes for the identification of new risks or a change to an existing risk.
The Risk Committee oversees a formal periodic review of our assessment of individual risks mitigating activities and associated remedial actions.
The table below sets out the principal risks and uncertainties facing the Group and how we mitigate them.
This is not an exhaustive analysis of all the risks the Group may face as there may be additional risks and uncertainties that are not currently known to the Board or have not been included in this section on the basis that they are not considered to be material.
Area Description of risk Examples of mitigating activities Regulatory risk Loss arising from a breach of existing regulation or regulatory changes in the markets within which the Group operates.
Experienced Board both in credit and FCA regulated businesses Dedicated Internal Audit and Compliance functions Completion of the annual risk based compliance monitoring plan Welldeveloped procedures training systems and operational controls Head of audit and compliance monitors legislative changes and supports departmental compliance functions as required Expert thirdparty legal andor compliance advice is sought where necessary Membership of appropriate trade associations who assist with both regulatory awareness and relationships Gold price A significant fall in the gold price impacting the security of pledge and the revenues from scrap operations.
The exit of the UK from the European Union may increase volatility in the sterling gold price as the exchange rate adjusts to the new market conditions.
Ensure sufficient headroom on bank covenants to absorb a reduction in gold price should it occur without covenant breach Monitoring of gold price at Board level Annual testing of forecasts sensitised for gold price Maintenance of appropriate margin between pledge value and gold price Lending on alternative high value items Review possible use of hedging instruments Focus on increasing redemption rates to minimise reliance on disposition Increase retail sales as a disposition hedge Annual Report and Accounts 2017  15 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Area Description of risk Examples of mitigating activities Theft and fraud Loss of inventory or pledge  High levels of physical security Insurance for material losses Systems and procedures to minimise risk Internal theft and fraud  Ensure staff are highly motivated Avoid lone working to reduce opportunity Internal audit visit to each store at least twice a year Internal audit team focussed on loss prevention and other manipulation for personal gain Fair ethical compliant and competitive incentive schemes and other benefits offered Reputational risk An event or circumstance could adversely impact on the Groups reputation including adverse publicity from the activities of legislators pressure groups and the media.
Consider regulatory and reputational impact of business changes Maintain focus on competitive advantage of customer service Ensure staff are highly motivated Staff undertake a comprehensive induction course and formal programme of ongoing training Ensure high level of compliance in product and service delivery Ensure price or shortterm earnings are not the dominant factor in decision making Risk events are recorded and any customer or reputational impact is assessed and changes to systems and controls are made when necessary Retained financial PR and media relations consultancy to provide ongoing reputation management support and media engagement Cyber security denial of service and data loss We have observed an increase in the frequency severity and sophistication of cyberattacks on UK businesses in general and in our own business.
HandT is increasingly using online platforms both for transactional processing and customer acquisition.
Failure to adequately manage cyber threats and to continually review and update processes in response to new threats could result in operational disruption resulting from system downtime financial loss data loss reputational damage and regulatory fines.
Utilise appropriate levels of industrystandard information security solutions for critical systems Conduct penetration testing to identify vulnerabilities and deliver improvements Continue to monitor cyberthreats using internal and external resources and where necessary implement changes to combat this Daily backup and secure storage of all systems to minimise data loss Detailed disaster recovery and business continuity plans are in place these are regularly reviewed and tested 16  site Financial risk management objectives and policies The Groups activities expose it to several financial risks including interest rate risk credit risk liquidity risk price risk and exchangerate risk.
The use of financial derivatives is governed by the Groups policies approved by the Board which provides written principles on the use of financial derivatives to manage these risks.
The Group does not use derivative financial instruments for speculative purposes.
A summary of the principal financial risks is provided below.
Further detailed discussion is provided in note 26 to the consolidated financial statements.
Interest rate risk The Groups activities expose it primarily to the financial risks of changes in interest rates.
At present the Board does not consider it necessary to enter into a hedging arrangement.
This position is reviewed by the Board on a regular basis.
Credit risk The Groups principal financial assets are bank balances and cash trade and other receivables.
The Groups credit risk is primarily attributable to its trade receivables the most significant of which are the pledge book the personal loan book and cheque cashing balances.
In all cases exposure on trade and other receivables is spread over a large number of counterparties and customers.
The risk attributable to the pledge book is further mitigated due to the presence of security customer pledges which can be easily liquidated in almost all cases fully recovering the amount lent.
The risks attached to the unsecured personal loan book are mitigated by the continual monitoring of bad debts and a possible modification of lending criteria.
The Group performs an external credit check prior to lending.
Similar procedures mitigate the risks associated with cheque cashing activities.
The amounts presented in the balance sheet are net of allowances for doubtful receivables.
An allowance for impairment is made where there is an identified loss event which based on previous experience is evidence of a reduction in the recoverability of the cash flows.
The credit risk on liquid funds and derivative financial instruments is considered to be low as funds are held with financial institutions with high creditratings assigned by international creditrating agencies to the Groups bankers as follows Moodys credit rating Barclays Bank plc A1 Negative Outlook Lloyds Bank plc Aa3 The Group had no significant concentration of credit risk at year end other than on bank balances of 47000 with Barclays Bank plc 2016 944936 and 1149000 2016 1412480 with Lloyds Bank plc.
Liquidity risk To maintain liquidity to ensure that sufficient funds are available for ongoing operations and future developments the Group uses a mixture of longterm and shortterm debt finance.
At 31 December 2017 the Group had sufficient headroom on its current borrowings and remains in full compliance with all loan covenants.
On 1 March 2018 the Group extended the existing facility with Lloyds Bank plc by 5m allowing for maximum borrowings of 35.0m.
Furthermore the Group will review at the appropriate time the possibility of raising future equity finance or refinance existing banking facilities to expand activities.
Price risk With regard to the current balance sheet position the Group is not exposed to price risk as the majority of its jewellery and all of its scrap gold is obtained through unredeemed pledges which have a cost to the Group which is lower than the retail value.
The Group is however exposed to adverse movements in the price of gold in its gold scrap activities and the value of the pledge collaterals.
Should the price of gold drop significantly the Group can mitigate that risk by changing its lending policy on pawnbroking pledges or by entering hedging instruments.
Currently the Group has no gold hedge in place although this is reviewed by the Board on a regular basis.
Exchange rate risk While the Groups activities are largely conducted in the United Kingdom the Group is impacted by foreign currency exchange rates affecting the gold price exchange from USD to GBP and the revaluation of foreign currency cash holdings in store.
The impact of revaluation is monitored on a monthly basis and hedging is utilised if required.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017  17 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Corporate social responsibility Training and development Induction All new store staff attend a oneweek induction in one of our purposebuilt training stores across the UK.
Stair step New staff work through the five steps of our stair step programme.
Steps 1 to 3 focus on skill development in the fundamental areas of the business plus technical areas such as diamonds watches and electronics.
Steps 4 and 5 focus on managerial and behavioural training these lead into our management development programme.
Workshops We provide classroom based workshops covering a wide range of technical and management subjects.
ELearning The ELearning platform allows us to support staff development instore through interactive training and assessment tools.
This platform integrates with the point of sale system and is an important component of our regulatory compliance programme.
Management development The Management Development Programme MDP is for aspiring Deputy Store Managers looking for preparation to be Store Manager.
Star development programme The Stars programme is a more personalised programme using 360 feedback and psychometric testing aimed to develop Store Managers into other positions in the business for example Area Manager Internal Auditor or Manager of a flagship store.
Our people At Hand T we believe that our employees are our single greatest asset and accordingly we endeavour to ensure our workforce are highly trained motivated and feel valued.
18  site Corporate social responsibility continued Reward and recognition As well as offering competitive salaries and bonus schemes we offer a generous benefits package including Life assurance for all of our staff members Interest free season ticket loans Childcare vouchers Employee assistance programme Enhanced sick and holiday pay Innovation scheme ideas rewarded by up to 1000 Health insurance for management Eye care vouchers Cycle to work scheme Throughout the year we operate a number of schemes designed to highlight performance or service ranging from awards for mystery shop results to the highly prized Top Team award where the store can choose the destination for a trip of a lifetime.
Employee engagement Your Voice is a councilstyle meeting with employees from a variety of positions within the Group and geographically from around the country.
These provide a forum to discuss suggestions and ideas with senior management.
The meetings are very productive as they allow direct feedback on any issues that arise in our stores or the wider organisation.
Internal appointments We strive to develop and retain our staff.
An important part of this is to provide opportunities within the Group where possible.
We advertise positions weekly to every employee in order to help them to apply for these positions where appropriate we use the management and star development programmes to help individuals progress.
66% of our Deputy Manager and Store Manager roles were filled internally in 2017.
We value experience and recognise long service from 5 years on in five yearly increments.
During 2017 126 employees received a long service award and 64 employees were invited to attend a lunch in London to celebrate services of 10 years or more.
A member of our audit team celebrated 45 years service with the Chief Executive John Nichols receiving his 20 year award.
Managers tenure years of service 79% 51% 28% 10 Annual Report and Accounts 2017  19 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Diversity and inclusion We appreciate the importance of ensuring that our workforce reflects the diversity of our customers and continue to ensure that we offer career opportunities without discrimination.
The following tables show the gender mix for staff across the Group at the end of the year Full Time Part Time Total Female 462 360 822
Male Female Board of directors 5 0 Whilst acknowledging the importance of diversity appointments to the Board as with all positions in the Group are based purely on merit and not according to personal characteristics such as race and gender.
Male Female Senior management nonboard directors and department heads Regional managers 1 1 Area managers 9 7 IN THE COMMUNITY We encourage community engagement and support a variety of local and national charities through events fun days and fundraising.
We have raised thousands of pounds and collected thousands of gifts for a number of organisations including Beatson Cancer Charity The Childrens Trust Macmillan Cancer Support OUR RESPONSE TO THE MODERN SLAVERY ACT 2015 The Group is opposed to slavery and human trafficking within its operations and the supply chain we utilise.
The Group will not knowingly support or do business with any organisation involved in slavery or human trafficking.
To address the risks the Group faces we have completed a review of our suppliers through a mixture of due diligence reviews and supplier questionnaires.
Our statement on compliance with the modern slavery act 2015 is published on the Groups website.
STRATEGIC REPORT APPROVAL This report was approved by the Board of Directors on 12 March 2018 and signed on its behalf by Stephen A Fenerty Company Secretary 12 March 2018 Registered and Head Office HandT Group plc Times House Throwley Way
Surrey
SM1 4AF 20  site Directors officers and advisers John G Nichols Chief Executive 67 Appointed 08092004 Committees None Profile After an early career in the RAF John entered the leisure industry with the Rank Organisation where he held several senior executive positions.
John joined Hand T as managing director in 1997 and subsequently became chief executive.
He has been instrumental in developing and implementing the business strategy and delivering growth in stores revenues and profitability.
External appointments Director The National Pawnbrokers Association Peter D McNamara NonExecutive Chairman 67 Appointed 25042006 Committees Audit Committee Nominations Committee Chair Risk Committee Remuneration Committee Profile Peter spent the majority of his career with Lloyds Bank plc as chief manager for strategic planning mergers and acquisitions and then as the managing director of personal banking.
He subsequently served as Group managing director of the Alliance and Leicester plc and chief executive of Wesleyan Assurance Society a mutual life insurance business.
In 2002 he left to become chairman and subsequently executive chairman of Moneybox plc the leading ATM deployer operating in the UK Germany and the Netherlands which he led to flotation on AIM.
In 2006 he set up a new ATM business Notemachine Ltd and is the CEO.
External appointments Director and shareholder of the Corsair Mint Limited Group of companies Partner of KRF Farms LLP.
Stephen A Fenerty Finance Director 45 Appointed 28022005 Committees None Profile Stephen trained with KPMGs banking and finance team and since then he has pursued a variety of management roles in the alternative credit sector.
Stephen joined Hand T in March 2005 as commercial director before taking on the role as finance director in December 2013.
Stephen has direct responsibility for finance IT unsecured lending acquisitions compliance and credit risk.
He is a member of the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales.
External appointments None Malcolm L Berryman NonExecutive Director 63 Appointed 01102008 Committees Audit Committee Nominations Committee Risk Committee Chair Remuneration Committee Chair Profile Malcolm is currently a nonexecutive director at STM Group PLC and runs his own consultancy business primarily involved in life and general insurance.
Between 1990 and 2005 he was chief executive of two Insurers Liverpool Victoria and Crown Financial Management.
He qualified as an Actuary in 1983.
External appointments Nonexecutive director at STM Group PLC Director at Berryman Consulting Limited James F Thornton NonExecutive Director 60 Appointed 30112012 Committees Audit Committee Chair Nominations Committee Risk Committee Remuneration Committee Profile James has more than fifteen years of experience in UK financial services organisations most recently as a director at Hannam and Partners from 20092015 and previously as head of finance at BAT Industries Group deputy finance director and UK finance director at Old Mutual plc and head of foreign exchange at IFX plc.
James has also held senior positions with Lord Ashcroft KCMG associated companies  Anne Street Partners and Global Health Partner plc.
James is a Fellow of the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales.
External appointments Director at Dunster 22 Limited Annual Report and Accounts 2017  21 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Registered and head office and advisers Registered and Head Office HandT Group plc Times House Throwley Way
Surrey
SM1 4AF Tel tel600 Broker and Nominated Adviser Numis Securities Limited 10 Paternoster Square
EC4M 7LT Legal advisers to the Group Berwin Leighton Paisner LLP Adelaide House London Bridge
EC4R 9HA Independent Auditor Deloitte LLP Statutory Auditor
RH10 9AD
Lloyds Bank plc 25 Gresham Street
EC2V 7HN Barclays Bank plc 1 Churchill Place
E14 5HP
Equiniti Group PLC Aspect House Spencer Road
West Sussex BN99 6DA Public relations Haggie Partners LLP 4 Sun Court 6667 Cornhill
EC3V 3NB 22  site Corporate governance The directors recognise the importance of adopting good corporate governance practices in the best interests of all shareholders.
Although the Group is not required to report on compliance with the UK Corporate Governance Code the Code since its shares are traded on the AIM Market the Group applies the principles of sound Corporate Governance in the following ways
The Board The Board comprises two executive directors and three nonexecutive directors.
Their biographies appear on page 20.
A review of these shows a range of experience and expertise sufficient to bring independent judgement on issues of strategy performance resources and standards of conduct which is vital to the success of the Group.
The three nonexecutive directors each hold shares as disclosed on page 28.
However because the number of shares held is small there is no entitlement to share options for nonexecutives and there are no cross directorships between executive and nonexecutive directors the nonexecutive directors are considered to be independent.
Board meetings The Board is responsible to the shareholders for the proper management of the Group.
A directors responsibilities statement in respect of the financial statements is set out in this Annual Report on page 31.
The Board meets 10 times during the year.
To enable the Board to discharge its duties all directors receive appropriate and timely information.
Briefing papers are distributed to all directors in advance of the Board meetings.
There is a formal schedule of matters reserved to the Board which include the determination of strategy approval of new stores and acquisitions approval of budget and major capital expenditure.
At Board meetings the agenda normally comprises a review of the management financial statements a CEO review of operations a review of new store proposals and potential acquisitions and an update on the progress of the Groups other strategic objectives.
The Board meetings in August and March cover the approval of the interim and preliminary financial results respectively and the November meeting deals with the approval of the annual budget.
The following committees deal with the specific aspects of the Groups affairs Remuneration Committee The Remuneration Committee comprises three independent nonexecutive directors.
The members of the Committee are Malcolm L Berryman Chairman Peter D McNamara James F Thornton The Committee meets at least twice in each year and at such other times as the Chairman of the Committee sees fit.
The Chairman of the Committee is appointed by the Board on the recommendation of the Nomination Committee.
The quorum for the Committee is two.
The duties of the Committee are to determine and agree with the Board the framework or broad policy for the remuneration of the chairman executive directors and any employees that the Board delegates to it within the terms of the agreed policy determine individual remuneration packages including bonuses incentive payments share options pension arrangements and any other benefits determine the contractual terms on termination and individual termination payments ensuring that the duty of the individual to mitigate loss is fully recognised in determining individual packages and arrangements give due regard to the comments and recommendations of the Code be told of and be given the chance to advise on any major changes in employee benefit structures in the Company recommend and monitor the level and structure of remuneration for senior managers below Board level as determined agree the policy for authorising claims for expenses from the chief executive and from the chairman of the Board and recommend an annual report for the Board to put to shareholders on executive remuneration compliant with relevant legal and regulatory provisions.
The Committee is authorised by the Board to seek any information it requires from any employee of the Group in order to perform its duties be responsible for establishing the selection criteria and then for selecting appointing and setting the terms of reference for any remuneration consultants providing advice to the Committee at the Groups expense and obtain at the Groups expense outside legal or other professional advice where necessary in the course of its activities.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017  23 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Audit Committee The Audit Committee comprises three independent nonexecutive directors.
The members of the Committee are James F Thornton Chairman Malcolm L Berryman Peter D McNamara The Audit Committee monitors the integrity of the financial statements of the Group and any formal announcements relating to financial performance reviewing and challenging where necessary the consistency of accounting policies and the application of critical accounting policies and practices and any changes to them.
The Audit Committee reviews the scope results and costeffectiveness of internal and external audit and has delegated power from the Board to exercise the power from shareholders to agree fees for external auditors.
It is responsible each year for satisfying itself on the independence and objectivity of external auditors and the independence of internal auditors.
The Audit Committee meets at least three times a year.
As directed by the Audit Committee the principal function of the Groups internal audit team is to verify the physical presence and control procedures surrounding the cash pledge and inventory balances within stores and the Groups Jewellery Centre.
The internal audit team report to the Audit Security and Compliance executive meetings and the Board and Audit Committee reviews those minutes.
The Audit Committee reviews the operation of internal controls and reports to the Board on the annual review of the internal control and risk management and the effectiveness of the financial reporting policies and systems.
Significant issues and areas of judgement considered by the Audit Committee The significant issues and areas of judgement considered by the Audit Committee in relation to the Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 are outlined below.
We discussed these with the external auditor during the year and where appropriate these have been addressed as areas of audit focus as outlined in the independent auditors report on pages 32 to 36.
Issue Judgement Role of the Committee Impairment of personal loan receivables Personal loan receivables are impaired based on the number of payments missed based on the original loan agreement with the customer.
Impairment is calculated using historical payment performance to estimate the value and timing of future payments for each level of customer arrears.
The key judgements in respect of the impairment calculation are The point at which to impair a loan account and Whether historical performance provides a suitable method to project future cash flows.
This is a key audit matter for our external auditors and is detailed in their independent auditors report.
Reviews analysis and recommendations produced by the executive team in respect of the required impairment.
Reviews the methodology used and the performance of the models versus the actual result of prior periods.
Consideration of the potential impact on future performance of factors such as Rapid growth of the product A range of external economic factors including consumer indebtedness Changing business mix for product type and channel Reviews the preparatory work and analysis in respect of the implementation of IFRS 9 in 2018.
Attendance at Board and committee meetings Board Audit Remuneration Risk Nomination Peter McNamara 1010 33 44 33 22 Malcolm Berryman 1010 33 44 33 22 James Thornton 1010 33 44 33 22 John Nichols 1010 NA NA NA NA Stephen Fenerty 1010 NA NA NA NA 24  site Corporate governance continued Issue Judgement Role of the Committee Recognition of revenue and the associated revenue accrual in respect of pawnbroking Interest income is recognised when it has been paid or is expected to be paid by the customer.
The interest accrual is calculated by using estimates for the expected redemption profile of pawnbroking loans based on a range of historical performance data.
The key judgement in respect of the interest accrual is the determination of the correct redemption profile to use in the model.
This is a key audit matter for our external auditors Deloitte and is detailed in their Independent Audit Report.
Reviews the application of the agreed methodology and supporting calculations.
Considers the impact and validity of any changes to the basis of the redemption predictions.
Considers the impact of changing redemption trends and outcomes over time and how to implement them in the model.
Impairment of goodwill The Group historically acquired a number of businesses and must consider whether goodwill requires impairment.
The impairment is based on the future cash flows generated by each individual cash generating unit CGU.
Expected cash flows are based on the Group operating budget for the next year and assumptions for growth or decline in revenues and costs in future years.
The key judgement is in respect of the forecast cash flows for the CGUs.
Reviews the application of the agreed methodology and supporting calculations.
Considers factors that may impact the future performance of the CGUs and whether that should be reflected in the forecast.
Considers the sensitivity of the projections and the amount of headroom available before impairment is required.
Provisions relating to store lease commitments The Group operates the store estate on a leasehold basis.
Provisions are required in respect of the costs of reinstatement of the premises at the end of the lease and potentially future lease costs in the case of underperforming stores.
The key judgement in respect of reinstatement is its cost and timing.
The key judgement for the onerous lease provision is the determination of future cash flows from the store.
Reviews the application of the agreed methodology and supporting calculations.
Considers factors that may impact the future performance of the stores and whether that should be reflected in the forecast.
Considers the sensitivity of the projections to changes in the inputs.
Provisions relating to inventories and pawnbroking loans The Group has significant pledge and inventory balances whose value is supported by precious metals and tradeable assets.
The Group considers the need to recognise a provision in respect of these balances if the net realisable value NRV falls below cost.
The key judgement in respect of the inventory provision is the calculation of
NRV is based on the precious metal value where available or an estimate of the achievable sales price based on the age of the piece.
The key judgements in respect of the pledge provision are the NRV the likelihood of the item not being redeemed and whether the item is likely to be retailed or scrapped.
In both the inventory and pledge provision consideration is also given to specific provisions and to the estimated losses since the last physical audit in store.
Reviews the application of the agreed methodology and supporting calculations.
Considers the overall adequacy of the provisions based on historical performance and changes in asset balances.
Considers changes in the business or external environment which may impact on the recoverability particularly gold price and redemption trends.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017  25 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Risk Committee The Risk Committee comprises three independent nonexecutive directors.
The members of the Committee are Malcolm L Berryman Chairman Peter D McNamara James F Thornton The Risk Committee is responsible for reviewing and reporting to the Board on the Groups risk appetite and framework the extent and categories of risk which the Board regards as acceptable for the Company to bear the Groups risk management and internal controls framework its principles policies methodologies systems processes procedures and people and in respect of the processes and procedures the arrangements for the identification assessment monitoring management and oversight of risk.
The Risk Committee owns the Groups Risk Appetite Statement which sets out the Groups attitude to risk and the ranges and limits of acceptable risk taking.
The Committee establishes the high level qualitative Risk Appetite Statement for the Group the quantitative Risk Appetite Statement and the Key Risk Indicators used to measure risk exposure.
The statement is subject to annual review by the Risk Committee and the Group Board.
The Risk Committee is responsible for the Risk Framework in place for identification of enterprise level risks top down approach and identifying risks that occur in the day to day processes and operations of the business bottom up approach.
The risks identified are recorded in the Corporate Risk Register and reviewed by the Committee on a biannual basis.
The Risk Committee reviews the regular reports of the head of audit and compliance to oversee the operational effectiveness of the risk management framework and the current risk exposure measured through the Key Risk Indicators.
The Committee should make recommendations to the Board in respect of all risks faced by the Company outside of its declared risk appetite.
Nomination Committee The Nomination Committee comprises three independent nonexecutive directors.
The members of the Committee are Peter D McNamara Chairman Malcolm L Berryman James F Thornton The function of the Nomination Committee is to provide a formal rigorous and transparent procedure for the appointment of new Directors to the Board.
In carrying out its duties the Nomination Committee is primarily responsible for identifying and nominating candidates to fill Board vacancies evaluating the structure and composition of the Board with regard to the balance of skills knowledge and experience and making recommendations accordingly reviewing the time requirements of NonExecutive Directors giving full consideration to succession planning and reviewing the leadership of the Group.
26  site Corporate governance continued INTERNAL CONTROL The Board acknowledges that it is responsible for the Groups system of internal control and for the continuing process of reviewing the effectiveness of the internal controls.
Internal
The directors confirm that they have reviewed the effectiveness of the systems of internal control that have been in operation during the year.
The Group operates a three lines of defence model the first line being the systems and controls in place to prevent and detect errors the second provided by compliance monitoring and oversight and the third by internal audit.
Internal control financial The internal control process has been reviewed and its main features are Financial reporting there is a comprehensive budgeting system with an annual budget approved by the Board.
Monthly trading results are reported against the corresponding figures for the budget and previous year.
The Board also reviews reforecasts on a regular basis.
Capital expenditure there is a comprehensive budgeting system for capital expenditure with an annual budget approved by the Board.
The Finance Director authorises individual items of capital expenditure and material items are also authorised by the Board or CEO.
Cash flow an annual cash flow forecast is drawn up and approved by the Board and actual cash flow is reviewed monthly against this forecast.
Organisational structure a clear organisational structure with defined responsibilities and clear authority levels has been set.
Store audits a Store Audit function exists to ensure that Group procedures regarding cash pledges and stock handling are being adhered to.
On average the internal audit visits to stores are performed biannually.
Corporate audits the Internal Audit Department has a defined audit universe and conducts risk based audits in line with the annual plan to address all other risks not covered within store audits the universe and plan is approved by the Audit Committee.
Internal control risk management During the year the Group had in place formalised procedures to identify evaluate and manage significant risks and to enable management to assess and regularly report to the Board on issues relating to business operational financial regulatory and noncompliance risks.
RELATIONS WITH SHAREHOLDERS The Board recognises the importance of communications with shareholders.
The chief executives review on pages 8 to 11 include a detailed review of the business and future developments.
There is a regular dialogue with institutional shareholders including presentations after the Groups preliminary announcement of the yearend results and at the half year results.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017  27 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Directors report The directors present their annual report and the audited financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017.
Principal activities and review of the business The main activities of the Group continue to be pawnbroking gold purchasing retail of jewellery cheque cashing unsecured lending and other related services operated through Harvey and Thompson Limited.
The principal activity of the Company is that of a nontrading holding Company for Harvey and Thompson Limited.
A review of the business and its future development including the information that fulfils the relevant requirements of section 417 of the Companies Act 2006 is given in the Chairmans Statement and Chief executives review on pages 2 to 11.
Dividends
The directors propose a final dividend of 6.2p 2016 5.3p per share subject to approval at the Annual General Meeting on 3 May 2018.
This proposed dividend in accordance with IAS 10 Events after the balance sheet date has not been provided for in the attached financial statements.
During the year the Company paid the final dividend for the year ended 31 December 2016 of 5.3p per share 2015 4.5p per share and an interim dividend for the year ended 31 December 2017 of 4.3p per share 2016 3.9p per share.
Capital structure Details of the authorised share capital are shown in note 27 to the consolidated financial statements.
The Company has one class of ordinary shares which carry no right to fixed income.
Each share carries the right to one vote at general meetings of the Company.
During the period 394273 ordinary shares 2016 187223 of 0.05 each were issued called up and fully paid as part of the Groups share option and longterm incentive plans.
The nominal issued share capital as at 31 December 2017 was 1871888 31 December 2016 1852174.
As at 1 March 2018 the Company has been notified of the following voting rights by major shareholders of the Company Name of holder Percentage of voting rights and issued share capital Artemis Investment Management Fidelity International Close Brothers Asset Management Fidelity Management and Research Camelot Capital Partners Janus Henderson Investors
Directors
Octopus Investments Braeside Capital 12.8% 9.8% 8.8% 8.1% 7.1% 5.3% 4.9% 3.8% 3.4% 3.3% Details of employee share schemes are set out in note 28.
Under these share schemes there are currently potentially an additional 1281558 shares that will be issued to current option holders at the call of the option holder.
Under its Articles of Association the Company has authority to allot under these share schemes for cash up to a maximum of 3704349 ordinary shares without being required to offer such securities to all shareholders in accordance with statutory preemption rights.
On any date no option may be granted under any share option scheme or long term incentive plan if as a result the aggregate nominal value of ordinary shares issued or issuable pursuant to options granted during the previous 10 years under any share option scheme would exceed 10% of the nominal value of the share capital of the Company in issue on that date.
There are no other potentially dilutive equity instruments in the Company in issue at 31 December 2017 or 31 December 2016.
No person has any special rights of control over the Companys share capital and all issued shares are fully paid.
With regard to the appointment and replacement of directors the Company is governed by its articles of association the Companies Acts and related legislation and requires certain directors annually to retire by rotation.
The Articles themselves may be amended by special resolution of the shareholders.
There are a number of agreements that take effect alter or terminate upon a change of control of the Company such as commercial contracts bank loan agreements property lease arrangements and employees share plans.
None of these are considered to be significant in terms of their likely impact on the business of the Group as a whole.
Furthermore the directors are not aware of any agreements between the Company or any other Group Company and its directors or employees that provide for compensation for loss of office or employment that occurs because of a takeover bid.
Directors and their interests The directors who served throughout the year and to the date of this report except where otherwise stated were as follows
J G Nichols S A Fenerty
P D McNamara M L Berryman J F Thornton 28  site Directors report continued The directors hold the following notifiable beneficial interests in the ordinary share capital of the Company Director Type of share
1 January
31 December J G Nichols S A Fenerty P D McNamara M Berryman J F Thornton Ordinary 5p shares Ordinary 5p shares Ordinary 5p shares Ordinary 5p shares Ordinary 5p shares At 31 December 2017 the market price of HandT Group plcs shares was 335p and the range during the year ended 31 December 2017 was 260p to 357p.
At 31 December 2016 the market price of HandT Group plcs shares was 259.75p and the range during the year ended 31 December 2016 was 180p to 300.5p.
None of the directors hold any interests in the shares of any other company within the HandT Group plc group.
At the forthcoming Annual General Meeting of the Company the following director will by rotation be offering himself for reelection J G Nichols Directors indemnities Under the Companys articles of association any director is entitled to be indemnified by the Company to the extent permitted by law against any liability incurred by him in defending proceedings which relate to any acts or omissions in his capacity as officer of the Company.
In addition the Company maintains insurance for the benefit of the directors in respect of such matters which it considers to be appropriate.
These arrangements were in force throughout the whole of the current and preceding financial years.
Aggregate directors remuneration The total amounts for directors remuneration were as follows
Gain on exercise of share options Money purchase pension contributions 1500453 1111521 As a result of the Approved and Unapproved Share Option Schemes operated by the Group the directors have a beneficial interest in the following options granted over ordinary shares in HandT Group plc At start of year
Granted during the year
Exercised during year
Forfeited during year
At end of year
Exercise price pence
Price on date exercised pence Date from which exercisable
J G Nichols 2007 Scheme 2008 Scheme 2009 Scheme 2010 Scheme 17 52010 351997  170683  181314 S A Fenerty 2007 Scheme 2008 Scheme 2009 Scheme 2010 Scheme 17 52010 221905  45517  176388 No share options were granted to any director since 2012.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017  29 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Directors emoluments and compensation Name of director
Basic salary
Annual bonuses
Total
Total
Executive
J G Nichols S A Fenerty
P D McNamara M Berryman J F Thornton Aggregate emoluments 593586 22817 362671 262370 1241444 922184 Directors bonus schemes The Remuneration Committee considers the total remuneration package available to executive directors in light of market practice for companies of a similar size and delivering a similar shareholder performance.
As part of the total package executive directors are entitled to receive an annual bonus subject to meeting certain performance conditions.
These performance conditions the maximum bonus payable and the proportion paid for ontarget performance are set by the Remuneration Committee in advance of each financial year.
In 2015 the Board established a cash settled longterm incentive plan based on the performance of the business over the period 20152017 and provided for a payment at the end of the period of no more than 100% of the annual base salary of the director.
The Remuneration Committee reviewed the audited performance under the plan and approved a payment of 60% of the base salary of the directors.
No other longterm bonus plan was active in the three year period.
Directors pension entitlements Two directors 2016 2 were members of money purchase schemes during the year.
Contributions paid by the Group in respect of such directors were as follows J G Nichols S A Fenerty 43729 43082
Details of the number of employees and related costs can be found in note 9 to the consolidated financial statements.
All employees have contracts of employment with Harvey and Thompson Limited the trading subsidiary in the HandT Group plc group.
Harvey and Thompson Limited maintains a policy of equal opportunities and is committed to ensuring that all individuals are treated fairly with respect and are valued.
Harvey and Thompson Limited is committed to providing a safe working environment for all employees through a combination of procedural and physical security measures.
These measures are kept under review and updated as appropriate.
All employees are incentivised through different bonus schemes.
Store managers and management also qualify for the approved share option scheme ASOS while directors and senior management also qualify for the unapproved share option scheme USOS.
The executive directors also qualify for the LongTerm Incentive Plan LTIP.
Further details on share option plans are provided in note 28.
30  site Directors report continued Employee consultation Consultation with employees or their representatives has continued at all levels with the aim of ensuring that their views are taken into account when decisions are made that are likely to affect their interests and that all employees are aware of the financial and economic performance of their stores regional areas and of the Group as a whole.
This is achieved through formal and informal meetings weekly information bulletins employee surveys a quarterly newsletter and every year through a store managers conference.
Employment of the disabled It is the policy of the Group to give full and fair consideration to the employment of disabled persons in jobs suited to their individual circumstances and as appropriate to consider them for recruitment opportunities career development and training.
Where possible arrangements are made for the continuing employment of employees who have become disabled whilst in the Groups employment.
Health and safety The safety of our customers and employees is of paramount importance to the Group.
All employees complete annual training and a programme of annual Health and Safety Risk Assessments is in place.
Health and safety standards and benchmarks have also been established in the business and compliance is monitored by the Board.
Political contributions No political contributions were made during the year 2016 nil.
Going concern The Group delivered profit after tax of 11.3m for the year ended 31 December 2017 2016 7.6m.
The Group also increased its net assets to 107.6m 2016 98.8m.
The Board has approved a detailed budget for 2018 which indicates surplus cash generated from operations for the year after accounting for the Groups forecast levels of capital expenditure.
The existing facility with Lloyds Bank plc allowing for maximum borrowings of 30.0m subject to covenants expires in April 2020.
At the year end 22.0m was drawn on the facility.
This strong balance sheet position provides a high level of confidence that the Group will be able to repay all liabilities as they fall due during 2018 and Q1 2019.
The Group met all covenants in 2017 and there is no evidence to suggest that they will not be met in 2018 or Q1 2019.
In considering the going concern basis of preparation longer term forecasts are also reviewed by the Board with the financial forecasts revealing no inability to meet financial covenants or repay liabilities.
Sensitivity analysis under less favourable scenarios designed to test the point at which the Group will either have insufficient headroom or breach financial covenants have also been prepared and reviewed.
The Board considers the selected scenarios as remote and is comfortable that mitigating strategies are available to the Group to offset liquidity constraints.
We believe that the current economic climate should have no significant negative impact to our business model.
The Group offering is principally through secured lending against pledges.
The Group policies on pawn lending remain rigorous and prudent such that the Group has limited exposure to loss in the event of customers not redeeming their pledges due to the value of the pledge collateral held principally being gold and precious stones.
The Group has no reason to believe that the value will not be maintained in the near future.
Further details are provided in note 26.
Based on the above considerations and after reviewing in detail 2018 and Q1 2019 forecasts the directors have formed the view that the Group has adequate resources to continue as a going concern for the next 12 months and has prepared the financial statements on this basis.
Principal risks and uncertainties to the Groups business are discussed in more detail in the Strategic Report.
Independent auditor and statement of provision of information to the independent auditor Deloitte LLP has expressed its willingness to continue in office as auditor and a resolution to reappoint them will be proposed at the forthcoming Annual General Meeting.
Each of the persons who is a director at the date of approval of this report confirms that so far as the director is aware there is no relevant audit information of which the Groups auditor is unaware and the director has taken all the steps that he ought to have taken as a director in order to make himself aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that the Groups auditor is aware of that information.
This confirmation is given and should be interpreted in accordance with the provisions of s418 of the Companies Act 2006.
Approved by the Board and signed on its behalf by J G Nichols Chief Executive 12 March 2018 Registered and Head Office HandT Group plc Times House Throwley Way Sutton Surrey SM1 4AF Annual Report and Accounts 2017  31 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Directors responsibilities statement The directors are responsible for preparing the Annual Report and the financial statements in accordance with applicable law and regulations.
Company law requires the directors to prepare financial statements for each financial year.
Under that law the directors are required to prepare the Group financial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and Article 4 of the IAS Regulation and have elected to prepare the Parent Company financial statements in accordance with United Kingdom Generally Accepted Accounting Practice United Kingdom Accounting Standards and applicable law including FRS 101 Reduced Disclosure Framework .
Under company law the directors must not approve the accounts unless they are satisfied that they give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Company and of the profit or loss of the Company for that period.
In preparing the parent Company financial statements the directors are required to select suitable accounting policies and then apply them consistently make judgments and accounting estimates that are reasonable and prudent state whether applicable UK Accounting Standards have been followed subject to any material departures disclosed and explained in the financial statements and prepare the financial statements on the going concern basis unless it is inappropriate to presume that the Company will continue in business.
In preparing the Group financial statements International Accounting Standard 1 requires that directors properly select and apply accounting policies present information including accounting policies in a manner that provides relevant reliable comparable and understandable information provide additional disclosures when compliance with the specific requirements in IFRSs are insufficient to enable users to understand the impact of particular transactions other events and conditions on the entitys financial position and financial performance and make an assessment of the Companys ability to continue as a going concern.
The directors are responsible for keeping adequate accounting records that are sufficient to show and explain the Companys transactions and disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the financial position of the Company and enable them to ensure that the financial statements comply with the Companies Act 2006.
They are also responsible for safeguarding the assets of the Company and hence for taking reasonable steps for the prevention and detection of fraud and other irregularities.
The directors are responsible for the maintenance and integrity of the corporate and financial information included on the Companys website.
Legislation in the United Kingdom governing the preparation and dissemination of financial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
Responsibility statement We confirm that to the best of our knowledge the financial statements prepared in accordance with the relevant financial reporting framework give a true and fair view of the assets liabilities financial position and profit or loss of the Company and the undertakings included in the consolidation taken as a whole the strategic report includes a fair review of the development and performance of the business and the position of the Company and the undertakings included in the consolidation taken as a whole together with a description of the principal risks and uncertainties that they face and the annual report and financial statements taken as a whole are fair balanced and understandable and provide the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Companys performance business model and strategy.
This responsibility statement was approved by the Board of Directors on 12 March 2018 and is signed on its behalf by J G Nichols S A Fenerty
Chief Executive Officer Finance Director
12 March 2018 12 March 2018 32  site REPORT ON THE AUDIT OF THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
In our opinion the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the Groups and of the Parent Companys affairs as at 31 December 2017 and of the Groups profit for the year then ended the Group financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union the Parent Company financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with United Kingdom Generally Accepted Accounting Practice including Financial Reporting Standard 101 Reduced Disclosure Framework and the financial statements have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006.
We have audited the financial statements of Hand T Group plc the Parent Company and its subsidiaries together the Group which comprise the Group statement of comprehensive income the Group and Parent Company balance sheets the Group and Parent Company statements of changes in equity the Group cash flow statement the Group and Parent Company statements of accounting policies and the related notes 1 to 33 and A to F The financial reporting framework that has been applied in the preparation of the Group financial statements is applicable law and IFRSs as adopted by the European Union.
The financial reporting framework that has been applied in the preparation of the Parent Company financial statements is applicable law and United Kingdom Accounting Standards including FRS 101 Reduced Disclosure Framework United Kingdom Generally Accepted Accounting Practice.
Basis for opinion We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing UK ISAs UK and applicable law.
Our responsibilities under those standards are further described in the auditors responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements section of our report.
We are independent of the Group and the Parent Company in accordance with the ethical requirements that are relevant to our audit of the financial statements in the UK including the FRCs Ethical Standard as applied to listed entities and we have fulfilled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with these requirements.
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion.
Summary of our audit approach Key audit matters The key audit matters that we identified in the current year were Revenue recognition accuracy of pledge interest revenue and the associated accrual at the balance sheet date Valuation of provisioning in relation to personal loan receivables Materiality The materiality that we used in the current year was 758000 which is 5.4% of the Groups profit before tax PBT figure of 14102000.
Scoping We have performed a full audit scope on both HandT Group plc and its subsidiary Harvey and Thompson Limited.
Independent Auditors Report
Annual Report and Accounts 2017  33 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Conclusions relating to going concern We are required by ISAs UK to report in respect of the following matters where the directors use of the going concern basis of accounting in preparation of the financial statements is not appropriate or the directors have not disclosed in the financial statements any identified material uncertainties that may cast significant doubt about the Groups or the Parent Companys ability to continue to adopt the going concern basis of accounting for a period of at least twelve months from the date when the financial statements are authorised for issue.
We have nothing to report in respect of these matters.
Key audit matters Key audit matters are those matters that in our professional judgement were of most significance in our audit of the financial statements of the period subject to our audit and include the most significant assessed risks of material misstatement whether or not due to fraud that we identified.
These matters included those which had the greatest effect on the overall audit strategy the allocation of resources in the audit and directing the efforts of the engagement team.
These matters were addressed in the context of our audit of the financial statements as a whole and in forming our opinion thereon and we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters.
Revenue recognition accuracy of pledge interest revenue and the associated accrual at the balance sheet date Key audit matter description Interest receivable on pawnbroking loans is recognised as interest accrues by reference to the percentage of the pawn loans that are estimated to be redeemed and the effective interest rate applicable.
The pawn loans interest accrual pledge accrual is dependent on the estimate that the Group makes of the expected level of redeemed pawn loans.
Management apply a best estimate of the redemption rate based on a historical analysis in order to determine the interest revenue due on the pledge receivable at balance sheet date.
There is a risk that the pledge accrual is misstated due to the use of a redemption rate estimate which is inappropriate.
This accrual totalled 7.4m as at 31 December 2017.
Management use historical data to build up a profile of historical redemption.
The profile is the basis for estimates of future redemption rates used to calculate the year end pledge accrual.
In recent years through evolution in customer redemption patterns the historical redemption profile has changed over time.
The redemption rate is a key assumption in driving pledge interest revenue recognition and is a key management judgement hence we consider this to be a key audit matter for the audit.
The estimated redemption on annual lending for the year ended 31 December 2017 is 83.6% Actual redemption of 2016 loans 84.3%.
Further information regarding the pledge accrual is found within the Corporate governance report on page 24 and the critical accounting judgements and key sources of estimation uncertainty on page 47.
How the scope of our audit responded to the key audit matter We evaluated the design and implementation of controls over the preparation and review of the redemption rate estimate used by management to calculate the pledge accrual.
We have assessed whether managements application of the redemption rate estimate remains consistent with the prior year and tested whether the judgement regarding future redemption rates is reasonable by Using IT specialists within the audit team to reperform the compilation of historical data into the historical redemption profile Analysing historical trends in the rate to assess the appropriateness of the redemption rates taking into consideration shifts in the historical profile Assessing whether the associated interest accrual calculation is compliant with the requirements of IAS 39 Financial instruments recognition and measurement and Assessing managements historical forecasting accuracy by performing a retrospective review of the prior year pledge interest accrual.
Key observations From the work performed above we concluded that managements estimate of the redemption rate was appropriate and that the interest recognition policies were appropriately applied.
34  site Valuation of provisioning in relation to personal loan receivables Key audit matter description Management apply a best estimate of the likely default on a personal loan based on historical analysis in order to determine the provision value.
This estimate requires management to make significant judgements regarding the level and timing of expected future cash flows.
In recent years the magnitude of the personal loan book has increased significantly.
At 31 December 2017 the gross loan book totalled 21.6m 2016 11.1m.
A risk has been identified in connection with the valuation of the provision in place in relation to personal loan receivables.
This provision totalled 3.8m as at 31 December 2017 31 December 2016 2.1m.
Further information regarding the loan provision is found within the Corporate governance report on page 23 and the critical accounting judgements and key sources of estimation uncertainty on page 48.
How the scope of our audit responded to the key audit matter We evaluated the design and implementation of controls over the calculation and review of the personal loan provisioning.
We have tested managements personal loan provision by Assessing whether the personal loan provision calculation is consistent with the requirements of IAS 39 Financial instruments recognition and measurement Testing the accuracy and completeness of personal loan data used to calculate the provision Challenging the provisioning methodology through discussions with management Analysing historical trends in the default rate to assess for any indication of ongoing increases in default and Performing a retrospective review of the prior year provision and subsequent writeoffs.
Key observations From the work performed above we concluded that the inputs and assumptions applied in managements loan provision calculation were reasonable and that the overall estimate was appropriate.
Our application of materiality We define materiality as the magnitude of misstatement in the financial statements that makes it probable that the economic decisions of a reasonably knowledgeable person would be changed or influenced.
We use materiality both in planning the scope of our audit work and in evaluating the results of our work.
Based on our professional judgement we determined materiality for the financial statements as a whole as follows Group financial statements Parent Company financial statements Materiality 758000 750000 Basis for determining materiality 5.4% of profit before tax.
We calculated 3% of net assets as the basis of materiality but further capped this at 99% of Group materiality.
Rationale for the benchmark applied In determining our materiality benchmark we considered the performance indicators most applicable to the users of the financial statements the nature of the business and comparative audit reports for listed entities.
Profit before tax is a key measure used by analysts in presenting business performance to users of the financial statements.
The Parent Company acts principally as a holding company and therefore net assets is a key measure.
The cap has been applied in line with our methodology for setting materiality for components.
Independent Auditors Report
Annual Report and Accounts 2017  35 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements We agreed with the Audit Committee that we would report to the Committee all audit differences in excess of 38000 as well as differences below that threshold that in our view warranted reporting on qualitative grounds.
We also report to the Audit Committee on disclosure matters that we identified when assessing the overall presentation of the financial statements.
An overview of the scope of our audit The Group comprises HandT Group plc and its subsidiary Harvey and Thompson Limited.
Both entities were subject to a full scope audit with all work performed by the group engagement team.
Our audit work was executed at levels of materiality applicable to each individual entity which were lower than group materiality.
At the Group level we also tested the consolidation process.
Other information The directors are responsible for the other information.
The other information comprises the information included in the annual report other than the financial statements and our auditors report thereon.
Our opinion on the financial statements does not cover the other information and except to the extent otherwise explicitly stated in our report we do not express any form of assurance conclusion thereon.
In connection with our audit of the financial statements our responsibility is to read the other information and in doing so consider whether the other information is materially inconsistent with the financial statements or our knowledge obtained in the audit or otherwise appears to be materially misstated.
If we identify such material inconsistencies or apparent material misstatements we are required to determine whether there is a material misstatement in the financial statements or a material misstatement of the other information.
If based on the work we have performed we conclude that there is a material misstatement of this other information we are required to report that fact.
We have nothing to report in respect of these matters.
Responsibilities of directors As explained more fully in the directors responsibilities statement the directors are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements and for being satisfied that they give a true and fair view and for such internal control as the directors determine is necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error.
In preparing the financial statements the directors are responsible for assessing the Groups and the Parent Companys ability to continue as a going concern disclosing as applicable matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless the directors either intend to liquidate the Group or the Parent Company or to cease operations or have no realistic alternative but to do so.
Chart style
PBT
Group materiality Group materiality Audit Committee reporting threshold PBT 14102000 36  site Auditors responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error and to issue an auditors report that includes our opinion.
Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with ISAs UK will always detect a material misstatement when it exists.
Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if individually or in the aggregate they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these financial statements.
A further description of our responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements is located on the Financial Reporting Councils website at www. rc. iteauditorsresponsibilities.
This description forms part of our independent auditors report.
Use of our report This report is made solely to the Companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006.
Our audit work has been undertaken so that we might state to the Companys members those matters we are required to state to them in an auditors report and for no other purpose.
To the fullest extent permitted by law we do not accept or assume responsibility to anyone other than the Company and the Companys members as a body for our audit work for this report or for the opinions we have formed.
Report on other legal and regulatory requirements Opinions on other matters prescribed by the Companies Act 2006 In our opinion based on the work undertaken in the course of the audit the information given in the strategic report and the directors report for the financial year for which the financial statements are prepared is consistent with the financial statements and the strategic report and the directors report have been prepared in accordance with applicable legal requirements.
In the light of the knowledge and understanding of the Group and or the Parent Company and their environment obtained in the course of the audit we have not identified any material misstatements in the strategic report or the directors report.
Matters on which we are required to report by exception Adequacy of explanations received and accounting records Under the Companies Act 2006 we are required to report to you if in our opinion we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit or adequate accounting records have not been kept by the Parent Company or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or the Parent Company financial statements are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns.
We have nothing to report in respect of these matters.
Directors remuneration Under the Companies Act 2006 we are also required to report if in our opinion certain disclosures of directors remuneration have not been made.
We have nothing to report in respect of these matters.
William Farren FCA Senior Statutory Auditor For and on behalf of Deloitte LLP Statutory Auditor Crawley United Kingdom 12 March 2018
Independent Auditors Report
Annual Report and Accounts 2017  37 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Group statement of comprehensive income For the year ended 31 December 2017
Restated
Continuing operations
Cost of sales 56 110333 Gross profit Other direct expenses Administrative expenses 6 63766 Operating profit Investment revenues Finance costs Profit before taxation Tax charge on profit Profit for the financial year and total comprehensive income 11336 7582
Pence
Earnings per share Diluted 13 30.94 20.88 See note 3 Revenue recognition 38  site
Share capital
Employee
Benefit
Trust shares reserve
Total
At 1 January 2016 Profit for the financial year Total comprehensive income    7582 7582 Share capital Share option movement Dividends paid At 31 December 2016 1852 25754 35 71276 98847 At 1 January 2017 Profit for the financial year Total comprehensive income    11336 11336 Share capital Share option movement Dividends paid At 31 December 2017 1872 26641 35 79144 107622 Group statement of changes in equity For the year ended 31 December 2017 Annual Report and Accounts 2017  39 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Group balance sheet As at 31 December 2017
31 December 31 December Noncurrent assets
Other intangible assets Property plant and equipment Deferred tax assets 25216 25759 Current assets
Trade and other receivables Other current assets Cash and cash equivalents 116720 99306 Total assets 141936 125065 Current liabilities Trade and other payables Current tax liabilities 11191 10006 Net current assets 105529 89300 Noncurrent liabilities
Provisions
23123 16212 Total liabilities 34314 26218 Net assets 107622 98847
Share capital Share premium account Employee Benefit Trust shares reserve Retained earnings 27 1872 Total equity attributable to equity holders 107622 98847 The financial statements of Hand T Group plc registered number  were approved by the Board of Directors and authorised for issue on 12 March 2018.
They were signed on its behalf by J G Nichols Chief Executive 40  site
Net cash used ingenerated from operating activities 30 3493 1315 Investing activities Interest received Proceeds on disposal of property plant and equipment Proceeds on disposal of trade and assets of businesses Purchases of property plant and equipment Acquisition of trade and assets of businesses Net cash used in investing activities 1782 1875 Financing activities Dividends paid Increase in borrowings Issue of shares 14 3564 Net cash generated fromused in financing activities 4343 755 Net decrease in cash and cash equivalents Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of the year Cash and cash equivalents at end of the year 8676 9608 Group cash flow statement For the year ended 31 December 2017 Annual Report and Accounts 2017  41 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Notes to the consolidated financial statements For the year ended 31 December 2017 GENERAL INFORMATION Hand T Group plc is a company incorporated in England and Wales under the Companies Act.
The Company is a public company limited by shares and is registered in England and Wales.
The address of the Companys registered office is shown on page 21.
The principal activities of the Company and its subsidiaries the Group and the nature of the Groups operations are set out in note 6 and in the chairmans statement chief executives review the finance directors review and the directors report.
The financial statements are presented in pounds sterling because that is the currency of the primary economic environment in which the Group operates.
CHANGES IN ACCOUNTING POLICIES Adoption of new and revised standards Amendments to IFRSs that are mandatorily effective for the current year In the current year the Group has applied a number of amendments to IFRSs issued by the International Accounting Standards Board IASB that are mandatorily effective for an accounting period that begins on or after 1 January 2017.
Their adoption has not had any material impact on the disclosures or on the amounts reported in these financial statements.
Amendments to IAS 7 Disclosure Initiative Amendments to IAS 12 Recognition of Deferred Tax Assets for Unrealised Losses Annual Improvements to IFRSs 20142016 Amendments to IFRS 12 Disclosure of Interests in Other Entities New and revised IFRSs in issue but not yet effective At the date of authorisation of these financial statements the Group has not applied the following new and revised IFRSs that have been issued but are not yet effective and in some cases had not yet been adopted by the EU IFRS 9 Financial Instruments IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers and the related Clarifications IFRS 16
IFRS 17 Insurance Contracts IFRS 2 amendments Classification and Measurement of Sharebased Payment Transactions IFRS 4 amendments Applying IFRS 9 Financial Instruments with IFRS 4 Insurance Contracts IAS 40 amendments Transfers of Investment Property IFRS 10 and IAS 28 amendments Sale or Contribution of Assets between an Investor and its Associate or Joint Venture Annual Improvements to IFRSs 20142016 Cycle Amendments to IFRS 1 Firsttime Adoption of International Financial Reporting Standards and IFRS 28 Investments in Associates and Joint Ventures IFRIC 22 Foreign Currency Transactions and Advanced Consideration IFRIC 23 Uncertainty over Income Tax Treatments The directors do not expect that the adoption of the standards listed above will have a material impact on the financial statements of the Group in future periods except as noted below IFRS 9 Financial instruments The Group will apply IFRS 9 from 1 January 2018.
The Group plans to restate comparatives on initial application of IFRS 9.
The full impact of adopting IFRS 9 on the Groups consolidated financial statements will depend on the financial instruments that the Group has during 2018 as well as on economic conditions and judgements made as at the year end.
The Group has performed an assessment of potential impact of adopting IFRS 9 based on the financial instruments as at the date of initial application of IFRS 9 1 January 2018.
Classification and measurement With respect to the classification and measurement of financial assets the number of categories of financial assets under IFRS 9 has been reduced compared to IAS 39.
Under IFRS 9 the classification of financial assets is based both on the business model within which the asset is held and the contractual cash flow characteristics of the asset.
There will be no impact on the classification and measurement of the personal loans or pawnbroking trade receivables both are measured on amortised cost.
There will be no change in the accounting for any financial liabilities.
42  site Notes to the consolidated financial statements For the year ended 31 December 2017 continued CHANGES IN ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED
The impairment model under IFRS 9 reflects expected credit losses as opposed to only incurred credit losses under IAS 39.
Under the impairment approach in IFRS 9 it is not necessary for a credit event to have occurred before credit losses are recognised.
Instead
The amount of expected credit losses should be updated at each reporting date.
Under IFRS 9 there will be a material increase in both revenue and impairment for Pawnbroking and Personal Loans.
In respect of the personal loan receivable the Group expects to recognise a loss allowance for 12month expected credit losses where the loan is not in arrears as the loan falls into arrears the loss allowance will be based on the lifetime expected credit losses as there has been a significant increase in credit risk.
The Groups estimate of the loss allowance for these assets as at 1 January 2018 is 2.6m greater compared to IAS 39.
In respect of the pawnbroking loan receivable the shortterm nature of the agreement results in 12month expected credit losses being the same as lifetime expected credit losses.
The Groups estimate of the loss allowance for these assets as at 1 January 2018 is 5.2m greater compared to IAS 39.
At the date of initial application of IFRS 9 the estimated impact is a decrease in receivables as at 1 January 2018 of 7.8m which net of deferred tax results in a reduction in net assets of 6.3m.
IFRS 16 Leases IFRS 16 introduces a comprehensive model for the identification of lease arrangements and accounting treatments for both lessors and lessees.
IFRS 16 will supersede the current lease guidance including IAS 17 Leases and the related interpretations when it becomes effective for accounting periods beginning on or after 1 January 2019.
The Group currently expects to adopt IFRS 16 for the year ending 31 December 2019.
No decision has been made about whether to use any of the transitional options in IFRS 16.
IFRS 16 distinguishes leases and service contracts on the basis of whether an identified asset is controlled by a customer.
Distinctions of operating leases off balance sheet and finance leases on balance sheet are removed for lessee accounting and is replaced by a model where a rightofuse asset and a corresponding liability have to be recognised for all leases by lessees i. except for shortterm leases and leases of low value assets.
The rightofuse asset is initially measured at cost and subsequently measured at cost subject to certain exceptions less accumulated depreciation and impairment losses adjusted for any remeasurement of the lease liability.
The lease liability is initially measured at the present value of the lease payments that are not paid at that date.
Subsequently the lease liability is adjusted for interest and lease payments as well as the impact of lease modifications amongst others.
Furthermore the classification of cash flows will also be affected because operating lease payments under IAS 17 are presented as operating cash flows whereas under the IFRS 16 model the lease payments will be split into a principal and an interest portion which will be presented as financing and operating cash flows respectively.
In contrast to lessee accounting IFRS 16 substantially carries forward the lessor accounting requirements in IAS 17 and continues to require a lessor to classify a lease either as an operating lease or a finance lease.
Furthermore extensive disclosures are required by IFRS 16.
As at 31 December 2017 the Group has noncancellable operating lease commitments of 30333000.
IAS 17 does not require the recognition of any rightofuse asset or liability for future payments for these leases instead certain information is disclosed as operating lease commitments in note 29.
Our assessment indicates that these arrangements will meet the definition of a lease under IFRS 16 and hence the Group will recognise a rightofuse asset and a corresponding liability in respect of all these leases unless they qualify for low value or shortterm leases upon the application of IFRS 16.
The new requirement to recognise a rightofuse asset and a related lease liability is expected to have a significant impact on the amounts recognised in the Groups consolidated financial statements and the directors are currently assessing its potential impact.
It is not practicable to provide a reasonable estimate of the financial effect until the directors complete the review.
SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES Basis of accounting The financial statements have been prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs adopted by the European Union and therefore the Group financial statements comply with the AIM Rules.
The financial statements have been prepared on the historical cost basis except for the revaluation of certain financial instruments that are measured at revalued amounts or fair values at the end of each reporting period as explained in the accounting policies below.
Historical cost is generally based on the fair value of the consideration given in exchange for goods and services.
The principal accounting policies adopted are set out opposite.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017  43 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Basis of consolidation The consolidated financial statements incorporate the financial statements of the Company and entities controlled by the Company its subsidiaries made up to 31 December each year.
All intragroup assets and liabilities equity income expenses and cash flows relating to transactions between the members of the Group are eliminated on consolidation.
Going concern The directors have at the time of approving the financial statements a reasonable expectation that the Company and the Group have adequate resources to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future.
Thus they continue to adopt the going concern basis of accounting in preparing the financial statements.
Further detail is contained in the Directors Report.
Business combinations Acquisitions of subsidiaries and businesses are accounted for using the acquisition method.
The consideration for each acquisition is measured at the aggregate of the fair values at the date of exchange of assets given liabilities incurred or assumed and equity instruments issued by the Group in exchange for control of the acquiree.
Acquisitionrelated costs are recognised in profit or loss as incurred.
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess of the cost of acquisition over the Groups interest in the fair value of the identifiable assets and liabilities of a subsidiary or trade and assets previously operated through either sole partnership in limited companies with no audited financial statements at the date of acquisition.
Goodwill is initially recognised as an asset at cost and is subsequently measured at cost less any accumulated impairment losses.
Cash generating units to which goodwill has been allocated are tested for impairment annually or more frequently when there is an indication that the unit may be impaired.
If the recoverable amount of the cashgenerating unit is less than the carrying amount of the unit the impairment loss is allocated first to reduce the carrying amount of any goodwill allocated to the unit and then to the other assets of the unit prorata on the basis of the carrying amount of each asset in the unit.
An impairment loss recognised for goodwill is not reversed in a subsequent period.
Goodwill arising on acquisitions before the date of transition to IFRS has been retained at the previous UK GAAP amounts subject to being tested for impairment annually as described above.
On the disposal of a cash generating unit the attributable amount of goodwill is included in the determination of the profit or loss on disposal.
Intangible assets Intangible assets with a finite useful life are carried at cost less amortisation less impairment losses.
Intangible assets represent intangibles which have been separately identified under IFRS 3 arising in business combinations being customer relationships or meet the recognition criteria of IAS 38 Intangible Assets  being principally computer software assets.
Amortisation of intangible assets acquired in a business combination is calculated using the expected life of the intangible assets acquired.
Amortisation of other intangible assets computer software is calculated using the straightline method to allocate the cost of the asset less its assessed realisable value over its estimated useful life 6 to 8 years.
The estimated useful life and amortisation method are reviewed at the end of each reporting period with the effect of any changes and estimates being accounted for on a prospective basis.
An intangible asset is derecognised on disposal or when no future economic benefits are expected from use or disposal.
Gains or losses arising from derecognition of an intangible asset measured as the difference between net disposal proceeds and the carrying amount of the asset are recognised in the Group statement of comprehensive income when the asset is derecognised.
Property plant and equipment Property plant and equipment are stated at cost less accumulated depreciation and any impairment in value.
Depreciation
Depreciation is provided on all property plant and equipment at rates calculated to write off the cost less estimated residual value of each asset evenly over its expected useful life as follows Leasehold premises Leasehold improvements Shorter of 7 years or life of lease Computer equipment Computer hardware 3 to 5 years Fixtures and fittings 10 years Motor vehicles 4 years The assets residual values useful lives and methods are reviewed and adjusted if appropriate at each financial year end.
44  site SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED An item of property plant and equipment is derecognised upon disposal or when no future economic benefits are expected to arise from the continued use of the asset.
The gain or loss arising on the disposal or scrappage of an asset is determined as the difference between the sales proceeds and the carrying amount of the asset and is recognised in income.
Inventories
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost and net realisable value.
For inventory acquired for retail sale the cost represents the purchase price plus overheads directly related to bringing inventory to its present location and condition and is measured on a first in first out basis.
For inventory arising from unredeemed pledges the cost represents the amount originally loaned plus overheads directly related to bringing inventory to its present location and condition.
Net realisable value represents the estimated selling price less all estimated costs of completion and costs to be incurred in marketing selling and distribution.
Where necessary provision is made for obsolete slow moving and damaged inventory or inventory shrinkage.
The provision for obsolete slow moving and damaged inventory represents the difference between the cost of the inventory and its market value.
The inventory shrinkage provision is based on an estimate of the inventory missing at the reporting date using historical shrinkage experience.
Financial assets All financial assets are recognised and derecognised on a trade date where the purchase or sale of a financial asset is under a contract whose terms require delivery of the financial asset within the timeframe established by the market concerned and are initially measured at fair value plus transaction costs except for those financial assets classified as at fair value through profit or loss.
Transaction costs directly attributable to the acquisition of financial assets classified as at fair value through profit or loss are recognised immediately in profit or loss.
In accordance with IAS 39 Financial Instruments Recognition and Measurement the Group has classified its financial assets as loans and receivables and fair value through profit and loss.
The classification depends on the nature and purpose of the financial assets and is determined at the time of initial recognition.
Loans and receivables The principal financial assets included in this measurement category are Trade receivables Trade receivables represent amounts due from customers in the normal course of business.
Trade receivables include certain amounts namely pledge receivables and personal loan debtors which are interest bearing.
The accrued interest arising on these interest bearing assets is included in prepayments and accrued income using the effective interest method.
All other amounts which are not interest bearing are stated at their nominal value as reduced by appropriate allowances for estimated irrecoverable amounts which are charged to the Group statement of comprehensive income.
Cash and cash equivalents Cash and cash equivalents include cash at hand and deposits held with banks with original maturities of three months or less.
Financial assets at Fair Value through Profit or Loss Only the Groups derivative financial instruments of which there are none outstanding at the year end are recorded as financial assets at Fair Value Through Profit or Loss FVTPL.
Financial assets at FVTPL are stated at fair value with any resultant gain or loss recognised in profit or loss.
Impairment of financial assets Financial assets other than those at FVTPL are assessed for indicators of impairment at each balance sheet date.
Financial assets are impaired where there is objective evidence that as a result of one or more events that occurred after the initial recognition of the financial asset the estimated future cash flows of the investment have been reduced.
Objective evidence of impairment could include significant financial difficulty of the counterparty or default on payments or it becoming probable that the counterparty will enter bankruptcy or financial reorganisation.
For certain categories of financial asset such as trade receivables assets that are assessed not to be impaired individually are subsequently assessed for impairment on a collective basis.
The carrying amount of the financial asset is reduced by the impairment loss directly for all financial assets with the exception of trade receivables where the carrying amount is reduced through the use of an allowance account.
When a trade receivable is considered uncollectible it is written off against the allowance account.
Subsequent recoveries of amounts previously written off are credited against the allowance account.
Changes in the carrying amount of the allowance account are immediately recognised in profit or loss.
If in a subsequent period the amount of the impairment loss decreases and the decrease can be related objectively to an event occurring after the impairment was recognised the previously recognised impairment loss is reversed through the Group statement of comprehensive income to the extent that the carrying amount of the financial asset at the date the impairment is reversed does not exceed what the amortised cost would have been had the impairment not been recognised.
Notes to the consolidated financial statements For the year ended 31 December 2017 continued Annual Report and Accounts 2017  45 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Financial liabilities and equity Financial liabilities and equity instruments are classified according to the substance of the contractual arrangements entered into.
Equity instruments An equity instrument is any contract that evidences a residual interest in the assets of the Group after deducting all of its liabilities.
Equity instruments issued by the Group are recorded at the proceeds received net of direct issue costs.
Financial liabilities Financial liabilities are classified as either financial liabilities at FVTPL or other financial liabilities.
Financial liabilities at FVTPL Only the Groups derivative financial instruments of which there are none outstanding at the year end are recorded as financial liabilities at FVTPL.
Financial liabilities at FVTPL are stated at fair value with any resultant gain or loss recognised in profit or loss.
The net gain or loss recognised in profit or loss incorporates any interest paid on the financial liability.
Other financial liabilities Other financial liabilities including borrowings are initially measured at fair value net of transaction costs.
All other financial liabilities are subsequently measured at amortised cost using the effective interest method with interest expense recognised on an effective yield basis.
Taxation
The tax expense represents the sum of the tax currently payable and deferred tax.
The tax currently payable is based on taxable profit for the year.
Taxable profit differs from net profit as reported in the Group statement of comprehensive income because it excludes items of income or expense that are taxable or deductible in other years and it further excludes items that are never taxable or deductible.
The Groups liability for current tax is calculated using tax rates that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the balance sheet date.
Deferred tax is the tax expected to be payable or recoverable on differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities in the financial statements and the corresponding tax bases used in the computation of taxable profit and is accounted for using the balance sheet liability method.
Deferred tax liabilities are generally recognised for all taxable temporary differences and deferred tax assets are recognised to the extent that it is probable that taxable profits will be available against which deductible temporary differences can be utilised.
Such assets and liabilities are not recognised if the temporary difference arises from the initial recognition of goodwill or from the initial recognition other than in a business combination of other assets and liabilities in a transaction that affects neither the taxable profit nor the accounting profit.
The carrying amount of deferred tax assets is reviewed at each balance sheet date and reduced to the extent that it is no longer probable that sufficient taxable profits will be available to allow all or part of the asset to be recovered.
Deferred tax is calculated at the tax rates that are expected to apply in the period when the liability is settled or the asset is realised based on tax laws and rates that have been enacted or substantively enacted at the balance sheet date.
Deferred tax is charged or credited in the Group statement of comprehensive income except when it relates to items charged or credited directly to equity in which case the deferred tax is also dealt with in equity.
The measurement of deferred tax liabilities and assets reflects the tax consequences that would follow from the manner in which the Group expects at the end of the reporting period to recover or settle the carrying amount of its assets and liabilities.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are offset when there is a legally enforceable right to set off current tax assets against current tax liabilities and when they relate to income taxes levied by the same taxation authority and the Group intends to settle its current tax assets and liabilities on a net basis.
VAT
The Group is partially exempt for VAT and operates a number of VAT schemes including the Margin Scheme and the Gold Scheme.
The
Group takes advantage of the simpler approach offered by global accounting under the Margin Scheme.
Within the financial statements sales are disclosed net of VAT payable other direct expenses and administrative expenses include the cost of irrecoverable input VAT.
Leases
Leases taken by the Group are assessed individually as to whether they are finance leases or operating leases.
Leases are classified as finance leases whenever the terms of the lease transfer substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership to the lessee.
All other leases are classified as operating leases.
Rentals payable under operating leases are charged to income on a straightline basis over the term of the relevant lease.
In the event that lease incentives are received to enter into operating leases such incentives are recognised as a liability.
The aggregate benefit of incentives is recognised as a reduction of rental expense on a straightline basis over the lease term.
The Group currently has no finance leases.
46  site SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED
A provision is recognised in the balance sheet when the Group has a present obligation legal or constructive as a result of a past event and it is probable that an outflow of economic benefits will be required to settle the obligation and a reliable estimate can be made of the amount of the obligation.
Provisions are measured at the directors best estimate of the expenditure required to settle the present obligation at the balance sheet date and are discounted to present value where the effect of the time value of money is material.
All the Groups premises are leased under operating leases.
The majority of the leases include end of lease rectification clauses which impose certain requirements on the Group to complete repairs and maintenance or redecoration activities if required.
The Group provides for both rectification costs and repairs and maintenance obligations.
Rectification costs are provided for on signing the lease and repairs are provided as Management becomes aware of any significant amounts that will be required.
Share capital and share premium account There is one class of shares.
When new shares are issued they are recorded in share capital at their par value.
The excess of the issue price over the par value is recorded in the share premium account.
Incremental external costs directly attributable to the issue of new shares are recorded in equity as a deduction net of tax to the share premium account.
Employee Benefit Trust Shares Under the terms of the Group Long Term Incentive Plan LTIP for the directors the Parent Company issued certain shares to an Employee Benefit Trust paid for through the issuance of a loan to the Trust from the Group.
The award of shares under the LTIP is conditional upon certain vesting criteria as outlined in note 28.
The fair value of the awards made is measured under the policy disclosed below for Share Options.
The Group presents the conditional shares as an adjustment to its own equity at the balance sheet date through the Employee Benefit Trust shares reserve until the point that the shares are awarded and cease to be conditional awards of shares.
Revenue recognition Revenue is measured at the fair value of the consideration received or receivable and represents amounts receivable for goods and services and interest income provided in the normal course of business net of discounts VAT and other salesrelated taxes.
Revenue is recognised to the extent that it is probable that the economic benefits will flow to the Group and the revenue can be reliably measured.
The following specific recognition criteria must also be met before revenue is recognised Pawnbroking or Pawn Service Charge PSC comprises interest on pledge book loans plus auction profit and loss less any auction commissions payable and less surplus payable to the customer.
Interest receivable on loans is recognised as interest accrues by reference to the principal outstanding and the effective interest rate applicable which is the rate that discounts the estimated future cash receipts through the expected life of the financial asset to that assets net carrying amount Retail comprises revenue from retail jewellery sales with inventory sourced from unredeemed pawn loans newly purchased inventory and inventory refurbished from the Groups gold purchasing operation.
All revenue is recognised at the point of sale Pawnbroking scrap and gold purchasing comprises proceeds from gold scrap sales and is recognised on full receipt of sale proceeds Personal loans comprise income from the Groups unsecured lending activities.
Personal loan revenues have historically been recognised net of related impairment charges.
In light of the growth of the personal loans segment the Group has changed the personal loan revenue recognition policy to better reflect the underlying nature and substance of such revenues.
From 1 January 2017 onwards revenue has been stated before impairment with any impairment charge included within other direct expenses in the Group statement of comprehensive income.
2016 revenue gross profit and other direct expenses have been restated.
The revenue and other direct expenses as previously stated have been increased by 2351000.
There have been no changes to previously reported operating profit profit before tax profit after tax earnings per share nor any change to the Group balance sheet or the Group cash flow statement and Other services comprise revenues from third party cheque cashing foreign exchange income buyback and other income.
The commission receivable on cheque cashing is recognised at the time of the transaction.
Buyback revenue is recognised at the point of sale of the item back to the customer.
Foreign exchange income represents the commission when selling or buying foreign currencies and is recognised at the point of sale.
Any other revenues are recognised on an accruals basis.
The Group recognises interest income arising on secured and unsecured lending within trading revenue rather than investment revenue on the basis that this represents most accurately the business activities of the Group.
Gross profit Gross profit is stated after charging inventory pledge and other services provisions and direct costs of inventory items sold or scrapped in the year.
Other direct expenses Other direct expenses comprise all expenses associated with the operation of the various shops and collection centre of the Group including premises expenses such as rent rates utilities and insurance all staff costs and staff related costs for the relevant employees.
Notes to the consolidated financial statements For the year ended 31 December 2017 continued Annual Report and Accounts 2017  47 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Operating profit Operating profit is stated before investment income and finance costs.
EBITDA
EBITDA is defined as earnings before interest taxation depreciation and amortisation.
It is calculated by adding back depreciation and amortisation to the operating profit as follows Operating profit Depreciation and amortisation EBITDA 17297 13140 The Board consider EBITDA to be a key performance measure as the Group borrowing facility includes a number of loan covenants based on it.
Retirement benefit costs The Group operates a defined contribution pension scheme which is contracted into the State Scheme.
The amount charged to the Group statement of comprehensive income in respect of pension costs and other postretirement benefits is the contributions payable in the year.
Differences between contributions payable in the year and contributions actually paid are shown as either accruals or prepayments in the balance sheet.
Employee share incentive plans The Group issues equitysettled sharebased payments to certain employees including directors.
These payments are measured at fair value at the date of grant by use of a BlackScholes model or a Stochastic model depending on the vesting conditions attached to each scheme.
This fair value cost of equitysettled awards is recognised on a straightline basis over the vesting period based on the Groups estimate of shares that will eventually vest and adjusted for the effect of any nonmarket based vesting conditions.
The expected life used in the model has been adjusted based on managements best estimate for the effects of nontransferability exercise restrictions and behavioural considerations.
A corresponding credit is recorded in equity.
No cost is recognised for awards that do not ultimately vest.
Dividends
Dividends are provided for in the period in which they become a binding liability on the Company.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING JUDGEMENTS AND KEY SOURCES OF ESTIMATION UNCERTAINTY In the application of the Groups accounting policies which are described in note 3 the directors are required to make judgements estimates and assumptions about the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources.
Actual results may differ from these estimates.
The estimates and underlying assumptions are reviewed on an ongoing basis.
Revisions to accounting estimates are recognised in the period in which the estimate is revised if the revision affects only that period or in the period of the revision and future periods if the revision affects both current and future periods.
Critical judgements in applying the Groups accounting policies There are no critical judgements apart from those involving estimations which are dealt with separately below that the directors have made in the process of applying the Groups accounting policies and that have the most significant effect on the amounts recognised in financial statements.
Key sources of estimation uncertainty The key assumptions concerning the future and other key sources of estimation uncertainty at the balance sheet date that have a significant risk of causing a material adjustment to the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities within the next financial year are discussed below.
Pawnbroking loans interest accrual estimation The Group recognises interest on pawnbroking loans as disclosed in the Critical judgements in applying the Groups accounting policies section above.
The pawn loans interest accrual pledge accrual is material to the financial statements and is dependent on the estimate that the Group makes of the expected level of redeemed pawn loans.
The Group estimates the expected redemptions based on the historical redemption rates achieved.
There is a risk that the actual redemption rate may vary significantly from the historical rate used to estimate the pledge accrual at the balance sheet date.
The Directors assess the pledge accrual estimate made at the prior balance sheet date annually to determine if the actual redemption differs significantly to the previous estimate.
No significant differences were noted for 2017 or 2016.
The sensitivity of the pledge accrual to reasonable changes in the redemption rate is shown in note 26.
48  site CRITICAL ACCOUNTING JUDGEMENTS AND KEY SOURCES OF ESTIMATION UNCERTAINTY CONTINUED Impairment of goodwill and other intangibles Determining whether goodwill is impaired requires an estimation of the value in use of the cashgenerating units to which goodwill has been allocated.
The value in use calculation requires the Group to estimate the future cash flows expected to arise from the cashgenerating unit and a suitable discount rate in order to calculate present value.
The review is conducted annually in the final quarter of the year.
The impairment review is conducted at the level of each cash generating unit which for acquisitions represents the specific store or stores acquired.
There was no impairment loss recorded in the current year 2016 nil.
The principal assumptions applied by management in arriving at the value in use of each cash generating unit are as follows The Group prepares cash flow forecasts over a five year period for each cash generating unit.
Forecast EBITDA used as a proxy for cashflows has been derived by applying the Board approved base budget assumption to each individual stores results for the twelve months to September 2017.
For impairment review purposes we have used conservative growth assumptions after 2018 even in this scenario there is still significant headroom on each CGU.
A perpetuity formula has been applied to the cashflows i. assumption that periodic cashflows will be received indefinitely.
The Group has discounted the cash flows at a pretax risk adjusted rate of 12% 2016 9%.
While the impairment review has been conducted based on the best available estimates at the impairment review date the Group notes that actual events may vary from management expectation.
Trade receivables provisioning Trade and other receivables are stated at their nominal amount less expected impairment losses.
A provision for impairment on personal loans is recognised when a loan has no payments due when contractual monthly payments are missed or when a balance is outstanding beyond the final repayment date.
Personal Loan provision was 3875000 2016 2195000.
With respect to all provisions that are based on estimates there is a risk that actual losses incurred will vary significantly from management expectation at the balance sheet date if historical loss rates are not a good indicator of the actual credit risk profile of the yearend receivables.
For further details on the provisions and impairment losses refer to note 26 which show the amounts recorded in the period and the sensitivity at the balance sheet date to changes in the key assumptions with respect to impairment losses.
Revenue recognition Interest receivable on pawnbroking loans is recognised as interest accrues by reference to the percentage of the pawn loans that are estimated to be redeemed and the effective interest rate applicable for more details see Note 20 Trade and other receivables .
The effective interest rate is the rate that discounts the estimated future cash receipts through the expected life of the financial asset to that assets net carrying amount.
The estimated future cash receipts are based on the historical cash receipts experience the Pledge Redemption of the business which vary from month to month.
The Group monitors the Pledge Redemption on a monthly basis.
The critical judgement is that the Group does not recognise interest income on the pawn loans that are not expected to be redeemed.
The Group recognises income on these loans when the related collateral that supports the loan is disposed of through either the scrap or retail operations of the Group.
The Group is of the opinion that the revenue earned on the unredeemed pledges is only realised from the Group perspective at the point at which the inventory or scrap item that the Group obtains from the pledge collateral is disposed of.
In arriving at this treatment the Group also considers that the transfer value from pawn loans to inventory of the unredeemed pledge collateral cannot exceed the cost to the Group of the inventory item which is represented by the underlying loan amount provided on the unredeemed pledge item.
Impairment of personal loans Impairment is calculated using models which use historical payment performance to generate the estimated amount and timing of future cash flows from each arrears stage more information is set out in Note 6 Operating Segments .
Judgement is applied as to the appropriate point at which receivables are impaired and whether past payment performance provides a reasonable guide as to the collectability of the current personal loan receivables book.
Notes to the consolidated financial statements For the year ended 31 December 2017 continued Annual Report and Accounts 2017  49 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements
Restated
An analysis of the Groups revenue is as follows Sales of goods Gold purchasing retail pawnbroking scrap 64754 56706 Interestcommission earned Pawnbroking cheque cashing and other financial services 45579 39867
Investment revenues Total Group revenue 110333 96574 Further analysis of revenue by segment is shown in note 6.
Included in the above revenues are the following items of income and gains
Interest earned on financial assets not designated at fair value Fees earned on financial assets not designated at fair value OPERATING SEGMENTS For reporting purposes the Group is currently organised into six segments  pawnbroking gold purchasing retail pawnbroking scrap personal loans and other services.
The principal activities by segment are as follows
Pawnbroking is a loan secured against a collateral the pledge.
In the case of the Group over 99% of the collateral against which amounts are lent comprises precious metals predominantly gold diamonds and watches.
The pawnbroking contract is a sixmonth credit agreement bearing a monthly interest rate of between 1.99% and 10.00%.
The contract is governed by the terms of the Consumer Credit Act 2008 previously the Consumer Credit Act 2002.
If the customer does not redeem the goods by repaying the secured loan before the end of the contract the Group is required to dispose of the goods either through public auctions if the value of the pledge is over 75 disposal proceeds being reported in this segment or if the value of the pledge is 75 or under through public auctions or the retail or pawnbroking scrap activities of the Group.
Purchasing
Jewellery is bought direct from customers through all of the Groups stores.
The transaction is simple with the store agreeing a price with the customer and purchasing the goods for cash on the spot.
Gold purchasing revenues comprise proceeds from scrap sales on goods sourced from the Groups purchasing operations.
Retail
The Groups retail proposition is primarily gold and jewellery and the majority of the retail sales are forfeited items from the pawnbroking pledge book or refurbished items from the Groups gold purchasing operations.
The retail offering is complemented with a small amount of new or secondhand jewellery purchased from third parties by the Group.
Pawnbroking scrap Pawnbroking scrap comprises all other proceeds from gold scrap sales other than those reported within gold purchasing.
The items are either damaged beyond repair are slow moving or surplus to the Groups requirements and are smelted and sold at the current gold spot price less a small commission.
50  site OPERATING SEGMENTS CONTINUED Personal loans Personal loans comprises income from the Company unsecured lending activities.
Personal loan revenues have historically been recognised net of related impairment charges.
In light of the growth of the personal loans segment the Group has opted to change the personal loan revenue recognition policy to better reflect the underlying nature and substance of such revenues.
From 1 January 2017 onwards revenue has been stated before impairment with any impairment charge included within other direct expenses in the Group statement of comprehensive income.
2016 revenue gross profit and other direct expenses have been restated accordingly.
There have been no changes to previously reported operating profit profit before tax profit after tax earnings per share nor any change to the Group balance sheet or Group cash flow statement.
Other services This segment comprises Third party cheque encashment which is the provision of cash in exchange for a cheque payable to our customer for a commission fee based on the face value of the cheque.
Buyback which is a service where items are purchased from customers typically highend electronics and may be bought back up to 31 days later for a fee.
The foreign exchange currency service where the Group earns a margin when selling or buying foreign currencies.
Western Union commission earned on the Groups money transfer service.
Cheque cashing is subject to bad debt risk which is reflected in the commissions and fees applied.
Further details on each activity are included in the chief executives review on pages 8 to 11.
Segment information about these businesses is presented below
Pawnbroking
Gold purchasing
Pawnbroking scrap
Other
For the year ended 2017 External revenue 29670 17651 35407 11696 10012 5897 110333 Total revenue 29670 17651 35407 11696 10012 5897 110333 Gross profit 29670 3397 12859 1931 10012 5897 63766 Impairment     4271  4271 Segment result 29670 3397 12859 1931 5741 5897 59495 Other direct expenses excluding impairment Administrative expenses Operating profit Finance costs Profit before taxation Tax charge on profit Profit for the financial year and total comprehensive income 11336 Notes to the consolidated financial statements For the year ended 31 December 2017 continued Annual Report and Accounts 2017  51 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements
Pawnbroking
Gold purchasing
Pawnbroking scrap
Restated
Other
For the year ended 2016
External revenue 28384 15021 30549 11136 5849 5634 96573 Total revenue 28384 15021 30549 11136 5849 5634 96573 Gross profit 28384 3941 11228 2084 5849 5634 57120 Impairment     2351  2351 Segment result 28384 3941 11228 2084 3498 5634 54769 Other direct expenses excluding impairment Administrative expenses Operating profit Investment revenues Finance costs Profit before taxation Tax charge on profit Profit for the financial year and total comprehensive income 7582 See note 3 Revenue recognition As disclosed in note 3 gross profit is stated after charging the direct costs of inventory items sold or scrapped in the period.
Other operating expenses of the stores are included in other direct expenses.
The Group is unable to meaningfully allocate the other direct expenses of operating the stores between segments as the activities are conducted from the same stores utilising the same assets and staff.
The Group is also unable to meaningfully allocate Group administrative expenses or financing costs or income between the segments.
Accordingly the Group is unable to meaningfully disclose an allocation of items included in the Group statement of comprehensive income below gross profit which represents the reported segment results.
The Group does not apply any intersegment charges when items are transferred between the pawnbroking activity and the retail or pawnbroking scrap activities.
Pawn broking
Retail
Pawn broking scrap
Other
Unallocated assets liabilities For the year ended Other information Capital additions Depreciation and amortisation Balance sheet
Segment assets 52924 1658 31858 1251 18256  105947
Consolidated total assets 141936
Segment liabilities   650   100 750
Consolidated total liabilities 34314 52  site OPERATING SEGMENTS CONTINUED
Gold purchasing
Pawn broking scrap
Other
Unallocated assets liabilities For the year ended Other information Capital additions Depreciation and amortisation Balance sheet
Segment assets 47301 1005 29066 570 9375  87317
Consolidated total assets 125065
Segment liabilities   649   260 909
Consolidated total liabilities 26218 The Group cannot meaningfully allocate this information by segment due to the fact that all the segments operate from the same stores and the assets in use are common to all segments.
Geographical segments The Groups revenue from external customers by geographical location are detailed below
United Kingdom
110333 96573 The Groups noncurrent assets are located entirely in the United Kingdom.
Accordingly no further geographical segments analysis is presented.
Major customers Included in revenues arising from gold purchasing and pawnbroking scrap segments are revenues from the Groups largest customer of 27625000 2016 22726000 and from its second largest customer of 229000 2016 1085000 which makes more than 10% of the total revenue.
These customers are bullion houses involved in the processing of the Groups scrap gold.
Notes to the consolidated financial statements For the year ended 31 December 2017 continued Annual Report and Accounts 2017  53 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements PROFIT BEFORE TAXATION Profit before taxation has been arrived at after charging Depreciation of property plant and equipment reported within Other direct expenses Administrative expenses Amortisation of intangible assets reported within Other direct expenses Loss on disposal of property plant and equipment Cost of inventories recognised as expense Write downs of inventories recognised as an expense Staff costs see note 9 Impairment loss recognised on personal loans financial assets 256tel38885 AUDITORS REMUNERATION The analysis of auditors remuneration exclusive of VAT is as follows Fees payable to the Companys auditor for the audit of the Companys annual financial statements Fees payable to the Companys auditor for other services to the Group The audit of the Companys subsidiaries pursuant to legislation 57 48 Total audit fees 114 95 Tax services Other assurance services Total nonaudit fees 15 10 The Company and Group audit fees are borne by a subsidiary undertaking Harvey and Thompson Limited.
There were no fees payable to the Companys auditor and its associates in respect of associated pension schemes.
INFORMATION REGARDING DIRECTORS AND EMPLOYEES Nonexecutive directors emoluments The 3 2016 3 nonexecutive directors receive payments for services rendered to the Hand T Group plc group.
Their emoluments are included in the analysis below Directors emoluments Aggregate emoluments Gain on exercise of share options Company pension contributions to money purchase schemes 1500 1111 All executive directors during the year 2016 all participated in Harvey and Thompson Limiteds money purchase pension scheme.
In addition nil 2016 16000 was charged to the Group statement of comprehensive income in respect of the fair value of the share options and conditional shares granted to the directors under the different schemes.
Two 2016 None of the directors exercised options over shares in the Company in the year.
None 2016 None of the directors were granted shares under the long term incentive scheme.
54  site INFORMATION REGARDING DIRECTORS AND EMPLOYEES CONTINUED Highest paid director Aggregate emoluments Gain on exercise of share options Company pension contributions to money purchase scheme In addition nil 2016 4000 was charged to the Group statement of comprehensive income in respect of the fair value of the share options and conditional shares granted under the different schemes.
No.
No.
Monthly average number of persons employed including directors
Administration
96tel1102 1101 Staff costs during the year including directors Wages and salaries Share option expense Note 28 Social security costs Other pension costs 24480 24225 All directors and employees are remunerated through a subsidiary Group Company.
The directors of Harvey and Thompson Limited the trading subsidiary are the key management personnel of the Group of which none are female.
INVESTMENT REVENUES Interest revenue Bank deposits  1 Investment revenues earned on financial assets analysed by category of asset is as follows Loans and receivables including cash and bank balances  1 Interest revenue recognised on pawnbroking and other financial services is reported within revenue for the reasons discussed in note 3.
Notes to the consolidated financial statements For the year ended 31 December 2017 continued Annual Report and Accounts 2017  55 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements FINANCE COSTS Interest on bank loans Other interest Amortisation of debt issue costs Total interest expense 567 479 TAX CHARGE ON PROFIT a Tax on profit on ordinary activities Current tax United Kingdom corporation tax charge at 19.25% 2016 20% based on the profit for the year Adjustments in respect of prior years Total current tax 2923 2334 Deferred tax Timing differences origination and reversal Adjustments in respect of prior years Effects of change in tax rate Total deferred tax note 24 157 196 Tax charge on profit 2766 2138 b Factors affecting the tax charge for the year The tax assessed for the year is higher than that resulting from applying a blended standard rate of corporation tax in the UK of 19.25% 2016 20%.
The differences are explained below Profit before taxation 14102 9720 Tax charge on profit at standard rate 2716 1944 Effects of Disallowed expenses and nontaxable income Effect of change in tax rate Movement in shortterm timing differences Adjustments to tax charge in respect of prior years Tax charge on profit 2766 2138 In addition to the amount charged to the income statement and in accordance with IAS 12 the excess of current and deferred tax over and above the relative related cumulative remuneration expense under IFRS 2 has been recognised directly in equity.
The amount released from equity in the current period was 96000 2016 charge of 56000.
56  site EARNINGS PER SHARE Basic earnings per share is calculated by dividing the profit for the year attributable to equity shareholders by the weighted average number of ordinary shares in issue during the year.
For diluted earnings per share the weighted average number of ordinary shares in issue is adjusted to assume conversion of all dilutive potential ordinary shares.
With respect to the Group these represent share options and conditional shares granted to employees where the exercise price is less than the average market price of the Companys ordinary shares during the year.
Reconciliations of the earnings per ordinary share and weighted average number of shares used in the calculations are set out below Year ended 31 December 2017 Year ended 31 December 2016
Weighted average number of shares
Earnings
Weighted average number of shares
Earnings per share basic Effect of dilutive securities Options and conditional shares Earnings per share diluted 11336 36634800 30.94 7582 36314635 20.88
Amounts recognised as distributions to equity holders in the year Final dividend for the year ended 31 December 2016 of 5.3 pence 2015 4.5p per share 1964 1666 Interim dividend for the year ended 31 December 2017 of 4.3 pence 2016 3.9p per share 1600 1443 3564 3109 Amounts proposed and not recognised Proposed final dividend for the year ended 31 December 2017 of 6.2p 2016 5.3p per share.
2321 1963 The proposed final dividend is subject to approval by shareholders at the Annual General Meeting and accordingly has not been included as a liability in these financial statements.
GOODWILL
Goodwill arising on purchase of subsidiaries
Total
Goodwill
Cost and carrying amount At 1 January 2016
At 1 January 2017 14133 3543 17676
At 31 December 2017 There are no recognised impairment losses at 31 December 2017.
Notes to the consolidated financial statements For the year ended 31 December 2017 continued Annual Report and Accounts 2017  57 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements Goodwill acquired in business combinations is allocated as follows Harvey and Thompson Limited Stores acquired in 2005 Stores acquired in 2006 Stores acquired in 2007 Stores acquired in 2008 Stores acquired in 2010 Stores acquired in 2011 Stores acquired in 2012 Stores acquired in 2013 1643 17676 The Harvey and Thompson Limited cash generating unit was created when Hand T Group plc acquired Harvey and Thompson Limited in September 2004.
Management is unable to allocate this goodwill by store and accordingly tests this for impairment at the subsidiary entity level.
All assets acquired after September 2004 are reviewed for impairment at the related store level.
The stores are grouped for financial reporting purposes by year of acquisition to facilitate presentation and comparability on a year by year basis.
Additionally store performance is monitored by management based on the year of acquisition as the historical performance of an individual store is linked to its acquisition date.
This approach is reflected in the way management has presented the above cash generating units.
The Group tests goodwill annually for impairment or more frequently if there are indications that goodwill might be impaired.
The impairment review was conducted as described in note 4.
OTHER INTANGIBLE ASSETS
Customer relationships
Cost
At 1 January 2016
At 1 January 2017
Disposals
At 31 December 2017 1599 2489 4088
At 1 January 2016 Charge for the year At 1 January 2017 Charge for the year
At 31 December 2017 1598 2159 3757 Carrying amount At 31 December At 31 December The customer relationships intangible assets arise from the acquisition of trade and assets of sole partnerships or limited companies with no audited financial statements and reflect the repeat business associated with the pawnbroking and pay day advance industry from existing customers at the acquisition date of the relevant assets.
The amortisation period for customer relationship intangible assets is between 6 and 8 years and the amortisation period for software intangible assets is 7 years.
These amortisation periods reflect the directors best estimate of the estimated useful economic lives of these intangible assets.
58  site PROPERTY PLANT AND EQUIPMENT
Long leasehold premises
Computer equipment
Total
Cost or valuation At 1 January 2016
Disposals
At 1 January 2017
Disposals
At 31 December 2017 24876 230 33 5590 4948 35677 Accumulated depreciation and impairment At 1 January 2016 Charge for the year
At 1 January 2017 Charge for the year
At 31 December 2017 20567 183 24 4584 3938 29296 Carrying amount At 31 December 2017 4309 47 9 1006 1010 6381 At 31 December 2016 4309 6874 Capital commitments for tangible and intangible assets are disclosed in note 32.
SUBSIDIARIES
A list of the investments in subsidiaries including the name country of incorporation and proportion of ownership interest is given in note C to the Companys separate financial statements.
INVENTORIES
Retail and scrap inventory 34102 29792 Of the retail and scrap inventory 92.09% 2016 93.97% represents gold jewellery and watch items.
The remaining balance is miscellaneous items mostly electrical goods and art pieces which were previously held as pledge collaterals and subsequently forfeited.
TRADE AND OTHER RECEIVABLES Trade receivables Other receivables Pledge accrued income Prepayments and accrued income 73277 59058 Trade and other receivables are disclosed net of impairment.
Notes to the consolidated financial statements For the year ended 31 December 2017 continued Annual Report and Accounts 2017  59 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements The pledge loan book of 45.5m 2016 40.8m and personal loan book of 18.3m 2016 9.4m are included net of provisions within the trade receivables balance.
Other current assets Other current assets 665 848 Other current assets represent buyback inventory where the Company holds items for 31 days in order for customers to repurchase their items.
CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTS Cash and cash equivalents 8676 9608 Cash and cash equivalents comprise cash held by the Group and shortterm bank deposits with an original maturity of three months or less.
Further details on financial instruments including the associated risks to the Group and allowances for bad and doubtful debts and fair values is provided in note 26.
TRADE AND OTHER PAYABLES Trade payables Other taxation and social security costs Accruals and deferred income 9731 8887 Trade payables and accruals principally comprise amounts outstanding for trade purchases and ongoing costs.
The average credit period taken for trade purchases is 37 days 2016 36 days.
For most suppliers no interest is charged on the trade payables for the first 30 days from the date of the invoice.
Thereafter interest is charged on the outstanding balances at various interest rates.
The Group has financial risk management policies in place to ensure that all payables are paid within the credit timeframe.
Current tax liabilities 1460 1119
Long term portion of bank loan Unamortised issue costs Amount due for settlement after more than one year 21810 14715 60  site BORROWINGS CONTINUED As at 31 December 2017 the key terms of the Lloyds Bank plc facility were Key Term Description Total Facility Size 30m Termination Date 30 April 2020
The facility is available to be drawn down to the full 30m so long as the Company remains compliant with leverage and interest cover ratios as stipulated in the Credit Agreement.
Margin
The facility has an interest calculation of LIBOR plus a margin of between 1.75% and 2.75% dependent on ratios as stipulated in the Credit Agreement.
Interest Payable Interest due on the loans is payable at each interest period end.
Interest amounts outstanding at the yearend are included in accruals.
Fixed Repayments No capital repayments prior to termination date.
On 1 March 2018 the Group extended the existing facility with Lloyds Bank plc by 5m allowing for maximum borrowings of 35.0m.
Deferred debt issue costs There were 94000 of deferred debt issue costs written off in the period to the Group statement of comprehensive income 2016 130000.
Security
The facility is secured by a fixed and floating charge over various assets of the Group.
Undrawn borrowing facilities At 31 December 2017 the Group had available 8000000 2016 15000000 of undrawn committed borrowing facilities in respect of which all conditions precedent had been met.
DEFERRED TAX The following are the deferred tax assets recognised by the Group and movements thereon during the current and prior year.
Property plant and equipment differences Hold over capital gain
Share based payment
At 1 January 2016 Prior year adjustment Credit to income Debit to equity At 1 January 2017 Prior year adjustment Credit to income Debit to equity As 31 December 2017 465  264 132 861 Deferred tax assets and liabilities all relate to the same tax jurisdiction and taxable entities and are expected to reverse over the same time periods.
Accordingly these have been offset in the balance sheet.
The Finance No 2 Act 2015 which provides for reductions in the main rate of corporation tax from 20% to 19% effective from 1 April 2017 and to 18% effective from 1 April 2020 was substantively enacted on 26 October 2015.
Subsequently the Finance Act 2016 which provides for a further reduction in the main rate of corporation tax to 17% effective from 1 April 2020 was substantively enacted on 6 September 2016.
These rate reductions have been reflected in the calculation of deferred tax at the balance sheet date.
The closing deferred tax asset as at 31 December 2017 has been calculated at a rate between 19% and 17% depending on when the deferred tax asset is expected to be utilised in future periods.
The utilisation of the deferred tax asset is dependent on future taxable profits in excess of the profits arising from the reversal of existing taxable temporary difference.
Notes to the consolidated financial statements For the year ended 31 December 2017 continued Annual Report and Accounts 2017  61 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements
Provision for reinstatement and onerous leases At 1 January 2016 1305 Additional provision in the year Released provision Provision utilised in the year At 1 January 2017 1497 Additional provision in the year Released provision Provision utilised in the year At 31 December 2017 1313 The reinstatement provision represents managements best estimate of the Groups liability to repair and maintain certain of the properties contracted under operating lease agreements and settled at the individual lease end dates.
At the reporting date no demand to enforce the contractual obligations has been made by the related property landlords.
Provisions for onerous leases are recognised when the Group believes that the unavoidable costs of meeting the lease obligations exceed the economic benefits expected to be received under the lease.
FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS The Groups financial assets and liabilities as defined under IAS 39 and their estimated fair values are as follows At 31 December 2017 Fair value through profit or loss Loans and receivables
Book value total
Financial assets Pawnbroking trade receivables Other financial services trade receivables Other assets Cash and cash equivalents Financial liabilities Trade and other payables Borrowings due after more than one year Net financial assetsliabilities  79981 30921 49060 52372 At 31 December 2016 Fair value through profit or loss Loans and receivables
Book value total
Financial assets Pawnbroking trade receivables Other financial services trade receivables Other assets Cash and cash equivalents Financial liabilities Trade and other payables Borrowings due after more than one year Net financial assetsliabilities  66454 23094 43360 47207 62  site FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS CONTINUED Fair value The assumptions used by the Group to estimate the current fair values are summarised below For trade receivables relating to pawnbroking the fair value has been calculated by adding The principal outstanding on pawn loans The interest receivable accrued using the effective interest rate method based on assumed redemption and Assumed scrap profits on the proportion of the Groups pledge book that is not expected to be redeemed i. which the Group does not recognise interest due to the uncertainty of recovery.
Other trade receivables and other assets are considered to have fair values which are the same as their book values due to the short period over which they will be recovered.
Book values for both cheque cashing and financial services trade receivables are calculated net of provisions and hence represent the Groups best estimate of recovery values based upon recent debt collections experience.
Cash and cash equivalents are all held on interest bearing bank accounts are considered to have a fair value the same as their book value.
For borrowings and trade and other payables the book value approximates to fair value because of their short maturities and interest rates where applicable.
None of the trade or other payables are interest bearing.
The borrowings are all held at floating interest rates which approximate market rates and accordingly the book value and fair value are the same.
The fair value of the pawnbroking trade receivables is determined using a model where the inputs are derived from historical trends monitored by the Group.
This valuation therefore falls within level 3 of the fair value hierarchy in IAS 39.
The fair value of all other financial instruments is equivalent to their book value due to their short maturities.
Financial risks The Group monitors and manages the financial risks relating to the financial instruments held.
The principal risks include credit risk on financial assets and liquidity and interest rate risk on financial liability borrowings.
The key risks are analysed below.
Credit risk Pawnbroking trade receivables The Group is exposed to credit risk through customers defaulting on their loans.
The key mitigant to this risk is the requirement for the borrower to provide security the pledge in entering a pawnbroking contract.
The security acts to minimise credit risk as a customers pledge becomes the property of the pawnbroker on default of the loan.
In addition to holding security the Group further mitigates credit risk by Applying strict lending criteria to all pawn loans Pledges are rigorously tested and appropriately valued.
In all cases where the Group lending policy is applied the value of the pledge items is in excess of the pawn loan.
The Group estimates that the current fair value of the security is equal to the current book value.
Seeking to improve redemption ratios For existing customers loan history and repayment profiles are factored into the loan making decision.
The Group has a high customer retention ratio and all customers are offered high customer service levels.
A 1% increasedecrease in the Groups redemption ratio is estimated to impact the pretax profit by 9000090000.
This does not account for lost repeat business however and as such the Group sees more value in retaining a high redemption ratio.
Additionally the Group is exposed to risk in recovery of the loan amounts which is considered to be similar to credit risk due to assets being pledged as security against loans which are subsequently seized by the police and ii assets being pledged as security against loans which are subsequently lost or stolen resulting in the borrower being relieved of the liability to the Group.
The legal title that the Group can enforce on these items and their ongoing security are therefore vital to the Group to ensure that the credit risk is mitigated to an acceptable level.
The Group continually reviews and monitors at both store and at Board level its internal controls to ensure the adequacy of the pledged items.
The key aspects of this are Appropriate details are kept on all customers the Group transacts with All pawn contracts comply with the Consumer Credit Act 2006 Appropriate physical security measures are in place to protect pledged items and An internal audit department monitors compliance with policies at the Groups stores.
Notes to the consolidated financial statements For the year ended 31 December 2017 continued Annual Report and Accounts 2017  63 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements The pawnbroking trade receivables are disclosed net of the provision for bad and doubtful debts associated with these financial assets including full provision on assets notified to the Group by the police as frozen assets.
The movement in the provision is as follows Balance at 1 January 2016 Net Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income charge Written off Balance at 31 December 2016 Net Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income charge Written off Balance at 31 December 2017 586 The ageing of past due but not impaired receivables is as follows 090 days Over 90 days Total 8681 8253 The Group has not provided for the 8681000 2016 825300 contractually overdue receivables i. is greater than the carrying value of the pledge loan as disclosed above.
The Group does not start the disposition process of the unredeemed pledges until three months after the end of the credit agreement since it is commercial practice to allow additional time for the customers to redeem their pledged items for an additional fee.
The maximum exposure to credit risk would be 52923000 2016 47300000 being the gross carrying amount net of any amounts offset and any impairment losses.
Other trade receivables This class represents amounts recoverable by the Group through receivables arising from the other financial services activities it engages in and is exposed to credit risk through default on the loan amounts for Personal Loans or default from the drawer for third party cheque encashment.
On each product the Group employs appropriate policies to mitigate the credit risk including credit checks obtaining legal security provided and appropriate staff recruitment and training policies.
The Group monitors the ongoing risk associated with this class of financial assets through a continual review of bad debts modifications to the lending policy and internal audit activities.
In the event of default by the customer the Group has also developed a debt collection department to recover any outstanding debt.
Personal loans and other services receivables are disclosed net of provisions for bad and doubtful debts an analysis of which is as follows
Other
Total
Balance at 1 January 2016 1369 17 1386 Net Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income charge Written off Balance at 31 December 2016 2196 16 2212 Net Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income charge Written off Balance at 31 December 2017 3875 18 3893 Trade receivables not overdue are provided for based on estimated irrecoverable amounts determined by reference to past default experience.
64  site FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS CONTINUED Credit risk continued Cash and cash equivalents The cash and cash equivalents balance comprises both bank balances and cash floats at the stores.
The bank balances are subject to very limited credit risk as they are held with banking institutions with high credit ratings assigned by international credit rating agencies.
The cash floats are subject to risks similar to any retailer namely of theft or loss by employees or third parties.
These risks are mitigated by the security systems policies and procedures that the Group operates at each store the Group recruitment and training policies and the internal audit function.
The concentration of bank balances by counterparty financial institution is as follows Barclays Bank plc Lloyds Bank plc The Royal Bank of Scotland plc Cash at stores 8676 9608 Market risk Pawnbroking trade receivables The collateral which protects the Group from credit risk on nonredemption of pawn loans is 99% 2016 99% comprised of gold jewellery items and watches.
The value of gold items held as security is directly linked to the price of gold.
The Group is therefore exposed to adverse movements in the price of gold on the value of the security that would be attributable for sale in the event of default by the borrower.
A 5% increasedecrease in the gold price is estimated to impact the pretax profit by 1200018000 and represents managements assessment of the reasonably possible change in gold prices.
The Group considers this risk to be limited for a number of reasons.
The Group applies conservative lending policies in pawnbroking pledges reflected in the blended margin made on retail sales and scrap gold when contracts forfeit.
The value of gold for our customers is also much greater than the price of gold since jewellery items contain a retail margin.
The Group is also protected due to the shortterm value of the pawn contract 6 months.
In the event of a significant drop in the price of gold the Group could mitigate this risk by reducing its lending policy on pawnbroking pledges by increasing the proportion of gold sold through retail sales or by entering gold hedging instruments.
Management monitors the gold price on a constant basis.
Considering areas outside of those financial assets defined under IAS 39 the Group is subject to more significant levels of pricing risk.
The price of gold will affect future Group profitability in three key ways A lower gold price will adversely affect the scrap disposition margins on existing inventory whether generated by pledge book forfeits or via the Groups purchasing operations.
While scrap profits will be impacted immediately retail margins may be less impacted in the shortterm.
While the Groups lending and purchasing rates do not track gold price movements in the shortterm any sustained fall in the price of gold is likely to cause lending and purchasing rates to fall in the longer term thus potentially reducing future profitability as a. b.
A lower gold price may reduce the attractiveness of the Groups gold purchasing operations.
Conversely a lower gold price may dampen competition as lower returns are available and hence this may assist in sustaining margins.
Liquidity risk
The Group has significant borrowings exposing it to liquidity risk in both repayment of borrowings and availability of finance.
In order to mitigate this risk the Group uses a mixture of shortterm and longterm debt finance with banking institutions with high creditratings assigned by international creditrating agencies.
The current borrowings are disclosed in detail in note 23 which shows that the Group has arrangements in place for funding until 2020.
At 31 December 2017 the Group also has available 8000000 2016 15000000 of undrawn committed borrowing facilities in respect of which all conditions precedent had been met.
This level of headroom is considered sufficient to finance operations at the current level and as described in note 23.
On 1 March 2018 the Group extended the existing facility with Lloyds Bank plc by 5m allowing for maximum borrowings of 35.0m Furthermore as shown in note 30 the business generates a positive cash flow from operating activities and has discretion in its expansion programme should the Group need to improve shortterm cash flow.
The Group is in full compliance with all loan covenants.
Notes to the consolidated financial statements For the year ended 31 December 2017 continued Annual Report and Accounts 2017  65 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements The maturity analysis of the cash flows arising from both current borrowing arrangements that expose the Group to liquidity risk are as follows Payments due by period Less than 30 days 30 to 60 days 60 days to 180 days 180 days to 1 year years years years
At 31 December 2017 Floating rate borrowings Trade and other payables Total 1826 736tel494 22164 32757 Payments due by period Less than 30 days 30 to 60 days 60 days to 180 days 180 days to 1 year years years years
At 31 December 2016 Floating rate borrowings Trade and other payables Total 1375 7054 9tel15099 24381 The amounts reported above for floating rate borrowings include the principal amount of borrowings as well as the interest payable on these borrowings.
The floating rates used to predict the interest cash flows are based on the relevant LIBOR yield curve derived from quoted interest rates.
The above amounts are contractual undiscounted cash flows.
Interest rate risk
The Group is funded based on a combination of equity and bank borrowings.
The bank borrowings are all held at floating rates based on LIBOR.
Accordingly the Group is exposed to cash flow risk through changes in the LIBOR rate impacting cash flows.
Analysis is shown below to demonstrate the sensitivity on profitability of a 1.0% change in LIBOR subject to LIBOR being a minimum of 0%.
The analysis is prepared assuming the amount of liability outstanding at the balance sheet date was outstanding for the whole year.
A 1.0% increase or decrease is used when reporting interest rate risk internally to key management personnel and represents managements assessment of the reasonably possible change in interest rates.
1.0% decrease in interest rates 1.0% increase in interest rates At 31 December 2017 Finance costs gainloss 109 220 Total pretax impact on profit from gainloss 109 220 Post tax impact on equity gainloss 88 178 At 31 December 2016 Finance costs gainloss 38 150 Total pretax impact on profit from gainloss 38 150 Post tax impact on equity gainloss 31 120 Financial Assets The Group is not exposed to significant interest rate risk on the financial assets other than cash and cash equivalents as these are lent at fixed rates which reflect current market rates for similar types of secured or unsecured lending and are held at amortised cost.
Cash and cash equivalents are exposed to interest rate risk as they are held at floating rates although the risk is not significant as the interest receivable is not significant.
66  site SHARE CAPITAL Issued and fully paid 37437760 2016 37043487 ordinary shares of 0.05 each 1872 1852 The Company has one class of ordinary shares which carry no right to fixed income.
Options over shares of the Company are disclosed in note 28.
Under these share option arrangements there are 838990 2016 1281558 open options over shares.
Employee Benefit Trust shares reserve The Group presents these conditional shares as an adjustment to own equity at the balance sheet date through the Employee Benefit Trust shares reserve until the point that the shares are awarded and cease to be conditional awards of shares.
The award of shares under the LTIP is conditional upon certain vesting criteria as outlined in note 28.
Movements in this reserve are shown in the Group statement of changes in equity.
Capital risk management The Group manages its capital to ensure that entities in the Group will be able to continue as going concerns while maximising the return to stakeholders through the optimisation of the debt and equity balance.
The capital structure of the Group consists of debt which includes the borrowings disclosed in note 23 cash and cash equivalents and equity attributable to equity holders of the Parent Company comprising issued capital reserves and retained earnings.
Gearing ratio Although the Group reviews its gearing ratio at each reporting date no specific target has been fixed by management.
The Groups gearing ratio at the year end is as follows
Cash and cash equivalents Net debt
Net debt to equity ratio 12.4% 5.5% Debt is defined as long and shortterm borrowings as detailed in note 23 before unamortised issue costs.
Equity includes all capital and reserves of the Group attributable to equity holders of the Company.
Externally imposed capital requirement The Group is not subject to any externally imposed capital requirements.
SHAREBASED PAYMENTS As at 31 December 2017 the Company operated three share award schemes.
The charge for the year in respect of all schemes was
Approved Share Option Scheme
Unapproved Share Option Scheme
Longterm Incentive Plan Awards that can be granted under the three schemes total a maximum of 3743776 shares 2016 3704349 shares.
Notes to the consolidated financial statements For the year ended 31 December 2017 continued Annual Report and Accounts 2017  67 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements
Approved Share Option Scheme ASOS The Approved Share Option Scheme is a share option scheme approved by HMRC where favourable tax treatment is received on exercise by the employee.
The options may be granted to all management from shop manager to executive director level.
The Remuneration Committee of the ultimate Parent Company Hand T Group plc sets the performance conditions.
The performance conditions applicable to the options granted in 2007 2008 2009 and 2010 have already been met.
The performance conditions applicable to grants in subsequent years are as follows Options granted in 2011 2012 and 2013 become exercisable subject to continued employment within the Group as at the exercise date.
Early exercise of the options is permitted if an option holder ceases to be employed by reason of death injury disability retirement or sale of his employing company.
The options outstanding at the year end were as follows Grant date Exercise price
Number of shares Earliest date of exercise Expiry date ASOS 2007 ASOS 2008 ASOS 2009 ASOS 2010 ASOS 2011 ASOS 2012 ASOS 2013 May 2007 May 2008 April 2009 April 2010 April 2011 March 2012 March 2013 17 042021 27 032023 The Group did not issue any share options during 2014 2015 2016 and 2017.
A reconciliation of option movements for the ASOS is set out below Number of share options Weighted average exercise price in pence Number of share options Weighted average exercise price in pence Outstanding at beginning of the year Granted during the year Forfeited during the year Exercised during the year Outstanding at the end of the year 375783 275.6 604399 272.9 Exercisable at the end of the year 375783 275.6 604399 272.9
Unapproved Share Option Scheme USOS The Unapproved Share Option Scheme is a discretionary option scheme under which the Remuneration Committee of Hand T Group plc may grant options to all executive directors and senior management of the Company.
The Remuneration Committee of Hand T Group plc sets the performance conditions.
Exercise of an option is subject to continued employment over a three year period from the date of the grant.
Early exercise of the options is permitted if an option holder ceases to be employed by reason of death injury disability retirement or sale of his employing company.
The options outstanding at the year end were as follows Grant date Exercise price
Number of shares Earliest date of exercise Expiry date USOS 2007 USOS 2008 USOS 2009 USOS 2010 USOS 2011 USOS 2012 USOS 2013 May 2007 May 2008 April 2009 April 2010 April 2011 March 2012 March 2013 17 042021 27 032023 The Group did not issue any share options during 2014 2015 2016 and 2017.
68  site SHAREBASED PAYMENTS CONTINUED
Unapproved Share Option Scheme USOS continued A reconciliation of option movements for the USOS is set out below Number of share options Weighted average exercise price in pence Number of share options Weighted average exercise price in pence Outstanding at beginning of the year Granted during the year Forfeited during the year Exercised during the year Outstanding at the end of the year 463207 225.2 677159 217.4 Exercisable at the end of the year 463207 225.2 677159 217.4
Longterm Incentive Plan LTIP The LTIP is a discretionary share incentive scheme under which the Remuneration Committee of Hand T Group plc can grant ordinary shares at no cost to executive directors and other senior management.
The LTIP operates as conditional shares awarded over a defined year performance period and subject to continued employment over a three year period from the date of the grant.
Early exercise of the conditional shares is permitted if a share award holder ceases to be employed by reason of death injury disability retirement or sale of his employing company.
There were no conditional shares outstanding at the year end.
A reconciliation of conditional share movements for the LTIP is set out below Number of conditional shares Weighted average exercise price in pence Number of conditional shares Weighted average exercise price in pence Outstanding at beginning of the year Granted during the year Forfeited during the year Exercised during the year Outstanding at the end of the year OPERATING LEASE ARRANGEMENTS The Group as lessee Minimum lease payments under operating leases recognised as an expense in the year 6519 6593 At the balance sheet date the Group had outstanding commitments for future minimum lease payments under noncancellable operating leases which fall due as follows Land and buildings
Leases expiring Within one year In the second to fifth years inclusive After five years 30057 31851 276 56 Significant operating lease payments represent rentals payable by the Group for rental of store premises.
Leases are normally negotiated for an average term of 10 years at the then prevailing market rate with a break option after 5 years.
The Group also sublets some of the premises above the stores the outstanding receipts from which are immaterial.
Notes to the consolidated financial statements For the year ended 31 December 2017 continued Annual Report and Accounts 2017  69 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements NOTES TO THE CASH FLOW STATEMENT Profit for the financial year Adjustments for Investment revenues Finance costs Movement in provisions Tax expense  Group statement of comprehensive income Depreciation of property plant and equipment Amortisation of intangible assets Sharebased payment expense Loss on disposal of property plant and equipment 2Operating cash flows before movements in working capital 17182 13613 Increase in inventories Increasedecrease in other current assets Increase in receivables Increase in payables Cash used ingenerated from operations 529 3849 Income taxes paid Debt restructuring costs Interest paid Net cash used ingenerated from operating activities 3493 1315 Cash and cash equivalents which are presented as a single class of assets on the face of the balance sheet comprise cash at bank and other shortterm highly liquid investments with a maturity of three months or less.
RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS Transactions between the Company and its subsidiaries which are related parties have been eliminated on consolidation and are not disclosed in this note.
Transactions with directors are disclosed in the directors report and note 9.
There were no other material related party transactions during the year.
Remuneration of key management personnel The remuneration of the directors of Harvey and Thompson Limited the trading subsidiary who are the key management personnel of the Group is set out below in aggregate for each of the categories specified in IAS 24 Related Party Disclosures Shortterm employee benefits Pension contributions Sharebased payments 1991 1526 CAPITAL COMMITMENTS There is no significant capital expenditure authorised and contracted for but not provided in the accounts 2016 nil.
EVENTS AFTER THE BALANCE SHEET DATE The directors have proposed a final dividend for the year ended 31 December 2017 of 6.2p 2016 5.3p note 14.
On 1 March 2018 the Group extended the existing facility with Lloyds Bank plc by 5m allowing for maximum borrowings of 35.0m.
70  site
Noncurrent assets Investments C 44586 44586 44586 44586 Current assets
Cash at bank and in hand D Liabilities amounts falling due within one year E 5860 3092 Net current assets 5799 3033 Total assets less current liabilities 38787 41553 Net assets 38787 41553 Capital and reserves Called up share capital Share premium account Employee Benefit Trust shares reserve Share option reserve Profit and loss account F 1872 Total shareholders funds 38787 41553 The financial statements of Hand T Group plc registered number  were approved by the Board of Directors and authorised for issue on 12 March 2018.
Signed on behalf of the Board of Directors by J G Nichols Chief Executive Parent Company balance sheet As as 31 December 2017 Annual Report and Accounts 2017  71 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements
Note
Called up share capital
Employee benefit trust shares reserve
Profit and loss account
At 1 January 1852 25754 35 1495 12487 41553 Loss for the financial year Dividend paid Issue of share capital F At 31 December 1872 26641 35 1495 8814 38787
Note
Called up share capital
Employee benefit trust shares reserve
Profit and loss account
At 1 January 1843 25409 35 1479 15709 44405 Loss for the financial year Dividend paid Issue of share capital Share option credit taken directly to equity At 31 December 1852 25754 35 1495 12487 41553 Parent Company statement of changes in equity For the year ended 31 December 2017 72  site
ACCOUNTING POLICIES Basis of preparation Hand T Group plc is a Company incorporated in the England and Wales under the Companies Act.
The address of the registered office is given on page 21.
The nature of the Companys operations and its principal activities are set out in the business overview on pages 4 to 7.
The separate financial statements of the Company are presented as required by the Companies Act 2006.
The Company meets the definition of a qualifying entity under FRS 100 Financial Reporting Standard 100 issued by the Financial Reporting Council.
Accordingly the financial statements have therefore been prepared in accordance with FRS 101 Financial Reporting Standard 101 Reduced Disclosure Framework as issued by the FRC in July 2015 and July 2016.
The financial statements have been prepared on the historical cost basis.
Historical cost is generally based on the fair value of the consideration given in exchange for the goods and services.
The principal accounting policies adopted are set out below.
These financial statements are separate financial statements.
The Company is exempt from the preparation of consolidated financial statements because it is included in the Group financial statements of Hand T Group plc.
As permitted by FRS 101 the Company has taken advantage of the disclosure exemptions available under that standard in relation to business combinations sharebased payment noncurrent assets held for sale financial instruments capital management presentation of comparative information in respect of certain assets presentation of a cashflow statement standards not yet effective impairment of assets and related party transactions.
Where required equivalent disclosures are given in the Group financial statements of Hand T Group plc.
The Group financial statements of Hand T Group plc are available to the public.
The financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis as discussed in the Directors Report.
The particular accounting policies adopted are described below.
Taxation
Current UK corporation tax is provided at amounts expected to be paid or recovered using the tax rates and laws that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the balance sheet date.
Where tax losses are surrendered to or received from Group companies the amount receivedsurrendered is chargedcredited to the profit and loss account and treated as payable toreceivable from the related Group party that has surrenderedreceived the losses.
Deferred tax is recognised in respect of all timing differences that have originated but not reversed at the balance sheet date where transactions or events that result in an obligation to pay more tax in the future or a right to pay less tax in the future have occurred at the balance sheet date.
Timing differences are differences between the Companys taxable profits and its results as stated in the financial statements that arise from the inclusion of gains and losses in tax assessments in periods different from those in which they are recognised in the financial statements.
A net deferred tax asset is regarded as recoverable and therefore recognised only to the extent that on the basis of all available evidence it can be regarded as more likely than not that there will be suitable taxable profits from which the future reversal of the underlying timing differences can be deducted.
Deferred tax is measured at the average tax rates that are expected to apply in the periods in which the timing differences are expected to reverse based on tax rates and laws that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the balance sheet date.
Deferred tax is measured on a nondiscounted basis.
Investments
Fixed assets investments are shown at cost less provision for impairment.
Financial liabilities and equity Financial liabilities and equity instruments are classified according to the substance of the contractual arrangements entered into.
An equity instrument is any contract that evidences a residual interest in the assets of the Company after deducting all of its liabilities.
Equity instruments issued are recorded at the proceeds received net of direct issue costs.
Dividends
Dividends receivable from subsidiary undertakings are recorded in the profit and loss account on the date that the dividend becomes a binding liability on the subsidiary Company.
Under the terms of IFRS 3 Business Combinations the Company records dividends arising from preacquisition profit and loss reserves of its subsidiary undertaking in the profit and loss account and considers whether the distribution affects the carrying value of the investment in the subsidiary undertaking.
Dividends payable are recorded as a distribution from retained earnings in the period in which they become a binding liability on the Company.
Share options The Companys trading subsidiary Harvey and Thompson Limited issues share options to employees in that Company which are equity settled in shares of Hand T Group plc.
Harvey and Thompson Limited determines the fair value of the options granted measured at the date of grant by use of a BlackScholes model or a Stochastic model depending on the vesting conditions attached to each scheme.
This fair value cost of equitysettled awards is recognised on a straightline basis over the vesting period in the financial statements of Harvey and Thompson Limited based on the estimate of shares that will eventually vest and adjusted for the effect of any nonmarket based vesting conditions.
The Company receives a payment each period equal to the annual expense recorded in Harvey and Thompson Limited calculated on the basis described above.
This amount is credited to the profit and loss account each period and is treated in a similar manner to a distribution of dividends from Group companies.
Notes to the Company financial statements For the year ended 31 December 2017 Annual Report and Accounts 2017  73 Strategic report Directors report Financial statements
COMPANY PROFIT AND LOSS ACCOUNT As permitted by s408 of the Companies Act 2006 the Company has elected not to present its own profit and loss account or statement of comprehensive income for the year.
The Company incurred a loss after taxation of 109000 in 2017 2016 loss of 113000.
The auditors remuneration for the current and preceding financial years is borne by a subsidiary undertaking Harvey and Thompson
Note 8 to the Group financial statements discloses the amount paid in respect of the Company.
The directors did not receive any emoluments for their services to the Company 2016 nil.
Other than the directors the Company has no employees in either financial year.
C.
INVESTMENTS
Shares in subsidiary undertaking
Cost
At 1 January 2016
Transfer of shares as a result of Group structure change At 1 January 2017 and 31 December 2017 44586 Within the cost at 1 January 2016 includes cost of shares in a subsidiary undertaking of 1.
Additions in the prior year represent capital contributions in relation to share options issued to employees as set out in note 28 on page 66.
During 2016 Hand T Finance Limited a wholly owned subsidiary of Hand T Group plc was wound up.
The investment of 43091000 in Harvey and Thompson Limited was subsequently transferred to Hand T Group plc.
The investments in Group companies which are all included in the consolidated financial statements are as follows Name of Company Country of incorporation Proportion of ordinary shares held Principal Activity Directly Indirectly Harvey and Thompson Limited Registered office Times House Throwley Way Sutton Surrey SM1 4AF England and Wales 100% Pawnbroking jewellery sales gold purchasing unsecured lending cheque cashing and related services The Company owns directly or indirectly 100% of the voting rights in the subsidiary undertaking.
Hand T Group plc is also incorporated in England and Wales.
D.
RECEIVABLES
Amounts owed by subsidiary companies Prepayments and accrued income
LIABILITIES AMOUNTS FALLING DUE WITHIN ONE YEAR Trade creditors Amounts owed to subsidiary companies Accruals and deferred income 5860 3092
CALLED UP SHARE CAPITAL Please refer to the Group financial statements of Hand T Group plc for details of share capital including shares issued in the year note 27 and dividends paid and proposed notes 14 and 33.
74  site Store directory
158 High Street W3 6QZ tel
114 High Street KA7 1PQ Tel 0telBARKING 27 East Street IG11 8ER tel
1a Market Pavement SS14 1DD Tel 0telBEDMINSTER 84 East Street Bedminster Bristol BS3 4EY Tel 0telBEXLEYHEATH 109 The Broadway Centre DA6 7JH tel
The Grange Shopping Centre 26 Borough Pavement CH41 2XX tel
102 Bull Street B4 7AA tel
10 Ethel Street B2 4BG tel
224 Soho Road B21 9LR tel
Unit 2 3 Ainsworth Street BB1 6AS Tel 0telBLACKPOOL 9799 Central Drive FY1 5EE Tel 0telBOLTON 13 Newport Street BL1 1NE Tel 0telBOOTLE Unit 115 Strand Shopping Centre L20 4SU tel
575 Roman Road E3 5EL tel
26 James Street BD1 3PZ Tel 0telBRIGHTON 4 Castle Square BN1 1EG Tel 0telBRIXTON Arch 9 Atlantic Road SW9 8HX tel
82 High Street BR1 1EY tel BURNT OAK 75 Burnt Oak Broadway HA8 5EP tel
72 Denmark Hill SE5 8RZ tel
58 Rushey Green SE6 4JD tel CHALK FARM 36 Chalk Farm Road NW1 8AJ tel
321 High Street ME4 4BN Tel 0telCHEETHAM HILL Unit 5 Cheetham Hill Shopping Centre M8 5EL tel
25 High Chelmer CM1 1XR Tel 0telCLAPHAM 9 Northcote Road SW11 1NG tel
157 Clapton Common E5 9AE tel
25 Sylvania Way South G81 1EA tel
10 Short Wyre Street CO1 1LN Tel 0telCORBY 19 Corporation Street NN17 1NG Tel 0telCOSHAM 32 High Street PO6 3BZ Tel 0telCOVENTRY 10 Hales Street CV1 1JD Tel 0telCOVENTRY Unit 1 Shelton Square CV1 1DG Tel 0telCRAWLEY 11 Broadwalk RH10 1HJ Tel 0telCREWE 21 Victoria Street CW1 2HF Tel 0telCROYDON EAST 16 George Street CR0 1PA tel CROYDON WEST 12 London Road CR0 2TA tel CROYDON WHITGIFT Unit 145a Whitgift Centre CR0 1UT tel
299 Heathway RM9 5AQ tel
52 Kingsland High Street E8 2JP tel
23 Skinnergate DL3 7NW Tel 0telDARTFORD Unit 33 The Orchards Shopping Centre DA1 1DN Tel 0telDEPTFORD 72 Deptford High Street SE8 4RT tel
33 Victoria Street DE1 1ES Tel 0telDONCASTER 23 High Street DN1 1DW Tel 0telDOWNHAM 438 Bromley Road BR1 4PP tel Annual Report and Accounts 2017  75
215 Wolverhampton Street DY1 1EF Tel 0telDUNDEE 116 Seagate DD1 2ET Tel 0telEAST HAM 47 High Street North E6 1HS tel EAST KILBRIDE 10 Princes Mall G74 1LB Tel 0telEASTERHOUSE Unit 19 Shandwick Square Shopping Centre Bogbain Road G34 9DT tel
4345 Market Street SO50 5RF Tel 0telEDINBURGH 106 Lauriston Place EH3 9HX tel
78a Nicolson Street EH8 9EW tel
169171 Fore Street N18 2XB tel
16 South Mall Edmonton Green Shopping Centre N9 0TN tel ELEPHANT AND CASTLE 212 EandC Shopping Centre SE1 6TE tel ELLESMERE PORT 43 Marina Drive Port Arcades Shopping Centre CH65 0AN tel
89 Eltham High Street SE9 1TD tel
119a West Street PO16 0DY Tel 0telFINSBURY 259261 Seven Sisters Road N4 2DD tel FOREST GATE 29 Woodgrange Road E7 8BA tel
224 Northend Road W14 9NU tel
Unit 5 Jackson Street NE8 1EE tel
169 High Street ME7 1AQ Tel 0telGLASGOW 911 Bath Street G2 1HY tel
487 Duke Street G31 1DL tel
156 Great Western Road G4 9AE tel
595 Govan Road G51 2AS tel
21 King Street DA12 2EB Tel 0telGREEN STREET 342 Green Street Upton Park London E13 9AP tel
Unit 3 Hamilton Gate Oakmall Shopping Centre PA15 1JW Tel 0telGRIMSBY 6 Victoria Street DN31 1DP Tel 0telHACKNEY 384 Mare Street E8 1HR tel
116 King Street W6 0QP tel
72 High Street NW10 4SJ tel
23 Broad Walk CM20 1JF Tel 0telHARROW 324b Station Road HA1 2DX tel
14 St Anns Road HA1 1LG tel
18 Queens Road TN34 1QY Tel 0telHAYES 46 Station Road UB3 4DD tel
9 Seven Sisters Road N7 6AJ tel
30 High Street TW3 1NW tel
253 High Street TW3 1EA tel
Unit 30 37 Prospect Centre HU2 8PP Tel 0telHYDE Unit 5 The Mall Clarendon Square Shopping Centre SK14 2QT tel
9193 Cranbrook Road IG1 4PG tel
211 High Road IG1 1LX tel
13 Bridgegate KA12 8BJ Tel 0telKILBURN 139 Kilburn High Road NW6 7HR tel KINGSTON UPON THAMES 26 Castle Street KT1 1SS tel
Unit 11b St Chads Way L32 8RD tel
85 High Street Fife KY1 1LN Tel 0tel76  site
8 New Market Street LS1 6DG Tel 0telLEICESTER 69 Market Place LE1 5EL tel
53 Bradshawgate WN7 4NB Tel 0telLEITH Unit 6 Newkirkgate Shopping Centre EH6 6AA tel
121 Lewisham High Street SE13 6AT tel
281 High Road E10 5QN tel
305307 Breck Road L5 6PU tel
66 County Road Walton L4 3QL tel
27 Walton Vale L9 4RE tel
Unit 6 4246 Whitechapel L1 6DZ tel
Unit 22 Almondvale Shopping Centre EH54 6HR Tel 0telLUTON 174 The Mall LU1 2TL Tel 0telMACCLESFIELD 23 Chestergate SK11 6BX Tel 0telMARGATE 72 High Street CT9 1DT Tel 0telMIDDLESBROUGH 45 Dundas Street TS1 1HR Tel 0telNEW ADDINGTON 14 Central Parade CR0 0JB Tel 0telNEWCASTLE 67 Clayton Street NE1 5PY tel
117 Grainger Street NE1 5AE tel
Unit 3 71b Abington Street NN1 2BH Tel 0telNOTTINGHAM 2224 Upper Parliament Street NG1 2AD tel
Unit 34 Town Square Shopping Centre OL1 1XF tel
Unit 24 Town Square Spindles Shopping Centre OL1 1XF tel
221 High Street BR6 0NZ Tel 0telPADDINGTON 63 Praed Street W2 1NS tel
333 Dumbarton Road G11 6AL tel
51 High Street SE15 5EB tel
136 High Street SE20 7EU tel
1 Westgate PE1 1PX Tel 0telPOPLAR 22 Market Way E14 6AH tel
186 Kingston Road PO2 7LP Tel 0telPRESTON 11 Friargate PR1 2AU Tel 0telREADING 31 Oxford Road Broad Street Mall RG1 7QG tel
92 Yorkshire Street OL16 1JX Tel 0telROMFORD Unit 30 Liberty 2 Mercury Gardens RM1 3EE Tel 0telROTHERHAM 2 Effingham Street S65 1AJ Tel 0telRUGBY 1 Church Street CV21 3PH Tel 0telRUNCORN Unit 119 Halton Lea Shopping Centre WA7 2BX Tel 0telRUTHERGLEN Unit 3 Mitchell Arcade Rutherglen Shopping Centre G73 2LS tel
70 Fitzgerald Way Salford Shopping Centre M6 5HW tel
114 High Street DN15 6HB Tel 0telSHEFFIELD The Kiosk 113 Angel Street S3 8LN tel
76 High Street DA14 6DS tel
64 High Street SL1 1EL Tel 0telSOUTHALL 1a The Broadway UB1 1JR tel
113a East Street SO14 3HD Tel 0telStore directory continued SOUTHAMPTON Unit 19 Marlands Shopping Centre SO14 7SJ Tel 0telSOUTHENDONSEA 95 Southchurch Road SS1 2NL Tel 0telSPRINGBURN Unit 13 Springburn Shopping Centre Springburn Way G21 1TS tel
HELENS
4 Ormskirk Street WA10 1BH Tel 0telSTEVENAGE 24 Westgate Centre SG1 1QR Tel 0telSTIRLING 3335 Murray Place FK8 1DQ Tel 0telSTOCKPORT 109 Princes Street SK1 1RW tel
107108 High Street TS18 1BB Tel 0telSTOKE ON TRENT 4951 Stafford Street ST1 1SA Tel 0telSTRATFORD Unit 27 The Mall Stratford Centre E15 1XD tel
254 Streatham High Rd SW16 1HT tel
Unit 44 Ground Floor Brody Street Mall Streford Mall Shopping Centre M32 9BB tel
26 Blandford Street SR1 3JH tel SURREY QUAYS 196 Lower Road SE16 2UN tel
232 High Street SM1 1NT tel SUTTON IN ASHFIELD Unit 44 Idlewells Shopping Centre NG17 1BJ Tel 0telSWINDON 46 Bridge Street SN1 1BL Tel 0telSYDENHAM 37 Sydenham Road SE26 5EX tel
51 Great Bridge DY4 7HF tel
63 Mitcham Road SW17 9PB tel TOOTING JUNCTION 2022 London Road SW17 9HW tel
518 High Road N17 9SX tel
Unit 11 Chequers Square The Mall UB8 1LN Tel 0telWALLSEND 28 High Street East NE28 8PQ tel
8 The Bridge WS1 1LR Tel 0telWALTHAMSTOW 234 High Street E17 7JH tel
389 Walworth Road SE17 2AW tel
241 Walworth Road SE17 1RL tel
111 Lower Marsh SE1 7AE tel
114 High Street WD17 2BJ Tel 0telWELLING 3 Bellegrove Road DA16 3PA tel
544 High Road HA0 2AA tel WEST BROMWICH 64 Kings Square High Street Sandwell Centre B70 7NW tel
21 Hope Street Galleries Shopping Centre WN1 1QF Tel 0telWILLESDEN 70 High Road NW10 2PU tel
10a Cleveland Street WV1 3HH Tel 0telWOLVERHAMPTON 1516 Queen Street WV1 3JW Tel 0telWOOD GREEN 12 Cheapside N22 6HH tel
4 Powis Street SE18 6LF tel WORCESTER PARK 148 Central Road KT4 8HH tel
2729 Bridge Street S80 1DA Tel 0telWYTHENSHAWE Unit 1d Hale Top Civic Centre M22 5RN tel BOND STREET OFFICE Hand T Finance 2nd Floor Standbrook House 2a Old Bond Street W1S 4PD tel Designed and produced by corporateprm Edinburgh and London.
Times House Throwley Way
Surrey
