Annual Report and Accounts 201 7
Strategic Report Section One Our Business 4 V esuvius at a Glance 8 Our Markets 10 Our Strategy 12 Business Model Section T wo Our Performance
16 Chairmans Statement
18 Chief Executives Strategic Review
20 Key Performance Indicators 22 Risk
26 Financial Review
32 Innovation
36 Operating Review
36 Steel Flow Control 40 Advanced Refractories 44 Digital Services 46 Foundry 50 Board of Directors 52 Group Executive Committee Section Three Our Responsibility 56 Our Principles 60 Health and Safety 64 Sustainability 67 People and Community Section Four Governance 76 Chairmans Governance Letter 78 Governance Report 85 Audit Committee 93 Nomination Committee
96 Directors Remuneration Report
96 Remuneration Overview Remuneration Policy Annual Report on Directors
117 Directors Report Statement of Directors
Section Five Financial Statements
124 Independent Auditors Report
130 Group Income Statement Group Statement of Comprehensive
132 Group Statement of Cash Flows 133 Group Balance Sheet Group Statement of Changes of Equity Notes to the Group Financial
181 Company Balance Sheet Notes to the Company Financial
188 Fiveyear Summary Divisional Results 189 Shareholer Information 191 Glossary Financial Performance
9m 2016 1401.4m 20.2% on a reported basis 12.5% on an underlying basis Trading pro t 2016 133.3m 24.2% on a reported basis 1% on an underlying basis Return on sales 9.8% 2016 9.5% 30 basis points 30 basis points on an underlying basis Pro t before tax 1 m 2016 79.4m 22.3% increase Headline earnings per share 40.7 pence 2016 30.4 pence 33.9% increase
12.50 pence per share 18.00 pence Group full year dividend 2016 16.55 pence Group full year dividend Y earend net debt 1.3x net debt to EBITDA ratio 2016 320.3m Revenue m 17 1683.9 16 1401.4 15 1322.0 Trading profit Operating Profit m Headline earnings Statutory EPS pence Free cash flow Forwardlooking statements This Annual Report contains certain forwardlooking statements with respect to the operations strategy  performance  nancial condition and growth opportunities of the V esuvius
By their nature these statements involve uncertainty and are based on assumptions and involve risks uncertainties and other factors that could cause actual results and developments to differ materially from those anticipated.
The forwardlooking statements re ect knowledge and information available at the date of preparation of this Annual Report and other than in accordance with its legal and regulatory obligations the Company undertakes no obligation to update these forwardlooking statements.
Nothing in this Annual Report should be construed as a pro t forecast.
Underlying basis is at constant currency and excludes separately reported items and the impact of acquisitions and disposals.
For de nitions of alternative performance measures refer to Note 4 of the Group Financial Statements.
Headline results refer to continuing operations and exclude separately reported items.
Our Business At a Glance What we do and where See page 4 Our Strategy Our aims See page 10
Our RandD Focus See page 32 V esuvius is a global leader in molten metal  ow engineering V esuvius develops innovative customised highquality products services and solutions to be used in extremely demanding hightemperature industrial environments.
Our goal is to create value for our customers using our expertise to improve the safety and ef ciency of their manufacturing processes enhance their end product quality and reduce their costs.
In doing this we aim to deliver sustainable pro table growth and provide our shareholders with a superior return on their investment whilst providing each of our employees with a safe workplace where he or she is recognised developed and properly rewarded.
See page 10 Melvin Bond Plastic Operator and Union Steward Chicago Heights USA 2 Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7 Section One
Business
In this section V esuvius at a Glance 8 Our Markets 10 Our Strategy 12 Business Model The Strategic Report set out on pages 1 to 73 contains a fair review of our businesses strategy and business model and the associated principal risks and uncertainties.
We also deliver a review of our 2017 performance and set out an overview of our markets.
Details of our principles our people and community engagement together with our focus on safety are also contained in the Strategic Report.
Approved by the Board on 28 February 2018 and signed on its behalf by Patrick Andr Guy Young Chief Executive Chief Financial Of cer 3 Our Business I joined Vesuvius in Brazil as part of Project Columbus Building on my degree in Chemical Engineering and several industry internships I joined Vesuvius in Brazil in 2013 as part of Project Columbus the Groups international graduate programme.
I always wanted to work overseas since  rst starting college and was excited to start my nine month international assignment.
After initial training at home in Brazil I moved to India where over the course of my nine month secondment I developed three projects focusing on resin production and machine maintenance at Foseco in Pune and on VISO production in Vesuvius Calcutta .
This enabled me to apply my interest and expertise in process management and optimisation.
It also gave me the opportunity to immerse myself in a culturally very different operation.
Having enjoyed the challenge of working abroad I then moved to Germany as a Production Manager Assistant at the newly acquired mould powder plant in Mlheim.
Whilst there I worked on the optimisation of spraying processes improved packaging standards and implemented other safety standards all whilst learning to speak German.
More recently I was pleased to accept the additional responsibility of working as the Quality Coordinator at Mlheim which allows me to work with Vesuvius many different departments and learn how the company works as a whole.
I have achieved a lot in my  rst  ve years at Vesuvius developing technical skills growing in experience and expanding my language capabilities and geographical horizons.
See more about Vesuvius careers People and community on p 67 73 Aline Barros Quality Coordinator and Production Manager Assistant Vesuvius Fluxes Germany 4 Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7
We are a global group with a business model based on offering customised products solutions and services from production facilities in close proximity to our customers.
See our Business Model on p12 13 See more about our Steel and Foundry divisions on p6 7
Continents
Production sites
Sales of ces RandD centres Our global presence Michelle Chapman HR Associate Pittsburgh West USA 5 Production sites
RandD centres Sales of ces Production sites
RandD centres Sales of ces Production sites
RandD centres Sales of ces Americas EMEA AsiaPaci c
2016 415.3m 77 .2% Steel 22.8% Foundry
2016 585.6m 67 .5% Steel 32.5% Foundry
2016 400.5m 59 .9% Steel 40.1% Foundry Our Business Steel Flow Control Operating
See p36 Advanced Refractories
Operating Review
See p40
Foundry Operating Review
See p46 Digital Services Operating
See p44 The map shows our production RandD and commercial sites worldwide 6 Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7 BLAST FURNACE CONVERTOR AND REFINING LADLES STEEL SLAB OR BLOOM CONTINUOUS CASTER Business Units Steel Flow Control Specialised parts used to protect and control the  ow of molten metal Advanced Refractories Specialised materials for lining vessels for steel making furnaces ladles and tundishes and other high temperature industries Digital Services Digital products focus on the capture interpretation and use of key manufacturing data for process management Key Strengths Scale One of the worlds largest manufacturers in our market Technology Leading products and services Integration Deep knowledge of customers processes allows us to offer bespoke systems Innovation Capability to develop new valueadding solutions Proximity Effective and ef cient supply to customers Steel Division
Our customers are steel producers manufacturers of steel production equipment and other hightemperature industries.
Vesuvius is a world leader in the supply of refractory products systems and solutions.
These help our customers increase their ef ciency and productivity  enhance quality  improve safety and reduce their costs and their environmental impact.
Revenue
7 m 2016 942.0m Trading pro t 2016 79.2m Return on sales 7% 2016 8.4% See Steel Flow Control Advanced Refractories and Digital Services Operating Reviews on p3645 The Steel
Process
Steel manufacturing is a highly demanding process for which consistent quality and ef cient production is essential.
Our products systems and solutions enable this through every part of the process.
Ladle slide gate tube changer Purging Plug Stopper and rigging Robotic arm Robotic arm Ladle shroud
Mould level control Mould  ux Linings bottoms
Tap hole clay Torpedo ladle
Impact pad
Tundish
Mould
Iron trough Tundish tube changer
Technical services Our T echnical Services offering spans all of our businesses.
Convertor and re ning ladles
Blast furnace For more on Technical services See p4445 Stack repair Convertor repair Re ning ladles Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7 7 POURING INTO MOULD
PRODUCTION
Our Business Key Strengths Product offering Full range of high quality products and services Innovation Industryleading technologies with a focus on continuous innovation Integration Detailed knowledge of customers processes allows us to provide customised solutions Technical support Access to Fosecos extensive application engineering resources Proximity Global presence Foundry Division
Our primary customers are ferrous and nonferrous foundries serving various end markets from large bespoke castings to highvolume automotive pieces.
T rading as Foseco we are a world leader in products and services that serve the global foundry industry  improving casting quality and foundry ef ciency.
Revenue
2016 459.4m Trading pro t 1 m 2016 54.
1m Return on sales 2 % 2016 1 1.8% See Foundry Division Operating Review on p4649 The Foundry Process The foundry process is highly sequential and consistency of quality and productivity is essential.
The conditioning of molten metal the nature of the mould and the way metal ows in the mould affects both the quality of the  nished casting and the effort energy and metal usage.
Sand binder Digital Services  Our business unit dedicated to data capture technologies Flow Control Advanced Refractories and Foundry Providing services and solutions complementary to or independent of the sale of consumables
Final casting
Induction
CAST ITEM BEFORE FETTLING
Downsprue
Core and coatings
Runner
Mould coatings Pouring cup
Stopper rod
Drag
Cope 8 Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7 Our Markets
Customers of the Steel Division are principally steel producers and manufacturers of steel production equipment.
Steel production volumes are the critical driver of demand as the Steel Division primarily sells products that are consumed during the steel making process.
This is particularly true in the production of higherquality steels where our highly technical products deliver the most value.
The Advanced Refractories business also supplies other hightemperature industries such as primary aluminium copper cement petrochemical and energy from waste.
Around 7% of revenues in the Steel Division arise from nonsteel related process industries.
Steel production Steel quality as a driver for demand According to the World Steel Association WSA the worldwide steel industry saw growth of 5.3% in 201 7 with 1691.2 million tonnes mt produced globally.
For many years China has been the worlds largest producer of steel.
Chinas crude steel production increased by 5.7% to 832mt and accounted for 49% of the worlds steel production.
Production in Japan was mostly  at at 105mt in 201 7 whilst Indias steel production increased by 6.2% to 101mt and South Koreas increased by 3.7% to 71mt.
Steel manufacturers are increasingly searching for products that can support the production of higher grades of steel.
The  at steel used in later cycle consumer goods e. and infrastructure.
In the developed market of NAFT A the production ratio is currently 6535%  atlong.
As developing countries move from infrastructurebased economies to consumer based economies the ratio of  at to long steel consumption also transitions.
According to the Chinese Iron and Steel Association this trend has been seen in China over the past few years and is expected to continue.
The quality demands are even higher for production of speciality and highstrength steels.
Our highly technical innovative refractory products are designed to preserve the quality of molten steel during the steel making process.
Vesuvius engineered refractories prevent the build up of impurities in the steel protect the molten metal from oxidisation moderate its  ow and manage its  uid dynamics to harmonise consistency and reduce the pickup of inclusions.
T o do this our products need to be highly resistant to erosion corrosion and thermal shock to ensure that they do not themselves contaminate the steel during casting.
The capabilities of Vesuvius products  particularly when used as a total solution  are much more in demand for higher quality steel grades where the consistency of the nished steel is paramount.
Steel Division end markets Size of bubble represents relative revenue of Vesuvius steel division
7.6%
21.4%
6.4%
6.3%
6.8%
2.9%
9.9% Turkey 13.1%
3.5%
Korea
3.7%
4.0%
6.2%
0.1%
4.1%
WSA reported 5.7%
Vesuvius estimate 0%  2% 2017 steel production volume
1.3% Crude steel production growth Growth in crude steel production 2017 vs.
2016 vs.
2017 steel production volume T op15 producers and EU28 Chinese reported steel production growth was 5.7% however due to the closure of induction furnaces previously not reported in statistics Vesuvius estimates Chinas actual steel production growth in 201 7 was between 0% and 2% 9 Our Business
The vehicle sector comprising light vehicles passenger cars and light trucks and heavy trucks is the largest end market for worldwide castings.
Other end markets for foundry castings include machinery for the agricultural construction and mining industries petrochemicals power generation equipment railroad and general engineering sectors.
Our customers include the worlds major automotive OEMs truck producers and equipment manufacturers.
Foundry Division end markets Casting quality as a driver for demand Whilst Foseco products typically represent less than 5% of a foundrys production cost they contribute signi cantly to improving product quality and manufacturing ef ciency whilst reducing the environmental impact of the casting process and improving the ratio of nished castings to the amount of metal poured a key parameter for foundry ef ciency.
As castings become increasingly complicated driven in the case of automotive casting by the need for lightness they demand cleaner metal better  ow into the mould and more consistent solidi cation.
This supports the computer modelling ow simulation and casting methoding capabilities that are central to the services provided by Foseco.
Demand drivers for castings Light vehicle demand is largely driven by consumer con dence and in commercial purchasing the age of the overall  eet.
Demand in the majority of the remaining casting endmarkets is driven by the cost of capital and the level of current pro tability in the given sector.
Certain sectors are consumptiondriven such as construction mining agriculture and heavy truck where usage drives demand for replacement parts e. etc. based on actual wear.
T echnology changes and environmental drivers New technologies such as 3D printing are expected to continue to in uence the metal casting industry allowing for faster prototyping and production of smaller volume parts.
Environmental regulations driven by the desire to reduce volatile organic compound emissions and the use of silica within the industry are also expected to continue to tighten.
This will drive the trend to  nd processes and consumable products which support production ef ciency and reduce a foundrys impact on the environment.
Steel casting Aluminium Nonferrous casting Iron casting Iron casting is split between grey and ductile iron with grey iron representing the majority of metal being cast.
This is a costef cient and robust process to produce components that do not need to tolerate extreme mechanical stress.
All iron casting requires lters and coatings but grey iron is not as reliant on feeding system utilisation due to its lower shrinkage on solidi cation.
Conversely ductile iron production requires more sophisticated products to cope with the high shrinkages of metal whilst solidifying.
Steel is used in casting for manufacturing components with very high mechanical performance.
Steel casting is the most demanding casting process due to higher melting temperatures and greater tendency for shrinkage thus the greater demand for products and technical expertise in this segment.
Aluminium casting is the segment of the foundry market growing the fastest.
It has captured a signi cant share of the light vehicle market.
Being molten below 700C aluminium can be cast in iron moulds which can then be reused.
Foseco concentrates on supplying uxes  lters and machines that re ne the composition and cleanliness of the metal.
Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7
Objectives
V esuvius focuses on the following strategic objectives which we measure and monitor through our Key Performance Indicators KPIs Our Strategy
Priorities
Reinforce our technology leadership See our Key performance indicators on p2021 See p3235 Increase penetration of valuecreating solutions Capture growth in developing markets Improve cost leadership and margins See p3648 Develop our T echnical Services offering See p4445 Deliver growth Generate sustainable pro tability and create shareholder value Maintain strong cash generation and an ef cient capital structure Provide a safe working environment for our people Be at the forefront of innovation Run topquality  costef cient and sustainable operations Foster talent skill and motivation in our people 11 V esuvius has articulated  ve key execution priorities.
These will enable us to achieve our core strategic objectives of delivering longterm sustainable and pro table growth.
Vesuvius was built and grew on technology breakthroughs.
These enabled the steel continuous casting and foundry industries to improve their ef ciency and quality substantially.
Focusing on technology leadership continues to drive our unique value proposition and underpins our ability to deliver ongoing value enhancement to our customers.
The percentage of revenue accounted for by New Products that is products launched within the last  ve years grew from 8% in 2014 to nearly 15% in 2017 .
Our objective is for this to reach 20%.
The new RandD centre for Advanced Refractories at Visakhapatnam India was inaugurated in November 2017 .
Our spend on RandD increased yearonyear to 33.2m being 2.0% of our total revenue and we increased the ef ciency of our RandD by focusing our efforts on a reduced number of potentially highimpact RandD projects.
We also moved the RandD function closer to our customers embedding RandD within the business units which will ensure a closer link between RandD activities and the return we receive on our investment.
Our Business Progress in 2017 Description Our technology has been widely adopted by the most sophisticated producers in the most developed markets.
However  marked differences remain in the penetration of our solutions within the industry .
Consequently  there is a wider audience of customers whom we believe can bene t from them.
As steel and foundry markets in developing markets become more quality focused we have the opportunity to signi cantly increase our penetration of these markets through offering value creating solutions.
Our outperformance in the majority of end markets across both our Steel and Foundry Divisions is evidence of the penetration gains we are achieving due to increased customer interest in our valuecreating solutions.
For our Steel Division this outperformance is re ected in our underlying 2017 revenue growth of 14.
1% versus 5.3% growth in global steel production volumes.
For our Foundry Division underlying 2017 revenue growth of 9.3% is further evidence of this outperformance.
Building on our longstanding presence in all markets we can leverage the high growth enjoyed by our customers industries in emerging markets which are large consumers of steel goods and foundry castings.
Our growth in developing markets is especially encouraging and we delivered outperformance relative to end markets due to greater interest in our high valueadded solutions.
Our 201 7 revenue growth rates for our key developing markets were as follows China 9 .2% India 6.2% South America  1 7 .5% Mexico 1% EMEA excl.
EU28 37 .0%.
The acceleration of our revenue growth in China is also especially notable and we are bene ting from several favourable market trends which are driving a shift towards our higher quality consumables and services.
In 201 5 we initiated a restructuring programme throughout the Group to adapt our business and our cost base to the changing trading environment.
This is core to our efforts to improve profitability .
Furthermore we have embedded the principles of Lean manufacturing across all our sites continuously focusing on quality and productivity to enable us to maintain our margins.
Our global presence allows us to bene t from economies of scale and deliver excellent service from local sites.
We continued to make good progress with our previously announced restructuring programme mainly focused on the Flow Control business delivering savings of 16.2m in 201 7  which was ahead of expectations.
As a result the total savings delivered since launching the programme in 2015 are now 43.2m.
This programme is now expected to deliver 60m of savings at a total cost of 75m.
We also commenced a completely new restructuring programme targeting the Foundry Division in Europe and NAFT A the Advanced Refractories business unit in Europe and Group corporate functions from which we expect 15m of recurring savings by 2020.
Our customers processes require increasing levels of engineering services to reach the demanding levels of safety  accuracy and consistency required by their endcustomers quality specifications.
The key elements of V esuvius T echnical Services strategy are firstly the Digital Services business unit which is focused on incubating our data capture technologies and secondly  the business units which play a critical role in integrating these products into our broader consumables offering as well as ensuring customer access.
In this way  our T echnical Services strategy is progressively penetrating all activities of both our Steel and Foundry Divisions.
We saw good progress of our global T echnical Services offering which is now embedded in the operations of all our business units.
Global T echnical Services turnover across all business units reached 88m in 201 7  growing by 14% year onyear .
In late 201 7 we made a strategic investment in Sapotech Oy a Finnish technology company offering optical measurement services for the continuous casting process.
The Sapotech business will be managed by our Flow Control business unit.
Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7 Business Model A pro table  exible cashgenerative model focused on growth We develop and manufacture hightechnology products and solutions for supply to the steel and casting industries operating a pro table  exible cashgenerative and growthbuilding business model.
Over many years we have built the brand equity of our V esuvius and Foseco products through reliability technology and service.
The foundation of our business model is the supply of specialised and consumable products from a global presence.
Our industry experts are embedded at many customer locations and are therefore ideally placed to collaborate with customers to identify their needs and potential service and process improvements.
This also enables us to grow our solutions and service portfolio.
Our model is resilient to endmarket volatility due to the  exibility of our diversi ed manufacturing footprint and adjustable variable cost base.
Our model is pro table by allowing value pricing for bespoke products and services.
It generates growth as we enlarge our market with additional innovative products and solutions.
Key Resources Financial capital We use the cash generated by our business to invest in innovation people operating assets technology and sales to generate further growth.
Manufacturing capital We have a global footprint with 66 production sites based on six continents giving us close proximity to our customers.
Intellectual capital We have 17 RandD centres and over 300 RandD staff worldwide generating innovative products and solutions for our customers.
Human capital We invest in developing our skilled and motivated workforce of approx.
11000 people and provide them with a safe environment in which to work.
Social capital We champion our Values and our ethical conduct.
We maintain strong relationships with customers and our wider stakeholder group.
Natural capital We utilise highquality raw materials secured through reliable and welldeveloped supply chains.
Global Presence Using our global spread of expertise to identify and create market opportunities Vesuvius is present on six continents supporting the development of global steel and foundry manufacturing processes with new technologies.
We have manufacturing capability in all the main steel and foundry markets and hire and train local engineers.
They are progressively integrated within the Vesuvius network of experts and offered international careers.
Our local manufacturing local expertise and global knowledge of our customers processes give us a special relationship with our customers helping them to optimise their process and product performance.
All over the world new plants use Vesuvius and Foseco products to create the best possible conditions for success.
Optimised Manufacturing Lowcost Lean manufacturing close to customers provides reliable justintime products Our successfully tested products can be manufactured at a short distance from our customers plants guaranteeing costcompetitive and timeef cient delivery.
We optimise our cost competitiveness by investing in the lowest cost production site in the area and have established manufacturing facilities in emerging markets from the beginning of their industrialisation.
This together with the high volume of pieces we are able to produce provides our customers with the best balance between value cost and service for our hightechnology solutions.
See more about our global presence on p45 See more about sustainability on p6466 13 Our Business Key Outputs Value to shareholders Our ef cient use of capital generates annual pro ts giving returns to our shareholders and underpinning sustainable growth.
Highquality products We deliver bespoke highquality refractory and consumable products and systems to industryleading customers around the world.
Customer value Our investment in innovation creates cuttingedge products and solutions delivering enhanced value for our customers and differentiating us from our competitors.
Expert delivery We embed technical experts with our customers giving us a fundamental understanding of their needs and delivering them access to our global network of highly skilled individuals.
Sustainable business Our commitment to ethical business delivers strong longterm sustainable commercial relationships.
Environmental bene ts We develop products that deliver ef ciency and energy savings to our customers.
We focus on sustainability in our own business through the ef cient use of energy and natural resources.
Advanced Technology
Our technology centres develop valueadding solutions involving engineered systems and highvalue consumables Our continuing investment in the Companys RandD centres is re ected in all areas of our offering.
We have knowledge of the most advanced ceramic and metallurgical techniques using stateoftheart equipment and the most advanced technologies of  ow simulation and  nite element analysis.
We are therefore able to provide our customers with sophisticated innovative customdesigned solutions with the highest level of con dence in their suitability creating value and helping them differentiate from their competition.
We enhance this expertise with our growing capabilities in data capture and interpretation to deliver expert process management improvements to our customers.
Service and Consistency Serving our customers reliably competitively and consistently with consumables critical for their manufacturing processes Alongside developing our global presence we ensure a local service to our customers from inventory management to highquality technical support at their sites and the ability to swiftly modify production and supply to re ect changes in customer requirements.
Our knowledge of endmarket processes speci cations and techniques around the world gives our experts an unparalleled ability to support our customers.
This unique level of service relies on our technicians permanent presence at our customers sites and their ability to leverage the worldwide expertise accumulated across the Vesuvius network.
Read more about innovation on p3235 Read more about quality and reliability on p3648 A growth generating model with our
Global Presence Advanced T echnology
Optimised
Service and
Manufacturing technical experts across six continents RandD centres RandD PhDs and engineers manufacturing sites in 26 countries 14 Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7 Enno Hilgenhoener Director Solutions Group Steel Flow Control Borken Germany Section T wo
Performance
In this section
16 Chairmans Statement
Chief Executives Strategic Review
Key Performance Indicators 22 Risk
Financial Review
32 Innovation
36 Operating Review
36 Steel Flow Control 40 Advanced Refractories 44 Digital Services 46 Foundry 50 Board of Directors Group Executive Committee Our Performance 16 Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7
Chairmans Statement
W e have outperformed the market and delivered a strong set of results John McDonough CBE Chairman
2017 was a year of good progress for the Group as we saw improvements in our trading environment following the challenging market conditions experienced in 2015 and 2016.
We also completed a successful transition of Chief Executive with the appointment of Patrick Andr to the role as part of a planned succession process.
Global steel production growth exceeded our expectations and pleasingly our overall sales growth outperformed the global steel market.
We also experienced positive momentum in the majority of foundry end markets.
Overall despite experiencing headwinds relating to signi cant raw material price increases and some temporary increased intercompany sourcing costs the Group saw a 24.2% increase in reported trading pro t 16.
1% on an underlying basis and a 20.2% increase in reported revenue 12.5% on an underlying basis with cash generation strengthening further.
The Group continued to make good progress with the restructuring programme and we remained focused on the delivery of our strategy and its execution priorities.
Finally in December we strengthened our balance sheet repaying existing borrowing with the issuance of debt in the US Private Placement market.
New Chief Executive The appointment of our new Chief Executive Patrick Andr was a key event for Vesuvius this year.
It was the result of a rigorous process during which both internal and external candidates were considered.
We are delighted that the best  t for the role came from within our own ranks.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank Patricks predecessor Franois Wanecq for his many years of dedicated service to the business and his diligence in ensuring a smooth transition.
We look forward to the years ahead under Patricks executive leadership.
Market Dynamics and Strategy During the year we saw global steel production increase by 5.3% with production in the majority of major steel countries up yearonyear.
In our Foundry Division the overall trading environment and demand for our products was positive across the majority of our key end markets.
Throughout the year we faced notable in ationary pressures from signi cant price increases in several key raw materials.
These initially impacted our Advanced Refractories business but subsequently price rises were also experienced in the Steel Flow Control and Foundry businesses.
We responded proactively to the pressure placed on our business making good progress in recovering cost in ation through higher selling prices by yearend.
See the Chief Executives Strategic Review on p18 19 See more about our Markets on p89 See our Financial Review on p2631 See more about our Governance in the Governance Section on p74 121 17 Against this backdrop we continued to focus on the execution of our strategy and made good progress on our  ve key execution priorities see page 10.
We remain con dent that these will enable us to create value and deliver sustainable pro tability for our shareholders.
We continue to recognise the fundamental importance to the Group of the capabilities of our people.
Our highly talented leadership teams and operational staff ensure that we are able to drive our strategy forward with quality underpinning not only the premium promise of our products services and solutions but also our overall approach to business excellence.
Performance and Dividend In 2017  reported sales were 1683.9m an increase from 2016 of 20.2%.
Our margins improved to 9.8% delivering reported trading pro t of 165.5m.
Whilst we experienced some headwinds throughout the second half over the year we outperformed our markets in terms of growth.
These results serve to emphasise the strength of our management team and their ability to operate effectively against the backdrop of a volatile market.
Vesuvius remains an intrinsically cashgenerative business and we saw strong cash generation throughout 2017 ending the year with a stronger balance sheet than in previous years.
The Group continued to make good progress in delivering the previously announced restructuring programme which focused mainly on our Flow business.
We also commenced a completely new programme focusing on the Foundry Division in Europe and NAFT A the Advanced Refractories business unit in Europe and Group corporate functions.
Our Headline PBT was 152.9m 27 .6% higher than last year on a reported basis.
Including amortisation of 19.5m and restructuring costs of 36.3m our PBT of 97 .
1m was 22.3% higher than 2016.
Statutory EPS is 14.
1p.
Our dividend policy aims to deliver longterm dividend growth provided this is supported by cash  ow and underlying earnings and is justi ed in the context of our capital expenditure requirements and the prevailing market outlook.
With this in mind the Board has recommended a  nal dividend of 12.5 pence per share for the year ended 31 December 2017 2016 1 1.4 pence which would result in a total dividend for the year of 18.0 pence per share 2016 16.55 pence an increase of 8.8%.
If approved at the Annual General Meeting this  nal dividend will be paid on 25 May 2018 to shareholders on the register at 13 April 2018.
Board and Governance In April 2017  we appointed Holly Koeppel as a Nonexecutive Director replacing Nelda Connors who resigned from the Board in late 2016.
Holly has more than 35 years industry and nancial experience and has worked with businesses in Australia China the UK and the US.
We are delighted to have her signi cant experience around the Board table.
The Board continues to place great importance on furthering our understanding of the Vesuvius business by visiting key operations and engaging with as many of our people as possible.
This year the full Board visited our Foundry operations and customers in Brazil meeting management from all business lines and gaining a broader understanding of the overall South American business.
As Chairman I personally visited our operations in China in May and during the year other Nonexecutive Directors visited operations in Skawina in Poland Cleveland and Pittsburgh in the US and Borken in Germany.
The Board will continue to visit sites across the Group increasing individual knowledge and ensuring that we remain connected with our operations management teams and people around the world.
The 2017 externally facilitated Board evaluation con rmed that the Board continues to function effectively.
We believe it remains well balanced setting the right tone from the top with a strong mix of relevant experience and skills ensuring that a collaborative yet challenging culture is embedded throughout the Group.
Our People In 2016 I noted that to secure the current and future performance of the Group the Board had widened its focus on succession planning issues additionally reviewing the management level immediately below the Board.
This continues to be a critical area for Board attention with the Board fully recognising the importance of developing talent and maintaining a cadre of diverse and highly capable people throughout the business.
The need for greater diversity throughout the business is a goal upon which the Board remains focused.
As ever I continue to be impressed by the way in which our leadership teams and our people go the extra mile to exceed our own and our customers expectations as evidenced by our 2017 results.
On behalf of the Board I thank them all.
Annual General Meeting The Annual General Meeting will be held on 10 May 2018.
The Notice of Meeting and explanatory notes containing details of the resolutions to be put to the meeting accompany this Annual Report and Accounts and are available on our website www. esuvius. com.
I and all my Board colleagues plan to attend the Annual General Meeting and we look forward to the opportunity to meet with as many shareholders as possible on the day.
John McDonough CBE Chairman 28 February 2018 Our Performance 18 Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7
Chief Executives Strategic Review
Introduction
It is an honour to have been selected to lead Vesuvius and I am grateful to our Chairman John McDonough and the Board of Directors for their trust.
I would also like to thank Franois Wanecq for his exceptional commitment in leading Vesuvius over the past 1 2 years.
Thanks to his achievements and the efforts of all our teams the foundations of the Group are strong and sound.
Our main objective is now to build on these foundations and to generate and accelerate the Groups profitable growth over the coming years.
The strong performance of the Group in 2017 is an important first step in the implementation of this growth strategy.
Strong Performance In a globally favourable economic environment both our Steel and Foundry Divisions succeeded in outperforming the general market growth.
This was particularly the case in China.
Thanks to this performance Vesuvius global sales in 2017 reached 1683.9m an increase of 20.2% over 2016 on a reported basis.
At constant currency and adjusted for the effect of acquisitions underlying revenue was up 12.5% as compared with 2016.
Our trading profit in 2017 reached 165.5m an increase of 24.2% over 2016 on a reported basis and 16.
1% on an underlying basis.
Our return on sales improved from 9.5% to 9.8%.
After the inclusion of amortisation of acquired intangibles and restructuring costs operating profit was 109.7m 18.
1% ahead of prior year on a reported basis.
Our financial performance would however have been even stronger in 2017 if we had not been impacted by two temporary headwinds.
Some of the key raw materials used by our Steel and Foundry Divisions experienced significant price increases in 2017  particularly during the second half of the year.
The speed of these increases was such that it was not possible to fully recover the increased costs through the sales price of our finished products as we were bound by contractual obligations with some customers.
This situation improved towards the end of 2017 due to prices stabilising for several key raw materials and major progress being made in recovering cost inflation through higher selling prices.
Whilst the price of magnesite the largest contributor to raw material price inflation in 2017 has now stabilised the price of other raw materials such as bauxite silicon carbide and zirconia are still on an upward trend.
As a result the process of price adjustment will continue into 2018 until realised cost increases have been fully recovered.
Additionally the very strong growth of our Flow Control sales in EMEA temporarily exceeded the capacity of our manufacturing plants in the region requiring the import of products from our facilities in Asia and NAFT A incurring additional freight export duty and overtime costs.
Measures were immediately taken to increase the capacity of the Flow Control EMEA plants and this rampup is now complete substituting imports from nonEMEA plants.
Improved Financial Position Despite the strong growth in our turnover and increased capital investment of 44.3m in 2017 versus 35.2m in 2016 our cash conversion ratio increased to 104% in 2017 due to our focus on efficient working capital management.
Our trade working capital to sales ratio decreased to 24.9% from 26.6% in 2016.
This strong cash flow generation reduced our net debt to 274.3m at 31 December 2017 versus 320.3m at 31 December 2016.
We also partly refinanced our debt in December 2017 with the issuance of a 100m US Private Placement resulting in a significant decrease of our financing costs going forward.
Strategic Progress Our strategy remains centred around five key execution priorities designed to ensure the achievement of our core strategic objectives of delivering longterm sustainable and profitable growth.
Each of these execution priorities saw significant progress in 2017 Reinforce our technology leadership With a global RandD spend of 33.2m in 2017 201628.6m representing 2.0% of revenue Vesuvius continues to lead the industry with a significantly larger RandD spend to sales ratio than most of our competitors.
In 2017 Our main objective is to accelerate the implementation of our profitable growth strategy over the coming years Patrick Andr Chief Executive 19 we continued to focus our RandD efforts on a reduced number of potentially highimpact RandD programmes.
The new Advanced Refractory RandD centre in Visakhapatnam India was inaugurated in November reinforcing our presence in this key market for our future growth strengthening links with customers and enabling us to better tap into the growing talent pool of engineers and scientists in the country.
The decision was also made to reorganise the Flow Control RandD network around three main RandD centres in the US Pittsburgh Europe GhlinFeignies and China Suzhou operating under a common leadership.
This structure will be fully operational in 2020 and will enable us to increase the efficiency of our research further by reinforcing our proximity with customers and accessing a wider pool of worldwide scientific talents.
Increase penetration of our value creating solutions The growth of sales in our Steel and Foundry Divisions outperformed underlying market growth in most areas confirming the mounting interest of customers in our advanced solutions enabling them to improve their manufacturing efficiency whilst at the same time raising the quality of their finished products.
We were particularly pleased with our progress in China where Steel Division sales increased by 7% and Foundry Division sales increased by 13% on an underlying basis.
Capture growth in developing markets Steel Division sales grew faster than the market in the key developing regions of China India and the Middle East.
However sales growth in Latin America while positive was slightly below general steel market growth.
Foundry sales also outperformed markets in most developing countries with the exception of India where priority was given to the management of working capital and customer credit risk.
Improve cost leadership and margins Our previously announced Lean and selfhelp programme to improve the cost competitiveness and efficiency of our manufacturing network continued to develop in 2017  extending from Flow Control Europe to Flow Control NAFT A operations.
16.2m of savings were delivered in 2017  bringing the total savings delivered since launching the programme to 43.2m.
This programme is expected to deliver 60m of savings at a total cost of A completely new restructuring programme focused on the Foundry Division in Europe and NAFT A the Advanced Refractories business unit in Europe and global corporate functions was launched at the end of 2017  with expected recurring savings of 15m by 2020.
In parallel to these restructuring programmes Vesuvius is reinforcing its focus on operational excellence and continuous improvement in its manufacturing operations.
Develop our T echnical Services offering Our T echnical Services offering has continued to develop in 2017  not only within our Digital Services business unit but also within Flow Control Foundry and Advanced
Late in 2017  we made a strategic investment in Sapotech Oy a Finnish technology company developing optical defect detection services in the steel continuous casting process.
This investment will reinforce the Flow Control business unit.
Attracting Developing and Retaining T alent The success of our strategy ultimately relies on the quality and motivation of our people.
In 2017  we continued our efforts to attract develop and retain the best talents worldwide.
This will intensify in 2018.
We believe in diversity of talents and origins and in the importance of an entrepreneurial and decentralised culture with empowered accountable innovative and resultsoriented managers operating close to our markets and our customers.
I will strongly support the reinforcement of this culture within the Group going forward.
Stable Safety Performance in 2017 With a lost time injury frequency rate of 1.63 per million hours in 2017  our safety performance improved slightly over 2016 1.72.
The Groups injury severity rate improved more markedly in 2017 with a severity rate of 62.8 days lost per million hours worked versus 74.6 days lost per million hours worked in 2016 highlighting the success of the Groups efforts to address the most dangerous situations in our manufacturing plants.
Our objective is to improve this performance further yearonyear.
A new safety management organisation updating responsibility and accountability for the management of safety across the Group was established at the end of 2017 and will be fully operational in the first half of 2018.
Sustainability
Vesuvius RandD reinforced its efforts in 2017 to develop products and services helping our Steel and Foundry customers to reduce their energy consumption and carbon footprint through the improved service life of our products and reduction of waste in their manufacturing processes.
At the same time we continued our efforts to reduce waste and energy consumption in our own manufacturing processes.
Outlook
Our main Steel and Foundry markets remain positively oriented at the beginning of 2018.
However we expect a lower growth rate of steel production outside China in 2018 compared to 2017 as the significant decrease in Chinese steel exports which occurred in 2017 may not repeat in 2018.
Our selfhelp and manufacturing optimisation programme will continue to develop and expand in 2018.
The temporary raw material and product supply headwinds that impacted our 2017 results have now been mostly mitigated and will substantially unwind during the year subject to any further raw material cost increases.
We remain confident in our ability to further improve working capital management and generate strong operating cash flow.
For these reasons the Board is confident that in comparison to 2017  further strong progress will be made in 2018.
Patrick Andr Chief Executive 28 February 2018 Our Performance 20 Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7 Key Performance
The Board and management regularly monitor both financial and nonfinancial performance indicators to measure performance against objectives.
The Board reviews these KPIs as part of its governance and risk management processes.
Generate sustainable profitability and create shareholder value Trading profit and return on sales Headline profit before tax Used to assess the trading performance of Group businesses Used to assess the financial performance of the Group as a whole Deliver growth Provides an important indicator of organic likeforlike growth of Group businesses between reporting periods.
This measure eliminates the impact of exchange rates acquisitions disposals and significant business closures Strategic Alignment KPI Purpose Return on net assets Used to assess the financial performance and asset management of the Group Headline earnings per share Used to assess the underlying earnings performance of the Group as a whole
Maintain strong cash generation and an efficient capital structure Free cash flow Average working capital to sales ratio Interest cover ratio Ratio of net debt to EBITDA Used to assess the underlying cash generation of the Group.
One of the factors driving the generation of free cash flow is the average working capital to sales ratio which indicates the level of working capital used in the business Both ratios are used to assess the financial position of the Group and its ability to fund future growth Nonfinancial KPIs Provide a safe working environment for our people Lost time injury frequency rate Performance Strategic Alignment KPI Lost time injury frequency rate Be at the forefront of innovation RandD spend Total RandD spend m Delivery of value to shareholders is linked to remuneration through the Vesuvius Share Plan VSP which measures the vesting of awards against total shareholder return VSP  Read more about this on p111113 EPS is linked to remuneration as a measure used in the Annual Incentive plan AIP and the VSP AIP and VSP Read more about them in the Directors Remuneration Report on p96116 Performance Link to remuneration Run top quality cost efficient and sustainable operations T otal energy consumption Our Performance Underlying revenue growth % Trading profit m Headline profit before tax m Headline EPS pence Return on net assets % In 2017 working capital performance was linked to remuneration through the use of the Groups cash conversion ratio as one of the measures used in the AIP AIP  Read more about this on p109111 Free cash flow m Average working capital to sales % Return on sales % Workrelated illness or injuries which resulted in an employee being absent for at least one day  measured per million hours worked Read more about Safety on p6063 Constant 2017 currency Performance Strategic Alignment KPI Note The performance measure for this KPI has been amended this year.
The Company believes that the new performance measure using normalised consumption gives a more helpful indication of the Groups performance in this area.
Net debt to EBITDA Read more about Sustainability on p6466 Interest cover Energy Used kWh per metric tonne product packed for shipment Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7
The Board continually monitors the internal and external risks which could signi cantly impact the longterm performance of the Group Risk Management in 201 7 The Board is responsible for setting the Groups risk appetite and ensuring that appropriate risk management systems are in place.
The Group undertakes a continuous process of risk identi cation and review which includes both a topdown and bottomup process independently gathering views on risk from each business unit and from operational functional and senior executive management and the Board of Directors.
Building on the process conducted in 2016 where a clean sheet review of the Groups principal risks was undertaken the Groups assessment of principal risks has been reviewed and considered against a further group of emerging risks and uncertainties identi ed through our 2017 Board process.
Changes to Risk in 201 7 The Board believes that there has been no material change to the Groups principal risks and uncertainties during the year.
However the Board re ected on the implications of certain emerging macro trends during the year.
These included the increase in automation in manufacturing as a competitive disruption and the potential for negative implications for the business from the Brexit process the outcome of which remains unclear but which is not expected to be material in the context of the Group.
The Board also discussed the risks that could arise from a failure by the Group to foster the correct culture for success.
In addition to these wider trends the Board focused on identi ed risks where issues had arisen during the year  the interruption of supply of quality raw materials the related challenges of instigating price increases as input costs go up the more protectionist approach being implemented in some major markets and the potential for  nancial instability and worldwide recession.
Finally the Board continued its oversight of cyber issues as an emerging risk.
The
Boards view on each of these issues was integrated into management discussions on risk and factored into the approach the Group takes to successful mitigation.
Risk Mitigation The risks identi ed are actively managed in order to mitigate exposure.
Senior management owners are identi ed for each principal risk to manage the mitigations of that speci c risk and contribute to the analysis of its likelihood and materiality.
This is reported to the
The risks are analysed in the context of our business structure which gives protection against a number of principal risks we face with diversi ed currencies a widespread customer base local production matching the diversity of Todd Steele Technical Specialist MandT  Ferrous Foundry USA plemented in some major and the potential for  nancial and worldwide recession.
Viability Process
Viability time horizon and risk analysis framework
Principal risks and stress scenarios
Viability against risk scenarios examining probabilities and impacts
See Viability Statement above Our Performance our markets and intensive training of our employees.
Additionally we seek to mitigate risk through contractual measures.
Where costeffective the risk is transferred to insurers.
Board Monitoring The Board defines the Group s risk appetite considering the nature and extent of the principal risks that the Group should take.
The Boards oversight of principal risks also involves a Board review of the processes by which the Group manages those risks establishing a clear understanding at Board level of the individuals and groups in the business formally responsible for the management of speci c risks.
See more in Governance on pages74 121 Principal Risks The risks identi ed on pages 24 and 25 are those the Board considers to be the most relevant to the Group in relation to their potential impact on the achievement of its strategic objectives.
All of the risks set out on pages 2 4 and 25 could materially affect the Group its businesses future operations and  nancial condition and could cause actual results to differ materially from expected or historical results.
These risks are not the only ones that the Group will face.
Some risks are not yet known and some currently not deemed to be material could become so.
Viability Statement In accordance with the UK Corporate Governance Code the Directors have assessed the viability of the Group over a three year period to 31 December 2020 taking into account the Groups current position and the potential impact of the principal risks and uncertainties.
The Directors have determined that a three year period is an appropriate period over which to provide the Viability Statement because this is the period that the strategic business plan focuses on and is suf ciently funded by  nancing facilities with average maturity terms of approximately six years.
In making this statement the Directors have carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks that may threaten the business model future performance solvency and liquidity of the Group.
This is embodied in the annual review of a three year bottomup business plan process which includes a review of sensitivity to business as usual risks such as pro t growth and working capital variances severe but plausible events and the impact on the central debt and headroom pro le analysis.
The results take account of the availability and likely effectiveness of the mitigating actions that could be taken to avoid or reduce the impact or occurrence of the underlying risks.
Whilst the review has considered all the principal risks identi ed by the Group the following were selected for enhanced stress testing an unplanned drop in customer demand debt recovery risk due to customer default raw material price in ation reduction in earnings from increased interest charges and the impact of volatility in foreign currency earnings.
The Groups prudent balance sheet management  exible cost base to react quickly to end market conditions access to longterm capital at acceptable nancing costs and well diversi ed international businesses in different currency earning pro les leaves it well placed to manage these principal risks.
In performing the stress testing certain assumptions were made including that customer failures result in writeoffs of the full value of the receivables with no lost revenue replacement and partial cash  ow mitigation is possible from working capital releases restricted capital expenditure and operating cost reductions.
Under the enhanced stress testing described above a potential breach of a covenant would only occur in the event of an unforeseen reduction in revenue greater than 35%.
Accordingly the Directors con rm that they have a reasonable expectation that the Group will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the three year period to 31 December 2020.
Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7 Risk continued Principal Risks and Uncertainties Risk and Context Potential Impact Mitigation Demand volatility Vesuvius expectations of future trading are based upon an assessment of endmarket conditions which are subject to some uncertainty.
Vesuvius endmarkets are historically somewhat cyclical in nature.
Strategic alignment Unplanned drop in demand andor revenue due to reduced production Margin reduction Customer failure leading to increased bad debts Loss of market share to competition Cost pressures at customers leading to use of cheaper solutions Geographic diversi cation of revenues Product innovation and service offerings securing longterm revenue streams and maintaining performance differential Increase in service and product lines by the development of the Technical Services offering RandD includes assessment of emerging technologies Manufacturing capacity rationalisation and  exible cost base Diversi ed customer base no customer is greater than 10% of revenue Robust credit and working capital control to mitigate the risk of default by counterparties
Local national or regional political requirements con ict with the quality and ef ciency delivered by scale and standardisation.
Strategic alignment Restricted access to market due to enforced preference of local suppliers Increased barriers to entry for new businesses or expansion Increased costs from import duties or taxation Loss of market share Highly diversi ed manufacturing footprint with manufacturing sites located in 26 countries Strong local management with delegated authority to run their business and manage customer relationships Cost  exibility Tax risk management and control framework together with a strong control of intercompany trading Financial uncertainty Fluctuations in the value of currencies interest rates or rates of in ation may adversely impact the Groups  nancial position or results of operations.
Availability of suf cient capital is critical to allow Vesuvius to deliver its business plan.
Strategic alignment Customer and other counterparty default Restricted access to capital hampering ability to fund growth Reduction in earnings from increased interest charges Reduced market liquidity and increased cost of capital Capital allocation discipline Capital structuring including  xed rate borrowing and matching of debt to cash  ow earnings currency Alignment of cost structure with revenue where possible Effective planning of the debt re nancing pro le to avoid exposure to shortterm market disruptions Complex and changing regulatory environment Vesuvius is subject to worldwide legal and regulatory regimes some of which impose extra jurisdictional obligations on companies and are continually updated.
Strategic alignment Revenue reduction from reduced end market access Disruption of supply chain and route to market Increased internal control processes Increased frequency of regulatory investigations Reputational damage Globally disseminated Code of Conduct highlighting ethical approach to business Worldwide con dential Speakup procedure Compliance programmes and training across the Group Independent Internal Audit function Experienced Internal Legal function 25
Alignment
Deliver growth Generate sustainable pro tability and create shareholder value Maintain strong cash generation and an ef cient capital structure Provide a safe working environment for our people Be at the forefront of innovation Run topquality costef cient and sustainable operations Foster talent skill and motivation in our people See more about Our Strategy on p10 11 Risk and Context Potential Impact Mitigation Business interruption The Group is subject to operational risks including natural catastrophe terrorist action  reexplosion environmental regulation industrial action supply chain issues and cyber risk.
Strategic alignment Loss of a major plant temporarily or permanently impairing our ability to serve our customers Damage to or restriction in ability to use assets Denial of access to critical systems or control processes Disruption of manufacturing processes Inability to source critical raw materials Diversi ed manufacturing footprint Disaster recovery planning Business continuity planning with strategic maintenance of excess capacity Physical and IT control systems security access and training Cyber risks integrated into wider riskmanagement structure Wellestablished global insurance programme Groupwide safety management programmes Dual sourcing strategy and development of substitutes Failure to secure innovation Not maintaining andor developing the necessary sustainable differentiation in products systems and services by driving innovative solutions.
Competitive advantage derived from proprietary intellectual property is lost through inadequate protection.
Strategic alignment Product substitution by customers Increased competitive pressure through lack of differentiation of Vesuvius offering Commoditisation of product portfolio through lack of development Lack of response to changing customer needs Loss of intellectual property protection Enduring and signi cant investment in RandD with market leading research A shared strategy for innovation throughout the Group deployed via our RandD centres Stage gate process from innovation to commercialisation to foster innovation and increase alignment with strategy Programme of Manufacturing and Process Excellence Quality programme focused on quality and consistency Stringent intellectual property registration and defence Attracting talent and performance management Failure to attract suf cient new talent to the Group based on industry perception and competition.
Failure to maintain and develop a talent pipeline and internal succession options for middle and senior management positions.
Strategic alignment Organisational culture of high performance is not achieved Staff turnover in growing economies and regions Stagnation of ideas and development opportunities Loss of expertise and critical business knowledge Reduced management pipeline for succession to senior positions Internal focus on talent development and training with tailored careerstage programmes and clear performance management strategies Contacts with universities to identify and develop talent Career path planning and global opportunities for high potential staff Internal programmes for the structured transfer of technical and other knowledge Clearly elucidated values to underpin business culture Quality health and safety Vesuvius works in highly challenging manufacturing environments providing products systems and services that are mission critical and for which reliability is paramount.
Strategic alignment Injury to staff and contractors Product or application failures lead to adverse  nancial impact or loss of reputation as technology leader Health and safety breach manufacturing downtime or damage to infrastructure from incident at customer plant Customer claims from product quality issues Active safety programmes with ongoing wideranging monitoring and safety training Quality management programmes including stringent quality control standards monitoring and reporting Experienced technical staff knowledgeable in the application of our products and technology Targeted global insurance programme Experienced Internal Legal function controlling thirdparty contracting Our Performance 26 Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7
Financial Review
Signi cant progress has been made in improving the strength of our balance sheet through a focus on working capital and cash generation during a period of revenue growth Guy Young Chief Financial Of cer Basis of Preparation All references in this  nancial review are to headline performance unless stated otherwise.
See Note 4 to the Group Financial Statements on page 138.
Introduction
We have made good progress towards our previously stated aim to enable the business to improve shareholder returns and sustain growth whilst optimising operating costs and maintaining an appropriate level of control and compliance.
The key components of our strategy to achieve this were successfully launched in 2017  including structural and people changes to the Finance team the building of a European shared service centre and improved performance reporting and measurement.
Whilst there remains a lot still to do before all of our improvement plans are implemented the pleasing progress to date is thanks to the dedication and professionalism of our  nance personnel across the Group.
201 7 Performance Overview In contrast to 2016 endmarkets were stronger during 2017 and our revenue bene ted from the improved demand for our products in both Steel and Foundry as a result as well as business gains in many of our key markets principally EMEA and NAFT A.
Reported revenue increased by 282.5m over the prior year and by 186.4m on an underlying basis.
The restructuring programme continued to deliver ahead of plan during 2017 with a total of 16.2m of incremental bene ts reported.
The increased revenue and restructuring bene ts drove the higher reported trading pro t of 165.5m which was 24.2% higher than prior year.
Return on sales for 2017 on a reported basis at 9.8% was higher than the prior year by 30bps despite a number of higher costs in the period.
The higher costs related to price increases on several key raw materials as well as temporary costs associated with importing product into Europe from other facilities in the Group to satisfy the higher demand.
In a year of strong sales growth our cash management performance was strong achieving a 104% cash conversion due largely to better working capital management.
As a result we have decreased our net debt position and improved our leverage ratio of net debt to EBITDA to 1.3x from 1.8x at December 2016.
9 m
Reported Underlying 20.2% 1 2.5% Trading pro t Reported Underlying 24.2% 1 % 1 p Statutory EPS
3 3.2% 8 % Return on sales Reported Underlying 30bps 30bps Underlying basis is at constant currency and excludes separately reported items and the impact of acquisitions and disposals.
For de nitions of alternative performance measures refer to Note 4 of the Group Financial Statements.
Dividend
The Board has recommended a  nal dividend of 12.50 pence per share to be paid on 25 May 2018 to shareholders on the register at 13 April 2018.
When added to the 2017 interim dividend of 5.50 pence per share paid on 22 September 2017  this represents a fullyear dividend of 18.0 pence per share.
It remains the Boards intention to deliver longterm dividend growth provided this is supported by underlying earnings cash ows capital expenditure requirements and the prevailing market outlook.
Key Performance Indicators We have identi ed a number of KPIs against which we have consistently reported since demerger.
Details of the KPIs are provided on pages 20 and 21.
As with prior years we measure our results on an underlying basis where we adjust to ensure appropriate comparability between periods irrespective of currency  uctuations and any business acquisitions and disposals.
This is done by Restating the previous periods results at the same foreign exchange FX rates used in the current period Removing the results of disposed businesses in both the current and prior years Removing the results of businesses acquired in both the current year and prior years Therefore for 2017  we have Retranslated 2016 results at the FX rates used in calculating the 2017 results Removed the results of our mould and tundish  ux business in Brazil Mastercodi which was acquired in 2016 Objective Deliver growth over the long term KPI Underlying revenue growth Reported revenue for 201 6 was 1 401 .4m which after FX translation effects and removing the impact of acquired businesses equates to 1492.0m on an underlying basis.
The reported revenue in 2017 of 1683.9m when adjusted for acquisitions made is 1678.4m on an underlying basis which is an increase of 12.5% yearonyear.
The growth has been as a result of stronger endmarket demand and business gains during the period particularly in EMEA and NAFT A.
KPI RandD spend We believe that our marketleading product technology and services deliver fundamental value to our customers and that the primary mechanism to deliver that value is to invest signi cantly in research and development.
In 2017 we spent 33.2m 2016 28.6m on RandD activities which represents 2.0% of our revenue 2016 2.0%.
Objective Deliver attractive pro tability KPI T rading pro t and return on sales We continue to measure underlying trading pro t of the Group as well as trading pro t as a percentage of sales which we refer to as our return on sales or RoS.
T rading pro t of 165.5m increased by 1% on an underlying basis versus last year whilst RoS on a constant currency basis was 9.8% a 30bps improvement over 2016.
The improved trading pro t is due in part to the higher revenue along with the ongoing delivery of bene ts from the restructuring programme.
The Steel Division recorded RoS of 8.7% this year an increase from 8.4% in 2016 despite the additional costs incurred in importing nonEuropean based product into EMEA as well as the substantial increases in raw material costs experienced in Advanced
Foundry reported a 12.2% RoS another improvement over the prior year 2016 1 1.8% with production ef ciency gains and operating expense reductions offsetting raw material cost increases that started to impact results in the second half.
Revenue
2017 Revenue 2016 Revenue % change m As reported
Disposals Underlying As reported Currency
Disposals Underlying Reported Underlying Steel 1 148.7 5.5 1 143.2 942.0 60.2  1002.2 21.9% 14.1% Foundry 535.2  535.2 459.4 30.4  489.8 16.5% 9.3% Total Group 1683.9 5.5 1678.4 1401.4 90.6  1492.0 20.2% 12.5% Our Performance Underlying revenue growth % 5 % RandD spend m 1 % At constant 2017 currency Return on sales % 9.8% 3.2% At constant 2017 currency Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7 KPI Headline PBT and headline EPS Headline pro t before tax PBT and headline earnings per share EPS are used to measure the underlying nancial performance of the Group.
The main difference between trading pro t and PBT is net  nance costs.
Net  nance costs in 2017 of 13.9m were 0.6m below 2016.
The reduction in  nance costs was largely due to lower net debt levels that triggered a more favourable interest cost on the Companys revolving credit facility.
During the year this facility was successfully extended for a further two years to 2022 and 1 10m of the US Private Placement programme USPP was redeemed and replaced by a Eurodenominated USPP of the same value but on more favourable terms.
Our headline PBT was 152.9m 27 .6% higher than last year on a reported basis.
Including amortisation 19.5m and the restructuring charges 36.3m our PBT of 97 .
1m was 22.3% higher than 2016.
Headline EPS at 40.7 p is 33.9% higher than 2016.
Objective Ensure capital is deployed ef ciently KPI Free cash  ow and working capital Fundamental to ensuring that we have adequate capital to execute our corporate strategy is converting our pro ts into cash partly through strict management of our working capital.
Free cash  ow from continuing operations was 93.
1m for the year which is all the more pleasing against a backdrop of revenue growth that inevitably requires some cash investment in working capital.
Free cash  ow from continuing operations in 2017 was 31.7m higher than last year on a reported basis because of the better working capital performance partially offset by higher cash restructuring costs.
Our cash conversion in 2017 improved to 104% 2016 94%.
We measure working capital both in terms of actual cash  ow movements and as a percentage of sales revenue.
T rade working capital as a percentage of sales in 2017 was 24.9% 2016 26.6% measured on a 12month moving average basis.
In absolute terms on a constant currency basis trade working capital increased by 12.2m well below the increase in sales and with an improved inventory and creditor position leading to an improvement as a percentage of sales.
KPI Return on net assets RONA RONA is our principal measure of capital ef ciency.
We do not exclude the results of businesses acquired and disposed from this calculation as capital ef ciency is an important consideration in our portfolio decisions.
It is calculated by dividing trading pro t plus our share of pro ts from joint ventures by our average operating assets property plant and equipment and trade working capital.
As with most of our KPIs we measure this on a 12month moving average basis at constant currency to ensure that we focus on sustainable underlying improvements.
Our RONA for 2017 was 24.2% 2016 21.
1%.
Financial Review continued
Trading pro t 2017 T rading pro t 2016 T rading pro t% change m As reported
Disposals Underlying As reported Currency
Disposals Underlying Reported Underlying 1  84.3 26.8% 18.9% Foundry 65.
1 54.1 4.0  58.1 20.3% 1 2.0% Total Group 165.5 0.2 165.3 133.3 9 .
1  1 42.4 2 4.2% 1 6.
1 % Operating pro t m 1 % Headline earnings per share pence 9% Statutory earnings per share pence 1 p 33.2% Objective Maintain a strong nancial position KPI Interest cover and net debt As at 31 December 2017  the Group had committed borrowing facilities of 563.4m 2016 576.9m of which 153.7m was undrawn 2016 158.3m.
The revolving credit facility term was extended to 2022 and 1 10m of the USPP was redeemed and replaced with a Eurodenominated USPP at better rates.
Net debt at 31 December 2017 was 274.3m a 46.0m decrease from 2016 as a result of our good cash generation.
The main drivers of the decrease were the impact of strong cash conversion partially offset by higher restructuring costs and tax payments.
The Groups debt facilities have two nancial covenants the ratios of net debt to EBITDA maximum three times limit and EBITDA to interest minimum four times limit.
These ratios are monitored regularly to ensure that the Group has suf cient  nancing available to run the business and fund future growth.
At the end of 2017  the net debt to EBITDA ratio was 1.3x an improvement over last year 2016 1.8x and EBITDA to interest was 15.8x 2016 13.4x.
Further information on our  nance costs can be found in Note 9 to the Group Financial Statements on page 143.
Financial Risk Factors The Group undertakes regular risk reviews and as a minimum a full risk assessment process twice a year.
As in previous years this included input from the Board in both the assessment of risk and the proposed mitigation.
As referred to in the Principal Risks and Uncertainties and Viability Statement on pages 2324 and 25 we consider the main  nancial risks faced by the Group as being demand volatility and the impact of nancial uncertainty leading to reduced revenue and pro t as well as potential customer default and a lack of liquidity brought on by market volatility.
Important but lesser risk exists in interest rate movements and cost in ation but neither is expected to have a material impact on the business after considering the controls we have in place.
Our key mitigation of demand volatility is to manage the Groups exposure through balancing our portfolio of business geographically and by end market and to invest in product innovation.
We do so through targeted capital investment in new and growing businesses and a combination of capital and human resource in emerging markets.
The second main  nancial risk of a lack of liquidity is mitigated by nancing using both the bank and private placement markets.
The Group also seeks to avoid a concentration of debt maturities in any one period to spread its re nancing risk.
The Groups undrawn committed bank facilities at 31 December 2017 were 153.7m.
Counterparty risk and customer default are mitigated by our relatively widespread customer base  with no customer being greater than 10% of revenue  and credit control procedures.
Operating cash  ow and cash conversion 3m Cash generated from continuing operations 17 6.6 130.2 Add Out ows relating to restructuring charges 27 .3 16.8 Add Net retirement bene t obligations 4.8 7.
Less Capital expenditure 39.0 31.3 Add Proceeds from the sale of property plant and equipment 1.8 1.6 Operating cash  ow 171.5 125.0 T rading pro t 165.5 133.3 Cash conversion 104% 94% Our Performance For de nitions of alternative performance measures refer to Note 4 of the Group Financial Statements RONA moving average % 24 .2% Net debt m Unutilised committed debt facilities m 7 m Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7 Other Relevant Financial
Restructuring
We continued to make good progress in implementing our previously announced restructuring programme mainly in Flow Control with 16.2m savings delivered in 2017  which was ahead of expectations.
The total savings delivered since launching the programme are now In 2017  we reported 36.3m of restructuring costs 2016 28.5m that were predominantly made up of redundancy and plant closure costs along with related consulting fees.
These costs included the  nal costs related to the previously announced restructuring plan as well as 4.8m of costs related to a completely new restructuring plan launched at the end of 2017  targeting the Foundry Division in Europe and NAFT A the Advanced Refractories Business Unit in Europe and Group corporate functions.
The cash costs in 2017 were 27 .3m 2016 16.8m.
We are carrying a restructuring provision forward into 2018 of 22.9m.
Taxation
A key measure of tax performance is the effective tax rate which the Group calculates on the income tax associated with headline performance divided by the headline pro t before tax and before the Groups share of posttax pro t of joint ventures 2017 151.6m 2016 The Groups effective tax rate based on the income tax costs associated with headline performance of 36.4m 2016 31.4m was 24.0% in 2017 2016 26.4%.
This was lower than expected due largely to better pro t performance in countries where we had tax losses the impact of the weakening of the peso on our Mexican tax position and the release of provisions due to favourable tax litigation outcomes.
The Groups effective tax rate is sensitive to changes in the geographic mix of pro ts and level of pro ts and re ects a combination of higher rates in certain jurisdictions such as India Mexico Germany and Belgium nil effective rates in the UK and US due to the availability of unutilised tax losses and rates that lie somewhere in between.
Other key factors impacting the sustainability of the Groups effective tax rate are set out in Note 10.6 to the Group Financial Statements.
The income tax charge on separately reported items of 18.0m 2016 5.0m credit comprises 6.0m noncash deferred tax movements relating to the amortisation of a deferred tax liability arising from the 2008 acquisition of Foseco plc 2016 3.7m 4.3m tax credits relating to restructuring charges 2016 3.8m and a net reduction in the deferred tax asset previously recognised in respect of US tax losses and certain other temporary differences of 28.3m 2016 2.
1m largely caused by US tax reform enacted in late December 2017 in the form of the US T ax Cuts and Jobs Act
A combination of the reduction in the US Federal tax rate from 35% to 21% the repatriation tolling charge and other provisions of TCJA caused a 25.7m reduction in our US deferred tax asset which together with other normal movements and foreign exchange revaluation reduced from 65.9m at the end of 2016 to 32.6m at the end of 2017 .
However this writedown did not impact our Headline earnings after tax as the change in the asset was re ected through separately reported items.
Based on our initial interpretation the Base Erosion and AntiAbuse T ax provisions introduced by the Act may increase the Groups effective tax rate by approximately 0.7% in 2018 and 1.2% in 2019.
We expect the Groups effective tax rate from 2018 onwards to be between 27% and 28% including the expected adverse impact of US tax reform re ecting the tax bene t of initiatives being taken.
The net income tax charge recognised directly in the Group Statement of Comprehensive Income of 3.
1m 2016 0.7m comprises a 2.4m charge 2016 0.7m charge in respect of deferred tax on pension obligations and 0.7m 2016 nil UK tax in respect of foreign exchange differences arising on hedged positions.
Financial Review continued 31 Capital Expenditure Capital expenditure in 2017 of 44.3m 2016 35.2m comprised 34.0m in the Steel Division 2016 23.7m and 10.3m in the Foundry Division 2016 1 1.5m.
Capital expenditure on revenuegenerating customer installation assets primarily in Steel has been increased to 10.7m 2016 6.5m.
Pensions
The Group has a limited number of historical de ned bene t plans mainly in the UK US Germany and Belgium.
The main plans in the UK and US are largely closed to further bene t accruals and 56.5% of the liabilities in the UK have already been insured.
The total net de cit attributed to these de ned bene t obligations at the end of December 2017 was 16.5m 2016 29.4m representing an improvement of 12.9m.
The key movements giving rise to this were increases of 1.8m to the de cit arising out of changes to actuarial assumptions attributable to increasing discount rates updated mortality assumptions and pension membership data and additional accrual and administrative expenditure paid for the year 6.8m offset by reductions to the de cit of 10.2m from asset returns and cash contributions of 1 1.6m.
The majority of the ongoing pension plans are de ned contribution plans where our only obligation is to make contributions with no further commitments on the level of post retirement bene ts.
During 2017  cash contributions of 12.6m 2016 10.8m were made into the de ned contribution plans and charged to trading pro t.
Corporate Activity Late in 2017  we made a strategic investment in Sapotech Oy a Finnish technology company with which we will be jointly developing predictive analytical service offerings to Steel customers.
Acquisition opportunities remain part of our growth strategy and are evaluated on an ongoing basis.
Guy Y oung Chief Financial Of cer 28 February 2018 Our Performance Net de ned bene t pension de cit m 43.9% Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7
W e engage the creativity of our people across the entire organisation to drive innovation Alan Charnock Vice President and Chief Technology Of cer Vesuvius RandD organisation has been a major factor in maintaining our technology leadership position.
We are now three years into our initiative to engage the creativity of people across the whole organisation and to drive innovation across the entire Group.
Like all our other major Group initiatives safety quality and excellence embedding a culture of innovation requires focus on leadership structure process tools training and incentivisation.
The structures are in place with the necessary process and tools which are constantly being streamlined and improved.
Digital T ransformation Digital T ransformation is a key theme for companies targeting signi cant growth strategic regeneration or market disruption with breakthrough technologies.
For Vesuvius this has been manifested by our Digital Services business unit.
This also engages each of the Groups other business units in adopting a business model complementary to and independent of their existing consumables business.
Vesuvius is extremely well positioned to harness the digital transformation trend by creating this new market offering built on the reputation of over 100 years as a leader of innovation giving technical support to the Steel and Foundry industries.
Our customers already recognise our expertise in developing engineering solutions using our understanding of our own technology platforms and our customers processes.
This is borne out of our longterm daily presence at customer plants working in partnership with them to improve the performance of our products and providing the continuous process improvement that our customers demand to maintain their own competitiveness.
Ideation
Understanding our customers processes and the application of our products knowing what to look for and then understanding what we see are the rst essential ingredients of the creative process of ideation.
Ideation links experience and knowledge with the situation in front of you generating new ways to make improvements.
Occasionally this can lead to breakthrough ideas giving a step change in performance or a disruptive new technology platform.
It is this presence at and interaction with the customer that is at the heart of the Vesuvius business model.
It is also illustrated in our T echnical Services strategy developing sensors software tools and techniques to Spend on RandD 2016 28.6m 2.0% % of Revenue 2016 2.0% 5 % % of new product sales 2016 14.2% Sales of products launched within the last 5 years as a % of total revenue 33 Our Performance Katarzyna Szafraniec Quality Engineer  Poland As a Quality Engineer I continue to draw on my RandD experience.
Having studied Chemical T echnology at university I joined Vesuvius in 201 1 beginning as a RandD Assistant at the Vesuvius site in Skawina Poland working on refractory material.
In this role I collaborated with engineers across numerous projects conducting physical and chemical analysis.
Using Xray diffraction Thermogravimetric Analysers and Scanning Electron Microscopy I was able to gain a thorough understanding of Vesuvius products and their structure.
T wo years later I was promoted to the position of RandD Engineer at Skawina where part of my role was to conduct onsite product analysis for customers solving production issues for them.
I was also responsible for the development of new products such as the industrialisation of our spinelforming self ow castable.
During this time I also participated in Vesuvius inhouse technical Hea T t training.
In 2016 I was selected to join Skawinas new Casting and Precast Department as a Quality Engineer where I continue to draw on my RandD experience to monitor and further improve production processes.
My career at Vesuvius has enabled me to develop my technical expertise as well as understand production processes develop training programmes and manage a team of motivated colleagues. motivated colleagues.
Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7 Innovation continued constantly monitor customer processes and our products in use interpreting the data obtained reacting with process adjustments in real time and allowing for new process and product developments.
This model can create new services add value to our existing product offering and accelerate our traditional ideation process.
Innovation is the creative process of converting ideas into valuecreating technologies or creating value by doing things differently.
But to be effective we need to identify and prioritise the right ideas and have the courage to put the other ones aside.
Our new product introduction NPI process has been in place for three years enabling us to identify and focus on the ideas and projects which are most aligned with our strategic plans injecting greater rigour into decisionmaking with a stage gate approach.
T oday we have no shortage of ideas but actively work on a much smaller number of prioritised projects than we worked on four years ago.
We operate a continuous portfolio review process to ensure that the RandD technology roadmaps emphasise both current needs and the essential longerterm programmes.
In 2017  we launched an Ideation Platform where new ideas are reviewed and re ned with viable and valuable ideas funnelled into the NPI pipeline.
The Ideation Platform is presently targeted only at new products and manufacturing processes but our intention is to broaden its scope to include ideas on all topics for all functions each with their own review process.
RandD Performance During 2017  our new product sales growth rate for products launched within the last 5 years slowed slightly after an initial two years of very healthy growth.
By the end of 2017  we reached c.
15% from our starting position of 8% in 2014.
We launched a total of 26 new products in 2017  with more than 30 new products planned for 2018 launch.
The RandD resource allocation to technology projects has steadily increased in all business units.
The maturity of our NPI process means we can now monitor additional KPIs to provide a deeper level of analysis on our innovation performance so we can continue to improve and ensure that we achieve the targets we set ourselves.
In 2018 we will introduce new input and output indicators for innovation to monitor our pipeline of breakthrough projects how ef ciently we move projects through the NPI process and how effective we are at achieving our forecasted project targets.
We spend 2.0% of revenue on RandD a signi cantly larger proportion of sales than most of our competition and expect to deliver signi cant bene ts from this investment.
New Product Development Enabling T echnologies our fundamental research group continues to pursue a range of new technology platforms.
The team monitors technology trends across a broad range of industries both inside and outside our own markets.
The team looks for previously unimagined or unconventional ways to use materials and processes  ltering these concepts through our frontend innovation process and incubating them until they become new technology platforms.
These can then be used by RandD departments across our business to foster new product or process development projects.
Our NPI projects usually start from an identi ed customer need but this frontend innovation process starts with no speci c product or market in mind meaning that the new technology platforms may have applications across multiple business units and be integrated into many different products multiplying the value of the technology.
T echnology platforms that come from these unorthodox beginnings are more likely to lead to breakthrough and disruptive innovations.
We have several such new technology platforms that are ready to move into the NPI process and therefore look forward to exciting prospects for these in the years ahead.
Another important group in Vesuvius drive for innovation is the Solutions
This groups activities have become a differentiator for Vesuvius in our Steel market and an essential driver for the development of our T echnical Services strategy.
The team translates what we see in customer processes either directly or through data analysis into new solutions ranging from new designs for existing products to new products and process control functionalities.
More fundamentally it looks at the entire customer process and all the products in use rather than just a single element enabling the root cause of a problem to be identi ed rather than tackling individual symptoms.
The Solutions Group combining its process application modelling and metallurgical expertise is in high demand from both the Vesuvius regional organisations and our customers because of the positive results it has demonstrated in solving complex problems.
IP portfolio The protection of our IP is as important as its generation.
In 2017  we tested and are now ready to roll out an enhanced audit process to measure the security of our IP across the Group starting with RandD and manufacturing locations in 2018.
Our IP portfolio was reviewed in 2015 and 2016 and we continued with a stable level of lings in 2017 to maintain our portfolio at 156 families 1569 granted patents and 518 applications pending.
Training
During 2017  we extended our training efforts to the broader Vesuvius community.
T o date our project management training programme has included over 300 people giving each an understanding of the full innovation process  covering not only their role in the process but also providing them with the skills to function more effectively in the crossfunctional teams required to deliver new product introduction.
The training provided interactions with their future collaborators identifying the good practices and operating skills necessary to drive our NPI projects to greater successes.
T raining will continue with a new programme called Quality in the NPI process speci cally focusing on Project de nition to ensure that projects going into the NPI process all have clear success criteria converting the customer needvoice of the customer into SMART objectives Design Failure Mode and Effect Analysis FMEA and design of experiments to accelerate the RandD stage of the NPI process reducing the risk that the solutions developed and tested in the laboratory do not perform as expected in the  eld causing recycled developments and project delays Process FMEA to ensure that our industrialisation process is effective and the product we ultimately manufacture consistently achieves the desired performance objectives as detailed in the project de nition Joining Up Innovation Vesuvius consists of two divisions and four business units.
Whilst this creates an opportunity to crossfertilise products services processes and technologies the divisional structure does not naturally facilitate the sharing of knowledge.
In 2017  we launched a T echnology Bridge Initiative taking experts from the RandD department of each division our fundamental research group and our central process development group.
The bridges are structured around various technology themes related to materials processes and the new technology platforms with the goal of Promoting  new ideas and applications for technology Measuring  the evolution of technologies that are key to our industries Building  Technology Maps that will include internal and external information Constructing  a knowledge network We launched the initiative with ten areas of focus and will gradually add new themes over time.
All generated data is collated and stored in our RandD collaboration platform  T echConnect making the sharing of information as simple as possible and avoiding duplication.
The learning generated by these community practice groups will be converted into tutorial presentations to allow for dissemination throughout the technical community of Vesuvius.
The community of practice groups became the go to experts for these speci c topics ensuring that the resources with the most knowledge and experience in any  eld are referenced making for more ef cient progress of our projects.
Excellence
Our innovation activities are supported by the Group Excellence programme which allows for selfassessment against designated benchmarks.
Within the RandD community progress has already been made on the various Excellence roadmaps not only in Innovation but also with respect to other initiatives such as standardising the career ladder for RandD staff developing standard job descriptions across all divisions enhancing performance assessment and supporting the career and personal development of our staff.
Making steady progress along all the roads of the Excellence road map will ensure that the Innovation pillar of the Vesuvius strategy will continue to strengthen maintaining a solid foundation on which we continue to build for the future.
Alan Charnock Vice President and Chief T echnology Of cer
Understanding our customers processes and the application of our products knowing what to look for and then understanding what we see are the rst essential ingredients of the creative process of ideation.
Global Research and Development centres Barlborough UK Bettsville USA Enschede Netherlands Feignies France Ghlin Belgium Pittsburgh USA Suzhou China Visakhapatnam India Our Performance 36 Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7
Operating Review
Steel Flow Control Vesuvius Flow Control business unit supplies the global steel industry with consumable ceramic products used to contain and control the  ow of molten steel in the continuous casting process.
This process enables steel manufactured in a blast furnace or electric arc furnace to be cast without interruption whilst protecting it from the atmosphere.
Avoiding atmospheric contact is crucial as it signi cantly reduces contamination and oxidation levels in the steel.
The products Vesuvius supplies into the continuous casting process have a short service life often a matter of a few hours due to the signi cant wear caused by the extremely demanding environment in which they are used.
These products must withstand extreme temperature changes whilst resisting liquid steel and slag corrosion.
In addition the ceramic parts in contact with the liquid steel must not in any way contaminate it.
The quality reliability and consistency of the products and process control equipment are therefore critical to the quality of the  nished metal being produced and the productivity pro tability and safety of our customers processes.
Steel Flow Control products supplied by Vesuvius include Viso isostatically pressed alumina graphite and VAPEX extruded clay graphite products These include ladle shrouds stopper rods submerged entry nozzles and shrouds which channel and control the  ow of molten steel from ladle to tundish and from tundish to mould Slidegate refractories These include nozzles plates and speciality shapes used in furnace ladle and tundish slide gate systems T emperature measurement and RADAR These provide optical temperature measurement and slag detection Gaskets These create an airtight seal between refractory components to minimise the risk of air ingress and steel oxidisation Fluxes These are powders spread on the surface of the molten steel which provide thermal and chemical insulation and remove inclusions In 201 7  Steel Flow Control sales growth continued to outperform growth in the global steel market Roel van der Sluis President Steel Flow Control
Flow Control revenue m 9m Steel Flow Control supplies the stoppers and tubes used to channel and control the  ow of molten steel from ladle to tundish and from tundish to mould slide gate refractories for ladles and tundishes slide gate systems tundish and mould  uxes and control devices to monitor and regulate steel  ow into the mould.
These products have been designed to resist extreme thermomechanical stress and corrosive environments.
The majority of these products are consumed during the process of making steel and consequently demand is primarily linked to steel production volumes.
Continuing innovation allows us to offer enriched solutions that create additional value in our customers processes.
Purging systems These are used to stir steel in the ladle Control devices These are used to monitor and regulate steel  ow into the mould 201 7 Performance Steel Flow Control sales growth has continued to outperform growth in the global steel market.
In 2017  we reported revenues of 605.9m an increase of 1 1.8% on an underlying basis compared with 2016.
All regions outperformed underlying steel volume growth and EMEA was our fastest growing region.
Steel production in EMEA increased 4.9% in 2017  and Vesuvius outperformed the market with underlying revenue up 17 .5% to 240.
1m re ecting market share gains.
During 2017  we experienced very strong growth of our Flow Control sales in EMEA which temporarily exceeded the capacity of our manufacturing plants in the region requiring the import of products from our facilities in Asia and NAFT A incurring additional freight export duty and overtime costs.
Measures were immediately taken to increase the capacity of the Flow Control EMEA plants and this rampup is now complete substituting imports from nonEMEA plants.
In the Americas Steel Flow Controls underlying revenues increased 8.8% to 201.7m in 2017  against a 5.9% increase in steel production volumes.
Our outperformance relative to steel production was due to market share gains in North America.
In the US in particular our market share is continuing to recover from the low point of the second half of 2015 when we were impacted by customer closures and volume losses due to market pricing pressure.
Our Performance Our teams worked together to provide a solution for the customer utilising the  rst worldwide application of new patented sealing technology Andrew Morrison and Linna Sun heads of NAFT A and Asia VISO Development teams The Challenge A large integrated steel producer in NAFTA resolved to convert most of their production to Vesuvius Flex Cold Start T undish Shroud  which channels the  ow of steel into the nal mould for solidi cation.
The coldstart technology eliminates the need for preheat increasing the safety of the tube changing process and reducing energy consumption.
However as cold start tubes require additional time to expand after production starts to form an airtight seal at the joint of the tundish and the tube to prevent air contamination a preheat would still have been required for some speci c automotive steel grades to improve sealing times.
Our Solution Dale Bower leading the local NAFTA sales team challenged the VISO Global Development team to provide a solution.
Andrew Morrison and Linna Sun the heads of the NAFTA and Asia VISO Development teams respectively collaborated in the development of an innovation born in our RandD centre in Suzhou China the combination of an intumescent coating and an integral groove sealant which provides a quicker gas tight seal by expanding many multiples of its original thickness on commencement and for the duration of service.
The Bene ts This combination of the coating and groove sealant allows the customer to reliably use the cold start piece for higher steel grades.
The new patented technology creates a tight seal within one minute of service commencement resulting in immediate reduction in steel reoxidation reduced steel nishing and overall improved steel quality.
Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7 Underlying revenue increased by 7 .8% in AsiaPaci c in 2017 to 164.
1m compared to a 5.7% increase in steel production volume in the region.
Revenues increased faster than the steel market in the key regional markets of China India and South Korea.
The bene ts of the restructuring programme implemented during 2016 and 2017 started to deliver a positive impact on the  nancial performance of the business unit.
Strategic Highlights from the Y ear Following the success of the manufacturing rationalisation programme in EMEA a similar initiative was launched for the NAFT A region where through a combination of improving ef ciency and adapting production volumes between plants improvements in cost base have been made.
We will continue to pursue this effort in 2018 in order to deliver further bene ts.
We are now translating this methodology to new territories through which we expect to drive further cost improvements.
The additional projects identi ed include a focus on industrial ef ciencies in Brazil and India.
In addition to these wider initiatives we targeted process improvements aimed at increasing the output in speci c areas such as in our mix plant in China.
Optimisation work performed here has allowed us to simplify our supply chain make it more costef cient and create capacity to absorb growth.
Over the last few years Vesuvius has invested in developing robotics solutions which improve the safety and consistency of our customers operations while supporting our sales.
Our unique value proposition is the result of the integration of speci c refractory system and robotic design  three core competencies inside
Several steel makers have been pioneers in adopting this technology delivering process ef ciency and removing personnel from the harsh environment around the caster.
In 2017 we saw an increase in demand for robotics solutions and received orders to convert steel plants in South Korea South America and Europe.
This positions Vesuvius well to support our customers in facing the future challenges of automation and a greater focus on quality.
In 2017  we also further developed our capabilities in data capture and continuous temperature measurement.
Our investment in and exclusive distribution agreement with Sapotech Oy a Finnish technology company offering optical defect detection services and realtime data on steel surface quality now places us well to address the requirements for data management at our customers.
From the start of 2018 this business is being managed within the Steel Flow Control business unit.
Our RandD efforts also delivered new products to support the growth in the ladle slidegate business with the introduction of our next generation slidegate mechanism which is robot ready and uses optimised refractory plates creating value for our customers in terms of ergonomics safety and reliability while reducing their operating cost.
In addition we launched our new Flex Cold Start T undish Shroud which allows customers to operate their casters with more  exibility in terms of sequence length and daily operation as well as reducing their waste and cost.
As shown in the case study on page 37  we have also developed complementary technology to allow for the use of this product in higher grade steel production.
We continued to develop our service offering helping our customers to understand better their mould  ow pattern.
This is a key element in the casting process as it is the last step between liquid and solid steel.
This audit service is carried out by our process experts using speci cally designed tools and software to measure  ow pattern through monitoring temperature mould level and meniscus velocity.
We can then compare this with the data generated from our Computational Fluid Dynamic simulation capabilities.
Comparing the data allows us to recommend improved solutions to our customers.
More details on the work of our Solutions Group are contained in the Innovation Section on pages 32 to 35.
Looking Ahead It is our expectation that despite the relatively high growth achieved in 2017 and a broadly positive outlook for 2018 steel production in the mature economies of Europe and North America will not exhibit material growth in the medium long term given that the nature of economic growth requires less steel than in the past.
This is a key driver behind the efforts to adapt our manufacturing footprint and overhead structure in the mature markets.
Operating Review continued
Steel Flow Control An SEM 3085 tube changer for the robotic tube changing process The glowing VISO subentry nozzle channels molten steel into the mould China is the worlds largest producer of steel accounting for approximately 50% of global production.
The adjustment of the Chinese steel industry from producing long steel for infrastructure to producing at steel typically used for consumer products and automotives is highly bene cial for Vesuvius.
Flat steel typically uses three times as much Vesuvius products by value and as a result we believe the accessible market for Vesuvius Flow Control business in China could grow signi cantly in the long term.
Furthermore Chinas Government is focused on a comprehensive upgrade of Chinese manufacturing making it innovationdriven emphasising quality over quantity and achieving green development though Made in China 2025.
This trend towards higher quality industrial manufacturing is bene cial to Vesuvius steel division.
Our current strong position in this market will help us to bene t from these trends.
India is another key growth market and one where we enjoy high penetration rates.
It was one of the fastest growing steel markets in 2017 and closely tied to the Governments economic development plans is the target to increase steel capacity to 300 million tonnes per annum by 2030 versus a production level in 2017 of c.
101 million tonnes.
As a result Vesuvius also considers that this market presents an opportunity for Vesuvius to grow sales by a factor of approximately three times in the long term.
We also remain optimistic about the outlook for future steel production growth in countries such as Brazil Mexico T urkey the Middle East Russia and Vietnam.
Roel van der Sluis President Steel Flow Control Our Performance Ef cient technology transfer improves customer production reliability and reduces cost Joe Gu Production Manager of Slide Gate Refractories and Purge Plugs North Asia The Challenge The Castrip process is a recent technology developed to directly cast steel in a thin strip.
This enables the production of steel coils with less energy consumption and a reduced production cost compared with the conventional process which requires hot rolling after casting to reduce slab thickness.
For this technology Vesuvius has developed speci c technology for core refractory materials and designs as well as associated knowhow on operational best practices from our experience at sites running this technology in NAFTA.
Recently
Castrip machines were installed at a Chinese steel producer who required local refractory sourcing.
Our Solution A T ransfer of Technology team was formed inside Vesuvius before the rst Castrip machine commenced production in China.
Joe Gu was appointed as the Chinese team leader for this project which drew experts from the product lines of Advanced Refractories VISO and Systems the design and manufacturing teams and the local sales team.
He and his team identi ed a solid benchmark based on Vesuvius experience in NAFTA visiting Vesuvius RandD sites and manufacturing plants and also steel producers using the technology.
Once suf cient information had been gathered the Chinese teams were trained on how to support the new Chinese customers covering refractory design and manufacturing and onsite operational support.
The Bene ts With local production and support capabilities we secured an important contract offering the  rst Chinese user of the Castrip process the shortest delivery time at the best price while maintaining the original product quality developed in NAFTA.
The
Chinese and NAFTA teams continue to share the expertise gained on this process to allow for a continuous improvement of the refractory parts.
TA
Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7
Operating Review
Advanced Refractories Advanced Refractories revenue m 1 m Advanced Refractories produces specialised refractory materials for lining steelmaking vessels such as blast furnaces ladles and tundishes which are subject to extreme temperatures corrosion and abrasion.
These materials are in the form of powder mixes which are sprayapplied or cast onto the vessel to be lined monolithics and refractory shapes e. and dams.
Vesuvius is one of the worlds largest manufacturers of monolithic refractory linings.
Advanced Refractories delivers installation technologies products adapted to  t customers speci c processes and plants and effective and ef cient logistics services.
These factors are combined with signi cant RandD a deep knowledge of customers processes and project management capability to deliver marketleading solutions for our customers.
Customers of Advanced Refractories are principally steel producers and manufacturers of steel production equipment.
Our products accompany the steelmaking process from the early steps of the process all the way downstream to the  nishing end in the rolling mill.
This array of heatintensive production processes and physical transformation of the iron ore into semi nished products accounts for two thirds of the revenue of the business unit.
In addition Vesuvius Advanced Refractories business services other hightemperature industries such as primary aluminium copper cement petrochemicals and energy from waste.
These refractory lining materials are supplied in the form of powder mixes which are sprayapplied or cast onto the vessels to be lined monolithics or in precast shapes and bricks.
An integral part of our success depends upon the level of collaboration with our customers.
Our experts presence at our customers facilities allows us a fundamental understanding of their needs.
The level of trust our business model creates makes it more resilient to market cycles enabling us to generate growth by adding new products and services throughout the business cycle.
The service life of the products Advanced Refractories supplies into the steel making process can vary some a matter of hours and others for a period of years based upon the type of refractory and the level of wear caused by the demanding environment in which they are used.
Advanced Refractories key products are Blast furnace casthouse applications These are special refractories used to line the blast furnace and a network of runners to transfer molten iron from torpedo ladles to the melt shop for further processing into steel Blast furnace tap hole clay This is a refractory mass used to plug the tapping hole in a blast furnace.
When molten iron is ready to be extracted from the blast furnace a drilling machine perforates a hole through the solidi ed clay to start the tapping process Steel ladle applications These are refractories typically bricks used to line a steel vessel which contains the molten metal and transports it from the furnace to a casting machine Our outperformance of steel production volume growth was supported by increased customer interest in our valuecreating solutions T anmay Ganguly President Advanced Refractories 41 Our Performance V esuvius has supported and rewarded my professional development Andy T oner  Director of Marketing and T echnology for Iron and Steel  NAFT A My career at Vesuvius began in 2008 when I joined as a Service T echnician responsible for the preparation of tundishes at Gerdaus steel manufacturing plant at Midlothian T exas in the United States.
As a result of my work there I was offered the opportunity to become the Application Specialist for Brick Products based at our site at Pittsburgh United States but also working in steel manufacturing plants across America.
I then moved on to work as an Application Specialist for Ladles with a focus on ladle bottoms working with customers in their steel mills to ensure that they were deriving the maximum bene t from our products.
T wo years after that I was promoted to Product Manager for the Ladle Program and in 2014 I moved to become the Marketing Manager for our Advanced Refractory business not only for ladles but also for the basic oxygen furnaces and electric arc furnaces operated by our steel manufacturing customers.
In 2016 I became Regional Manager for the East Region USA in Steel Applications and  nally in 2017  I was named Director of Marketing and T echnology for Iron and Steel NAFT A.
In this role I am responsible for the expansion of our product portfolio and the technical product development to support this growth across the entire NAFT A region.
At Vesuvius I have been supported  challenged and rewarded in the development of my professional and technical expertise.
I have been given the opportunity to work in different areas of the business thereby broadening my experience and my career opportunities.
Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7
Operating Review continued
Advanced Refractories Integrated material supply  robotic installation equipment and laser scanning for Electric Arc Furnace maintenance The Challenge Vesuvius has a historically well established business in Electric Arc Furnace maintenance using entirely manual application techniques.
An ongoing dialogue with the customer identi ed some key improvement opportunities.
These improvements were centred around three main drivers 1  the application of the material 2 the accurate assessment of the condition of the active lining in service and 3 safety for the operation and application teams.
Our Solution Working with established partner companies and crossfunctional expertise the Vesuvius team developed an optimised design for a Robotic Application unit for the customers furnaces.
These units were speci cally constructed to suit the individual plant con guration.
Using the latest laser scanner devices from our subsidiary Process Metrix to identify the areas of the furnace lining that required repair we achieved accurate targeted and safe material placement.
The Bene ts The ability to safely repair refractory lining in a hot and dif cult environment was a key demand.
The robot arm and laser scanner signi cantly improve the safe working conditions for the plant operations.
The integration of the robot and laser equipment also enables more accurate gunning of refractory material in the areas where it is most required.
This delivers better performance and improved material consumption rates for the customer.
Steel tundish monolithics These are powdermix refractories used to line the tundish which receives molten steel from the ladle then acts as a reservoir to control the  ow of the liquid metal and feed the continuous casting machine at the required rate Aluminium applications These products are used for secondary aluminium production and are mostly used in furnace lining Cement applications Monolithic technology used in the preheater stage before materials are transferred into the rotary kiln during the continuous calcination process for cement making 201 7 Performance Advanced Refractories reported revenues of 499.
1m in 2017  an increase of 25.2% compared to 2016.
On an underlying basis the yearonyear increase was 1 7 .4%.
This outperformance relative to steel volume growth was supported by increased customer interest in our valuecreating solutions and the successful launch of new products such as our Supergard T undish refractory line which is a patented tundish lining product for improving steel quality.
We also bene ted from customers seeking to diversify their supplier base in response to recent consolidation.
We achieved attractive underlying revenue growth in each of our key regions in 2017  with the Americas up 8.6% EMEA up 28.4% and AsiaPaci c up 9.4%.
The particularly high growth level in EMEA was due to signi cant progress regaining market share in Europe despite competitive market conditions.
Some of the key raw materials used by Advanced Refractories experienced signi cant price increases in 2017 particularly during the second half of the year.
The speed of these increases was such that there was a time lag in recovering the increased costs through the sales price of our  nished products Our Performance as we were bound by contractual obligations with some customers.
We have made major progress in recovering this cost in ation through higher selling prices.
This process of price adjustment will continue into 2018 until realised cost increases have been fully recovered.
This con rms our ability to recover raw material cost in ation through price rises over time.
Strategic Highlights from the Y ear The addition of new customers in Europe in the melting and re ning segment was a signi cant contributor to our growth in 2017 .
This was also boosted by a positive volume growth in the steel industry in Europe.
An increased focus on valueadded solutions in niche segments like steel nishing also allowed us to achieve good momentum during the period.
We continuously review and seek to improve our manufacturing ef ciency with targeted capital investment delivering signi cant bene ts in process ow inventory management and labour and energy ef ciency.
In Brazil we rationalised our manufacturing footprint and maximised capacity utilisation by relocating our Brazilian manufacturing facilities to Rio de Janeiro from Sao Paulo in 2017 .
We also commenced a cost ef ciency study in Europe to review our manufacturing footprint as part of our wider focus on cost ef ciency.
We are initiating a similar exercise in 2018 at our facilities in the NAFT A region.
Our business model is underpinned by our focus on valuecreating solutions and maintaining technological leadership from investment in RandD.
We improved our RandD footprint in 2017 with the inauguration of our newest RandD facility in Visakhapatnam India.
The addition of this stateofthe art facility will allow us to complement our existing technical capabilities and tackle speci c problems in the local market.
Our investment in this new facility is proof of our commitment to staying at the forefront of new technology.
Our existing RandD centres are well positioned to support our existing markets whilst this new facility is the next building block to support our future growth in developing markets.
Looking Ahead As 70% of Advanced Refractories revenue comes from the steel making industry steel production is a key driver for the business.
In mature economies it is our expectation that these regions will not exhibit material growth in the medium long term given that the nature of economic growth requires less steel than in the past.
However as growth in emerging markets moves forward and our business in mature markets continues to evolve we are constantly developing our resource base to align with activity levels.
In the developed markets of Europe and North America we are experiencing a greater demand for higher quality refractories.
In response to recent consolidation we are also seeing increased interest in certain segments such as bricks as customers in these regions seek to diversify their supplier base as well as market evolution towards other technologies like monolithic refractories.
We expect this to continue going forward.
Improving the pro tability of Advanced Refractories is a key area of focus.
Market share whilst important is not the main driver of our strategy as there is signi cant fragmentation both on a global and regional basis in our area of the refractory supply business.
Achieving consolidation at the expense of margins will not meet our goals for value creation.
In the developing markets of India China and Brazil our focus is to capture or exceed the growth rate of the industry.
Our longstanding presence and local manufacturing capabilities position us well to take advantage of future growth opportunities in India.
Solidifying our presence with the installation of our newest RandD facility in India is a strong step forward.
As the country continues demanding more technology with the evolution of the market we are well positioned to maintain our leadership position in the segments we currently operate in whilst at the same time look at new avenues for growth.
Tanmay Ganguly President Advanced Refractories Precast Monolithic Steel Ladle Bottom Manufactured in Chicago Heights USA Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7
Operating Review
Digital Services Digital Services revenue m 7 m Digital Services offers digitalised solutions to our customers to make their underlying processes more ef cient and reliable.
Digital
Services complements existing product lines by providing new services to our existing customers.
Digital Services focuses on the capture and interpretation of key manufacturing data complementing Vesuvius strong presence and expertise in molten metal engineering to create new technologies and integrate them into expert process management systems.
There are two key elements of Vesuvius T echnical Services strategy  rstly the Digital Services business unit which focuses on incubating our data capture technologies and secondly the other business units which play a critical role in integrating these products into our broader consumables offering as well as ensuring customer access.
In this way our T echnical Services strategy is embedded in the activities of both our Steel and Foundry divisions which can work both with and independently of our Digital Services business.
Our digital services products assist our customers to meet the increasing end product consistency and quality requirements  enabling them to capture and analyse large quantities of production data and harness them to deliver reliable and auditable process and product improvements.
Key Products Our business focuses on providing solutions that enhance the control and monitoring of our customers production processes.
During 2017  the business unit comprised four key product lines Disposable sensors and probes These measure a variety of liquid metal characteristics which are mostly used in the primary and secondary steelmaking stages.
Laser technology Technology used for measuring the wear of refractory materials in furnaces and ladles.
This is an important area of focus as the market moves towards the use of ladle  eets Continuous temperature measurement This provides realtime continuous temperature data in the tundish.
This allows customers to better understand temperature correlations with steel quality reduce energy costs and optimise caster speed.
Current solutions include Accuoptix Accucone  and the Accumetrix continuous temperature measurement systems Mould level sensors and control systems These are critical to ensure the stable controlled  ow of metal during the casting process and have a signi cant impact on slab quality.
In addition mould audit services using our unique XMA T device in combination with computerised ow modelling provide our Steel customers with an expert eye inside the mould allowing them to gain an intimate understanding of liquid behaviour as steel is cast By using each of these technologies customers can focus on critical parameters within their processes enabling them to re ne their production methods to improve quality lower production costs and maximise ef ciency.
The information derived from these measurements can be included as a consulting service and used as support for improvements in refractory solutions.
W e are creating new offerings to participate in the digitalisation of our customers processes Alexander LaugierWerth President Digital Services 45 Our Performance 201 7 Performance Digital Services generated revenues of 43.7m in 2017  an increase of 18.4% yearonyear on a reported basis.
On an underlying basis revenues increased 8.9%.
This re ected market share gains in North America and India and the signi cant success we experienced in South America as a result of increased penetration of our sensors and probes business.
In our Process Metrix lasers business we had a record year of sales with shipments up over 50% versus 2016.
Avemis our mould level sensors and continuous temperature measurement products also had a strong year with revenues up c.30%.
Strategic Highlights from the Y ear In December 2017  we  nalised a strategic investment in Sapotech Oy a Finnish technology company developing optical defect detection services in the steel continuous casting process.
This investment will be managed by the Flow Control business unit.
We continued to integrate the Digital Services companies ECIL Met T ec and Sidermes into the existing Group sales networks.
This enabled the businesses to access the wider footprint of the Vesuvius customer base.
As a result we made signi cant product performance improvements in key lines such as probes for measuring hydrogen and oxygen.
We also initiated restructuring actions to optimise our cost base and manufacturing footprint and to reduce operating costs.
We introduced a number of new features in laser technology in 2017 through completely revamped software and the T wo Colour Pyrometer which combines dimensional measurements with our most accurate surface temperature measurements to date.
Our focus on increasing sales in the continuous temperature measurement space began to drive sales volumes and pro ts in this area and we expect this to continue in the years ahead.
Looking ahead The development of a digital offering for our customers complementary to our consumables offering remains a fundamental priority of our Group strategy.
T o ensure that we continue to maximise the opportunities to leverage our existing customer relationships to expand this area of business the ongoing support of our Flow Control and Advanced Refractories business units is critical.
Flow Controls involvement is focused on developing valueadded services around the tundish and the mould in the continuous casting part of the steel process.
SERT  Avemis and the new investment in Sapotech Oy are key to these efforts.
For Advanced Refractories laser technology business Process Metrix has a key role to play in the development of its technical services offering.
Going forward we are optimising our manufacturing footprint for sensors and probes with the closure of a site in France and in Germany.
T o reduce operating costs further we have initiated an investment programme to automate the manufacturing process.
We will continue to review acquisition opportunities for additional technological solutions to complement our existing customer offerings focused on data gathering and information analysis to provide customers with the information they need to deliver process improvements.
The amount of data generated by sensors is growing exponentially so allied with this approach we intend to focus on solutions for converting this data into valuable decision support information maximising the value our various sensor technologies bring to customers.
Alexander LaugierWerth President Digital Services Shaping of a thermocouple quartz tube Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7
Operating Review
Foundry
Our growth in 201 7 was achieved through developing our business in China gains in our established markets and new product launches Glenn Cowie President Foundry Foundry revenue m Vesuvius Foundry Division trading as Foseco is a world leader in the supply of consumable products solutions and associated services related to the foundry industry.
The foundry process is highly sequential and is critically dependent on consistency of product quality and productivity optimisation.
The Foundry Divisions products solutions and use of advanced computer simulation techniques allow foundries to reduce defects and hence reduce labour intensive fettling and machining minimise metal usage requirements in uence the metal solidi cation process and automate moulding and casting thus reducing cost energy usage and mould size.
The conditioning of molten metal the nature of the mould used and especially the design of the way metal  ows into the mould are key parameters in a foundry determining both the quality of the  nished castings and the labour energy and metal usage ef ciency of the foundry.
Vesuvius products and associated services to foundries improve these parameters.
The Foundry Division supplies ceramic consumables such as  lters and feeding systems and chemical coatings and binders to foundries which use these products in the production of metal castings.
Working alongside customers at their sites our engineers provide onsite technical expertise in addition to simulation software to develop the best individualised solutions.
Each of our products typically represents a small element of the overall cost of the foundry processes but contributes signi cantly to product quality and yield.
We support our customer offering with the Foseco University an online library of expertise in foundry practice which demonstrates our expertise and provides technical support to our engineers and customers across the globe.
Key Products Fosecos key products are Binders These are used to prepare the sand moulds and cores the quality of which improves the precision and surface  nish of the  nal casting Coatings These are designed to protect both sand and permanent moulds from the effects of being  lled with liquid metal.
This is especially important on cores where liquid metal may cover up to three sides of the sand Filtration Our  ltration products remove impurities from the liquid metal before it enters the mould and reduce turbulence during pouring Feeding Systems Our speci cally shaped insulating and exothermic feeding systems allow for the ef cient supply of molten metal to key areas of complex or large castings and prevent liquid shrinkage defects in the nished casting improving yields and productivity by reducing the amount of molten metal required per casting.
Our exothermic feeding aids also provide a secondary heat source which can also control metal cooling minimising the adverse effects of shrinkage during solidi cation Crucibles These are used in a wide range of melting and holding applications for nonferrous alloys particularly aluminium copper and zinc.
Each of these applications requires a crucible with speci c properties to maximise productivity and minimise energy costs Other products These include innoculants used for ferrous and nonferrous castings  ux degassing equipment for removing unwanted gas in liquid aluminium and refractory materials used for the transportation of liquid metal 47 Our Performance 201 7 Performance There was positive momentum in the majority of Foundry end markets during 2017  with particular strength in heavy trucks and a recovery in mining equipment as well as construction and agricultural equipment after several years of weakness.
Revenue in the Foundry Division increased 16.5% to 535.2m in 2017 on a reported basis whilst underlying revenue increased by 9.3%.
T rading pro t improved by 12.0% on an underlying basis.
Our 2017 performance bene ted materially from our commitment to technological leadership through investment in RandD which resulted in 13 new product launches during the year the highest on record.
These new product launches supported doubledigit revenue growth across Foundrys highest margin product lines  feeding systems  lters and coatings.
T rading pro t also benefited from the ongoing organisational restructuring in North America which commenced in 2016 and is focused on developing a  atter leaner structure.
In the Americas underlying revenue increased 1 1.2% despite weakness in the light vehicle and rail sectors in North America and the closure of a number of customer plants in the steel foundry sector.
This was offset by growth in heavy trucks as well as increases in iron casting output related to construction and agricultural equipment.
We were successful in gaining market share as a result of new product introductions and we experienced signi cant success in Brazil growing our feeding systems lters and nonferrous metal treatment revenues.
Underlying revenue in EMEA increased 8.8% yearonyear as a result of growth across the majority of foundry end markets with particular strength in heavy trucks as well as high growth in the nonferrous market.
We were also successful in gaining market share as a result of new product introductions.
In AsiaPaci c underlying revenue increased by 8.8% with sales increasing in all major markets.
Our revenues in China were up c.
13% due to booming demand in heavy truck production as well as our tangible progress in developing a strong local sales force and marketing organisation.
In India our revenues were up c.5% bene ting from growth in light vehicle production as well as strength in construction and agricultural equipment and mining equipment.
Our revenue growth in India could potentially have been higher had it not been for high raw material costs and supply issues as well as an increased focus by Foseco on customer payment terms.
Strategic Highlights from the Y ear The organisational restructuring in North America which commenced in 2016 continued through the year with a focus on developing a  atter leaner structure.
We also focused on improved succession planning with several key new employees joining during the year.
Each of these initiatives saw a focus on improving organisational culture and accountability which has allowed us to move decision making closer to the customer and improve our speed of doing business.
We continued our efforts to rationalise our manufacturing footprint and maximise capacity utilisation with the closure of the Cleveland  lter plant and Conneaut shank production.
We also continued to focus on the implementation of Lean principles and improvement in our support and planning systems for operations.
In addition we have initiated a cost ef ciency study at our facilities in Borken and Grossalmerode in Germany as part of our wider focus on cost ef ciency.
The investment in our worldclass RandD facility in Enschede The Netherlands continues to generate new products.
In
2017  New Product sales as a percentage of Foundry sales reached 10%.
T o drive penetration into Japanese foundries in ASEAN we appointed a Japanese business development manager in Thailand and also refocused our efforts on our business in Vietnam.
A new  lter production line was launched in India and is expected to be completed by Q3 2018.
The availability of a local lter source will improve customer service levels and support increased market penetration.
In China the focus remains on further developing the local sales and marketing organisation and growing market share in our major product segments mainly coatings  lters and feeding systems.
Our RandD facility in Enschede
Foseco offers a wide range of foundry products and services to meet the requirements of iron steel and non ferrous foundries to help them to reduce defects improve casting quality and optimise production costs.
Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7 Looking Ahead The potential revenue per customer and per tonne of castings produced is strongly in uenced by the technical sophistication of the customer the endmarket for the casting and the processes used in its production.
These factors tend to correlate with the level of industrial development within a given market.
Therefore we see signi cant growth potential in markets where industrial development continues to gather momentum particularly certain parts of Eastern Europe and Asia.
T o position Foseco to bene t from this trend we are expanding our network of technical sales staff and application engineers within developing markets ensuring that customers there have local access to the same high levels of expertise and technical support in all markets.
In Europe we expect modest growth in the Foundry market for the next few years with an improving outlook for growth in the steel foundry segment mainly due to growth in the construction and mining industries.
Consolidation of the Foundry industry continues reducing the gap between capacity on offer and real demand.
We anticipate that plant closures and mergers and acquisitions will continue in the industry as will the trend to transfer production from western countries to Eastern Europe and T urkey.
Cheaper labour and energy costs together with the availability of technical skills remain key for the future development of the industrial footprint in these developing markets.
In the automotive industry the trend to develop lighter vehicles is pushing further growth of aluminium castings increasing volumes in the nonferrous foundry segment.
The foundry market in Mexico continues to see rapid growth with foreign investment from Asia Europe and the US in new foundry facilities and the ongoing expansion of existing facilities.
We are positioning ourselves to bene t from this growth with a new manufacturing site in Monterrey.
The market recovery in mining agriculture and construction that started in 2017 is expected to accelerate in 2018 for both NAFT A and South America.
Further growth is also anticipated in India and South East Asia with increasing quality requirements expected to drive increased penetration of Fosecos feeding systems  ltration coatings and nonferrous product lines.
Glenn Cowie President Foundry
Operating Review continued
Foundry
Consistent application of coatings through automated density control The Challenge When manufacturing a casting applying the correct thickness of mould coating is critical in providing a protective barrier between the liquid metal and the core or mould surface.
A challenge for all foundries is to ensure that coating is applied correctly.
In a recent review we identi ed one major problem  the coating is often diluted manually and its density is checked only periodically during a shift.
Inevitably this can lead to variations in performance as coating that is too thick can compromise dimensional accuracy and gas permeability and coating that is too thin can fail to prevent steel penetration into the mould sand and can result in surface defects on the casting.
Our Solution The development team investigated potential solutions but realised that available technology would either adversely affect the mixing of the coating or used delicate pipes and pumps that were impractical requiring extra cleaning and maintenance and therefore potential production downtime.
Working with a thirdparty engineering unit we developed a new design that did not impact the mixing process and provides very accurate continuous density and level measurement with no moving parts.
The Bene ts The Intelligent Coating Unit ICU helps our customers achieve better and more consistent casting results by ensuring that at all points in the production cycle coating products are diluted to their optimum application density on a continuous basis.
This signi cantly reduces the risk of defects in the nished casting reduces scrapped casting and lowers cleaning costs.
The ICU also continuously records the application density data providing an audit trail for use in process optimisation and quality reviews.
Our Performance V esuvius has invested in my future Kerstin Berndt Product Manager Germany See more about Vesuvius careers in People and Community on pages 67 73 rformance See more about Vesuvius careers in People and Community on pages 67 73 I started working in the Foundry Division of Vesuvius GmbH in 2006 following an apprenticeship as a chemicaltechnical assistant.
I spent my  rst two and a half years working in the SGI Organisation covering international projects including the development of data for the Coveral  MTS 1582 which is now a leading product in the  eld of NonFerrous Metal T reatment.
I was then moved to the RandD department during which time I obtained two degrees as a statecerti ed technician and as a training supervisor through the German Chamber of Industry and Commerce.
Since 2015 I have worked as a Local Product Manager for nonferrous metal treatment and am the customer contact for our Foundry Divisions chemical production lines in Germany Austria Switzerland and the
My time at Vesuvius has enabled me to gain important academic and professional quali cations whilst at the same time receiving critical onthejob technical experience.
Whilst doing this I have developed a considerable international network working on a daily basis with Vesuvius colleagues in different countries.
Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7 Board of Directors Hock Goh Independent Nonexecutive Director Appointed 2 April 2015 Career experience Hock was appointed as a Director of the Company on 2 April 2015.
Hock has more than 30 years experience in the oil and gas industry having spent 25 years with Schlumberger the leading global oil eld services provider.
His roles included President of Network and Infrastructure Solutions in London President of Asia Paci c and Vice President and General Manager of China.
From 2005 to 2012 Hock was a Partner of Baird Capital Partners Asia the private equity arm of the US investment bank Robert W Baird and Co.
Based in China he focused on the industrial business services and healthcare sectors.
Hock strengthens the Board through his extensive experience of the global services industry and his understanding of Asian markets.
Hock is a Singaporean citizen.
Other appointments Hock is Chairman of MEC Resources Ltd and Advent Energy Ltd and is a Nonexecutive Director of AB SKF Santos Ltd Harbour Energy Ltd and Stora Enso Oyj.
Jane Hinkley Independent Nonexecutive Director Appointed 3 December 2012 Career experience Jane was appointed as a Director of the Company on 3 December 2012 and as Chairman of the Remuneration Committee in June 2013.
Jane spent a large part of her executive career working at GotaasLarsen Shipping Corporation the lique ed natural gas shipping specialist which was listed on both the London Stock Exchange and
She served as Chief Financial Of cer from 1988 to 1992 and as Managing Director until 1997 .
In 1998 Jane was appointed Managing Director of Navion Shipping AS a company majority owned by Statoil the Norwegian multinational oil and gas company a position she held until 2001.
She previously was a Nonexecutive Director of Revus Energy ASA a Norwegian oil exploration and production company.
Jane is a Chartered Accountant and has strong experience gained in the shipping industry of working with highly international teams.
Jane is a British citizen.
Other appointments Jane is Chairman of Teekay GP LLC and a Nonexecutive Director and Chairman of the Remuneration Committee of Premier Oil plc.
A N R John McDonough CBE Chairman Appointed 31 October 2012 Career experience John was appointed as a Director and Chairman of the Company on 31 October 2012.
John was group Chief Executive Of cer of Carillion plc the support services and construction  rm for 11 years until he retired in 2011.
Prior to joining Carillion he spent nine years in the automotive systems division at Johnson Controls to develop the business in AsiaPaci c.
He returned to the UK as Vice President of the integrated facilities management division for EMEA.
He served as Chairman of the Remuneration Committee of T omkins plc from 2007 to 2010.
John has a strong engineering background and considerable international commercial and listed company experience which enable him ably to lead the Vesuvius Board.
John was awarded a CBE in 2011 for services to industry and is a British citizen.
Other appointments John is Chairman of The Vitec Group plc.
He is also Chairman of Cornerstone Property Assets Limited and Sunbird Business Services Limited and a T rustee of Team Rubicon UK.
Patrick Andr Chief Executive Appointed 1 September 2017 Career experience Patrick was appointed as a Director and Chief Executive of the Company on 1 September 2017 having joined the Group as President of the Steel Flow Control business unit in February 2016.
Patrick has had a long global career in the steel industry and prior to joining the Group served with Lhoist company the world leader in lime production where he held the positions of Executive Vice President Strategic Growth CEO Europe and CEO for Asia CIS and Africa.
Prior to this he worked at ERAMET group a global manufacturer of nickel and special alloys where he was CEO of the Nickel division then CEO of the Manganese division.
Patrick showed signi cant drive and energy in strengthening the Flow Control business and he brings to the Board this commitment together with his industry experience strategic vision constant customer focus and proven record of delivery that will enable him to lead the Group in the next stages of its development.
Patrick is a French citizen.
A N R Changes to the Board during the year As disclosed above Holly Koeppel and Patrick Andr were appointed to the Board on 3 April 2017 and 1 September 2017  respectively.
Franois Wanecq retired from the Board on 31 August 2017 .
Douglas Hurt Senior Independent Director Appointed 2 April 2015 Career experience Douglas was appointed as a Director of the Company on 2 April 2015 and as Senior Independent Director and Chairman of the Audit Committee at the close of the 2015 Annual General Meeting.
Douglas has signi cant  nancial experience having served as Finance Director of IMI plc the global engineering group from 2006 to 2015.
Prior to this he held a number of senior nance and general management positions at GlaxoSmithKline plc which he joined in 1983 previously having worked at Price Waterhouse.
His career has included several years working in the US and signi cant experience in European businesses as Chief Financial Of cer and as Operational Managing Director.
Douglas is a Chartered Accountant and a highly knowledgeable corporate and operational  nance professional bringing signi cant US and European experience as well as general management and  nancial leadership experience.
Douglas is a British citizen.
Other appointments Douglas is Senior Independent Director and Chairman of the Audit Committee of T ate and Lyle plc Senior Independent Director and Chairman of the Audit Committee of Countryside Properties PLC and a Nonexecutive Director of the British Standards Institution.
Holly Koeppel Independent Nonexecutive Director Appointed 3 April 2017 Career experience Holly was appointed as a Director of the Company on 3 April 2017 .
Holly has more than 35 years global industry and nancial experience having spent the early part of her career at Columbia Gas Distribution Company and Consolidated Natural Gas Corporation in a variety of management roles which included four years based in Australia.
She joined the American Electric Power Company in 2000 and in 2006 was appointed Chief Financial Of cer.
In 2010 Holly joined Citi Infrastructure Investors as CoHead a 3.4bn fund set up to capitalise on the growing need for infrastructure around the world.
In 2015 the fund was renamed Gateway and transitioned to Corsair Infrastructure Management LP CIM part of Corsair Capital.
Holly retired as Head of CIM in January 2017 and continued as a Senior Advisor and a Nonexecutive Director on CIMs four portfolio companies until June 2017 .
From 2012 to 2015 Holly was a Director of Integrys Energy Group Inc. and a Director of Reynolds American Inc. from 2008 to 2017 .
Holly brings extensive global industry  nancial and management experience to the Board.
Holly is an American citizen.
Other appointments Holly currently serves as a Nonexecutive Director of The AES Corporation and British American T obacco p.
A N R Guy Young Chief Financial Of cer Appointed 1 November 2015 Career experience Guy was appointed as a Director and Chief Financial Of cer of the Company on 1 November 2015.
Prior to joining the Group from January 2011 to October 2015 he served as Chief Financial Of cer of T armac and latterly Lafarge T armac the British building materials company.
Guy held a number of senior  nancial and business development positions at Anglo American plc from 1997 to 2010 including the position of CFO of Scaw Metals Group the South African steel products manufacturer.
Guy is quali ed with the South African Institute of Chartered Accountants and brings to the Board a wealth of  nancial and operational insight gained through his extensive international experience in the mining and industrial sectors.
Guy is a British and South African citizen.
Christer Gardell Nonexecutive Director Appointed 31 October 2012 Career experience Christer was appointed as a Director of the Company on 31 October 2012 having previously joined the board of Cookson Group plc in June 2012.
Christer cofounded Cevian Capital in 2002 and serves as Managing Partner.
Cevian Capital is a shareholder of the Company and at 28 February 2018 held 21.
11% of Vesuvius issued ordinary share capital.
From 1996 to 2001 Christer was the Chief Executive Of cer of AB Custos the Swedish investment company.
Prior to joining AB Custos he had been a partner of Nordic Capital and McKinsey and Company.
He served as a Nonexecutive Director of AB Lindex until December 2007 and of Tieto Corporation until March 2012.
Christer brings a wealth of commercial acumen to the Board through his extensive business management experience and the ability to focus and drive change.
Christer is a Swedish citizen.
Other appointments Christer is Managing Partner of Cevian Capital and Vice Chairman of the global Finnish technology and services company Metso Corporation.
Our Performance A N R Key to Committee membership A Audit Committee N Nomination Committee R Remuneration Committee R Committee Chairman 52 Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7
Executive
Committee
1 Henry Knowles General Counsel and Company Secretary Appointed September 2013 4 years with Group Based in London UK and is a British citizen 2 Glenn Cowie President Foundry Appointed November 2014 36 years with Group Based in Cleveland US and is a South African and British citizen 3 T anmay Ganguly
Advanced Refractories Appointed November 2014 10 years with Group Based in Barlborough UK and is an Indian citizen 4 Guy Young Chief Financial Of cer Appointed November 2015 2 years with Group Based in London UK and is a South African and British citizen 5 Roel van der Sluis President Flow Control Appointed October 2017 27 years with Group Based in Ghlin Belgium and is a Dutch citizen Our Performance 6 Patrick Bikard President Operations Appointed February 2014 9 years with Group Based in Ghlin Belgium and is a French citizen 7 Alexander LaugierWerth
Digital Services Appointed July 2016 9 years with Group Based in Ghlin Belgium and is a French and US citizen 8 Alan Charnock Vice President and Chief Technology Of cer Appointed April 2015 33 years with Group Based in Ghlin Belgium and is a British citizen 9 Patrick Andr Chief Executive Appointed September 2017 2 years with Group Based in London UK and is a French citizen 10 Ryan van der Aa Chief Human Resources Of cer Appointed May 2013 18 years with Group Based in London UK and is a Dutch citizen The date appointed is the date the individual was appointed to their current role.
Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7 55 Our Responsibility Section Three
Responsibility
In this section Our Principles 60 Health and Safety 64 Sustainability 67 People and Community Nancy Han HR Generalist ChangShu China 56 Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7 Vesuvius is a geographically and culturally diverse group employing more than 1 1000 people in 37 countries.
This geographical diversity places us close to our customers across the globe but also highlights the importance of maintaining and applying strong and consistent ethical values in our worldwide approach to business.
Our employees engagement with our values and culture is vital to our success and the sustainable delivery of the Groups strategy.
Vesuvius Values The behaviours we champion in our employees are represented by the six Vesuvius Values.
They are an expression of the common culture of the Group promoting our image to external stakeholders and underpinning the commercial promise we provide to our customers.
The Values are displayed in all our facilities and in Vesuvius of ces at customer sites.
During 2017  we continued to engage our employees on the importance of the Vesuvius Values through the addition of a new value of Excellence.
Our approach to our customers and business operations has always been to strive for Excellence and the addition of this sixth Value reinforces our objective to integrate continuous improvement into our business approach.
Our Values are celebrated annually through the Groups Living the Values Awards L TVA.
In 2017  we came together to celebrate the outstanding individual contributions to the implementation of Vesuvius Values by 74 employees from 1 1 countries who were nominated by their peers.
See more about the Living the Values Awards in our People and Community section on p67 73 Our Values
Our commitment to technology and quality is the basis for our competitive advantage.
Creativity allows us to develop innovative products and solutions and the continuous improvements that generate value through performance enhancement.
Employees are actively encouraged to be innovative and to register their ideas in our newly developed Ideation database.
Cooperation
Encouraging internal and external cooperation enables us to create unique solutions with our partners.
Through cooperation each Vesuvius employee is committed to the success of their community of colleagues and customers and that of the wider Group.
Reliability
Our solutions involve us in critical aspects of our customers manufacturing processes.
Our commitment to deliver consistent products and services gives them the level of con dence they require.
Integrity
At the heart of our promise lies the trustworthiness of all Vesuvius employees in their acts and words.
Integrity honesty and transparency are essential in all our exchanges.
Embracing Diversity Vesuvius is a global company built upon a true respect for local customs and experience.
We recognise and embrace the potential that comes from the coexistence of so many different cultures and of diversity in its broadest sense.
Excellence
This new value introduced in 2017  represents our aim to deliver optimised performance to our customers and stakeholders eliminating waste and striving for continuous improvement.
Excellence is our attitude as we engage with our colleagues our customers and our communities.
Our Principles Working together as a community with shared values makes V esuvius stronger .
Vesuvius has established a framework for explaining and delivering the culture and principles we consider to be fundamental to our sustained success Vesuvius Framework for Business Integrity Vesuvius Values Code of
Policies and
Training
Monitoring and Evaluation 57 Code of Conduct Our Code of Conduct sets out the standards of conduct expected without exception of everyone who works for Vesuvius in any of its worldwide operations.
The Code emphasises our commitment to ethics and compliance with the law and covers every aspect of our approach to business from the way that we engage with customers employees the markets and each of our other stakeholders to the safety of our employees and workplaces.
Everyone within Vesuvius is individually accountable for upholding its requirements.
We recognise that lasting business success is measured not only in our  nancial performance but in the way in which we deal with our customers business associates employees investors and local communities.
The Code of Conduct is published in our 29 major functional languages.
Policies and
We continue to enhance the policies that underpin the principles set out in the Code of Conduct.
These assist employees to comply with our ethical standards and the legal requirements of the jurisdictions in which we conduct our business.
They also give practical guidance on how this can be achieved.
Amongst these policies are Speak Up The foundation of our compliance programme is the ability to speak up without fear of retaliation either to Vesuvius management or independent of them.
A third partyoperated con dential Employee Concern Helpline Speak Up is available for employees wishing to raise concerns anonymously or in situations where they feel unable to report internally.
This independent helpline provides the ability to make reports online through a web portal by phone or by voicemail.
Ensuring global accessibility employees can now speak with operators in any of our 29 functional languages.
No individual is ever penalised or disadvantaged for reporting a legitimate concern in good faith.
Reports received via Speak Up are managed by the General Counsel assisted by senior managers from the Legal Department and HR.
All reports are investigated following a protocol for review action closure and feedback.
For complex issues formal investigation plans are drawn up and support from external experts is engaged where necessary.
Feedback is recognised as an important element of the Speak Up process and we aim to provide an update on all reports within 28 days of receipt.
Our Responsibility Health safety and the environment T rading customers products and services Antibribery and corruption Employees and human rights Disclosure and investors Government society and local communities Con icts of interest
The Code of Conduct is available in 29 languages at site Code of Conduct principles Evaristo Beltran Saenz Process Engineer Slide Gate Monterrey Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7 AntiBribery and Corruption and Working With Third Parties Vesuvius engages with various third party representatives and intermediaries which can present an increased anti bribery and corruption risk.
Our
Vesuvius engages with thirdparty sales agents many of whom operate in countries where we do not have a physical presence.
Our employees interaction with sales agents is supported by an ongoing training programme for those who have speci c responsibility for these relationships.
Data Protection Our data protection policy requires a uniform approach in the handling of personal data to manage the privacy obligations of the Group.
Everyone has rights in respect of how their personal data is handled.
Our policy recognises that the lawful and correct treatment of personal data is vital to our continued success in an increasingly regulated global marketplace.
During the course of our activities we may collect store and process personal data about our staff customers suppliers and other third parties.
We are committed to treating this data in an appropriate manner.
Human Rights The Group human rights policy re ects the principles contained within the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights the International Labour Organisations Fundamental Conventions on Labour Standards and the United Nations Global Compact.
The policy applies to all Group employees.
It sets out the principles for our actions and behaviour in conducting our business and provides guidance to those working for us on how we approach human rights issues.
The
Group commits not to discriminate in any of our employment practices and to offer equal opportunities to all.
The Group respects the principles of freedom of association and the effective recognition of the right to collective bargaining and opposes the use of and will not use forced compulsory or child labour.
These principles have been integrated into the work of our procurement teams as we assess our suppliers and their business practices.
Training
During the year we continued to operate our training programme on the principles contained in the Vesuvius Code of Conduct and associated antibribery corruption and other compliance policies and procedures.
T raining gives our employees a clearer understanding of the scope of risks that exist as we conduct our business and gives context to how the Group expects each one of us to respond to those risks.
In 2017  our training processes have developed to include an integrated learning management system which allows us to deliver Vesuviusspeci c elearning modules to employees on topics relevant to their role through an online interactive platform.
T raining provided during 2017 included Elearning modules for modern slavery data protection and trade sanctions Webex and video conference workshops on data protection Facetoface training by the Legal and Compliance team to staff at several sites covering antibribery and corruption gifts hospitality and entertainment and trade sanctions Our elearning platform supplements the facetoface training provided to employees by the Legal and Compliance team enabling us to reach more employees more quickly and in a more targeted way.
In 2018 we will continue to develop our training processes and modules available in the elearning platform to help our staff understand the Vesuvius policies and procedures relating to our Code of Conduct and regulatory compliance requirements.
Monitoring and Evaluation Alongside our training programme we assist employees with the implementation and interpretation of the Groups policies and their application through a process of monitoring and evaluation.
Part of this process involves performing ongoing and targeted due diligence to understand the background to policy design and application.
This forms part of our compliance framework to ensure that our ethical and legal approach remains  t for purpose and is understood throughout the business.
Our Principles continued 59 Speak Up The Group continues to monitor the volume geographic distribution and range of reports made to its Speak Up facility to ascertain not only whether there are signi cant regional compliance concerns but also whether there are countries where access to this facility is less well understood or publicised.
The Audit Committee continues to monitor and oversee the Groups procedures for reporting allegations of improper behaviour and throughout 2017 the Audit Committee received updates on the volume of reports received from the con dential Speak Up Helpline key themes emerging from these reports and the results of any investigations undertaken.
In 2017 we received 76 reports through the Speak Up facility a number of which related to the same set of facts.
Each one of these was investigated.
A substantial majority of reports received in 2017 were human resource issues which indicated no compliance concerns nor serious breaches of the Code of Conduct.
In relation to the repetitive reports even though these did not identify compliance concerns steps were taken to ensure that changes were implemented locally including in certain cases entitywide management training recommunication of policies and reinforcement of our business culture supported by senior management oversight.
Of the small number of reports received that contained allegations in breach of our Code of Conduct thorough investigations were performed and where appropriate disciplinary action taken including one termination.
Prevention of Slavery and Human Traf cking During 2017 we published our second transparency statement outlining the Groups approach to the prevention of slavery and human traf cking in our business and supply chain.
Y ou can nd a copy of our latest statement on our home page at site Since the publication of our  rst statement we have conducted a Groupwide risk assessment as well as developing our internal policies and enhancing our supplier assessment programme.
T o ensure effective communication of our Human Rights Policy we have provided training to our key purchasing staff and introduced an online elearning module to upgrade the training given to all supplierfacing staff which provides key guidance on the red ags associated with modern slavery to assist them in identifying these during supplier visits and accreditation.
Working with Third Parties During 2017 the Group continued the review of our thirdparty representatives and intermediaries.
This included detailed review of our due diligence activities for active sales agents across the Group.
This process covers reputation public information searches regulatory searches and ultimate bene cial ownership and has been applied to each one of our active sales agents.
The review of our due diligence processes will continue to be extended on a riskbased approach during 2018 and beyond.
Data Protection In 2017  we spent considerable time reviewing our approach to data protection in anticipation of the implementation of the EU General Data Protection Regulation in May.
We formally identi ed a Data Protection Of cer DPO in July 2017 whose role includes setting Group policy implementing procedures monitoring compliance with data protection provisions and championing Vesuvius approach to the protection of personal data.
Our review involved Groupwide due diligence to clarify the data we control and process the methods by which we do this the security of the systems that hold our data and the assignment of responsibilities for responding to this.
The DPO is also responsible for raising awareness of data protection issues across the Group and training staff who undertake roles that involve the processing of data.
Other Due Diligence The Group continues to undertake focused country and functionspeci c risk assessments reviewing  nancial records and the quality of implementation of our policies and procedures often engaging the assistance of external advisers.
The outputs of these assessments are used to identify activities that require further improvement ensure that our Group policies and procedures for the management of antibribery and corruption risk continue to be appropriate for the business and ensure that within our business there is the necessary awareness and understanding to be able to manage risks appropriately.
Our Responsibility Operations meeting Skawina Poland Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7 Health and Safety V esuvius remains fundamentally committed to protecting the health and safety of employees contractors visitors customers and any other persons affected by our activities.
Our approach to health and safety is based on the following beliefs Health and safety is one of Vesuvius core principles and our commitment to health and safety is embedded throughout the organisation.
The Vesuvius ethos is to identify eliminate reduce or control all workplace risks and an ongoing system of training assessment and improvement is in place to focus on achieving this.
Safety Leadership Safety performance remains the  rst item on the agenda at all our Group Executive Committee and management meetings and safety performance is reported to the Board by the Chief Executive as a matter of priority at each Board meeting.
Any site experiencing a serious dangerous occurrence or medically treated injury is required to carry out a full 8D investigation and incorporate the  ndings into their site improvement plan.
The Group Executive Committee reviews the more serious incidents and the responses from the sites.
The Group remains fully committed to continuing safety improvement with a Group health and safety policy stating a clear goal of This goal is pursued through a range of policies standards and procedures which are reviewed and updated on an ongoing basis.
In 2017  the accident and incident reporting personal protective equipment road vehicle and machine safety standards were all reviewed and updated to maintain their relevance to the current Vesuvius risk pro le.
Health and Safety Health and safety is regarded as a core management responsibility with executives and line managers directly responsible for health and safety matters in the operations under their control.
This tone from the top is demonstrated by the requirement for all senior managers to perform executive safety tours report on their  ndings to local operations management and follow up on improvement requirements.
Management is accountable for health and safety performance against objectives and all employees understand that they have a responsibility to take care of themselves and others whilst at work.
We expect everyone to participate positively in the task of preserving workplace health and safety.
Every business facility has an appointed health and safety manager who works with management and all employees to review site health and safety assess training needs and develop and implement site safety improvement plans.
These local health and safety managers are assisted by a central team of experts who not only identify adverse trends and respond to them but also enable the sharing of best practice across Vesuvius.
In 2017  a thorough review was undertaken of the operation of the health and safety function in Vesuvius.
Following this review the function was restructured with the creation of a new position of Group Vice President Quality Health and Safety and the restructuring of central functions.
The Vice President QHSE will be responsible for setting the Groups policies for quality and safety and controlling their application with the business units taking full responsibility for their implementation and accountability for performance against them.
A new safety auditing team will be established to develop and maintain policies and standards improving them in the light of external and internal changes on a Good health and safety is good business Safety is everybodys responsibility Working safely is a condition of employment All workrelated injuries and work related illhealth are preventable No lost time injuries No repeat injuries No harm to our people or contractors th owing ured and al will for ity consistent Groupwide basis.
In addition this team will systematically audit Group locations worldwide including customer locations against these policies and standards providing recommendations on improvements and assisting the locations with their implementation.
Health and Safety Policy All employees are expected to adhere to the Groups health and safety policy.
A copy of the policy signed by all members of the Group Executive Committee is translated into local languages and displayed prominently in all locations.
Safety Breakthrough Safety Breakthrough is Vesuvius global initiative to reduce the number of accidents  res and lost time injuries and to increase safety awareness through greater employee engagement.
Our aim is to raise health and safety performance to bestinclass levels throughout the Vesuvius business.
Safety Breakthrough sets a goal of attaining the lowest level of accidents within our industry sector with the ultimate goal of reaching zero accidents throughout Vesuvius as identi ed in our safety goals.
The speci c focus on employees based at customer locations continues to yield results not only for the safety of our employees but also our customers employees  helping to support the strong relationships built between customers and Vesuvius.
T raining Employees to Work Safely T urbo S training pulls together all Vesuvius good safety management practices that are aimed at enabling all Vesuvius employees to work in a safe environment.
Using a trainthetrainer approach T urbo S training sessions are tailored to the audience and their activities.
For example there is a special training course developed for customer locations that focuses speci cally on the risks faced by our employees at our customers premises and how best to manage them.
Vesuvius conducts Permit to Work training in all Group facilities including customer locations and extends recognised best practices throughout the
This ensures that all nonstandard work conducted in our facilities whether by Vesuvius employees or contractors is the subject of a precommencement risk assessment and a formal permission to commence activity setting out the safety requirements.
Vesuvius has developed machinery safety training with an outside industry leader Pilz GmbH and Co a company specialising in safe automation technology.
We are now extending recognised best practices throughout the Group through a series of machinery assessments and training programmes.
Working Safely The executive safety tours carried out by senior managers provide visible safety leadership on the shop  oor in Vesuvius sites and in customer locations.
These along with our daily safety audits are a pillar of our Safety Breakthrough initiative.
In 2017  1 1 1 Executive Safety T ours of which 12 were in customer locations were carried out by the members of the Executive Committee and their direct reports across all territories where Vesuvius operates.
In our plants more than 76% of our working population performed routine safety audits generating an average of nine improvement opportunities per person resulting in an improvement in worker safety.
The audit programme involves employees at all levels  from the Group Executive Committee and safety specialists through to local site management employees and contractors.
Our Responsibility Turbo S The current phase of the Safety Breakthrough initiative  Turbo S  builds on the foundation of Safety Breakthrough and includes a strong focus on the standardisation of all our repetitive activities.
Turbo S also integrates good management practices in the workplace with a strong emphasis on the need to implement an organisation which enables everybody to work to the same high standards in safety performance.
As part of the continuing T urbo S initiative Senior executives regularly lead safety tours at all locations Severe accidents are formally reviewed by the Group Executive Committee Employees are routinely engaged in safety audits We invest signi cantly in safety training for all employees irrespective of their roles and functions within our business All employees are expected to routinely raise and implement safety improvement opportunities we focus on the number of implemented ideas Safety standards are continually updated translated and deployed throughout Vesuvius All injuries and dangerous occurrences are analysed locally with a formal presentation of ndings root causes and improvement actions cascaded through management. safety requirements.
Aaron Gonzalez Quality Engineer Flow Control Monterrey Mexico 62 Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7 Health and Safety continued LTIFR 12 month rolling Lost time injuries per million hours workedtelteltel 2008 2007 Safety performance in 2017 T raining activities undertaken in 201 7 include In Poland a Road Safety Champion was established and a Road Safety training plan developed.
In addition work was undertaken on machinery safety.
Four presses were assessed by
They identi ed safety improvement actions and a plan was put in place to complete these.
One piece of equipment which could not be made compliant a friction press was dismantled.
In the Netherlands Turbo S training was completed for 24 participants and 10 employees were trained in machinery safety by Pilz.
In Germany dust control Turbo S permit to work and 5S Lean training were all completed.
In the USA 11 production employees and 19 NAFTA HSE professionals were trained on machinery safety by Pilz.
In addition a Road Safety Champion and a Road Safety Committee were appointed.
The team developed a road safety action plan safe driving policy training for speci c categories of drivers and updated car pool process.
These programmes policies were shared and adopted by Canada and Mexico.
The safe driving policy was sent to all drivers who signed and returned it to their manager.
Monthly general awareness topics were created and sent out and the basic level of training was completed for all categories of drivers.
Skid control training was completed for highrisk drivers in Canada and Mexico.
In addition Turbo S permit to work dust and vibration and furfural training were undertaken.
Health and Safety highlights As part of the customers Steel Zone Safety Month December 2017 at our JSW customer location in India three of our employees received awards from the Customer Mr Chandrakant for Best Essay on Steel Plant Safety Mr Venu Jaya Prakash for Best Drawing competition on Steel Plant Safety Mr Srinath and Vishnu Arat for Hazard Identi cation in the working area Vesuvius Chester eld in the UK gained national recognition for its efforts to improve the working environment by reducing the amount of airborne dust.
The Pilot dust reduction and awareness training course was awarded a certi cate of achievement by the Health and Safety Executiveendorsed awarding body at the annual Ceramic Industry HandS Pledge Awards.
Furthermore the training initiative has since been developed into the Group Global Dust and Vibration initiative which was deployed throughout 2017 .
In ArcelorMittal Galati Vesuvius took on six  tters from their previous company and trained them in all Vesuvius policies with a 5S implemented workshop as part of the renewed contract covering additional activities in the customers plant.
In 2017  Vesuvius Ibrica Refractarios was awarded with an honourable mention in the National and International Prevention the prevention of accidents.
Our T ake 2 initiative ensures that employees think again before performing any unusual or nonstandard activity.
Simply stated the employees take 2 minutes to discuss the task any hazards and how to prevent accidents before any work is started.
For new contracts in customer locations Vesuvius uses a formal risk assessment which aims to identify signi cant risks to our employees and contractors.
This enables appropriate control measures to be agreed and implemented with the support of our customers in advance of work commencing.
Safety Performance in 2017 We continue to work hard to reduce incident severity and develop robust policies standards and practices aimed at improving the safety and health of our people in all that they do and to develop actionable insight from the performance indicators.
The lost time injuries frequency chart shows how injuries have been reduced and how that reduction has been maintained through a combination of a behaviour based approach to safety and the implementation of physical safeguards.
In 2018 the business units will continue to build on the embedded behaviour based safety approach taken to date to drive continual improvement in safety performance.
Working in Tidy Plants The continuing use of 5S the workplace organisation method throughout the Group has driven signi cant improvements in our workplace environment.
Employees are encouraged to develop ownership of their working areas and take pride in their cleanliness and organisation.
The added support of Vesuvius Lean specialists has been key to improving plant safety by removing hazards for employees and offering a clear bright and safe working environment.
Daily 5S audits led by team leaders ensure continuous improvement of working conditions and promote a safer workplace.
Accident and Incident Reporting and Analysis A signi cant investment in time and resources has been made over recent years to develop robust comprehensive and timely reporting of incidents including all  res explosions and any major spill or other chemical releases.
In its internal standards Vesuvius continues to use more stringent de nitions for lost time injuries L TIs and severe accidents than the de nitions used by local regulatory bodies.
This extends investigation to all medically treated injuries and serious dangerous occurrences.
Vesuvius has implemented a full investigation based on the 8D Practical Problem Solving 8D tool to identify the true root causes to prevent repeat incidents with a formal presentation of  ndings 8Dbased root causes and improvement actions cascaded through management. time injuries.
Involving Accountable Management for Safety Performance Site safety improvement plans are now in place for all production sites with deployment being the direct responsibility of local managers.
Any site experiencing a dangerous occurrence or severe injury is required to investigate using 8D and to share their incident investigation and action plans across the Group.
In 2017 there were no severe injuries but 407 dangerous occurrences.
Vesuvius encourages the reporting of all dangerous occurrences and injuries as only through a sound root cause analysis and preventative action plan implementation can future occurrences be prevented.
D1
D5
D3
D7
D2
D6
D4
D8 clarify the problem de ne countermeasures contain and set target check results grasp the current situation execute and track progress analyse causes standardise and establish control Vesuvius 8D Practical Problem Solving
Our Responsibility 111 Executive Safety Tours
Europe
India
NAFTA
North Asia South America South Asia Executive Safety T ours carried out in 2017 64 Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7
Our solutions improve the quality of our customers products and reduce the environmental footprint of their processes.
Vesuvius and its Processes The Board recognises that good environmental management is aligned with our focus on cost optimisation and operational excellence.
Whilst Vesuvius products do vary signi cantly in the energy intensity of their manufacture the majority of our manufacturing processes are not energy intensive nor do they produce large quantities of waste and emissions.
Vesuvius total energy costs are less than 3% of revenue with only 1.8% of the total energy requirements across the Group consumed in the UK.
T otal Energy Consumption Overall gas use increased by 6.4% in 2017 and electricity use by 1 1.9% primarily as a result of the increased production of energyintensive bricks and of our South African production of Slagdol an energyintensive product used in converters.
In this way changes in product mix can have a positive or negative effect on our energy performance such that they can outweigh any underlying changes.
The underlying data for 2017 does indicate improvements in energy consumption in some areas.
This detailed analysis of normalised data is used by Vesuvius senior engineers to drive improvements across the business.
Environmental Monitoring All our factory emissions are proactively managed in accordance with local regulations.
Regular analysis enables us to take action to reduce our emissions where possible and to operate more ef ciently.
The Group monitors its energy consumption worldwide CO e emissions and usage of water.
Vesuvius proactively seeks to reduce waste in production and to reuse and to recycle materials where practical.
In 2017  Vesuvius recorded nine minor environmental incidents.
These included items such as encroachment of waste water from a neighbouring property complaints about a factory odour and contained spillages.
All of the incidents were contained via Vesuvius site environmental response plans and reported through the Vesuvius incident reporting system.
T wo of these incidents in China were reported to the local environmental regulators.
No action was taken by the authorities after Vesuvius made process changes.
In all cases we complied with our local reporting requirements.
Energy used kWh per metric tonne product packed for shipmentteltel 2011 2010 Energy conservation
Sustainability Highlights
Vesuvius France installed a water network separation and rain water collection system linked to an onsite  re ghting water lagoon.
In Korea 4891 square metres of asbestos containing roo ng was safely replaced with steel cladding to improve the health safety and environmental risk pro le of the site.
Process Metrix shipped a record number of laser systems in 2017 with the new
TM software.
Process Metrix also released their new TwoColor Pyrometer for surface temperature measurement in conjunction with lining thickness measurement.
The systems typically increase ladle refractory lifetime by 1030% with a concomitant reduction in waste with less brick consumed over the lifetime of the ladle.
Greenhouse Gas Reporting In line with our total energy consumption both total emissions and normalised emissions increased in 2017  driven predominantly by the issue mentioned above  the increased production of Slagdol which generated high process
Chinese brick plant.
In 2017  Vesuvius also included the emission from our newly acquired  ux plant in Brazil.
If these products are excluded then there is an underlying downward yearonyear trend in normalised emissions of CO of 7 .7% and of normalised energy consumption of 7 .3%.
In reporting greenhouse gas GHG emissions we have used the GHG Protocol Corporate Accounting and Reporting Standard revised edition methodology to identify our GHG inventory of Scope 1 direct and Scope 2 indirect CO e.
We report in kg of CO equivalent CO e.
The Group also meets all of its obligations in relation to the Carbon Reduction Commitment CRC Energy Ef ciency Scheme the Producer Responsibility Packaging Waste regulations and the Energy Saving Opportunity Scheme by which the UK has implemented the EU Energy Ef ciency Directive.
Energy Conservation Plan The Vesuvius Energy Conservation Plan was launched in 201 1 with the objective of reducing our normalised energy consumption by 10% over the following three years.
In June 2015 we reset our focus and set the objective of a 10% improvement using 2014 as our base year by 2018.
Against that 2014 base a 4.2% improvement has been realised towards this target making a 7 .
1% improvement since 2010.
Managing our energy intensity not only has an environmental bene t but is also part of our longterm strategy to enhance our cost competitiveness.
Our Responsibility Global GHG emissions kg of CO 2017 2016 Emissions source Combustion of fuel and operation of facilities 396m 340m Electricity heat steam and cooling purchased for own use 1 20m 98m T otal GHG emissions 516m 438m 9% Vesuvius chosen intensity measurement Emissions reported above normalised to per tonne of product output 3.0% Methodology We have reported to the extent reasonably practicable on all the emission sources required under Part 7 of the Accounting Regulations which fall within our consolidated  nancial statements.
Scope 1 covers emissions from fuels used in our factories and of ces.
Scope 2 relates to the indirect emissions resulting from the generation of electricity heat steam and hot water we purchase to supply our of ces and factories.
We have used data gathered to ful l our requirements under the CRC Energy Ef ciency scheme and emission factors from UK Governments and the IEA GHG Conversion Factors for Company Reporting 2016 in the calculation of our GHG.
New Insural furnace lining system increases productivity and casting quality The Challenge The need to improve productivity commercial competitiveness and environmental impact is increasingly driving the adoption of energy ef cient furnaces in aluminium foundries.
However the ef ciency of these furnaces is often undermined by the choice of the refractory lining.
Our Solution Foseco has developed a new multipart and highly insulating lining made of Insural material.
The lining is delivered ready to install and combines energy saving potential with long service life and resistance to oxide buildup.
The Bene ts As most of the lining system is made of precast Insural shapes the installation can be completed in under three days unlike traditional linings which require several weeks to fully stabilise.
In addition no sintering is necessary.
The furnace just needs to be preheated and maintained at working temperature for 48 hours and is then ready for service.
The Insural furnace lining system is completely water free.
Consequently hydrogen pickup from the new lining system is negligible and the aluminium melt density index speci cation can be achieved immediately following installation.
Furnace downtime is dramatically reduced and the risk of increased rejects associated with relining work is avoided.
With conventional linings the external furnace body temperature often runs in excess of 100 C while with Insural furnace lining systems installed an external furnace body temperature of only 64C can be achieved.
This signi cantly improves the foundry working environment and reduces energy loss.
Our tests show that Insural lining runs on 33% less energy than a tradional lining.
The Insural furnace lining system offers the foundry a reduction in cost increased productivity and security in casting quality .
Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7 Water Conservation Whilst water is not a scarce resource in the places where Vesuvius operates Vesuvius works to reduce the consumption of water in its manufacturing processes by recycling and improving processes to reduce consumption.
Normalised consumption of water does vary with product mix however there is an overall downward trend for both absolute water consumption and normalised water consumption  that is water use per tonne of product manufactured.
Our Customers and Their
Under the Vesuvius and Foseco brands we deliver a wide range of solutions that help our customers improve the productivity of their operations.
These solutions also improve the quality of our customers products and reduce the environmental footprint of their processes.
Thermal optimisation and reject reduction are key factors in the processes for which we supply solutions.
We contribute to the reduction of our customers energy usage and subsequent and reduced downtime.
The iron and steel industry accounts for approximately 6.7% of total world CO emissions and 18% of industrial CO emissions with on average 1.8 tonnes of CO being emitted for every tonne of steel produced.
With around 10 kg of refractory material required per tonne of steel produced careful selection of energysaving refractories can bene cially impact on the net emission of CO In the foundry process the amount of metal melted versus the amount sold is critical to a foundrys pro tability.
Foseco continuously works with its customers to increase the ratio of metal sold to metal melted.
Sometimes this is as low as 40% and we work with them to increase it to 70%.
How Does Vesuvius Contribute Since 201 1 we have used a CO impact stamp to highlight the most energy ef cient solutions in our portfolio of products and services and to support the deployment of energyef cient and sustainable solutions engineered by our technology departments.
Vesuvius products and services facilitate environmental bene ts by Enabling lighter thinner and stronger components leading to lighter vehicles and less energy consumption Improving customer processes through the supply of innovative consumables to reduce energy intensity and the
Reducing customers refractory usage per tonne of steel produced through higherquality longer servicelife products Increasing the level of sound castings produced per tonne of metal melted through improved mould design and the application of molten metal ltration and feeding systems Sustainability continued 1200telteltel Water conservation 1.2 Water used in metric tonnes Water used in metric tonnes per metric tonne of product packed for shipment 67 People and Community Our people are unique and important to us.
We are unequivocally committed to helping them to be the best they can at what they do.
Our aim at Vesuvius is to foster a working environment that is inclusive and diverse where people can be themselves without fear of harassment bullying or discrimination.
We recognise that the dedication and professionalism of our people their capacity for owning their roles and their drive for results are the most signi cant contributors to Vesuvius success.
In order to get the best from our people we emphasise that one of the most important tasks of being a manager in Vesuvius is the development of their direct reports.
We recognise that we attain our goals through our people.
Line and functional managers are guided in managing and developing their people by a central HR function headquartered in London delivering support through its expertise in Reward T alent Management and Global Mobility and backed up by modern HR information systems.
Management in the business units and regional and local HR staff draw upon this expertise and cascade it to their respective business units and local organisations.
Much care is taken to ensure that Corporate HR initiatives are properly communicated and implemented at local level with the cooperation of identi ed employee representatives.
The main area of attention for the central HR function is identifying and fostering talent across the organisation and making sure that those individuals identi ed as having high potential are seen as a companywide resource with appropriate development plans put in place.
In recruiting talent whether it be recent graduates or seasoned professionals we are looking for individuals who embody an entrepreneurial mindset and an international outlook.
Special attention is paid in addressing matters such as gender balance and the employment of a diverse workforce.
For 2018 a strengthening of both the T alent Management and Reward functions is planned to equip them better for the everincreasing battle for talent in the marketplace.
T alent Management Strengthening the leadership pipeline and facilitating people development throughout the organisation remain key areas of focus for Vesuvius.
We work hard to ensure that across all operational and functional areas of the business at a senior managerial level there is the appropriate level of alignment in strategic outlook and performance goals.
This increases accountability and drives results.
We encourage and reward high performance foster talent and aim to create an environment where all can realise their individual potential.
T o meet the demands of the business and add rigour to our employee value proposition we have launched a number of programmes to assist our employees in growing their careers through utilising worldclass learning opportunities.
Our Responsibility Our T raining Programmes
This is a  rst generation management development programme aimed at developing individual contributors who are likely to occupy a line management role in the short to medium term and managers who have no direct reports but need to be familiar with a broad range of people management skills to use in oneoff projects.
In its  rst year the programme is designed to take place over 12 months and includes a blended learning approach of online learning facetoface workshops and individual projects.
Participants are supported by line management and HR business partners throughout the duration of the programme and thereafter where additional support is needed.
The programme includes a 360 assessment of each participant to enable them to compile a personal development plan for the next stage of their career.
WINGS
This is the Vesuvius middle management development programme aimed at those who manage other managers.
Wings now in its eighth year is held in Spring each year at Vlerick University in Belgium.
In 2017 26 employees successfully completed the course.
The programme entails an introduction to general management theory and practice and like the ADVANCE programme includes a 360 assessment of each participant.
ASCENT
This is the Vesuvius high potential and senior leadership development programme which Vesuvius offers in partnership with Insead.
It is aimed at accelerating the development of top talent within the organisation.
The programme is highly structured and takes place over a ninemonth period involving initial online modules facetoface workshops and individual and group projects in which participants are assessed individually and also against each other.
Participants are supported by senior executives and senior HR management for the duration of the programme and thereafter.
Participants on this programme are those identi ed as being potential future senior management of the Group.
HeaTt
These courses form part of the Vesuvius Technical University aimed at the continuous technical development of Vesuvius personnel.
Courses range from entry to expert levels and are continuously updated to keep pace with developing technology thereby guaranteeing that Vesuvius staff are at the forefront of technical innovation.
HR4HR
During 201617  under the Vesuvius HR4HR project 30 HR professionals underwent accredited professional training in psychometric assessment and evaluation and simulation of key talent management processes each achieving Expert status.
These HR4HR graduates will act now as catalysts for implementing innovative recruitment and talent identi cation techniques across the business.
The project will be progressed in 2018.
Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7
Vesuvius has invested heavily in a new people platform and key digital products.
The SuccessFactors HRIS project was launched globally in January 2017 .
It provides greater transparency across the business facilitating better performance management and focused talent identi cation and development and has been implemented across all our businesses and geographies.
Reward
Vesuvius reward systems are designed to create a market competitive and fair pay environment for all of our employees and to reinforce the vision strategy and expectations set by the Board.
We have adopted the Willis T owers Watson job grading model which enables us to compare roles and deploy a structured assessment methodology across countries and specialisms to ensure that roles are rewarded consistently throughout the organisation.
Employees can also visualise their potential career paths within Vesuvius on the grade map.
Vesuvius is committed to creating reward systems which are transparent and objective where employees receive equal pay for work of equal value regardless of their age race disability sexual orientation gender marital civil partnership or parental status religion or beliefs.
The Corporate Annual Incentive Plan for managers ensures that our people are motivated to achieve their objectives with awards linked to business performance.
The Mid T erm Incentive Plan for managers and senior managers acts as a retention tool for key talent reducing employee turnover and diversifying our pay methods.
The
Vesuvius Share Plan for Executive Directors and Group Executive Committee members encourages decisions based on longterm goals rather than shortterm gains and works to align the interests of participants and shareholders.
People and Community continued Following an early career in construction and refractory manufacturing I joined Vesuvius Canada as a Sales Account Manager in 2000.
I was gradually promoted to the roles of District Manager and Steel Sales Manager  before becoming General Manager of the Canadian business in 2005.
My  rst international posting was to Suzhou China where I became Vice President Advanced Refractories  Asia Paci c.
There
I oversaw all of our Advanced Refractories operations for the Asia Paci c region covering Korea Japan T aiwan and China including our Chinese joint venture with Angang Steel.
My next move was to Australia where I became the General Manager  overseeing the opening of the new Port Kembla manufacturing site and the sale of some of our noncore businesses.
In 201 3 I moved back to Canada to take over the General Manager role once again and in November 2015 became the Operations Director for Advanced Refractories NAFT A responsible for managing our production sites in the US Canada and Mexico.
Finally in May 201 7  I moved to Pittsburgh to take on the position of Vice President of Advanced Refractories NAFT A leading the business in this region.
Vesuvius has given me the chance to work overseas gaining international and intercultural experience enabling me to take on senior management roles around the world.
My  rst international posting was to Suzhou China Bill Cousineau Vice President Advanced Refractories NAFT A al ced le tes and ng ent Global Mobility Although Vesuvius is active worldwide we keep the number of international assignments as low as possible as we believe that local Vesuvius companies should be managed and staffed by local personnel.
International assignments are therefore limited in time usually to three years.
Currently 29 employees are on longterm assignments.
Employee Diversity Vesuvius believes that the diversity of its employees is one of the core strengths of the Group.
Having a balance of cultures ethnicities and genders helps to promote the innovation and creativity that is key to our success.
We recognise that in line with other engineering companies of our size and nature we have an unbalanced gender representation.
We are seeking to address this as part of our wider commitment to diversity.
Female Male Total Female Male Group Executive Committee member 0 10 10 0% 100% Senior management 994 103 9% 91% Middle management 41 305 346 12% 88% Directors of subsidiaries included in consolidation % 93% All other employees 1368 9 183 10551 1 3% 87% Grand total 1418 9592 1 1010 1 3% 87% Of these 103 senior managers 42 directly report to members of the Group Executive Committee and of these three are women.
482 individuals in the Group are Directors of Group subsidiaries.
Of these 7% are women.
This disclosure is made to comply with regulatory requirements.
It includes Directors of dormant companies and those with multiple directorships.
Our Responsibility Global mobility at Vesuvius Providing Vesuvius companies with skills that are not locally available and that are required at short notice.
This typically occurs in countries where we are establishing a new presence.
The number of expatriates working on this basis diminishes over time as the organisation matures and we recruit and train local talent to take over Career development.
We believe that the personal development plan of any employee being developed for a senior management or senior expert position should include a posting outside their home country.
This encourages them to develop the skills necessary to function successfully in an international environment.
These postings are tailored to the needs of the organisation and the needs of the individual Enhancing diversity.
Management teams bene t from having a mix of gender and cultures.
In speci c cases we use international assignments to achieve this goal Vesuvius expatriates do not come from one or two countries alone we have a truly international mix of nationalities in our expatriate population.
Individuals
China China to Germany Poland to the USA and Brazil to China.
Our mobility programme shows that our expatriate population is as diverse as our Group.
Vesuvius operates a number of international assignment policies to provide for the different circumstances of these assignments  whether they be short term longer term or require extended commuting.
These policies are supplemented with clearly identi ed bene ts delivering support appropriate to the nature of the assignment.
By accessing this broad range of policies we can manage our international assignments with greater  exibility thus catering for changing expectations and demands from employees whilst at the same time meeting the demands of the business.
Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7 Employee Consultation and Industrial Relations In most of the countries in which we operate we discuss matters concerning the Vesuvius business with local works councils and trade unions.
These processes and procedures are regulated by local law and we  nd that the constructive dialogue that takes place between employee representatives and management provides bene t to our business.
In addition to local employee representation we operate a European Works Council EWC that contains representatives from each of the EU countries where Vesuvius has employees.
European management and the EWC meet formally once a year.
At this meeting management provides an update on the performance of the business with a particular focus on developments likely to impact European employees.
Additional Special Event Meetings are held when the Group is required to consult with the EWC about particular matters including proposed restructurings in the European organisation.
One such meeting was held in 2017 .
The EWC Select Committee also meets twice a year to receive additional updates and the Chief Human Resources Of cer of Vesuvius joins part of these meetings.
All EWC representatives receive four dedicated training days per year to ensure they are appropriately equipped to ful l their duties.
In addition to formal discussion and consultation mechanisms in many countries our operations hold town hall meetings on a regular basis.
These provide an opportunity for local management to meet with staff and provide an update on corporate developments and matters material to the business.
Valuing our Employees Vesuvius operates a number of awards and initiatives aimed at recognising the contribution of particular individuals and disseminating best practice throughout the Group.
Examples of these include the Living the Values Awards and the EMEA 8D PPS Awards.
Our Living the Values Awards programme is central to maintaining our Groups collective focus on Vesuvius
On 14 December 2017 we gathered for our  fth awards ceremony to celebrate and acknowledge the efforts of 74 employees.
Awards were presented to 14 individuals and 13 teams from 1 1 different countries all of whom nominated by their peers were credited with embodying Vesuvius
They were rewarded with a specially designed trophy with Vesuvius making a  nancial contribution to each winners chosen charity.
The EMEA 8D PPS Awards 2017 took place in Pavia Italy in October.
These awards showcase the bene ts of the 8 Disciplines approach to practical problemsolving.
They were launched to reinforce the messages of our intensive training courses to promote the use of practical problemsolving in the business and to recognise excellence in quality.
During a twoday programme Vesuvius employees were invited to present case studies evidencing the application of the 8D methodology to offer to customers sustainable business solutions.
A panel chaired by Vesuvius Chief Executive judged the presentations selecting the winning team from Olifantsfontein South Africa.
This team demonstrated outstanding capabilities in pushing the boundaries in high temperature solutions.
Their case study demonstrated the use of 8D in a joint effort between the customer and our  eld service engineers to develop a unique solution for the customers team to increase operational ef ciency and to develop new business for Vesuvius.
Vesuvius in the Local Community Our social responsibility activities complement our values in driving our culture.
Our operating sites engage with their local communities through various social action projects.
In Germany Vesuvius GmbH opened its doors to junior researchers from Borken kindergartens.
About 30 children interested in research accompanied by their nursery school teachers turned the Vesuvius canteen into an exciting research island.
At ten research stations the boys and girls experimented with colours sowed herbs and built noise protectors and boats.
People and Community continued 71 Our employees Employees by employment type Employees by region
China 1884
North Asia 337
Europe 4472 F .
South America 1009
India 838
South Asia 296
NAFTA 2174
Salaried 3983
Hourly 5897
Temps 1 130 A C Employees by business unit
Flow Control 4302 D.
Digital Services 526
Foundry 2836 E.
Head Of ce 49
Advanced Ref 2474
Others 823 Our Responsibility In the Netherlands Foseco Nederland BV operates an employee charity donation competition.
Employees write an essay explaining why the charity organisation with which they have a connection should win the donation.
In June 2017  Marloes Goorhuis won the award for her contribution to an organisation named MeeReizen.
MeeReizen organises holidays for mentally disabled people providing the participants with an exciting adventure and their carers with some respite at home.
Marloes has been a volunteer on these holidays for years.
The trip is paid for by the participants themselves so there is a very limited budget.
Additional donations are used to provide additional experiences such as a visit to the zoo a theme park or a museum.
In France colleagues from Vesuvius France SA trained a futsal a special form of football team to participate in an intercompany competition organised by the local association.
This annual competition is organised to support the charity L Enfant Bleu which  ghts against the maltreatment of children.
In addition Vesuvius France SA again worked with Feignies local  re brigades this time conducting four major exercises to learn more about managing chemical risk at high temperatures.
We helped them explore how best to assess situations without prior knowledge how to evaluate circumstantial and environmental factors under pressure as well as how to communicate effectively with teams when facing speci c chemical ow hazards.
In China Vesuvius Suzhou sponsors primary school pupils from lower income families so that they can join in with extracurricular activities.
Now in its seventh year our Vesuvius Y outh T eam project at the ChinaSingapore Suzhou Industrial Park Y outh and Children Centre originally began with three teams unicycle aerobics and chorus.
Since then the project has grown to include jump rope and music teams with 3040 children in each team.
Vesuvius International Scholarship Programme The Vesuvius International Scholarship Programme is set up to assist quali ed dependent children of Vesuvius employees in helping to  nance under graduate and graduate education at accredited institutions.
Awards are granted globally without regard to race colour creed religion sexual orientation age gender disability or national origin.
Vesuvius has been involved in this programme for 22 years during which period Vesuvius has assisted 902 students to achieve their higher education goals at a cost of Individual scholarships have been awarded to employees children living in Belgium Brazil China the Czech Republic France India Indonesia Malaysia Netherlands Poland Romania South Africa Spain UAE and the UK.
8D Awards 2017 The Awards champion unique solutions designed to address customers requirements Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7 Developing talent in our facilities in Brazil and China is critical to the success of our strategic priority to capture growth in developing markets Carolinas career began at Carboox 25 years ago where she delivered RandD success with new casting  ux products and initiatives to assist customers.
As
Vice President she played a key role in establishing the company as a leader across Brazil and
Following its acquisition by Vesuvius Carolina became Managing Director and has been instrumental in enabling a smooth transition working hard to integrate the Vesuvius culture and achieve strong nancial results.
1992 Joined Carboox Resende Quimica Brazil 2016 Carboox acquired by
2017 Promoted to Managing Director Vesuvius Fluxes
Joining Vesuvius a year after graduating Manuel learned quickly and was open to new challenges.
He initially joined the VISO team as a product specialist putting his technical skills to good use developing innovative solutions for customers.
Showing strong leadership capabilities Manuel moved into a managerial role and now heads South Americas growing Digital Services team from the Sao Paulo of ce.
2002 Joined Vesuvius as VISO Specialist Andean region 2008 Sales manager Steel 2012 General and Country Manager Steel Andean
2017 South America Director Sales and Marketing Digital
Following his graduation from university Rafael has enjoyed a successful  ve year engineering career at Vesuvius.
In this time he has been able to develop his technical and commercial knowledge across a number of roles and he is currently using his experience as a worldwide product manager.
2013 Joined ECIL Met T ec as Technical Salesman 2014 Avemis product specialist 2016 Worldwide product manager Hydrogen Systems and Probes 2017 Global Product Manager Hydrogen Systems Hardware and Instruments V esuvius has really welc omed me and m y c ompan y into the international group My work is ex citing we are building the future together V esuvius gave me the opportunity to manage worldwide pr ojects and work with global teams Site Resende Brazil Carolina Campello Bezerra Campos Managing Director Vesuvius Fluxes Site Piedade Brazil Manuel Del no Sales and Marketing Director Digital Services South America Site Piedade Brazil Rafael Lorenzo Jacob Global Product Manager Hydrogen Systems Hardware and Instruments Digital Services People and Community continued 73 I c an use the knowledge I ac quired in the S teel division to bene t the Foundry business Four years after university Benny joined Vesuvius as a Sales Engineer applying his technical expertise to enhance product excellence for customers across China.
Benny to grow his commercial responsibility where he fostered a successful partnership improved product quality and grew market share.
Most recently as Manager of the Foundry team he oversaw a good set of  nancial results last year.
1999 Joined Vesuvius as Sales
2001 Slide Gate Refractories SGRPurging Plugs PP Product Specialist 2006 SGRPP T echnical Director 2012 General Manager WG 2016 Foundry Manager China I am pr oud to be able to share m y technic al expertise with m y c olleagues ar ound the world Site ChangShu China Benny Y ang BU Manager Foundry China Jerry joined Vesuvius on an internship learning about the value of IT to every part of the company.
Always seeking to understand the needs of other functions he soon built a strong culture around him.
After growing his remit across European operations leading a number of projects in Europe Jerry became Director of IT Asia Paci c managing a loyal team that he ensures have access to many overseas opportunities.
2002 Graduated and joined Vesuvius as intern 2004 IT Specialist 2006 IT Manager 2013 IT Manager Borken
2015 IT DirectorAsia Paci c My family and I had a great experienc e working in German y Site Suzhou China Jerry Huang IT DirectorAsia Paci c Site Kobe Japan Shigeru T akii Marketing Manager
Shigeru built up a strong track record after beginning his career as part of Japans sales team.
He was promoted to Manager of Filter Products following nine years at the company where he was successful despite inheriting a challenging market.
Last year he became Marketing Manager of Steel and NonFerrous Products where he has grown a global network across the company and continues to deliver strong results.
1996 Sales team Foseco Japan 2004 Application Engineer Kobe
2007 Manager Filter Products 2010 Manager Metal T reatment
2017 Marketing Manager Steel and Non Ferrous Products Our Responsibility 74 Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7 Section Four
In this section 76 Chairmans Governance Letter 78 Governance Report 85 Audit Committee 93 Nomination Committee
Directors Remuneration Report
96 Remuneration Overview 98 Remuneration Policy Annual Report on Directors
117 Directors Report Statement of Directors Responsibilities 75
I moved from Mexico to Brussels to join the Corporate HR team.
Carlos Bersoza Human Resources Director  Advanced Refractories NAFT A See more about Vesuvius careers People and community on p67 73 I joined Vesuvius in 2006 taking the role of HR Coordinator at Monterrey Mexico whilst Vesuvius was expanding the production lines at its Mexico facility.
Following the inauguration of the new PreCast production line I was offered the opportunity to join the Corporate HR team and in 2008 I moved to Brussels to work as the HR Project Coordinator for the head of ce team.
Whilst there I helped to organise the Groups expatriation processes develop internal training modules and worked on the HR SAP implementation project.
Following the completion of this 5year assignment in Brussels I returned to Mexico in 2013 as Operations HR Business Partner supporting the deployment and training of standardised working teams across the facility.
I continued to travel internationally to deliver workshops and train company leaders in China Brazil Poland and the US on the basis of my experience in Mexico.
T wo years later I was promoted to HR Director for Advanced Refractories NAFT A moving to
In this role as well as my responsibilities for HR across the US Canada and Mexico I also support the Digital Services business unit as their HR contact.
Moving around the world has given me an international mindset enabling me to support and guide Vesuvius colleagues in HR matters.
Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7 Dear shareholder On behalf of the Board I am delighted to present the 2017 Corporate Governance Report.
As a Board we remain committed to applying the highest standards of corporate governance recognising that robust governance and culture underpin business success.
This year the Company is reporting against the 2016 UK Corporate Governance Code the Code.
This version of the Code includes minor changes following the implementation of the European Unions Audit Regulation and
I am pleased to report that the Company is fully compliant with the Code.
There was much debate in 2017 about the future direction of corporate governance with the publication in April of the Business Energy and Industrial Strategy BEIS Select Committees report on corporate governance and the Governments publication of its response to the Green Paper on Corporate Governance Reform in August.
During the year institutions and voting agencies also issued guidance on governance and voting issues and the FRC produced commentaries on key governance issues and responded to the Governments announcements.
This culminated in December with the FRCs publication of its consultation on a new draft of the UK Corporate Governance Code.
The Board monitored each of these developments and remains focused on ensuring that the Company continues to comply with all its governance obligations including full compliance with the UK Corporate Governance Code.
Board Composition 2017 has been a year of signi cant development for the Board with two new Board appointments.
In April the Board was strengthened by the appointment of Holly Koeppel as an independent Nonexecutive Director replacing Nelda Connors who resigned from the Board in 2016.
Having spent 35 years working in global utility power and infrastructure businesses Holly brings with her extensive international experience.
In September we welcomed Patrick Andr to the Board as Chief Executive replacing Franois Wanecq who retired from the Board on 31 August 2017 .
Patrick was appointed as part of a planned succession process which involved a comprehensive review of external and internal candidates.
Patrick joined the Group in early 2016 and has displayed signi cant drive and energy since then strengthening the Flow Control business and exhibiting strong leadership skills and a constant customer focus.
The Board believes that Patrick is the ideal candidate to lead the Group in the next stages of its development.
Following a period of transition Franois Wanecq retired from the Group on 31 December 2017 .
Franois led the business through a period of signi cant challenges and change.
He worked tirelessly to strengthen Vesuvius business and to champion safety and quality throughout the Group.
We thank him for his dedication leadership and stewardship of the Group.
Prior to undertaking these new appointments the Nomination Committee spent time re ecting on the balance of skills and experience of the existing Board members and considering these against the future needs of the business.
Balancing independence with the skills knowledge and experience required on the Board and on the Committees which support it is crucial to the Groups success.
With the appointments of Holly and Patrick we are con dent that the Board has the appropriate composition to ensure the continued longterm success of the business.
Consequently I encourage all shareholders to support the election and reelection of our incumbent Directors at the 2018 Annual General Meeting.
Further details about the recruitment processes for Patrick and Holly can be found in the Nomination Committee Report.
Culture and Diversity Corporate culture continues to be an important focus for our organisation.
Following the recruitment of a new Chief Executive the Board looks to him to continue the work of his predecessor in ensuring that appropriate values and a robust ethical stance are re ected consistently in our behaviour as we conduct our business.
One of the key strengths of Vesuvius has always been in the diversity of our employees.
With a wide geographic spread and local hiring of the clear majority of staff the Group encompasses individuals from a multitude of different nationalities and ethnicities.
At a Board level we recognise the signi cant bene ts of diversity in our business and understand its importance in supporting candid and constructive boardroom debate.
During 2017 the Board re ected further on this theme monitoring the recommendations of the HamptonAlexander Parker and McGregorSmith Reviews on gender and ethnic diversity and approving a Board diversity policy.
This policy sets out our commitment to diversity and explains the actions we will take to af rm this going forward.
Whilst recognising that the HamptonAlexander Review has set a target of 33% female representation on FTSE 350 Boards by 2020 the Board considers its diversity size and composition to be appropriate for the requirements of the business and does not believe that at this time it needs to accelerate the usual rotation of Directors to meet this target.
However the Board will continue to consider the acknowledged bene ts of greater diversity in all future Director recruitment decisions.
With respect to the Group as a whole we recognise that our commitment to diversity is not currently re ected in the gender diversity of our employees.
Like many other industrial engineering companies we know that our organisation must work harder to attract develop and retain talented women.
A copy of the Board Diversity Policy can be found in the Governance Report.
Chairmans Governance
Letter 77 Board Evaluation and T raining This year the Boards formal evaluation process was again externally facilitated by the corporate advisory  rm Lintstock.
It utilised a fresh approach with the key element constituting oneonone interviews with each Director conducted by Lintstock aimed at gaining a deeper insight into Directors responses.
Overall the evaluation concluded that the Board remained of a high calibre and was functioning well with open and challenging debate and transparent information ow.
The Nomination Committee was felt to have dealt successfully with Board succession during the year identifying an accomplished candidate to replace Franois Wanecq as Chief Executive and securing an excellent new Nonexecutive
Similarly the Audit Committee continued to deliver robust challenge to management on  nancial matters and had overseen a smooth transition of external auditor.
Finally the Remuneration Committee had prepared and recommended an updated Remuneration Policy for 2017 .
The evaluation highlighted a number of Board priorities for 2018 including the need to integrate the new Chief Executive an ongoing emphasis on strategy and its delivery and the need for the Board to continue to set the right tone from the top and monitor the culture of the Group.
The development of senior management level talent and succession plans for them was again noted as being a key area for focus in 2018 with new training programmes implemented and continuing initiatives in place to ensure greater Board access to these highpotential individuals.
As Chairman I recognise that I am responsible for ensuring that the Board continues to operate effectively and that part of this role is to ensure that all Directors attain an appropriate understanding of the business and continue to refresh their skills and knowledge.
During the year both new Directors undertook a tailored induction programme to ensure that they quickly gained a good understanding of the Group and their responsibilities and obligations.
As well as receiving brie ngs and updates on key  nancial legal and governance issues impacting the organisation the Directors furthered their knowledge by undertaking visits to various operations during the year.
The Board visited Group operations and a customers facilities in Brazil I visited our operations in China and other Nonexecutive Directors visited operations in Poland the US and Germany.
During 2018 the Nonexecutive Directors will continue to broaden their understanding of the Group through individual site visits as well as scheduled Board visits.
Financial Reporting and Risk In 2016 the Audit Committee conducted a competitive tender for the external audit which led to the appointment of PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP PwC as the Companys new auditor in 2017 .
PwC formulated a detailed transition plan working with people across the business to build on their understanding of the Group and re ne the planned approach to the audit.
During the year PwC provided regular updates to the Audit Committee on the status and progress of the auditor transition plan along with valuable insights into the Groups audit environment.
Further details about the transition process are contained in the Audit Committee Report.
The Board continually assesses the Groups key risks and the methods by which we manage our risks.
The impacts of the risks are also reviewed and tested as part of our ongoing risk management approach.
This process continued in 2017 .
A number of emerging risks were raised and discussed re ecting developing macro trends and identi ed risks where issues had arisen during the year.
Whilst none of these was considered signi cant enough to change the overall characterisation of the Groups risks and uncertainties the Boards view on each of these issues was integrated into management discussions on risk and factored into the approach the Group takes to mitigation.
The Board continues to monitor all perceived risks and the methods by which these are managed.
Y ours sincerely John McDonough CBE Chairman 28 February 2018 In this section Board effectiveness on Board accountability on p83 Audit Committee Report on p85 Nomination Committee Report on p93 Directors Remuneration Report on p96 Also see Risk on Principles on p56 Governance 78 Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7 Governance Report The Board of Vesuvius plc the Company is responsible for the Groups system of corporate governance and is committed to maintaining high standards of governance and to developing them to re ect progression in best practice.
This report describes the Companys corporate governance structure and explains how during the year ended 31 December 2017 Vesuvius applied the Main Principles of the UK Corporate Governance Code 2016 issued by the Financial Reporting Council the Code.
Throughout the year and up until the date of this report Vesuvius was in full compliance with the requirements of the Code.
The Board has noted the consultation that has commenced regarding a new revised UK Corporate Governance Code and has begun to consider the changes that the Company would need to make to its existing practices and procedures to ensure continuing full compliance in the future.
A number of the proposed new requirements are already re ected in the Companys approach to governance.
A copy of the current Code can be found on the FRC website at https frc.
Roles and Responsibilities of the Board Ultimate responsibility for the management of the Group rests with the Board of Directors.
The Board focuses primarily upon strategic and policy issues and is responsible for the Groups longterm success.
It sets the Groups strategy oversees the allocation of resources and monitors the performance of the Group.
It is responsible for effective risk assessment and management.
The Board The Board has a formal schedule of matters reserved to it and delegates certain matters to its Committees.
It is anticipated that the Board will convene on seven occasions during 2018 holding ad hoc meetings to consider nonscheduled business if required.
The Chairman and Chief Executive The division of responsibilities between the Chairman and the Chief Executive is set out in writing.
This was reviewed during the year on the appointment of our new Chief Executive as well as being part of the Companys annual corporate governance review.
No amendments were considered necessary.
The interactions in the governance process are shown in the schematic below.
Board Committees The principal governance Committees of the Board are the Audit Remuneration and Nomination Committees.
Each Committee has written terms of reference which were reviewed during the year .
No amendments were considered to be required.
These are available to view on the Companys website site For biographical details see Board of Directors on pages 50 and 51.
Governance Committees
Administrative Committees Audit Committee T o monitor the integrity of  nancial reporting and to assist the Board in its review of the effectiveness of the Groups internal controls and risk management systems
Douglas Hurt
All independent Nonexecutive Directors Remuneration Committee T o determine the appropriate remuneration packages for the Groups Chairman Executive Directors and Company Secretary and to recommend and monitor the level and structure of remuneration for other senior management
Jane Hinkley
All independent Nonexecutive Directors Nomination Committee T o advise the Board on appointments retirements and resignations from the Board and its Committees and to review succession planning and talent development for the Board and senior management
John McDonough
Nonexecutive Director
Chairman and any three Nonexecutive Directors In addition the Board delegates certain responsibilities on an ad hoc basis to a Finance Committee and Share Scheme Committee which operate in accordance with the delegated authority agreed by the Board Finance Committee To approve speci c funding and T reasuryrelated matters in accordance with the Groups delegated authorities or as delegated by the Board
John McDonough
Membership
Chairman Chief Executive Chief Financial Of cer and Group Head of Corporate
Share Scheme Committee T o facilitate the administration of the Companys share schemes
Any Board member
Any two Directors or a Director and the Company Secretary Group Executive Committee The Group also operates a Group Executive Committee GEC which is convened and chaired by the Chief Executive and assists him in discharging his responsibilities.
The GEC comprises the Chief Executive Chief Financial Of cer the four Business Unit Presidents the Chief Human Resources Of cer the Chief T echnology Of cer the President Operations and the General Counsel and Company Secretary.
The GEC met six times during 2017 and is scheduled to meet seven times during 2018.
Its meetings are generally held at major operational sites or in the London head of ce.
Having reviewed the role of the GEC the new Chief Executive has chosen to maintain its operation in its current form.
Governance
Board and Committee Attendance The attendance of Directors at the Board meetings and at meetings of the principal Committees of which they are members held during 2017 is shown in the table below.
The maximum number of meetings in the period during which the individual was a Board or Committee member is shown in brackets.
Board
Audit
Committee
Remuneration
Committee
Nomination
Committee
Chairman
John McDonough CBE 8 9   6 6 Executive Directors Patrick Andr appointed 1 September 201 7 3 3 Guy Y oung 9 9 Franois Wanecq retired 31 August 201 7 6 6 NonExecutive Directors Christer Gardell 9 9   5 6 Hock Goh 8 9 4 5 3 5 5 6 Jane Hinkley 9 9 5 5 5 5 6 6 Douglas Hurt 8 9 5 5 4 5 6 6 Holly Koeppel appointed 3 April 201 7 7 7 2 3 4 4 4 4 John McDonough was absent from a Board meeting due to a family emergency.
The meeting was chaired in his absence by the Senior Independent Director SID Douglas Hurt.
Hock Goh and Douglas Hurt were unable to make additional Board and Remuneration Committee meetings scheduled at short notice due to prior engagements.
T o the extent that Directors are unable to attend scheduled meetings or additional meetings called on short notice they receive the papers in advance and relay their comments to the Chairman for communication at the meeting.
The Chairman follows up after the meeting in relation to the decisions taken.
In 2017  the Chairman sought Hock Goh and Douglas Hurts views on the matters to be discussed at the Board meeting they were due to miss in each case prior to the meeting and provided feedback to them on the outcome of discussions.
The Committee Chairmen likewise contacted those Directors who were unable to attend Committee meetings in advance of those meetings to canvass their views and understand any issues they wished to raise in respect of the subject matters being discussed.
The SID maintained contact with the Chairman regarding his priorities for the meeting he was unable to attend together with the discussions undertaken and the action points that stemmed from that meeting.
Governance Structure Nonexecutive Directors Exercise a strong independent voice challenging and supporting Executive Directors.
Scrutinise performance against objectives and monitor nancial reporting.
Monitor and oversee risks and controls determine Executive Director remuneration and manage Board succession through their Committee responsibilities
Provides leadership and guidance for the Board promoting a high standard of corporate governance.
Sets the Board agenda and manages meetings.
Independent on appointment he is the link between the Executive and Nonexecutive Directors Chief Executive Develops strategy for review and approval of the
Directs monitors and maintains the operational performance of the Company.
Responsible for the application of Group policies implementation of Group strategy and the resources for their delivery.
Accountable to the Board for Group performance Senior Independent Director Acts as a sounding board for the Chairman an alternative contact for shareholders and an intermediary for other Nonexecutive
Leads the annual evaluation of the Chairman and recruitment process for hisher replacement when required Company Secretary Advises the Chairman on governance together with updates on regulatory and compliance matters.
Supports the Board agenda with clear information  ow.
Acts as a link between the Board and its Committees and between Nonexecutive Directors and senior management The Board Responsible for Group strategy risk management succession and policy issues.
Sets the tone values and culture for the Group.
Monitors the Groups progress against the targets set 80 Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7 Governance Report continued Board Effectiveness Board Composition The Board comprises eight Directors  the Nonexecutive Chairman John McDonough CBE the Chief Executive Patrick Andr the Chief Financial Of cer Guy Y oung and ve Nonexecutive Directors.
Patrick Andr joined the Board as Chief Executive on 1 September 2017  replacing Franois Wanecq who retired from the Board on 31 August 2017 as part of a planned succession process.
Holly Koeppel joined the Board as an independent Nonexecutive Director on 3 April 2017 .
Douglas Hurt is the Senior Independent Director.
Henry Knowles is the Company Secretary.
The Board focuses on ensuring that both it and its Committees have the appropriate range of diversity skills experience independence and knowledge of the Company and the markets in which it operates to enable it to discharge its duties and responsibilities effectively.
The Board continues to look at diversity in its broadest sense  re ected in the range of backgrounds and experience of our Board members who are drawn from different nationalities and have managed a variety of complex global businesses.
During the year the Board re ected on the recommendations of the HamptonAlexander Parker and McGregorSmith reviews on gender and ethnic diversity and formalised its approach to diversity with the approval of a Board Diversity Policy.
The policy sets out the Boards objectives with regard to diversity to ensure that the Company maintains the optimum Board and Committee composition underpinning the fundamental requirement to maintain the right balance of independence skills and knowledge in the boardroom.
Details of the Nomination Committees activities in compliance with the policy during the year are included in the Nomination Committee Report.
The Boards overall skills and experience as well as Non executive Director independence were reviewed during the year as part of the process of recruiting the two new Directors.
The Boards composition also formed part of the Board evaluation process.
T wo of the eight Directors 25% are women and four 50% are nonUK citizens.
The Board also contains individuals from a range of ethnic backgrounds.
The Board consequently considers its diversity size and composition to be appropriate for the requirements of the business and in line with its adopted policy.
The Board recognises that the HamptonAlexander Review has set a target of 33% female representation on FTSE 350 Boards by 2020.
Whilst the Board does not believe that it is appropriate to accelerate its planned rotation of Directors purely to meet this target it will continue to consider the bene ts of greater diversity in all future Director recruitment decisions.
Board Diversity Policy
This policy sets out the approach to diversity in respect of the Board of Directors of Vesuvius plc.
The policy is intended to assist the Board through the work of the Nomination Committee in creating and maintaining optimum Board and Committee composition.
The broad principles of diversity contained in this policy apply to all employees of the Vesuvius Group.
The Vesuvius Code of Conduct re ects Vesuvius commitment to diversity and respect for its employees.
Policy Statement Vesuvius plc recognises the value of a diverse and skilled workforce and is committed to creating and maintaining an inclusive and collaborative workplace culture that will provide sustainability for the organisation into the future.
Policy Objectives The Nomination Committee will focus on ensuring that it the Board and the Boards other Committees have the appropriate range of diversity skills experience independence and knowledge of the Company to enable them to discharge their duties and responsibilities effectively.
The Nomination Committee will ensure that all appointments to the Board are based on merit with each candidate assessed against objective criteria focused on the skills experience and knowledge required of the position and with due regard to the bene ts of diversity on the Board.
The Nomination Committee will engage with executive search  rms in a manner which ensures that opportunities are taken for a diverse range of candidates to be considered for appointment.
This will include ensuring that the Committee only uses search  rms that are signed up to the Voluntary Code of Conduct for Executive Search Firms.
The Nomination Committee supports senior management efforts to increase diversity in the senior management pipeline to facilitate succession planning towards executive Board positions.
With respect to the representation of women on the Board highlighted by the Davies and HamptonAlexander Reviews the Board is supportive of the initiative to increase the proportion of women on the boards of FTSE 350 companies.
Vesuvius which at the date of this policy has a Board comprising 25% female membership will continue to ensure that the Board of Vesuvius plc re ects this level or greater levels of gender diversity as are appropriate for its size and dynamics to enable it to continue to deliver on the requirements of the Vesuvius business.
Monitoring and Reporting This policy and progress against its objectives will be reviewed annually.
The Nomination Committee is responsible for the implementation of this policy and for monitoring progress towards the achievement of its objectives.
Board Composition Number of Directors with key skills and experience Chairman Chief Executive or CFO experience Safety and Risk
Global engineering and manufacturing Related industrial experience Operational leadership Strategic planning
Committee composition is set out in the relevant Committee reports.
No one other than the Committee Chairman and members of the Committee is entitled to participate in meetings of the Audit Nomination and Remuneration Committees.
However as detailed in the Committee reports where the agenda permits other Directors and senior management regularly attend by invitation supporting the operation of each of the Committees in an open and consensual manner.
The Board considers that for the purposes of the UK Corporate Governance Code four Nonexecutive Directors excluding the Nonexecutive Chairman namely Hock Goh Jane Hinkley Douglas Hurt and Holly Koeppel are independent of management and free from any business or other relationship which could affect the exercise of their independent judgement.
Christer Gardell is Managing Partner of Cevian Capital which holds 21.
1 1% of Vesuvius issued ordinary share capital and is not considered to be independent.
He brings a wealth of commercial acumen to the Board.
The Chairman satis ed the independence criteria on his appointment to the Board.
Biographical details of the Directors are set out on pages 50 and 51.
Appointment to the Board Recommendations for appointments to the Board are made by the Nomination Committee.
Further information is set out in the Nomination Committee report on pages 93 to 95.
Time Commitment of the Chairman and the Nonexecutive Directors The Chairman and Nonexecutive Directors each have a letter of appointment which sets out the terms and conditions of their directorship.
An indication of the anticipated time commitment is provided in any recruitment role speci cation and each Nonexecutive Directors letter of appointment provides details of the meetings that they are expected to attend along with the need to accommodate travelling time.
Nonexecutive Directors are required to set aside suf cient time to prepare for meetings and regularly to refresh and update their skills and knowledge.
All Nonexecutive Directors have agreed to commit suf cient time for the proper performance of their responsibilities acknowledging that this will vary from year to year depending on the Groups activities and will involve visiting manufacturing and customer sites around the Group.
The Chairman in particular dedicates a signi cant amount of time to Vesuvius in discharging his duties.
The Board notes that the Chairman holds chairmanships other than Vesuvius but that only one of these is for a listed company.
The other two chairmanships are for much smaller private companies where the time commitment is limited.
All Directors are expected to attend all scheduled Board and Committee meetings and any additional meetings as required.
Each Directors other signi cant commitments are disclosed to the Board during the process for their appointment and they are required to notify the Board of any subsequent changes.
The
Company has reviewed the availability of the Chairman and the Nonexecutive Directors and considers that each of them can and in practice does devote the necessary amount of time to the Companys business.
At the time of her appointment Holly Koeppel served on a number of Boards and was in the process of adjusting her portfolio and retiring from her executive positions.
During 2017 she stepped down from all but one of her board appointments and now only serves as a Nonexecutive Director on two other boards having taken on a new Nonexecutive position at British American T obacco plc in July 2017 .
The Board notes that Hock Goh holds a number of other directorships but that these other commitments typically only require a total of 25 days work per year.
MEC Resources Ltd is the listed parent company of Advent Energy Ltd an investment company that is not currently operational.
As a result Hok Gohs commitments as Chairman of these companies are currently minimal and he is only required to attend two Board meetings a year.
His other directorships require attendance at a small number of Board meetings each year.
Having reviewed this the Board believes that Hocks additional commitments do not prevent him from properly ful lling his duties as a Nonexecutive Director of Vesuvius plc.
Information and Support The Board ensures that it receives in a timely manner information of an appropriate quality to enable it adequately to discharge its responsibilities.
Papers are provided to the Directors in advance of the relevant Board or Committee meeting to enable them to make further enquiries about any matters prior to the meeting should they so wish.
This also allows Directors who are unable to attend to submit views in advance of the meeting.
In addition to the formal Board processes the Chief Executive provides written updates on important Company business issues between meetings and the Board is provided with a comprehensive monthly report of key  nancial and management information.
Regular updates on shareholder issues are provided to the Directors who also receive copies of analysts notes issued on the Company.
For the distribution of all information Directors have access to a secure online portal which contains a reference section containing background information on the Company.
All Directors have access to the advice and services of the Company Secretary.
There is also an agreed procedure in place for Nonexecutive Directors in the furtherance of their duties to take independent legal advice at the Companys expense.
Induction and T raining A comprehensive induction programme is available to new
The core of the induction programme is designed in compliance with the UK Corporate Governance Code and is tailored to meet the requirements of the individual appointee and the dynamics of the Group.
This process was undertaken twice during the year on the appointment of Holly Koeppel as a Non executive Director and the appointment of Patrick Andr as Chief Executive.
The Chairman through the Company Secretary continues to ensure that there is an ongoing process to review training and development needs.
Directors are provided with details of seminars and training courses relevant to their role and are Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7 encouraged and supported by the Company in attending them.
In 2017  regulatory updates were provided as a standing item at each Board meeting in a Secretarys Report.
External input on legal and regulatory developments impacting the business was also given with specialist advisers invited to the Board and its Committees to provide brie ngs on overall market and economic developments including Brexit forthcoming accounting changes legal developments in data protection and tax matters and other general corporate governance issues.
In addition in 2017 the full Board visited our operations and customers in Brazil gaining a broader understanding of the South American business.
The Chairman visited our operations in China in May and other Nonexecutive Directors visited operations in Poland the US and Germany during the year.
In 2018 the Nonexecutive Directors will continue to broaden their understanding of the Group through further site visits.
Governance in Action  Chief Executive Induction Following his appointment as Chief Executive the Board requested that the Company Secretary arrange a comprehensive induction programme for Patrick Andr.
This recognised his prior employment with the Group as President Flow Control and was therefore tailored to focus on the corporate aspects of his new role and the work of the other business units.
Reference materials were provided including information about the Board its Committees procedures for dealing in the Companys shares and other regulatory and governance matters.
All aspects of risk and its management through insurance compliance and relevant corporate policies and procedures were covered.
Patrick was advised of his legal and other duties and obligations as a Director of a listed company.
These matters were discussed in detail in a series of meetings conducted by internal management and external advisers.
Patrick held onetoone meetings with all other Board members and conducted meetings with key executives throughout the Group including regular meetings and joint site and customer visits with the outgoing Chief Executive.
He also held a week of offsite meetings with the Group Executive Committee to strengthen the relationship with his new team and focus on the organisational structure of the key functions of the Group.
Since his appointment Patrick has been undertaking a comprehensive programme of site visits with a view to visiting all the Groups key RandD and manufacturing facilities.
Patrick has met with the Groups principal advisers the Companys brokers and investor community using this as an opportunity to understand their roles and the corporate governance environment in greater detail.
The Board monitored the induction process and asked the Company Secretary to provide updates on its progress.
Performance Evaluation The Board carries out an evaluation of its performance and that of its Committees every year.
In 2017  this evaluation took place in the fourth quarter and was again externally facilitated by the corporate advisory  rm Lintstock.
The Group subscribes to access Lintstocks Insider database but has no other connection with the organisation.
This years evaluation utilised a fresh approach.
Rather than conducting the evaluation via a series of questionnaires this year Lintstock issued a short questionnaire and then conducted a series of indepth interviews with each Director and the Company Secretary aimed at analysing and gaining further insight into their responses.
As with previous years the evaluation not only covered the performance of the Board but also that of its Committees along with individual reviews of each Director and analysis of the performance of the Chairman.
A narrative report broken down into thematic areas was then presented to the Board.
The 2016 evaluation had highlighted several priorities for 2017 including strategy and Board succession and had also identi ed areas for ongoing improvement including greater efforts to support the development of staff members below senior management level.
As part of the 2017 evaluation the Board assessed that the Nomination Committee had dealt successfully with Board succession during the year securing an excellent new Nonexecutive Director and identifying an accomplished candidate to replace Franois Wanecq as Chief
Overall the Board felt that the transition of Chief Executive had been effectively managed.
The development of staff members below senior management level continued during 2017 and remains a focus for 2018 with new training programmes implemented and continuing initiatives in place to ensure greater Board access to these individuals.
Regarding priorities for 2018 the evaluation highlighted the need to continue to support the integration of the new Chief Executive to ensure he establishes effective working relationships with members of the Board and senior management and is supported in formulating and implementing his objectives for the Group.
The Board noted there would be an ongoing emphasis on strategy and recognising the increasing corporate governance focus on stakeholder communication the Board would need to continue to develop plans to interact with stakeholders and oversee the culture of the Group.
The evaluation also identi ed a consistent theme regarding personal development plans.
It was agreed that the Board would focus on this during its oversight of senior management.
In respect of its own activities individual Nonexecutive Directors would be encouraged to continue undertaking site visits to operations throughout the Group.
On more practical matters there was a continuing need to improve Board processes with the re nement of Board packs and the promotion of consistency in Board presentations.
As in previous years a set of action points was compiled from the output of the evaluation to ensure that its  ndings are implemented into the Boards activities.
This is supervised by the Chairman and reviewed throughout the year.
The Chairman noted that overall the evaluation had concluded that the Board remained of a high calibre and was functioning well with open debate and good information  ow.
The individual assessment of Directors concluded that all continued to contribute effectively devoting adequate time to their duties and being engaged and proactive in debate at all meetings.
Each of the Committees was considered to have operated effectively during the year with recognition that the Remuneration Committee had overseen the successful implementation of the new Remuneration Policy the Audit Committee had overseen the smooth transition in external auditor and the Nomination Committee had undertaken two productive rounds of recruitment.
Appointment and Replacement of Directors Board membership should not be fewer than  ve nor more than 15 Directors save that the Company may by ordinary resolution from time to time vary this minimum andor maximum number of Directors.
Directors may be appointed by ordinary resolution or by the Board.
A Director appointed by the Board must retire from of ce at the  rst Annual General Governance Report continued 83 Meeting AGM after hisher appointment.
A Director who retires in this way is then eligible for reappointment.
The Board may appoint one or more Directors to any executive of ce on such terms and for such period as it thinks  t and it can also terminate or vary such an appointment at any time.
The Articles specify that at every AGM any Director who has been appointed by the Vesuvius Board since the last AGM and any Director who held of ce at the time of the two preceding AGMs and who did not retire at either of them shall retire from of ce.
However in accordance with the requirements of the Code all the Directors will offer themselves for election or reelection at this years
The biographical details of the Directors offering themselves for election and reelection including details of their other directorships and relevant skills and experience will be set out in the 2018 Notice of AGM.
The biographical details of the Directors are also set out on pages 50 and 51.
The Board believes that each of the current Directors is effective and demonstrates commitment to his or her respective role.
Accordingly the Board recommends that shareholders approve the resolutions to be proposed at the 2018 AGM relating to the reelection of all the Directors then standing.
Directors Con icts of Interest The Board has established a formal system to authorise situations where a Director has an interest that con icts or may possibly con ict with the interests of the Company situational con icts.
Directors declare situational con icts so that they can be considered for authorisation by the noncon icted Directors.
In considering a situational con ict these Directors act in the way they consider would be most likely to promote the success of the Company and may impose limits or conditions when giving authorisation or subsequently if they think this is appropriate.
The Company Secretary records the consideration of any con ict and records any authorisations granted.
The Board believes that the approach it has in place for reporting situational con icts continues to operate effectively.
No situational con icts were brought to the Board for authorisation during the year under review.
Board Accountability Risk Management and Internal Control The Board has overall responsibility for establishing and maintaining a system of risk management and internal control and for reviewing its effectiveness.
This system is designed to manage rather than eliminate the risks facing the Group and safeguard its assets.
No system of internal control can provide absolute assurance against material misstatement or loss.
The Groups system is designed to provide the Directors with reasonable assurance that problems are identi ed on a timely basis and are dealt with appropriately.
The Audit Committee assists the Board in reviewing the effectiveness of the Groups system of internal control including  nancial operational and compliance controls and risk management systems.
The key features of the Groups system of internal control are set out in the table below.
Governance
Strategy and nancial reporting Comprehensive strategic planning and forecasting process Annual budget approved by the Board Monthly operating  nancial information reported against budget Key trends and variances analysed and action taken as appropriate Vesuvius GAAP Accounting policies and procedures formulated and disseminated to all Group operations Covers the application of accounting standards the maintenance of accounting records and key  nancial control procedures Operational controls Operating companies and corporate of ces maintain internal controls and procedures appropriate to their structure and business environment Compliance with Group policies on items such as authorisation of capital expenditure treasury transactions the management of intellectual property and legalregulatory issues Use of common accounting policies and procedures and  nancial reporting software used in  nancial reporting and consolidation Signi cant  nancing and investment decisions reserved to the Board Monitoring of policy and control mechanisms for managing treasury risk by the Board Risk assessment and management Continuous process for identifying evaluating and managing any signi cant risks Risk management process designed to identify the key risks facing each business Reports made to the Board on how those risks are managed Each major Group business unit produces a risk map to identify key risks assess the likelihood of risks occurring their impact and mitigating actions T opdown risk identi cation undertaken at Group Executive Committee and Board meetings Board review of insurance and other measures used in managing risks across the Group The Board is noti ed of major issues and makes an annual assessment of how risks have changed Ongoing assurance processes by the Legal function and Internal Audit including the annual certi cation process Externally supported Speak Up whistleblowing line Risk Management and Internal Control  Key Features 84 Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7 Reviewing the Effectiveness of Risk Management and Internal Control The internal control system covers the Group as a whole and is monitored and supported by the Groups Internal Audit function which conducts reviews of Vesuvius businesses and reports objectively both on the adequacy and effectiveness of the system of internal control and on those businesses compliance with Group policies and procedures.
The Audit Committee receives reports from the Group Head of Internal Audit and reports to the Board on the results of its review.
As part of the Boards process for reviewing the effectiveness of the system of internal control it delegates certain matters to the Audit Committee.
Following the Audit Committees review of internal  nancial controls and of the processes covering other controls the Board annually evaluates the results of the internal control and risk management procedures conducted by senior management.
This includes a selfcerti cation exercise by which senior nancial operational and functional management certify the compliance throughout the year of the areas under their responsibility with the Groups policies and procedures and highlight any material issues that have occurred during the year.
Since the date of this review there have been no signi cant changes in internal controls or other matters identi ed which could signi cantly affect them.
In accordance with the provisions of the Code the Directors con rm that they have carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Company including those that threaten its business model future performance solvency or liquidity.
They have also reviewed the effectiveness of the Groups system of internal control and con rm that the necessary actions have been taken to remedy any control weaknesses identi ed during the year.
The Groups principal risks and how they are being managed or mitigated are detailed on pages 24 and 25 and the Viability Statement which considers the Groups future prospects is detailed on page 23.
Risk management and internal control is discussed in greater detail in the Audit Committee report.
The Audit Committee The members of the Audit Committee are set out on page 85.
The Audit Committee report which describes the Audit Committees work in discharging its responsibilities is set out on pages 85 to 92.
Executive Compensation and Risk All of the independent Nonexecutive Directors serve on both the Audit and Remuneration Committees.
They therefore bring their experience and knowledge of the activities of each Committee to bear when considering critical areas of judgement.
This means that for example the Directors are able to consider carefully the impact of incentive arrangements on the Groups risk pro le and to ensure that the Groups Remuneration Policy and programme are structured to align with the longterm objectives and risk appetite of the Company.
Share Capital and Voting Disclosure of the information regarding share capital the authorisation received by Directors at the AGM regarding the issue of shares and the authority to purchase own shares is contained on page 1 18 within the Directors Report.
There are no restrictions on voting contained in the Companys Articles of
Further details are set out in the Directors Report on page 1 19.
Relations with Shareholders The Board is committed to communicating with shareholders and other stakeholders in a clear and open manner and seeks to ensure effective engagement through the Companys regular communications the AGM and other investor relations activities.
The Company undertakes an ongoing programme of meetings with investors which is managed by the Chief Executive and Chief Financial Of cer.
The majority of meetings with investors are led by them.
Following the announcement of his appointment as Chief Executive Patrick Andr accompanied Guy Y oung and Franois Wanecq on the investor roadshows conducted to communicate the halfyear results.
Since formally taking up his Chief Executive position Patrick has been continuing to meet with investors attending investor conferences and meeting with market analysts.
In advance of the 2017 AGM we wrote to our largest shareholders inviting discussion on any questions they might like to raise and making the Chairmen of the Board the Audit Committee and the Remuneration Committee available to meet shareholders should they so wish.
In 2017  other than one institutional shareholder no requests for discussions were received from shareholders following this communication.
The Chairman Senior Independent Director and Committee Chairmen remain available for discussion with shareholders throughout the year on matters under their areas of responsibility either through contacting the Company Secretary or directly at the AGM.
The Company reports its  nancial results to shareholders twice a year with the publication of its annual and halfyear  nancial reports.
In addition to maintain transparency in performance it also issued two scheduled trading updates during 2017 .
One was published immediately prior to the 2017 AGM on 10 May 2017  and the second was published on 14 November 2017 .
In conjunction with these announcements presentations or teleconference calls were held by the Chief Executive and Chief Financial Of cer with institutional investors and analysts.
All Directors are expected to attend the Companys AGM providing shareholders with the opportunity to question them about issues relating to the Group either during the meeting or informally afterwards.
Governance Report continued 85 Dear shareholder On behalf of the Audit Committee I am pleased to present the Audit Committee Report for 2017 .
The Committee works largely to a recurring and structured programme of activities which are de ned in an annual rolling Audit Committee timetable.
Additional items are then added and the Committee agenda is modi ed as the year progresses to accommodate new topics and priorities.
Signi cant nonstandard items that required Committee focus during the year were the appointment of the new external auditor and updating of the Internal Audit reporting process.
The Committee also continued its review of deep dive topics during the year covering de ned bene t pension schemes and cyber security.
Following the completion of the formal audit tender in 2016 and the appointment of PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP PwC in May 2017  the Committee oversaw the seamless transition of the external audit from KPMG LLP to PwC during the year.
PwC followed a detailed transition plan focused on gaining a good understanding of the Group and establishing contact with key management and local personnel.
The Committee received regular updates on progress against this plan and bene ted from PwCs insights into the Groups risk control framework as they conducted their initial meetings and reviews.
During the year the approach to internal audit was updated to allow for clearer focus at the Audit Committee on key control issues albeit that the overall scope and coverage of the annual Internal Audit plan remained as broad as in previous years.
Internal audits are now identi ed by separate designations Compliance and Control CandC or Effectiveness and Ef ciency
CandC audit activities focus entirely on internal  nancial control and key Board compliance issues with the EandE audits examining a broader constituency of business performance issues.
The Audit Committee receives detailed feedback on any issues identi ed in CandC audit activity and more general oversight of the results of EandE audit activity.
The latter highlight broader performance issues identi ed by the Internal Audit team for management response and remediation.
The Audit Committee Report describes the work of the Committee during the year including its role in monitoring the integrity of the Companys  nancial statements and the effectiveness of the internal and external audit processes.
It provides an overview of the signi cant issues the Committee has considered during the year and its material judgements.
It also describes how the Committee ful lled its responsibilities to assist the Board in reviewing the effectiveness of the Groups system of internal control including  nancial operational and compliance controls and risk management systems.
Y ours sincerely Douglas Hurt Chairman Audit Committee Committee Members Douglas Hurt Committee Chairman Hock Goh Jane Hinkley Holly Koeppel appointed on 3 April 2017 The Audit Committee The Audit Committee comprises all the independent Non executive Directors of the Company who bring a wide range of  nancial and commercial expertise to the Committees decisionmaking and evaluation processes.
Douglas Hurt is the Senior Independent Director and Chairman of the Audit Committee having been appointed to these roles by the Board following the 2015 AGM.
He was the Finance Director of IMI plc for nine years prior to that and has worked in various  nancial roles throughout his career.
Douglas is also Chairman of the Audit Committees of Countryside Properties PLC and T ate and Lyle plc and a Chartered Accountant.
This background provides him with the recent and relevant  nancial experience required under the Code.
The Company Secretary is Secretary to the Committee.
The Code and Financial Conduct Authority Disclosure Guidance and T ransparency Rules also contain requirements for the Audit Committee as a whole to have competence relevant to the sector in which the Company operates.
Vesuvius Nonexecutive Directors have signi cant breadth of experience and depth of knowledge on matters related to Vesuvius operations both from their previous roles and from their induction and other activities since joining the Board of
The Directors biographies on pages 50 and 51 outline their range of multinational businesstobusiness experience and expertise in  elds including engineering manufacturing services and logistics as well as  nancial and commercial acumen.
The Board therefore considers that the Audit Committee as a whole has competence relevant to Vesuvius business sector.
Meetings
The Committee met  ve times during 2017 .
The Committee has also met twice since the end of the  nancial year and prior to the signing of this Annual Report.
The Board Chairman the nonindependent Nonexecutive Director the Chief Executive the Chief Financial Of cer the Group Financial Controller the Head of Internal Audit and the external auditor were all invited to each meeting.
Other management staff were also invited to attend as appropriate.
In preparation for their tenure as the new external auditor PwC attended Audit Committee meetings prior to their formal appointment by shareholders at the 2017 AGM.
In February 2017  the Audit Committee held a preliminary meeting on yearend issues in advance of the  nalisation of the  nancial statements in early March.
This approach was judged to be effective and has been integrated into the Audit Committee schedule going forward.
Audit Committee Governance 86 Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7 Audit Committee meetings are conducted to promote an open debate to challenge constructively signi cant accounting judgements to provide guidance and oversight to management to ensure that the business maintains an appropriately robust control environment and to provide informed advice to the Board on  nancial matters.
The Chairman of the Audit Committee encourages open dialogue between the external auditors the management team and the Head of Internal Audit between Audit Committee meetings to ensure that emerging issues are addressed in a timely manner.
During the year as is the Audit Committees established practice the Committee members met and discussed business and control matters with senior management during site visits informal meetings and Board presentations.
The Committee also met privately with the Head of Internal Audit and the external auditor without any executives present.
The outcomes of Audit Committee meetings were reported to the Board and all members of the Board received the agenda papers and minutes of the Committee.
Role and Responsibilities The main role and responsibilities of the Committee continue to be to Monitor the integrity of the  nancial statements of the Company and the Group and any formal announcements relating to the Groups  nancial performance informing the Board of the outcome of the audit Monitor and review the effectiveness of the Groups internal nancial controls and the Groups internal control and risk management systems Establish and review procedures for detecting fraud systems and controls for the prevention of bribery and oversee the Companys arrangements for employees to raise concerns about possible wrongdoing in  nancial reporting or other matters Monitor and review the effectiveness of the Companys Internal Audit function Make recommendations to the Board on the appointment reappointment and removal of the external auditor and approve the remuneration and terms of engagement of the external auditor Monitor and review the external auditors independence objectivity and effectiveness taking into consideration any nonaudit services provided and the relevant UK professional and regulatory requirements T ake account of the  ndings and conclusions of any FRC audit inspection undertaken when monitoring the performance of the audit The Committee operates under formal terms of reference approved by the Board which were reviewed during the year.
They are available in the InvestorsCorporate Governance section of the Companys website site Within these terms the Committee and its individual members are empowered to obtain outside legal or other independent professional advice at the cost of the Company.
These powers were not utilised during the year.
The Committee may also secure the attendance at its meetings of any employee or other parties with relevant experience and expertise should it be considered necessary.
Activities in 201 7 The Committees agenda covered the usual standing items  the review of  nancial results the effectiveness of the Groups internal  nancial controls and the review of the internal control and risk management systems  as well as nonstandard items including oversight of the transition of the external audit from KPMG to PwC.
The Audit Committee continued to devote time to ensure that initiatives to mitigate potential risks and  nancial exposure remained robust and appropriate.
The Committee challenged the adequacy of inventory and receivables provisions the assumed growth rates and discount rates used for asset impairment assessments as well as the accounting for and presentation of the Groupwide restructuring programme undertaken in response to the challenging conditions within our endmarkets.
The Committee considered the Companys going concern statement and challenged the nature quantum and assessment of the signi cant risks to the business model future performance solvency and liquidity of the Group that were modelled as part of the scenarios and stress testing undertaken to support the Viability Statement made by the Company in the 2016 Accounts.
The 2017 Viability Statement which was also critically reviewed is contained within the Strategic Report and can be found on page 23.
The Committee monitored the resourcing and delivery of the 2017 Internal Audit plan and approved the 2018 Internal Audit plan.
The Committee monitored both the responses from and followup by management to Internal Audit recommendations arising during the year and where necessary the Committee tasked management to verify their successful closure within de ned timescales.
The Committee examined speci c audit issues such as tax matters including the judgements inherent in the partial recognition of deferred tax assets for US tax losses and undertook deep dive reviews of cyber security and the Groups de ned bene t pension arrangements.
The Committee considered the impact of new accounting standards including IFRS 9 Financial Instruments and IFRS 15 Revenue from contracts with customers  and reviewed the implementation plan for these in the 2018  nancial year.
Based on an assessment of these standards the Group does not believe there will be a signi cant impact on its Group Financial Statements.
The Committee members believe that they received suf cient relevant and reliable information throughout the year from management and the external auditor to enable the Committee to fully discharge its responsibilities.
The work of the Audit Committee is further elaborated in the paragraphs below.
Statement of compliance with the Competition and Markets Authority CMA Order The Committee considers that the Company has complied with The Statutory Audit Services for Large Companies Market Investigation Mandatory Use of Competitive Processes and Audit Committee Responsibilities Order 2014 Article 7 . the audit scope and fees and authorising nonaudit services.
Audit Committee continued 87 Financial Reporting The Committee ful lled its primary responsibility to review the integrity of the 2017 halfyear and 2017 annual  nancial statements and recommended their approval to the Board.
The Committee also reviewed the two trading updates released during the year.
In forming its views the Committee assessed The quality acceptability and consistency of the accounting policies and practices The clarity and consistency of the disclosures including compliance with relevant  nancial reporting standards and other reporting requirements Signi cant issues where management judgements andor estimates had been made that were material to the reporting or where discussions had taken place with the external auditor in arriving at the judgement or estimate In relation to the overall Annual Report whether the Annual Report and Accounts taken as a whole was fair balanced and understandable taking into consideration all the information available to the Committee The application of the FRCs guidance on clear and concise reporting The disclosure and presentation of alternative performance measures in view of the new guidance from the European Securities and Markets Association The Committee actively deliberated and challenged reports from the Chief Financial Of cer and Group Financial Controller.
These were well prepared and for areas of judgement andor estimation set out the rationale for the accounting treatment and disclosures and the pertinent assumptions and the sensitivities of the estimates to changes in the assumptions.
PwC also delivered memoranda for the halfyear and yearend stating their views on the treatment of signi cant issues.
PwC provided a summary for each issue including its assessment of the prudence of managements judgements or estimates.
The Committee considered the overall level of prudence applied this year compared this with the prior year and concluded that it remained unchanged.
Signi cant Issues and Material Judgements The Committee considered the following signi cant issues in the context of the 2017  nancial statements.
It considered these areas to be signi cant taking into account the level of materiality and the degree of judgement exercised by management.
The Committee resolved that the judgements and estimates made on each of the signi cant issues detailed below were appropriate and acceptable.
Income T ax Income tax remains a complex area where signi cant judgements are required to estimate both uncertain tax liabilities and the value of deferred tax assets.
The Committee challenged the assumptions used to arrive at the 34.3m 2016 34.9m provided for income tax payable which includes 23.2m 2016 24.5m for uncertain tax provisions as set out in Note 10.5.
After discussions with internal tax experts and considering the results of recent tax audits and the views of the external auditors the Committee concurred with managements judgement.
At the end of 2017  the Group recognised a US deferred tax asset of 32.6m 2016 65.9m.
The Group has signi cant additional tax losses and other temporary differences in the US and elsewhere which have not been recognised which are kept under review.
The recognition of deferred tax assets for tax losses and other temporary differences is a highly technical area and the Committee has drawn on internal experts to understand the treatment.
The future prospects for US pro tability were carefully modelled by management and challenged by the Committee as was the impact of the signi cant tax reform announced in late December 2017 in the US T ax Cuts and Jobs Act TCJA.
The Committee particularly noted that this reform had a material impact on the Groups deferred tax position and of itself caused a writedown in Vesuvius US deferred tax asset of 25.7m which in addition to other normal movements in the year and exchange revaluation resulted in the signi cant decrease in the value of this asset in 2017 .
The Committee also noted that as there is uncertainty in how some of the provisions of TCJA will operate subsequent guidance issued by US T reasury may impact Vesuvius reported tax position.
The Committee reviewed the Groups projections for trading in the US which had improved in 2017  and concurred with management that the US forecast pro ts are considered suf cient to sustain the deferred tax asset in the US at the end of 2017 .
Other Provisions The Committee has been made aware of a number of potential exposures and claims arising from ongoing litigation product quality issues employee disputes restructuring environmental matters onerous leases indirect tax disputes and indemnities or warranties outstanding for disposed businesses.
Due to the long gestation period before settlement can be reached provisioning for these items requires careful judgement in order to establish a reasonable estimate of future liabilities.
The Committee also assessed the strength of any insurance coverage for certain of these liabilities and challenged the accounting treatment for any amounts deemed to be recoverable from insurers.
Subsequent to this challenge certain insured liabilities have been represented in the balance sheet on a gross basis.
After due consideration and challenge with expert advice sought in certain areas the Committee is satis ed that there are appropriate levels of provisions set aside to settle thirdparty claims and disputes Note 32 and that adequate disclosure has been made under International Accounting Standards IAS 1 paragraph 129 in respect of estimation uncertainties that might impact the accounts in the following Governance 88 Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7 nancial year.
Where the outcome of an existing issue is uncertain or where no reliable estimate of the potential liability can be made no provision has been made and appropriate disclosure is included under contingent liabilities Note 34.
Restructuring Charges The Group restructuring programme continued in 2017 in response to the structural changes in the endmarkets that we serve.
The Committee critically reviewed the treatment of the restructuring costs disclosed as separately reported items in 2017 and concluded that these have been treated consistently with the accounting policy.
This ensures that only signi cant restructuring programmes that have a de ned scope and are material in nature are reported separately which enables the reader more clearly to understand the underlying results of the Group.
Impairment of Intangible Assets The yearend carrying value of goodwill of 643.2m was tested against the current and planned performance of the Steel and Foundry cashgenerating units CGUs.
The Committee challenged both the determination of the relevant CGUs the planned and terminal growth assumptions as well as the discount rates used in the assessments and the relevant sensitivities that were evaluated.
The detailed assumptions provided in Note 17  re ect both a reduction in global riskfree rates offset by the impact of the increasing contribution from the Groups operations in emerging markets.
The Committee considered the Boardapproved mediumterm business plans the range of industry longerterm projections and expert views on discount rates.
Given that the models indicated that there remains signi cant headroom between the value in use and the carrying value the Committee concurred that no goodwill impairment charges were required.
Working Capital Provisions The Committee challenged the level of provisions held against both receivables and inventories Notes 18 and 19 and after reviewing ageing analyses regional analyses and speci c customer accounts concluded that the provisions held were appropriate.
Pensions
Determining the current value of the Groups future pension obligations requires a number of assumptions.
The appropriateness of assumptions used described in Note 28 was questioned by the Committee as small changes in the assumptions could have material effects and bond yields in particular have been volatile.
The assumptions made by management for each of the major schemes were compared by PwC with other similar schemes.
The Committee agreed the reasonableness of the assumptions.
Fair Balanced and Understandable Reporting The Committee considered all the information available to it in reviewing the overall content of the Annual Report and Accounts and the process by which it was compiled and reviewed to enable it to provide advice to the Board that the Annual Report is fair balanced and understandable.
In doing so the Committee ensured that time was again dedicated to the drafting and review process so that internal linkages were identi ed and consistency was tested.
The Committee welcomed the attention that had been paid in the 2017 Annual Report to explain further the strategy markets execution priorities and business model of the Group.
Drafts of the Annual Report and Accounts were also reviewed by a senior executive not directly involved in the yearend process who reported to the Committee on his impressions of clarity comprehensiveness balance and disclosure in the document.
On completion of the process the Committee was satis ed that it could recommend to the Board that the Annual Report and Accounts is fair balanced and understandable.
Risk Management and Internal Controls As highlighted in the reviews of strategy and principal risks in the Strategic Report risk management is inherent in managements thinking and is embedded in the business planning processes of the Group.
The Board has overall responsibility for establishing and maintaining a system of risk management and internal control and for reviewing its effectiveness.
The Audit Committee assists the Board in reviewing the effectiveness of the Groups system of internal control including  nancial operational and compliance controls and risk management systems.
This framework is consistent with the Code.
As part of its review of the Groups principal risks and uncertainties the Committee supported the Board in its review of risks in 2017 .
As in previous years a bottomup mapping of the risks was constructed and reviewed in each major business unit delivering a risk register that was then reviewed by the Head of Internal Audit to deliver a coordinated picture of the key operational risks identi ed by the business.
In conjunction with this all the members of the Committee and the Board contributed their individual views of topdown strategic risks facing the Group into this process  drawing on the broad commercial and  nancial experience gained both inside and outside the Group.
This information was collated by the Head of Internal Audit into a paper for discussion in the context of the Groups identi ed principal risks.
This was reviewed and discussed at the Board and taking note of the Boards comments subsequently by the Group Executive Committee.
In monitoring the overall process Committee members also fully participated in the Board review of existing risks and ongoing mitigating actions.
The Committee determined that this approach once again enhanced the Groups process for identifying and understanding the Groups principal risks and uncertainties which are set out on pages 24 and 25.
The Committee continues to consider that this process is robust and appropriate.
Audit Committee continued 89 The Committee considered the Companys going concern statement and challenged the nature quantum and combination of the unlikely but signi cant risks to the business model future performance solvency and liquidity of the Group that were modelled as part of the scenarios and stress testing undertaken to support the Viability Statement.
As part of this review the Committee considered the Groups forecast funding position over the next three years and analysed the impact of various scenarios based upon pertinent key risks faced by the Group and with reference to the Groups debt covenants.
The scenarios considered the impact of multiple risks occurring simultaneously and additional mitigating actions that the Group could take.
The Committee noted that the Groups debt pro le had improved in terms of maturity with the completion of a new placement of 100m USPP Notes and that the resultant debt headroom was suf cient to accommodate the modelled stress scenarios.
As a result of their review the Committee was satis ed that the going concern and Viability Statements had been prepared on an appropriate basis.
The 2017 going concern statement is contained in the Directors Report on page 1 17 and the 2017 Viability Statement is contained within the Strategic Report and can be found on page 23.
The Committee also maintains a programme of indepth reviews into speci c  nancial operational and regulatory areas for the business.
These reviews allow the Committee to meet with the business colleagues responsible for these areas and gain greater indepth understanding about key areas for the
In 2017  the Committee undertook deep dive reviews of pensions and cyber security.
The former provided the Committee with a detailed overview of the Groups principal liabilities under de ned bene t schemes and the steps that were being taken to manage these noting that derisking roadmaps are in place for each of the funds.
The cyber review covered the assessment of the Groups cyber security risks the operation of the Groups Cyber Security Steering Committee and the actions that were being taken throughout the organisation to improve cyber security.
It was noted that improvements had been seen in overall cyber awareness following two successful training campaigns and that plans were in place to allocate additional resources to cyber security during 2018.
In addition the Committee reviewed the draft UK T ax Strategy disclosure noting that this had been prepared for publication on the Groups website in line with statutory requirements and recommended that it be approved by the Board.
The key features of the Groups internal control system which provides assurance on the accuracy and reliability of the Groups  nancial reporting are detailed in the Governance Report on page 83.
During 2017  the Committee considered the process by which management evaluates internal controls across the Group.
The Head of Internal Audit provided the Committee with a summary overview of the assurance provided by the Groups control framework and the testing of these controls.
PwC also reviewed controls in the businesses within the scope of its audit.
This review indicated an appropriate control environment with identi ed improvement actions under careful management by the Group.
The Group is made up of several large operating units but also many small units in geographically diverse locations.
Consequently segregation of duties overlapping access controls on systems and remote management oversight can give rise to control vulnerabilities and fraud opportunities.
The Group has not adopted a common Enterprise Resource Planning system as a Groupwide standard.
Over time management intends to move to more sharing of services enabled by process and systems standardisation between businesses.
This is likely to improve the overall internal controls in the smaller operating units.
The Group undertakes a range of activities to mitigate the risk of fraud.
This framework is regularly reviewed to determine areas for improvement.
In assessing the effectiveness of the Groups internal controls the Committee considered the following initiatives which had been implemented over the past two years The publication of a revised Group authority matrix to emphasise a clear assignment of responsibilities and authorities A continued focus by regional  nance directors and the central  nance team on balance sheet reconciliations The ongoing review by Internal Audit of the separation of duties and access rights at operating entities to ensure that no one person is in sole control of all aspects of any transaction to mitigate the risk of fraud An updated employee vetting process for prospective senior employees in higherrisk countries Ongoing internal communications on the heightened risk of socialengineering fraud coupled with increased cyber security training to raise awareness of the use of malware The formation of a cyber security working group to focus on enhancing the Groups resilience to cyber risks Eliminating the risk of fraud remains one of the key areas of focus for Internal Audit forming a fundamental part of full scope and  nancial audits.
These assess the quality of the balance sheet reconciliation review key judgement matters consider ERP access rights review tenders and quotations review the entitys controls over master data changes and controls over payments and associated applications.
During 2017 the Group continued its review of thirdparty representatives and intermediaries.
This included detailed due diligence for active sales agents and where required updates to the contractual basis on which these agents are engaged.
The review will be extended to other thirdparty representatives and intermediaries during 2018.
The Committee continued its assessment of the Groups potential exposure to bribery and corruption risks noting the ongoing work conducted by the Group in this context such as facetoface visits to operations providing focused countryspeci c training and reviewing nancial records sometimes with the assistance of external advisers.
The output of these processes and previous risk assessments continue to be used to develop Group policies and procedures for the management of antibribery and corruption risk re ecting an appropriate level of control for the business.
Governance 90 Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7 The Committee continues to monitor and oversee procedures regarding allegations of improper behaviour and employee complaints.
Further details of the operation of the Groups SpeakUp policy and helpline can be found in the Our Principles section.
Throughout the year the Audit Committee received updates on the volume of reports key themes emerging from these reports and the results of investigations undertaken.
Each year the senior  nancial operational and functional management of the businesses selfcertify compliance with Group policies and procedures for the areas of the business under their responsibility and con rm the existence of adequate internal control systems throughout the year.
The Committee reviews any exceptions noted in this bottomup exercise.
After considering these various inputs the Committee was able to provide assurance to the Board on the effectiveness of internal  nancial control within the Group and on the adequacy of the Groups broader internal control systems.
Internal Audit The Groups Internal Audit function operates on a global basis through professionally quali ed and experienced individual members located around the world including an auditor with specialist IT knowledge.
They report to the Head of Internal Audit based in London who in turn reports directly to the Chairman of the Audit Committee.
During the year the approach to internal audit was updated with audit activities subdivided into two different categories Compliance and Control CandC and Effectiveness and Ef ciency
CandC audit activities focus entirely on internal  nancial control and key Board compliance issues whereas the EandE audit activities examine a broader constituency of business performance issues.
Characterising the audit process in this way enables the Audit Committee to concentrate more speci cally on key control issues for resolution with reporting focused on CandC audit activity and more general commentary provided on the outcome of EandE audit activities.
The detailed outcomes of EandE audits are then used to engage management on the broader performance issues identi ed by the Internal Audit team.
During the year the frequency of meetings between the Head of Internal Audit and the Business Unit Presidents was also increased to ensure that engagement on the resolution of issues is clearly understood at all levels of the business and responsibility for remediation taken accordingly.
The Committee received considered and approved the 2017 Internal Audit plan which was constructed using a riskbased approach to cover the Groups control environment.
The plan was based on the premise that all operating units are internally audited at least once in every threeyear period whilst maintaining a focus on smaller operating units.
A third of operating units are now subject to internal audit twice in every threeyear period and Internal Audit annually audits each of the large operating entities located in Germany the US China Mexico and Brazil.
During the year the Committee also considered and approved changes to the Internal Audit plan as required.
These changes meant that the Internal Audit coverage was greater than in previous years and audits were carried out with more indepth analysis across legal entities and operating units.
In addition in 2017 many projectbased reviews were also undertaken.
In 201 7  a total of 56 audit assignments including three unplanned audits were undertaken by Internal Audit covering 65% of the Groups revenue and 60% of the Groups pro t before tax.
The Committee received a dashboard from the Head of Internal Audit at each of its meetings detailing progress against the agreed plan and identifying key trends and  ndings from Internal Audit reports along with progress on the resolution of actions agreed.
Common themes emerging from Internal Audit reports were discussed and these discussions have informed the compilation of the 2018 Internal Audit plan.
When necessary Internal Audit uses external outsourced auditors to supplement Internal Audit on an adhoc basis.
The outsourcing process provides valuable learning opportunities and we expect to continue to use outsourcing in specialist areas and geographies in the future.
Where control issues or other problems are  agged by the  eldwork they are recorded in a live webbased database into which management and operational entities are required to report progress against audit exceptions.
In this way Internal Audit monitors the progress and adequacy of the remediation steps taken.
Additionally regular meetings are held with each business unit President to discuss the progress against highpriority issues.
Consequently the Committee has oversight of appropriate and timely actions taken by the responsible management.
The Audit Committee also involved senior management as necessary to provide an update against highpriority actions and Internal Audit provided followup reviews as required to ensure that there was clarity on the responsibility for delivery of solutions to the audit  ndings.
In situations where audit  ndings required longerterm solutions the Committee oversaw the process for ensuring that adequate mitigation actions were taken while permanent solutions are pursued.
During the year a review was undertaken of the effectiveness of the Internal Audit function.
The review which canvassed the views of Nonexecutive Directors and senior management con rmed that the Internal Audit function continued to operate to a high standard with a good understanding of the business and an appropriate scope.
Respondents noted the high degree of energy professionalism and independence exhibited by the function and welcomed the steps that had been taken to improve the interface with the management of each of the business units.
Having considered the work of the Internal Audit function during 2017  including progress against the 2017 Internal Audit plan the quality of reports provided to the Committee and the results of the review of the functions effectiveness the Committee concluded that the Internal Audit function operated effectively during 2017 .
Audit Committee continued 91 External Audit Auditor Appointment In 2016 the Committee undertook a tender process to appoint a new statutory auditor for the  nancial year ending 31 December 2017 .
The tender culminated in the appointment of PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP PwC as external auditor and the appointment of Mazars LLP to audit the nonmaterial entities within the Group.
As a result KPMG concluded its tenure as the Groups external auditor during the year and further to the approval of the Companys shareholders at the 2017 AGM PwC was appointed as the Groups external auditor for the year ending 31 December 2017 .
PwC nominated Julian Jenkins as the audit partner responsible for the Group audit.
In line with the regulations on auditor rotation the external audit contract will be put out to tender at least every ten years.
In addition PwC will be required to rotate the audit partner every  ve years.
Auditor T ransition and 2017 Audit Plan PwCs transition plan focused on exiting the nonaudit services that PwC provided to the Group and working with people from across the business to build on their understanding of the Group and re ne the planned approach to the audit.
Key elements of the transition plan included meeting with senior management local management key functional heads and wider business stakeholders to gain insight into the business meeting with KPMG and performing a detailed review of their working papers attending Committee meetings prior to the formal appointment undertaking a risk assessment to identify signi cant and elevated audit risks and formulating and communicating a detailed audit plan.
During the year PwC provided regular updates to the Committee on the status and progress of the auditor transition plan and valuable insights into the Groups audit environment from the results of their review.
In February 2018 the Audit Committee held a preliminary meeting on yearend issues in advance of the  nalisation of the  nancial statements in early March.
During the year private sessions were held with PwC without management being present covering reporting and control issues in the context of the resourcing of the Group Finance team.
The Chairman of the Audit Committee met on a number of occasions with PwC to monitor the progress of the audit and discuss questions as they arose.
The strength of the  nance teams across the Group was also considered.
In these sessions PwC con rmed that its work had not been constrained in any way and that it was able to exercise appropriate professional scepticism and challenge throughout the audit process.
The Independent Auditors Report provided by PwC on pages 124 to 129 includes PwCs assessment of the risks of material misstatement in the accounts.
These risk areas are discussed in the signi cant issues and material judgements comments above.
The report also summarises the scope coverage and materiality levels applied by PwC in its audit.
As part of the audit planning process and based on a detailed risk assessment the Committee agreed a materiality  gure of 7 .6m for Group nancial reporting purposes which is higher than last year 4.0m and in line with similar groups is set at 5% of headline pro t before tax of 152.9m.
Importantly much lower levels of materiality are used in the audit  eldwork on the individual businesses across the Group and these lower  gures drive the scope and depth of audit work.
Any misstatement at or above 0.4m was reported to the Committee.
There were no signi cant changes this year to the coverage of the audit which stood at 68% of the Groups revenue and 76% of headline pro t before tax.
This coverage was considered to be suf cient by the Committee.
The audit coverage is re ective of the long tail of smaller businesses within the Group that individually are not material to the Group result.
The PwC audit fee approved by the Audit Committee was This was constructed bottomup on a local currency basis and was assessed in light of the audit work required by the agreed materiality level and scope.
It was agreed as part of the audit tender process and updated for changes in scope that were required during the year.
The fee approved by Mazars for the audit of the nonmaterial entities was 0.4m resulting in a combined fee with PwC of 1.7m compared to 2.0m paid to KPMG LLP in 2016.
The reduction in fee follows from the tender and the utilisation of two audit  rms.
The Committee noted the ruling by the Securities Exchange Board of India regarding the prohibition placed on PwC network companies performing audits of listed entities for two years from 1 January 2018.
The
Committee is watching developments on this matter carefully in the context of the Groups two listed Indian subsidiaries Foseco India Limited and Vesuvius India Limited.
Independence and Objectivity The Committee is responsible for safeguarding the independence and objectivity of the external auditors in order to ensure the integrity of the external audit process.
In discharging this responsibility during 2017  the Committee Sought regular con rmation from the incumbent external auditor that it considered itself to be independent of the Company in its own professional judgement and within the context of applicable professional standards Evaluated all the relationships between the external auditor and the Group including compliance with the Groups policy on the employment of former employees of the external auditor to determine whether these impaired or appear to impair the auditors independence Reviewed compliance against the policy on the provision of nonaudit services by the external auditor Reviewed details of the nonaudit services provided by the external auditor and associated fees The Committee noted that in Sweden a nonpermitted service had been performed by PwC during the transition process being supporting compliance in respect of payroll taxes.
Given the de minimis nature of the fee incurred and balances involved the Committee concluded that the conduct of this work had not affected PwCs independence.
As a result of its review the Committee concluded that PwC remained appropriately independent.
Governance 92 Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7 Nonaudit Services Vesuvius operates a policy for the approval of nonaudit services.
This was revised in 2016 with the new policy applying to the audit of the  nancial year ended 31 December 2017 and for  nancial years thereafter.
A copy is available to view on the InvestorsCorporate Governance section of the Companys website site Group companies are not permitted to use the external auditor for any prohibited nonaudit services as speci ed by the UK Financial Reporting Councils FRCs Revised Ethical Standard 2016 unless subject to a permitted derogation.
The restrictions broadly prohibit external auditors involvement in tax services any services that involve playing a part in management decisionmaking preparing accounting records designing or implementing internal controlrisk management services or  nancial systems certain HR services and other legal investment and share dealing services.
The external auditor can be invited to provide nonaudit services which in its position as external auditor it must or is best placed to undertake and which do not impact auditor objectivity or independence.
All auditrelated and permissible nonaudit services proposed to be carried out for any Group company worldwide by the external auditor must be preapproved by the Chief Financial Of cer who thereafter will refer matters to be further approved by the Chairman of the Audit Committee or the full Audit Committee before an engagement is agreed.
Any assignment proposed to be carried out by the external auditor must also have cleared the external auditors own internal preapproval process to con rm the rms ethical ability to do the work.
In practice the Group did not seek to engage PwC for nonaudit services during 2017 unless there were compelling advantages to doing so.
In 2017  the fees for nonaudit services payable to PwC amounted to 0.
1m similar to the nonaudit fees of 0.
1m payable to KPMG LLP last year .
The 201 7 fees represent payment for assurance services related to the review of the Companys halfyear  nancial statements and quarterly reviews and tax accounts in India required by regulation.
T ax compliance and other nonaudit services were for the previously mentioned Swedish service and the transition of expatriate tax services to the new outsourced provider.
Effectiveness and Reappointment of PwC for 2018 The Committee and the Board are committed to maintaining the high quality of the external audit process.
Throughout the year the Committee assessed the performance of the external auditor taking into consideration The quality of reports provided to the Committee and the quality of issues and challenges raised with the Committee and with management across the Group The level of insight exhibited in the feedback they provided as part of the transition process Managements assessment of the transition process Their de nition and completion of the 2017 audit plan Their performance during their review of the 2017 half year results The effectiveness of their relationship with the Committee with management and with Internal Audit Feedback from the Chief Financial Of cer and Group Financial Controller on the quality of local audit teams The Committee also considered the FRCs Audit Quality Inspection of PwC published in June 2017 .
A process to formally assess PwCs performance in respect of the 2017  nancial year will be completed following the completion of their yearend work taking account of the guidance for audit committees prepared by the FRC.
As part of this review PwC will be asked to identify any issues they consider could pose a risk to audit quality.
In an initial assessment of PwCs performance during their  rst year of audit the Committee concluded that PwC had provided an effective audit for 2017 .
They had exhibited a good understanding of the Groups businesses and internal control environment based on a signi cant process of engagement with the business as part of audit transition and had provided sound feedback to the Committee on the product of their transition work.
They had established effective working relationships with the Committee and with management and had exhibited an appropriate level of professional scepticism and robust challenge of managements judgements as appropriate.
The Committee has therefore recommended to the Board that PwC be reappointed for 2018.
It con rms that its recommendation is free from the in uence of any third party and that there are no contractual restrictions on the choice of auditor.
A resolution proposing the reappointment of PwC is included in the notice of AGM for 2018.
Audit Committee Evaluation The Audit Committees performance was evaluated as part of the overall externally facilitated Board and Committee performance evaluation which is described in depth on page The performance of the Committee was rated highly with its oversight seen to be of a very high standard.
A number of areas of focus had been identi ed by the 2016 evaluation and it was felt that these had all been managed effectively in 2017 .
The transition of the external auditor had progressed smoothly and the institution by the Audit Committee Chairman of more regular meetings with management outside formal Committee meetings had enhanced the  ow of information with the
The deep dive initiative had once again proved useful in providing the Committee with detailed information on key topics and would be continued in 2018 and the implementation of an additional Audit Committee meeting early in the year end cycle had been positively received and would be continued.
On behalf of the Audit Committee Douglas Hurt Chairman Audit Committee 28 February 2018 Audit Committee continued 93 Dear shareholder On behalf of the Nomination Committee I am pleased to present the Nomination Committee Report for 2017 .
The primary responsibility of the Nomination Committee is to focus on Board succession planning to ensure that the Board is made up of individuals with the appropriate drive abilities and experience to lead the Company in the delivery of its strategy.
In 2017 the Committee presided over the appointment of a new Chief Executive as part of a planned succession process for Franois Wanecq who retired from his role as Chief Executive at the end of August 2017 .
We also appointed a new independent Nonexecutive Director Holly Koeppel in April 2017  who strengthens the Board in terms of its knowledge skills and experience replacing Nelda Connors who stepped down from the Board in late 2016.
The Committee reviews the current and future needs of the Board and its Committees on an ongoing basis.
In line with this during 2017  the Committee reviewed the tenure of all of the Directors and discussed future Board rotation.
In additon as part of the annual corporate governance review conducted each year the Committee examines the independence of the Board and the balance of skills and development needs of Board members.
The output from this process was used to de ne the recruitment requirements for the new Directors with each then having a job speci cation drawn up to target the attributes required.
The Committees succession planning activities do not exclusively relate to the Board but also encompass the senior management levels immediately below the Board.
The Committee is working to support and encourage the growth of a consistent pool of talent able to step up to the top roles in future years.
The oversight of senior management succession planning and talent development will be a key area for emphasis in 2018.
During 2017 the Board formalised its approach to diversity and approved a Board Diversity Policy.
In line with this the Committee continues to consider the mix of skills experience and knowledge required on the Board and to promote diversity not only on the Board but also throughout the wider business.
Y ours sincerely John McDonough CBE Chairman Committee Members John McDonough CBE Committee Chairman Christer Gardell Hock Goh Jane Hinkley Douglas Hurt Holly Koeppel appointed 3 April 2017 The Nomination Committee The Nomination Committee is made up of myself as Chairman of the Company and any three of the Nonexecutive Directors.
During the year I continued as Chairman of the Committee though I would not act as Chairman if the Committee was considering the appointment of my successor.
In that case the Chairman would be an appropriate Nonexecutive Director.
The Company Secretary is Secretary to the Committee.
Members biographies are set out on pages 50 and 51.
Key Activities during the Y ear Completion of Chief Executive recruitment The Committee completed the Chief Executive succession process which culminated in the selection and recommended appointment of Patrick Andr as Chief Executive succeeding Franois Wanecq on his retirement from the Company Nonexecutive appointment The Committee led the search for a new Nonexecutive Director resulting in the selection and recommended appointment of Holly Koeppel Board composition The Committee reviewed the skills knowledge and experience required for the Board to continue to function effectively and evaluated the current Board composition against an assessment of these future business needs Board succession The Committee reviewed the ongoing requirements for Board rotation to maintain the correct skills experience and diversity at Board level Directors elections The Committee considered the Directors annual reelection at the 2017 AGM Committee evaluation The Committee reviewed its performance and effectiveness during 2017 Role and Responsibilities The Nomination Committees foremost priorities are to ensure that the Company has the best possible leadership maintains a clear plan for orderly Executive and Nonexecutive Director succession and cultivates the appropriate skills experience and diversity in the Boards overall composition.
Its primary focus is therefore on the strength of the Board for which appointments are made on merit against objective criteria selecting the best candidate for the post.
The Nomination Committee advises the Board on appointments retirements and resignations from the Board and its Committees.
Nomination Committee Governance 94 Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7 The Committee operates under formal terms of reference which were reviewed and con rmed during the year.
The terms of reference are available on the Groups website site The Committee and its members are empowered to obtain outside legal or other independent professional advice at the cost of the Company in relation to its deliberations.
These rights were not exercised during the year.
The Committee may also secure the attendance at its meetings of any employee or other parties it considers necessary.
Process for Board Appointments The Committee follows formal rigorous and transparent procedures for the appointment of new Directors.
When considering a Board appointment the Nomination Committee draws up a speci cation for the role taking into consideration the balance of skills knowledge and experience of its existing members the diversity of the Board the independence of continuing Board members and the ongoing requirements and anticipated strategic developments of the Group.
The search process is then able to focus on appointing a candidate with the necessary attributes to enhance the Boards performance.
The Committee uses the services of search  rms to identify appropriate candidates ensuring that any selected  rm is not in any way con icted in the delivery of its role.
In addition the Committee will only use those  rms that have adopted the Voluntary Code of Conduct addressing gender diversity and best practice in search assignments.
During 2017  the Committee oversaw a selection process to identify a new Chief Executive to succeed Franois Wanecq on his retirement from the Company and the ongoing search for a new Nonexecutive Director following Nelda Connors retirement from the Board in 2016.
The Committee reviewed the skills and attributes required for each role and agreed individual job speci cations.
The Committee utilised the services of specialist recruitment agencies to search for suitable candidates  Korn Ferry to identify prospective candidates for the Chief Executive role and Spencer Stuart to search for a new Nonexecutive Director.
Both agencies have adopted the Voluntary Code of Conduct and neither have any other connection with the Group other than in respect of management recruitment work undertaken during normal trading activities.
Each agency was selected for their assignment following a review of potential agencies based on their skills expertise and price.
Chief Executive As part of the Groups ongoing senior management succession planning processes a detailed independent review of internal candidates was undertaken to consider candidates for succession to the role of Chief Executive with those individuals identi ed as potential candidates fully integrated by Korn Ferry into the search process.
The Nomination Committee also engaged external assistance to benchmark the skills and experience required for the Chief Executive role de ning the issues fundamental to the Vesuvius role given the Groups business scale geographical diversity performance and the stage of its development.
The search was conducted globally and a longlist of potential appointees was produced including external internal international and female candidates.
The Committee reviewed the longlist and a shortlist of candidates for interview was drawn up for the role based upon the objective criteria identi ed at inception.
The Chairman and the Chairman of the Remuneration Committee interviewed an initial shortlist of candidates with a shorter list of candidates then interviewed by the Senior Independent Director and again by the Chairman.
The two  nal preferred candidates then met with all the other Board members.
Finally detailed external references were taken up and following this the Committee made formal recommendations to the Board for the appointment of Patrick Andr as the new Chief Executive.
Patrick Andr was supported in undertaking due diligence on the Company in areas not connected to his previous role as President Flow Control.
Nonexecutive Director The search was conducted globally and a longlist of potential appointees was produced by Spencer Stuart.
The Committee reviewed the longlist and a shortlist of candidates for interview was drawn up based upon the objective criteria identi ed at inception.
The Chairman and the Chief Executive interviewed the short listed candidates and the preferred candidate then met with all other Board members.
Detailed external references were taken up and following this the Committee made a formal recommendation to the Board for the appointment of Holly Koeppel as a new Nonexecutive Director.
Holly Koeppel was supported in undertaking her own due diligence on the Company and meeting with its advisers.
She was also required to demonstrate that she had suf cient time available to devote to the role and to identify any potential con icts of interest.
No con icts were identi ed.
Following their appointment the Committee has continued to monitor the development and integration onto the Board of the two new Directors.
Holly Koeppel and Patrick Andr both undertook a full induction programme and have continued to gain insight into the business and meet executives throughout the organisation.
Board Composition On an ongoing basis the Committee reviews the current and future needs of the Board and its Committees  re ecting on the balance of skills and experience of current Directors and comparing this against the Boards list of key skills.
The Committee also considers existing lengths of tenure and the prospective rotation and retirement of Board members so that it can plan accordingly.
As part of the annual corporate Nomination Committee continued 95 skills and development needs of Board members.
Based on this analysis in 2016 the Committee concluded that the Board would bene t from the appointment of a new Nonexecutive Director with expert knowledge of the industrial sector together with a high degree of commercial acumen and global markets knowledge.
The Nonexecutive Director search identi ed above was commenced on this basis.
In addition the Nomination Committee considered the future needs of the business its corporate strategy culture and direction in assessing its requirements of a new Chief Executive and used this analysis to inform the recruitment process.
The Committee recognised that the business needed an individual who had a proven track record of enhanced strategic thinking and managing complexity who also excelled at managing and developing relationships with a crosssection of people.
Diversity
All Directors have served at a very senior level in global organisations have international experience across a variety of industries and most have spent a considerable amount of time resident outside the UK.
The Nomination Committee believes that diversity underpins the successful operation of the Board.
It recognises that this is a key ingredient in creating a balanced culture for discussions and minimising groupthink and continues with its policy to review the requirements for different skills experience background and gender in respect of the Boards composition.
During the year the Board formalised its approach to diversity and approved a Board Diversity Policy details of which are set out on page 80.
The Committee will continue to consider the mix of skills experience and knowledge required on the Board and promote diversity not only on the Board but also throughout the wider business.
Senior Management Succession During the year the Committees succession planning activities did not exclusively relate to the Board but continued to encompass the senior management levels immediately below the Board aiming to support and encourage the growth of a consistent pool of talent able to step up to the top roles in future years.
Consequently the Committee continued to monitor the execution of development plans for the Group Executive Committee and supported the Board in understanding the process for the development of high potentials throughout the business.
The Board met key executives throughout the Group to gain a greater understanding of the breadth and depth of management talent.
This process included a series of presentations to the Board by business unit functional and geographical heads providing the basis for a more informed approach to executive succession planning and talent development across the Group.
As identi ed by the Board evaluation process the oversight of senior management succession planning will be a key area for emphasis in 2018.
Committee Evaluation The Committees activities were part of the externally facilitated evaluation of Board effectiveness during the year .
The Committee was considered to have performed effectively over the past year and the oversight of the Chief Executive succession process was commented on favourably.
Priorities for the Committee going forward include Board rotation over the longer term as well as succession planning and talent development for senior management.
On behalf of the Nomination Committee John McDonough CBE Chairman Nomination Committee 28 February 2018 96 Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7 Dear shareholder On behalf of the Remuneration Committee I am pleased to present the Directors Remuneration Report for 2017  which sets out details of the pay received by Directors in 2017 and how we intend to apply our Remuneration Policy in 2018.
This report will be subject to an advisory shareholder vote at the 2018
In 2017  Shareholders approved a new Remuneration Policy for the Group.
If no changes are made prior to the 2020 AGM then the Company will next need to formally table a Remuneration Policy at that meeting.
All payments received by Directors in 2017 were in line with our Remuneration Policy.
I have set out details below of the key decisions made by the Committee during 2017 .
More details about these are included in the Annual Report on Directors Remuneration.
Performance in 201 7 As described in the Strategic Report 2017 was a year of good progress for the Group with revenue growth of 20.2% outperforming end markets and the global steel market.
Despite experiencing headwinds related to rising raw material prices and intercompany imports required by Flow Control in Europe the Group saw a 24.2% increase in reported trading pro t with cash generation remaining strong.
Throughout the year the Group remained focused on its strategic priorities and made good progress with the restructuring programme delivering increased annualised savings strong progress in developing markets and further investment in RandD.
In 2017  Annual Incentive awards for the Executive Directors were based 60% on Group headline earnings per share EPS 20% on the Groups cash conversion de ned as operating cash ow divided by trading pro t and 20% on speci ed personal objectives.
In order to further align the interests of our Directors with those of our shareholders we introduced a requirement in the 2017 Remuneration Policy for deferral of a proportion normally 33% of the Annual Incentive into awards over shares for three years.
Given the appointment part way through the year of a new Chief Executive both Mr Wanecqs and Mr Andrs awards as Chief Executives were accordingly prorated.
Directors Remuneration Report
Remuneration Overview In 2017  our retranslated headline EPS of 39.
1p was above the maximum Annual Incentive target of 35.6p.
The Groups 2017 cash conversion of 104% was between the threshold of 90% and the target of 105%.
This results in awards of 75% and 1 1.38% of base salary respectively being 86.38% in total for the current Executive Directors Patrick Andr and Guy Y oung and for Franois Wanecq in respect of the  nancial performance metrics.
In addition we assessed each Executive Directors completion of the personal objectives they were set for 2017 awarding Mr Andr and Mr Y oung 19.65% and 15.75% respectively of their maximum entitlements of 25% and Mr Wanecq 15.00%.
As a result the overall Annual Incentive payable to Mr Andr for 2017 is 106.03% of base salary prorated in respect of his service as an Executive Director Mr Y oung 102.
13% of base salary and Mr Wanecq 101.38% of base salary against maximum bonus opportunities of 125%.
In addition Mr Andr received an Annual Incentive payout of 65.04% of his prorated base salary for 2017  out of a maximum bonus opportunity of 80% in respect of his tenure as President Flow Control prior to his appointment as Chief
Mr Wanecq received an Annual Incentive payout of 106.38% of his prorated base salary for the period of service from 1 September 2017 to 31 December 2017  when he had ceased to be a Director but remained as an employee of the Group.
The performance period for the awards made under the Vesuvius Share Plan in 2015 matured at the end of December 2017 .
Performance was measured equally by reference to T otal Shareholder Return TSR relative to the FTSE 250 excluding investment trusts and headline EPS growth above compound annual GDP growth over the threeyear period.
Relative TSR performance was between median and upper quintile as a result 27 .
1% of Performance Share awards will vest under the TSR element out of a maximum 50%.
The annual compound headline EPS growth above GDP for the period was 4.3%.
As a result 16.6% of Performance Share awards will vest under the EPS performance element out of a maximum of 50%.
Remuneration
Strategic
Alignment Deliver growth Generate sustainable pro tability and create shareholder value Maintain strong cash generation and an ef cient capital structure Provide a safe working environment for our people Be at the forefront of innovation Run topquality costef cient and sustainable operations Foster talent skill and motivation in our people Annual Incentive Plan V esuvius Share Plan 97
In con rming the vesting of the Performance Shares the Committee reviewed the underlying performance of the Company to satisfy itself that the outcome was justi ed.
Awards will vest in April 2018.
Other Key Decisions made by the Committee for 201 7 Key decisions made by the Committee in 2017 included Review consideration and approval of an appropriate remuneration package for Patrick Andr our new Chief
The principal features of his remuneration package were announced at the time of his appointment and they are included in the applicable sections of this years
Remuneration Report.
In conjunction with the transition of Chief Executive the Committee also considered the retirement arrangements for Franois Wanecq.
A summary of these arrangements was included in the Section 4302B statement published on the Companys website and details are also included in this years
Remuneration Report.
The Remuneration Policy approved in 2017 states that whilst an individuals performance is reviewed annually changes to base salary are normally appraised over a two or threeyear period.
In line with this policy the Committee reviewed Guy Y oungs salary in 2017 .
It was agreed that his salary should be increased by 7 .7% to 350000 with effect from 1 January 2018.
This is the  rst increase in Guys salary since he joined Vesuvius in 2015 and re ects the considerable diligence and dedication he has brought to the role and his development in it since the time of his appointment.
The Committee considered the structure of performance measures for incentives in 2018.
Having reviewed the existing arrangements the Committee intends to use the same framework for performance measures in 2018 that was used in 2017 for Executive Directors incentive awards updating one of the metrics to re ect more effectively the strategic demands of the business.
Thus these measures reward Growth through the EPS measure used in the Annual Incentive and the Vesuvius Share Plan  as in 2017 Effective working capital management through an updated target of working capital to sales ratio based on the 12month moving average to be used in the Annual Incentive Delivery of shareholder value through the TSR measure used in the Vesuvius Share Plan  as in 2017 In addition the Committee also took decisions about the grant and vesting of Share Plan awards in 2017 and the Annual Incentive Plan payments made in 2017 in respect of 2016.
Shareholders Views The Committee encourages dialogue with its major shareholders.
It is satis ed that the current Remuneration Policy is designed to promote the longterm success of the Company and that the performancerelated elements of remuneration which are kept under review are transparent stretching and rigorously applied.
The Committee was encouraged by the signi cant support shown for the new Remuneration Policy when it was tabled at the 2017 AGM 99% of votes in favour.
I remain keen to hear shareholders views on remuneration matters and look forward to an ongoing dialogue with shareholders and their continued support for our Directors Remuneration Report resolution at the AGM.
Y ours sincerely Jane Hinkley Chairman Remuneration Committee 28 February 2018 98 Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7 The Companys existing Remuneration Policy was approved at the AGM held on 10 May 2017 .
The previous policy applied in its entirety up until this date and after this date those elements of the previous policy that related to remuneration that remained extant on this date such as outstanding share awards continued to apply until these commitments cease.
The full policy report as approved by shareholders can be found in the 2016 Annual Report a copy of which is available under the Reports tab in the Investors section of the Group website site.
For the bene t of shareholders we have reprinted the Policy below.
T o ensure that the Policy is relevant to the 2018  nancial year we have made minor textual changes to refer to the applicable  nancial year in the following sections Illustration of the Application of the Remuneration Policy for 2018 which also contains as described 2017 data and Consideration of Shareholder Views.
We have amended the Service contracts section to refer to the terms of the current Executive Directors and the T erms of service section to refer to the dates of appointment of the current nonexecutive directors.
The Remuneration Committee reserves the right to make any remuneration payments and payments for loss of of ce including exercising any discretions available to it in connection with such payments notwithstanding that they are not in line with the policy set out here where the terms of the payment were agreed i before the date the Companys rst Remuneration Policy approved by shareholders in accordance with section 439A of the Companies Act came into effect ii before the policy set out here came into effect provided that the terms of the payment were consistent with the shareholderapproved Remuneration Policy in force at the time they were agreed or iii at a time when the relevant individual was not a Director of the Company and in the opinion of the Remuneration Committee the payment was not in consideration for the individual becoming a Director of the Company.
For these purposes payments includes the Remuneration Committee satisfying awards of variable remuneration and in relation to an award over shares the terms of the payment are agreed at the time the award is granted.
Remuneration Policy T able for Executive Directors
Directors Remuneration Report
Remuneration Policy Base salary
Helps to recruit and retain key employees.
Re ects the individuals experience role and contribution within the Company.
Operation
The individuals performance is reviewed annually with changes to base salary normally appraised over a two to three year period.
Any change will normally be effective from 1 January in the year of the increase.
Base salary is positioned to be market competitive when considered against other global industrial companies and relevant international and FTSE 250 companies excluding Investment T rusts.
Paid in cash subject to local tax and social security regulations.
Opportunity
Salary increases will normally be in line with the average increase awarded to other employees in the Group over a similar period.
In considering any increase in base salary the Committee will also consider the role and value of the individual ii changes in job scope or responsibility iii progression in the role e.
Group and the need to maintain market competitiveness.
In line with the two to threeyear period for base salary appraisal individual increases when paid are likely to be in excess of those for the wider population of employees for that year .
No absolute maximum has been set for Executive Director base salaries.
Current
Executive Directors salaries are set out in the Annual Report on Directors Remuneration section of this Remuneration Report.
Performance
Any increase will take into account the individuals performance contribution and increasing experience.
Other bene ts
Provides normal market practice bene ts.
Operation
A range of standard bene ts including but not limited to car allowance private medical care including spouse and dependent children life insurance disability and health insurance together with relocation allowance and expatriate bene ts in some instances grossed up for tax in accordance with the Groups policies and participation in any employee share scheme operated by the Group.
Opportunity
There is no formal maximum as bene t costs can  uctuate depending on changes in provider cost and individual circumstances.
Performance
None 99
Alignmentpurpose
Helps to recruit and retain key employees.
Ensures income in retirement.
Operation
An allowance is given as a percentage of base salary.
This may be used to participate in Vesuvius pension arrangements invested in own pension arrangements or taken as a cash supplement or any combination of the above options.
Opportunity
Maximum of 30% of base salary.
Performance
None
Annual Incentive
Incentivises Executive Directors to achieve key shortterm  nancial and strategic targets of the Group.
Additional alignment with shareholders interests through the operation of bonus deferral.
Operation
Normally 33% of any Annual Incentive earned by Executive Directors will be deferred into awards over shares under the Vesuvius Deferred Share Bonus Plan which normally vest after at least three years other than in speci ed circumstances outlined elsewhere in this Policy.
These may be cash or share settled.
The Committee has the discretion to determine that actual incentive payments should be lower than levels calculated by reference to achievement against targets if it considers this to be appropriate.
The Committee has the discretion to award participants the equivalent value of dividends accrued during the vesting period on any shares that vest.
Subject to malus and clawback.
Opportunity
Below threshold 0%.
Ontarget 62.5% of base salary.
Maximum 1 25% of base salary.
Payments made between threshold and ontarget and between ontarget and maximum are prorated.
Performance
Annual Incentive is measured on targets set at the beginning of each year .
The Committee establishes threshold and maximum performance targets for each  nancial year.
The majority of the Annual Incentive will be determined by measures of Group  nancial performance.
The remainder of the Annual Incentive will be based on  nancial strategic or operational measures appropriate to the individual Director .
Performance is measured over a oneyear period.
Actual performance targets will be disclosed after the performance period has ended.
They are not disclosed in advance due to their commercial sensitivity.
Vesuvius Share Plan
Flexible umbrella plan.
Aligns Executive Directors interests with those of shareholders through the delivery of shares.
Rewards Executive Directors for achieving the strategic objectives of growth in shareholder value and earnings.
Assists retention of Executive Directors over a threeyear performance period.
Operation
Awards may be granted as Performance share awards Deferred share bonus awards Restricted share awards Marketprice options These may be cash or share settled.
Individuals are entitled to an aggregate annual maximum amount of awards.
If more than one type of award is granted the individual limit for all awards is reduced to remain within the maximum.
Awards vest three years after their award date other than in speci ed circumstances outlined elsewhere in this policy subject to the achievement of speci ed conditions.
The Committee may decide that the shares in respect of which an award vests are delivered to participants at that point or that awards will then be subject to an additional holding period before participants are entitled to receive their shares.
The Committee has the discretion to award participants the equivalent value of dividends accrued during the vesting period on any shares that vest.
Subject to malus and clawback.
Opportunity
Executive Directors are eligible to receive an annual award with a face value of up to 200% of base salary in Performance share awards.
Vesting at threshold performance is 25% rising to vesting of the full award at maximum.
Performance
Vesting of Performance Share awards is usually dependent on measures of Group EPS and relative TSR with the precise measures and weighting of the measures determined by the Committee ahead of each award.
These details are disclosed in the Annual Report on Directors Remuneration section of this Remuneration Report.
The Company reserves the right only to disclose EPS performance targets after the performance period has ended due to their commercial sensitivity.
Prior to any vesting the Remuneration Committee also reviews the underlying nancial performance of the Company over the performance period to ensure the vesting is justi ed.
Governance 100 Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7 MalusClawback Arrangements The Executive Directors variable remuneration is subject to malus and clawback provisions.
These provide the Committee with the  exibility if required to withhold or recover payments made to Executive Directors under the Annual Incentive Plan including deferred awards andor to withhold or recover share awards granted to Executive Directors under the Vesuvius Share Plan including any dividends granted on such awards.
The circumstances in which the Committee could potentially elect to apply malus and clawback provisions include a material misstatement in the Companys  nancial statements an error in the calculation of the extent of payment or vesting of an incentive gross misconduct by an individual or signi cant nancial loss or serious reputational damage to Vesuvius plc resulting from an individuals conduct a material failure of risk management or a serious breach of health and safety.
These malus and clawback provisions apply for a period of up to three years after the end of a performance period or end of the deferral period in respect of deferred awards.
Performance Measures In selecting performance measures for the Annual Incentive the Committee seeks to re ect key strategic aims and the need for a rigorous focus on  nancial performance.
Each year the Committee agrees challenging targets to ensure that underperformance is not rewarded.
The Company will not be disclosing the speci c  nancial or personal objectives set until after the relevant performance period has ended because of commercial sensitivities.
The personal objectives are all non nancial or jobspeci c in nature and track performance against key strategic organisational and operational goals.
In selecting performance measures for the Vesuvius Share Plan the Committee seeks to focus Executive Directors on the execution of longterm strategy and also align their rewards with value created for shareholders.
On this basis the performance conditions for the Vesuvius Performance Share awards will usually be dependent on measures based on TSR and EPS performance.
Within the policy period the Committee will continually review the performance measures used including TSR and the applicable comparator group and EPS and other  nancial measures to ensure that awards are made on the basis of challenging targets that clearly support the achievement of the Groups strategic aims.
The Committee may vary or waive any performance conditions if circumstances occur which cause it to determine that the original conditions have ceased to be appropriate provided that any such variation or waiver is fair reasonable and not materially less dif cult to satisfy than the original condition in its opinion.
In the event that the Committee were to make an adjustment of this sort a full explanation would be provided in the next Remuneration Report.
The Committee may a in the event of a variation of the Companys share capital demerger special dividend or any other corporate event which it reasonably determines justi es such an adjustment adjust and b amend the terms of awards granted under the share schemes referred to above in accordance with the rules of the relevant plans.
Share awards may be settled by the issue of new shares or by the transfer of existing shares.
In line with prevailing best practice at the time this Policy Report was approved any issuance of new shares is limited to 5% of share capital over a rolling tenyear period in relation to discretionary employee share schemes and 10% of share capital over a rolling tenyear period in relation to all employee share schemes.
Remuneration Policy continued 101 Illustration of the Application of the Remuneration Policy for 2018 The charts below show the total remuneration for Executive Directors for 2018 for minimum ontarget and maximum performance.
The  xed elements of remuneration comprise base salary pension and other bene ts using 2018 salary data.
The assumptions on which they are calculated are as follows Minimum Fixed remuneration only.
Ontarget Fixed remuneration plus ontarget Annual Incentive made at 62.5% of base salary for Patrick Andr and Guy Y oung and threshold vesting i. base salary for Guy Y oung under the Vesuvius Share Plan.
Maximum Fixed remuneration plus maximum Annual Incentive being full achievement of  nancial and personal targets made at 125% of base salary for Patrick Andr and Guy Y oung and 100% vesting for Performance Share awards made at 200% of base salary for Patrick Andr and 150% of base salary for Guy Y oung under the Vesuvius Share Plan.
Note In addition the Committee retains the discretion to award dividends either shares or their cash equivalent on any shares that vest.
Service Contracts of Executive Directors The Committee will periodically review the contractual terms for new Executive Directors to ensure these re ect best practice.
Service contracts currently operate on a rolling basis and are limited to a 12month notice period.
Patrick Andr is employed as Chief Executive of Vesuvius plc pursuant to the terms of a service agreement made with Vesuvius plc dated 17 July 2017 .
Guy Y oung is employed as Chief Financial Of cer pursuant to the terms of a service agreement with Vesuvius plc dated 16 September 2015.
Each Executive Directors appointment is terminable by Vesuvius on not less than 12 months written notice and by each Executive Director on not less than six months written notice.
External Appointments of Executive Directors The Executive Directors do not currently serve as Nonexecutive Directors of any other quoted company.
Subject always to consent being granted by the Company for them to take up such an appointment were they to so serve the Company would allow them to retain any fees they received for the performance of their duties.
0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 Patrick Andr Chief Executive
100% 692k 54% 29% 27% 44% 2398k 26% 20% 1282k
Maximum
Guy Young CFO
100% 456k 57% 32% 31% 37% 1418k 27% 16%
Maximum
Fixed Elements Annual Variable Elements Long Term Variable Elements Remuneration Illustrations 000 Governance 102 Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7 Remuneration Policy for Nonexecutive Directors The Company seeks to appoint Nonexecutive Directors who have relevant professional knowledge and have gained experience in a relevant industry and geographical sector to support diversity of expertise at the Board and match the wide geographical spread of the Companys activities.
Nonexecutive Directors attend Board Committee and other meetings held mainly in the UK together with an annual strategy review to debate the Companys strategic direction.
All Nonexecutive Directors are expected to familiarise themselves with the scale and scope of the Companys business and to maintain their speci c technical skills and knowledge.
The Board sets the level of fees paid to the Nonexecutive Directors after considering the role and responsibilities of each Director and the practice of other companies of a similar size and international complexity.
The Nonexecutive Directors do not participate in Board discussions on their own remuneration.
No variable remuneration is available to Nonexecutive Directors.
Nonexecutive
Directors receive reimbursement of reasonable expenses incurred in attending the Board Committee and other ad hoc meetings including gross up payments to cover any personal tax owed on such expenses.
T erms of Service of the Chairman and other Nonexecutive Directors The terms of service of the Chairman and the Nonexecutive Directors are contained in letters of appointment.
Each Nonexecutive Director is appointed subject to their election at the Companys  rst Annual General Meeting following their appointment and reelection at subsequent Annual General Meetings.
During the  rst year of hisher appointment the Chairman is entitled to 12 months notice from the Company thereafter heshe is entitled to six months notice from the Company.
None of the other Nonexecutive Directors is entitled to receive compensation for loss of of ce at any time.
All Nonexecutive Directors are subject to retirement and election or reelection in accordance with the Companys Articles of Association.
The current policy is for Nonexecutive Directors to serve on the Board for a maximum of nine years with review at the end of three and six years subject always to mutual agreement and annual performance evaluation.
The Board retains discretion to extend the tenure of Nonexecutive Directors beyond this time subject to the requirements of Board balance and independence being satis ed.
Fees
Alignmentpurpose
T o attract and retain Nonexecutive Directors of the necessary skill and experience by offering marketcompetitive fees.
Operation
Fees are usually reviewed every other year by the Board.
Nonexecutive Directors are paid a base fee for the performance of their role payable in cash plus additional fees for Committee chairmanship or acting as the Senior Independent Director .
The Chairman is paid a single fee and receives administrative support from the Company.
Opportunity
Nonexecutive Directors and the Chairman will be paid marketappropriate fees with any increase re ecting changes in the market or adjustments to a speci c Nonexecutive Directors role.
No eligibility for bonuses retirement bene ts or to participate in the Groups employee share plans.
Base fees paid to Nonexecutive Directors will in aggregate remain within the aggregate limit stated in our Articles currently being 500000.
Performance
None
Bene ts and expenses
T o facilitate execution of responsibilities and duties required by the role.
Operation
All Nonexecutive Directors are reimbursed for reasonable expenses incurred in carrying out their duties including any personal tax owing on such expenses.
Opportunity
Nonexecutive Directors expenses are paid in accordance with Vesuvius expense procedures.
Performance
None
Remuneration Policy continued 103 The table below shows the date of appointment for each of the Nonexecutive Directors NonExecutive Director Date of Appointment John Mc Donough CBE 31 October 201 2 Christer Gardell 31 October 201 2 Hock Goh 2 April 2015 Jane Hinkley 3 December 201 2 Douglas Hurt 2 April 2015 Holly Koeppel 3 April 201 7 Recruitment Policy On appointment or promotion of a new Executive Director the Committee will typically use the Remuneration Policy in force at the time of the Committees decision to determine ongoing remuneration.
Base salary levels will generally be set in accordance with the Remuneration Policy current at the time of the Committees decision taking into account the experience and calibre of the appointee.
If it is appropriate to appoint an individual on a base salary initially below what is adjudged to be market positioning contingent on individual performance the Committee retains the discretion to realign base salary over the one to three years following appointment which may result in a higher rate of annualised increase than might otherwise be awarded under the policy.
If the Committee intends to rely on this discretion it will be noted in the  rst Remuneration Report following an individuals appointment.
Other than in exceptional circumstances other elements of annual remuneration will typically be set in line with the Remuneration Policy including a limit on awards under the Annual Incentive and Vesuvius Share Plan of 325% of salary in aggregate.
The Committee retains the discretion to make the following further exceptions In the event that an internal appointment is made or where a Director is appointed as a result of transfer into the Group on an acquisition of another Company the Committee may continue with existing remuneration provisions for this individual including pension entitlements where appropriate If necessary and appropriate to secure the appointment of a candidate who has to move locations as a result of the appointment whether internal or external the Committee may make additional payments linked to relocation above those outlined in the policy table and would authorise the payment of a relocation allowance and repatriation as well as other associated international mobility terms.
Such bene ts would be set at a level which the Committee considers appropriate for the role and the individuals circumstances If appropriate the Committee may apply different performance measures andor targets to a Directors rst incentive awards in hisher year of appointment Service contracts will be entered into on terms similar to those for the existing Executive Directors summarised in the Service contracts of Executive Directors section above.
In addition to the annual remuneration elements noted above the Committee may consider buying out terms incentives and any other compensation arrangements forfeited on leaving a previous employer that an individual forfeits in accepting an appointment with Vesuvius.
The Committee will have the authority to rely on Listing Rule 9.4.2R2 or to apply the existing limits within the Vesuvius Share Plan to make Restricted Share awards on recruitment.
In making any such awards the Committee will review the terms of any forfeited awards including but not limited to vesting periods the expected value of such awards on vesting and the likelihood of the performance targets applicable to such awards being met while retaining the discretion to make any buyout award the Committee determines is necessary and appropriate.
The Committee may also require the appointee to purchase shares in Vesuvius to a preagreed level prior to vesting of any such awards.
The value of any buyout award will be capped to ensure its maximum value is no higher than the value of the awards that the individual forfeited on joining Vesuvius.
Any such awards will be subject to malus and clawback.
With respect to the appointment of a new Chairman or Nonexecutive Director appointment terms will be consistent with those applicable at the time the appointment is agreed.
Variable pay will not be considered.
With respect to Nonexecutive Directors fees will be consistent with the policy at the time the appointment is agreed.
If in exceptional circumstances a Nonexecutive Director was asked to assume an interim executive role the Company retains the discretion to pay them appropriate executive compensation in line with the policy.
Exit Payment Policy Vesuvius has the option to make a payment in lieu of part or all of the required notice period for Executive Directors.
Any such payment in lieu will consist of the base salary  pension contributions and value of bene ts to which the Director would have been entitled for the duration of the remaining notice period net of statutory deductions in each case.
Half of any payments in lieu of notice would be made in a lump sum the remainder in equal monthly instalments commencing in the month in which the midpoint of their foregone notice period falls and are reduced or extinguished by salary from any role undertaken by the departing Executive in this time.
Executive Directors are subject to certain noncompete covenants for a period of nine months and nonsolicitation covenants for a period of 12 months following the termination of their employment.
Their service agreements are governed by English law.
Governance 104 Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7 Executive Directors contracts do not contain any change of control provisions they do contain a duty to mitigate should the Director  nd an alternative paid occupation in any period during which the Company must otherwise pay compensation on early termination.
The table below summarises how the awards under the annual bonus and Vesuvius Share Plan are typically treated in different leaver scenarios and on a change of control.
Whilst the Committee retains overall discretion on determining good leaver status it typically de nes a good leaver in circumstances such as retirement with agreement of the Company ill health disability death redundancy or part of the business in which the individual is employed or engaged ceasing to be part of the Group.
Final treatment is subject to the Committees discretion.
Event Timing Calculation of vestingpayment Annual Incentive Plan Good leaver Paid at the same time as to continuing employees.
Annual bonus is paid only to the extent that any performance conditions have been satis ed and is pro rated for the proportion of the  nancial year worked before cessation of employment.
Bad leaver Not applicable.
Individuals lose the right to their annual bonus.
Change of control Paid on the effective date of change of control.
Annual bonus is paid only to the extent that any performance conditions have been satis ed and is pro rated for the proportion of the  nancial year worked.
Vesuvius Share Plan Good leaver On normal vesting date or earlier at the Committees discretion.
Unvested awards vest to the extent that any performance conditions have been satis ed and a pro rata reduction applies to the value of the awards to take into account the proportion of vesting period not served unless the Committee decides that the reduction in the number of vested shares is inappropriate.
Bad leaver Unvested awards lapse.
Unvested awards lapse on cessation of employment.
Change of control On the date of the event.
Unvested awards vest to the extent that any performance conditions have been satis ed and a pro rata reduction applies for the proportion of the vesting period not served.
Note
In certain circumstances the Committee may determine that unvested awards under the V esuvius Share Plan will not vest on a change of control but will instead be replaced by an equivalent grant of a new award as determined by the Committee in the new company .
In the case of the Vesuvius Deferred Share Bonus Plan if the individual leaves for any reason other than dismissal for cause or in the event of a change in control the deferred award will vest in full unless the Committee determines otherwise.
Bene ts normally cease to be provided on the date employment ends.
However the Committee has the discretion to allow some minor bene ts such as health insurance tax advice and repatriation expenses to continue to be provided for a period following cessation where this is considered fair and reasonable or appropriate on the basis of local market practice.
In addition the Committee retains discretion to fund other expenses for the Executive Director for example payments to meet legal fees incurred in connection with termination of employment or to meet the costs of providing outplacement support and de minimis termination costs up to 5000 to cover transfer of mobile phone or other administrative expenses.
The Committee reserves the right to make any other payments in connection with a Directors cessation of of ce or employment where the payments are made in good faith in discharge of an existing legal obligation or by way of damages for breach of such an obligation or by way of a compromise or settlement of any claim arising in connection with the cessation of a Directors of ce or employment.
In certain circumstances the Committee may approve new contractual arrangements with departing Executive Directors including but not limited to settlement con dentiality restrictive covenants andor consultancy arrangements.
These would be used only where the Committee believed it was in the best interests of the Company to do so.
Remuneration Policy continued 105 Comparison of Remuneration Policy for Executive Directors with that for other Employees The Remuneration Policy for Executive Directors is designed in line with the remuneration philosophy set out in this report which also underpins remuneration for the wider Group.
Remuneration arrangements for Executive Directors draw on the same elements as those for other employees  base salary xed bene ts and retirement bene ts  with performance related pay extending down into the management cadres and beyond.
However given that remuneration structures for other employees need to re ect both seniority and local market practice they differ from the policy for Executive Directors.
In particular Executive Directors receive a higher proportion of their remuneration in performancerelated pay and sharebased payments.
Individual percentages of  xed versus variable remuneration and participation in sharebased structures decline as seniority decreases.
The process for delivering salary increases on a two to threeyear cycle for Executive Directors is also applied to other members of the Group Executive Committee and their direct managerial reports.
Whilst all employees receive an annual performance appraisal other employees continue to receive salary reviews on an annual basis.
As with Executive Directors middle and senior managers participate in the Annual Incentive Plan.
For members of the Group Executive Committee and functional employees the award is predominantly based on Group performance with the remainder awarded against achievement of personal objectives.
For operational employees any potential award is based upon achieving three measures relating to Group performance business unit performance and individual achievement of personal objectives.
All members of the Group Executive Committee participate in the Vesuvius Share Plan and receive awards of Performance Shares which vest in accordance with measures and targets set against EPS and TSR.
The level of awards granted to members of the Group Executive Committee who dont serve on the Board are lower than those payable to the Executive Directors.
For certain senior and middle managers awards are made under the Vesuvius Medium T erm Plan MTP.
These managers participate in the MTP at varying percentage levels and awards are based on the same measures and targets as the Annual Incentive Plan.
Senior managers have their MTP awards made over Vesuvius shares whilst middle managers receive their awards in cash.
In each case awards are granted following the end of the relevant  nancial year.
The MTP share awards vest on the second anniversary of the date of grant subject to continuing employment.
Consideration of Conditions elsewhere in the Group in Developing Policy The Company does not consult directly with employees on Executive Directors remuneration arrangements.
However the Remuneration Committee will take into account the pay and employment conditions of other Group employees when determining Executive Directors remuneration particularly when determining base salary increases when the Committee will consider the salary increases for other Group employees in the same jurisdiction.
Consideration of Shareholder Views Vesuvius is committed to open and transparent dialogue with its shareholders on remuneration as well as other governance matters.
As Chairman of the Committee Jane Hinkley welcomes shareholder engagement and is available for any discussions investors wish to have on remuneration matters.
During 2017  remuneration matters were discussed at a number of meetings with investors.
The feedback from such meetings is always shared with the Committee and taken into consideration when decisions are made about future remuneration strategy and arrangements.
Shareholding Guidelines The Remuneration Committee encourages Executive Directors to build and hold a shareholding in the Company.
The required holding of the Chief Executive is to be equivalent in value to at least 2x salary and that required of other Executive Directors is to be equivalent in value to at least 1x salary.
Compliance with the shareholding policy is tested at the end of each year for application in the following year using the average of the closing prices of a Vesuvius ordinary share for the trading days in that December.
General
The Committee may make minor amendments to the policy set out in this Policy Report for regulatory exchange control tax or administrative purposes or to take account of a change in legislation without obtaining shareholder approval for that amendment.
Governance 106 Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7
Directors Remuneration Report
Annual Report on Directors Remuneration Remuneration Committee Structure The current members of the Remuneration Committee are all the independent Nonexecutive Directors of the Company.
The Committee Chairman is Jane Hinkley.
Jane Hinkley Hock Goh and Douglas Hurt have all served on the Committee throughout 2017 .
Holly Koeppel has served on the Committee since her appointment to the Board on 3 April 2017 .
All continue in of ce as at the date of this report.
The Committee complies with the requirements of the UK Corporate Governance Code for the composition of remuneration committees.
Each of the members brings a broad experience of international businesses and an understanding of their challenges to the work of the
The Company Secretary is Secretary to the
Members biographies are on pages 50 and 51.
Meetings
The Committee met  ve times during the year.
The Groups Chairman Chief Executive and Chief Human Resources Of cer were invited to each meeting together with Christer Gardell our nonindependent Nonexecutive Director though none of them participated in discussions regarding their own remuneration.
In addition a representative from Deloitte the Remuneration Committee adviser attended the majority of meetings and the Chief Financial Of cer attended where the agenda of the meeting required it.
The attendees supported the work of the Committee giving critical insight into the operational demands of the business and their application to the overall remuneration strategy within the Group.
In receiving views on remuneration matters from the Executive Directors and senior management the Committee recognised the potential for con icts of interest to arise and considered the advice accordingly.
The Chairman of the Committee reported the outcomes of all meetings to the Board.
The Committee operates under formal terms of reference which were reviewed during the year.
The terms of reference are available on the Group website site The Committee members are permitted to obtain outside legal advice at the Companys expense in relation to their deliberations.
These powers were not exercised during the year.
The Committee may also secure the attendance at its meetings of any employee or other parties it considers necessary.
Role and Responsibilities The Committee is responsible for Determining the overall remuneration policy for the Executive Directors including the terms of their service agreements pension rights and compensation payments Setting the appropriate remuneration for the Chairman the Executive Directors and the Company Secretary Recommending and monitoring the level and structure of remuneration for senior management being the  rst layer of management below Board level and their direct reports Overseeing the operation of the executive share incentive plans Advice Provided to the Remuneration Committee Deloitte is appointed directly by the Remuneration Committee to provide advice on executive remuneration matters including remuneration structure and policy updates on market practice and trends and guidance on the implementation and operation of share incentive plans.
The Committee appointed Deloitte a signatory to the Remuneration Consultants Group Code of Conduct in relation to Executive Remuneration Consulting in the UK following a formal tender process in 2014.
Deloitte also provides the Remuneration Committee with ongoing calculations of total shareholder return TSR to enable the Committee to monitor the performance of longterm share incentive plans.
In addition in 201 7  within the wider Group Deloitte was procured in various jurisdictions to provide accounting and tax advisory work.
During 201 7  Deloittes fees for advice to the Remuneration Committee charged on a time spent basis amounted to 71975.
The Committee conducted a review of the performance of Deloitte as remuneration adviser during the year and concluded that Deloitte continued to provide effective objective and independent advice to the Committee.
No con ict of interest arises as a result of other services provided by Deloitte to the Group.
Activities of the Remuneration Committee The key matters the Remuneration Committee considered during its  ve meetings in 2017 included Considering formulating and approving the remuneration arrangements for the new Chief Executive Agreeing the retirement arrangements for the outgoing Chief Executive Considering and approving the 2018 salary review proposals for the Chief Financial Of cer and reviewing proposals for senior management as appropriate Reviewing and approving achievement against performance targets for the 2016 annual incentive arrangements Setting performance targets and approving the structure of the 2017 annual incentive arrangements Reviewing and assessing the Companys attainment of performance conditions applicable to the Vesuvius Performance Share awards made in 2014 Setting the performance measures and targets and authorising the grant of new awards in 2017 under the Vesuvius Share Plan and Medium T erm Incentive Plan Considering the Companys ongoing share sourcing requirements to meet obligations under the Companys share plans and funding of the ESOP In the light of advice received from the external advisers and trends in remuneration practice and governance discussing the Companys overall approach to executive remuneration and reviewing whether any changes should be made Reviewing the Remuneration Committees terms of reference Approving the 2016 Directors Remuneration Report and reviewing the 2017 Directors Remuneration Report 107 As in previous years the Committee was the subject of an externally moderated performance evaluation.
The performance of the Remuneration Committee was rated positively overall.
Several items had been identi ed in the 2016 evaluation and it was noted that these had been effectively managed in 2017 with in particular the Committee gaining greater insight into the remuneration arrangements for employees below the senior management tier and global remuneration policies.
Going forward communication was identi ed as an area of focus with the Committee expressing the view that the appointment of the new Chief Executive should be taken as an opportunity to review the level of dialogue between the Committee Chairman management and the external advisers.
In addition as with the Board in general it was felt that the Remuneration Committee would bene t from the more concise presentation of data in Committee papers.
Regulatory Compliance The Remuneration Policy which is set out on pages 98 to 105 was prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 2006 and the Large and Mediumsized Companies and Groups Accounts and Reports Amendment Regulations 2013.
It also meets the requirements of the Financial Conduct Authoritys Listing Rules and the Disclosure Guidance and T ransparency Rules.
This Remuneration Report sets out how the provisions of the UK Corporate Governance Code are applied by the Company in relation to matters of remuneration.
We have complied for the year under review with these provisions.
Share Usage Under the rules of the Vesuvius Share Plan the Company has the discretion to satisfy awards either by the transfer of T reasury shares or other existing shares or by the allotment of newly issued shares.
Awards made under the Deferred Share Bonus Plan to satisfy shares awarded to Directors under the Annual Incentive and awards made to senior managers by the Company over shares pursuant to the Medium T erm Incentive Plan must be satis ed out of Vesuvius shares held for this purpose by the Companys employee share ownership plan trust ESOP.
The decision on how to satisfy awards is taken by the Remuneration Committee which considers the most prudent and appropriate sourcing arrangement for the Company.
At 31 December 2017  the Company held 7 271 174 ordinary shares in T reasury and 877 744 ordinary shares in the ESOP .
The ESOP can be gifted T reasury shares by the Company can purchase shares in the open market or can subscribe for newly issued shares as required to meet obligations to satisfy options and awards that vest.
The Vesuvius Share Plan complies with the current Investment Association guidelines on headroom which provide that overall dilution under all plans over a rolling tenyear period should not exceed 10% of the Companys issued share capital with a further limitation over a rolling tenyear period of 5% for discretionary share schemes.
More than 9.9% of the 10% limit and more than 4.9% of the 5% limit is available as headroom for the issue of new shares or the transfer of T reasury shares for the
No T reasury shares have been transferred or newly issued shares allotted under the Vesuvius Share Plan during the year under review.
Policy Implementation The following section provides details of how the Companys Remuneration Policy was implemented during the  nancial year 2017 and how it will be implemented in the  nancial year 2018.
Directors Remuneration  Audited The table below sets out the total remuneration received by Executive Directors in the  nancial year under review Patrick Andr Franois Wanecq Guy Y oung Total salary 175  39telTaxable bene ts 56  Pension 44  Total  xed pay 275  66telAnnual Incentive 186  39telLongterm incentives Total variable pay 186  100telTotal 461  1675 1 Governance 108 Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7 The table below sets out the fees and taxable bene ts received by Nonexecutive Directors in the  nancial year under review and the total remuneration received by both Executive and Nonexecutive Directors during the year under review 2017 2016 Total fees
Total
Total fees
Total
John McDonough CBE Christer Gardell Hock Goh Jane Hinkley Douglas Hurt Holly Koeppel T otal 201 7 Nonexecutive Director remuneration 482 T otal 201 7 Executive Director remuneration 2892 T otal 201 7 Director remuneration 3374
Patrick Andr joined the Board on 1 September 2017.
Figures in the table relate to salary bene ts and Annual Incentive earned in respect of the period 1 September 31 December 2017.
Franois Wanecq stepped down from the Board on 31 August 2017 and retired from the Company on 31 December 2017.
Figures in the table relate to salary bene ts and Annual Incentive earned in respect of his employment as Chief Executive prorated for the period from the beginning of the  nancial year to 31 August 2017.
Also included in the table is the full value of his Vesuvius Share Plan award due to vest in 2018 based on performance over the performance period 20152017 see footnote 8 for more details.
Base salary or fees as appropriate earned in relation to services as a Director during the  nancial year.
The UK regulations require the inclusion of bene ts for Directors where these would be taxable in the UK on the assumption that the Director is tax resident in the
The  gures in the table therefore include expense reimbursement and associated tax relating to travel accommodation and subsistence in connection with attendance at Board meetings and other Board business during the year  which are considered by HMRC to be taxable in the UK.
Bene ts for Executive Directors include car allowance private medical care relocation expenses tax advice commuting costs school fees and de minimis amounts for Directors spouses travel and administrative expenses and bene ts incurred in connection with Franois Wanecqs retirement.
Patrick Andr and Guy Young receive a pension allowance of 25% of base salary.
Franois Wanecq received a pension allowance of 30% of base salary.
The  gures in the table represent the value of all cash allowances and contributions received in respect of pension bene ts.
The sum of total salary taxable bene ts and pension.
This  gure includes any Annual Incentive payments made to the Executive Directors in relation to services as a Director in the year under review.
See pages 109 to 111 for more details.
This represents the Performance Share award granted to Franois Wanecq in 2015 under the Vesuvius Share Plan that is due to vest in 2018.
See Note 6 of the Vesuvius Performance Share Awards Allocations table on page 113.
At an average Vesuvius midmarket closing share price from 1 October 201731 December 2017 of 580 pence the total value of the awards that are due to vest along with the cash payment for the dividend that has accrued on these vested shares was 609364.
The sum of the value of the Annual Incentive and the longterm incentives where the performance period ended during the  nancial year.
The sum of base salary bene ts pension Annual Incentive and longterm incentives where the performance period ended during the  nancial year.
Holly Koeppel joined the Board on 3 April 2017.
Additional note Total 2016 Director remuneration for the Directors who served during 2016 was 2.255m.
This included fees of 34k and taxable bene ts of 8k paid to Nelda Connors in 2016.
Nelda retired from the Board on 30 September 2016.
Remuneration for the Former Chief Executive
Franois Wanecq stepped down as an Executive Director and Chief Executive on 31 August 2017 and to assist the transition of of ce to the new Chief Executive he continued in employment receiving his salary bene ts and pension allowance totalling 471k until he retired from the Company on 31 December 2017 .
Franois Wanecq remained entitled to be considered for an Annual Incentive in respect of services rendered in the calendar year 2017 .
It was agreed that the amount payable if any would be calculated and paid in 2018 at the same time as other Executives and at a maximum would equal 125% of his base salary in 2017 .
Calculation and payment of the 2017 Annual Incentive was subject to the Companys achievement of the nancial targets and his achievement of his personal objectives for this period see Annual Incentive section below.
The Annual Incentive earned in relation to the period 1 September 31 December 2017 totalled 209k being 106% of his base salary for this period.
In addition the Remuneration Committee exercised its discretion to treat Franois Wanecq as a good leaver for the purposes of the Vesuvius Share Plan retaining his right to the awards granted in 2015 in full as he was employed by Vesuvius for the full performance period and those granted in 2016 and 2017 on a prorated basis.
The vesting of all these awards is subject to the achievement of the applicable performance criteria over the full performance period the rules of the Vesuvius Share Plan and the approval of the Remuneration
The extent of vesting of the 2016 and 2017 awards will be determined by the Remuneration Committee in 2019 and 2020.
Details of the vesting of Franois Wanecqs 2015 award the extent of which has already been determined by the Remuneration Committee are included in the Directors Remuneration table and also detailed in the Longerterm Pay section below.
Under the applicable company relocation policy Franois Wanecq has received one months salary as a relocation allowance.
In addition the Company con rmed in the Section Annual Report on Directors Remuneration continued 109 430B Statement that it would pay his removal costs the reasonable costs of any international tax advice required in connection with his retirement from employment and any tax support to meet his ongoing obligations to correctly report income received from the Company for a threeyear period following his retirement.
In addition the Statement con rmed that the Company will also pay de minimis administrative expenses and bene ts incurred in connection with his retirement.
No further termination payment will be made to Mr Wanecq.
There were no payments made to any Director for loss of of ce during the year ended 31 December 2017  and no payments were made to any other past Directors of the Company during the year ended 31 December 2017 .
Base Salary and Fees In the year under review the Chief Financial Of cer received a base salary of 325000 per annum.
Franois Wanecq received a base salary of 590000 per annum and following his promotion to Chief Executive Patrick Andr received a base salary of 525000 per annum.
The Nonexecutive Directors fees were set at 45000 per annum.
Supplementary fees of 15000 per annum were paid to the Chairmen of the Audit and Remuneration Committees.
A supplementary annual fee of 5000 was also paid to the Senior Independent Director.
The Chairman was paid an annual fee of 185000.
Neither the Chairman nor the other Nonexecutive Directors are members of the Groups pension plans nor do they participate in the Groups incentive schemes.
In line with the Groups longerterm approach of reviewing the salaries of Executive Directors and senior Executives every two to three years Guy Y oungs base salary was reviewed for application in 2018.
This was the  rst time his base salary had been reviewed since he joined the Company in 2015 and following this review it was resolved that his salary should be increased by 7 .7% with effect from 1 January 2018 up to 350000 per annum in recognition of his leadership of the Groups Finance function over the past three years and his development in the role.
In considering this increase the Committee also noted that over the previous two years the average salary increase for UK salaried employees had been 3.36%.
Following his recent promotion there is no change to Patrick Andrs salary in 2018 but as announced at the time of his appointment the Remuneration Committee has committed to review his salary annually for the  rst three years of his appointment January 2019 2020 and 2021 .
Pension Arrangements  Audited In accordance with their service agreements Patrick Andr and Guy Y oung are entitled to pension allowances of 25% of base salary.
Franois Wanecq was entitled to a pension allowance of 30% of base salary up until the date of his retirement.
This allowance can be used to participate in Vesuvius pension arrangements be invested in their own pension arrangements or be taken as a cash supplement or any combination of these alternatives.
Annual Incentive The Executive Directors are eligible to receive an Annual Incentive calculated as a percentage of base salary based on achievement against speci ed  nancial targets and personal objectives.
Each year the Remuneration Committee establishes the performance criteria for the forthcoming year.
The  nancial targets are set by reference to the Companys nancial budget.
The target range is set to ensure that Annual Incentives are only paid out at maximum for signi cantly exceeding performance expectations.
The Remuneration Committee considers that the setting and attainment of these targets is important in the context of achievement of the Companys longerterm strategic goals.
The Annual Incentive has a threshold level of performance below which no award is paid a target level and a maximum performance level at which a maximum award is earned.
2017 Annual Incentive For 2017 the maximum Annual Incentive potential for the Executive Directors was 125% of base salary and their target Annual Incentive potential was 62.5% of base salary.
Following his appointment as Chief Executive on 1 September 2017  it was agreed that Patrick Andr would participate in the Annual Incentive at these incentive levels with effect from that date.
With respect to his service with the Group prior to that date he remained entitled to receive any payouts due under the Flow Control business unit Annual Incentive Plan.
Following his retirement as a Director Franois Wanecq remained entitled to be considered for an Annual Incentive in respect of services rendered in the calendar year 2017 .
It was agreed that the amount payable if any would be calculated and paid in 2018 at the same time as other Executives.
For the  nancial year 2017 the Executive Directors Annual Incentives were based 60% on Group headline earnings per share 20% on the Groups cash conversion de ned as operating cash  ow divided by trading pro t and 20% on speci ed personal objectives.
Financial T argets The 2017 Vesuvius Group headline earnings per share performance targets set out below were set at the December 2016 fullyear average foreign exchange rates being the rates used for the 2017 budget process
30.4 pence
33.0 pence
35.6 pence The 2017 Groups cash conversion targets were set as follows
90%
105%
120% In assessing the Groups performance against these targets the Committee uses a constant currency approach.
Thus the 2017 fullyear EPS performance was retranslated at December 2016 fullyear average foreign exchange rates to establish performance.
This is consistent with practice in previous years.
Governance 11 0 Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7 In 201 7  Vesuvius retranslated EPS performance was 39 .
1 pence and cash conversion was 104%.
Consequently EPS performance was above maximum and the cash conversion performance was between threshold and target.
Payments of 75% and 1 1.38% of base salary respectively  86.38% in total were therefore due to the Executive Directors and Franois Wanecq under the Annual Incentive in respect of the  nancial performance metrics.
Personal Objectives In 2017  a proportion 20% of the Annual Incentive for Executive Directors representing 25% of the maximum 125% bonus entitlement was based on the achievement of personal objectives.
A summary of the objectives set and performance achieved is set out below.
Patrick Andr Summary of objective Summary outcome Drive Group performance  Launched new incremental restructuring programme with different scope Introduced and drove upgraded budget process for 2018 Transition to Chief Executive and engage the senior management team Completed tailored induction and handover of key contacts Developed relationship with investor community Developed relationships with senior teams in the Foundry Advanced Refractories and Digital Services business units Manage the succession in Flow Control business unit leadership Selected successor  and continued to manage the Flow Control business unit until handover Assisted in induction of new Flow Control President Review Group organisation and implement changes identi ed Reviewed and con rmed business unit leadership and updated organisational responsibility of business units Rede ned corporate functional roles organisation and leadership with clear communication In summary after considering performance as outlined above the Committee approved an Annual Incentive payout of 19.65% of base salary out of the 25% in respect of the personal objectives of Patrick Andr for the period of his tenure as Chief Executive.
For the period of his tenure as President Flow Control Mr Andr was awarded 9.76% of base salary out of 16% in respect of his personal objectives.
Guy Young Summary of objective Summary outcome Develop people and team  Developed updated functional strategy and plans including full team evaluation Developed updated succession plans for key  nance functions Drove performance across the team Improve working capital management process Implemented new supplier  nance scheme Introduced clearer working capital management and reporting processes with demonstrable impact on working capital performance Manage the Implementation of Shared Service Strategy Delivered strategy.
Oversaw launch of project and commenced transition with appropriate performance metrics put in place Develop Group IR strategy Implemented updated strategy and broker performance reviews Managed clear investor engagement and enhanced share register Enhance processes for monitoring corporate activity Increased robustness of internal processes Enhanced the capabilities for assessment of  nancial performance for corporate activity In summary after considering performance as outlined above the Committee approved an Annual Incentive payout of 15.75% of base salary out of the 25% in respect of the personal objectives of Guy Y oung.
Franois Wanecq Summary of objective Summary outcome Drive Group performance for 201 7  Maintained clear control of capital expenditure Reduced working capital percentage improvement in cash conversion Support the process for CEO succession Strong support of succession process with appropriate assistance provided Effective transfer of key relationships both within and outside the Group Complete implementation of agreed restructuring plan Delivered expected savings from existing plan Existing plan perimeter extended to increase savings and return Implement the Board approved strategy Increased performance focus on key growing markets of China and India Continued the development of the T echnical Service offering T arget corporate activity and business growth Continued focus on opportunities for corporate development Supported incremental growth in key areas of strategic focus Annual Report on Directors Remuneration continued 111 In summary after considering performance as outlined above the Committee approved an Annual Incentive payoutof 15% of prorated base salary out of the 25% in respect of the personal objectives of Francois Wanecq for the period of his tenure as Chief Executive during the year.
The total Annual Incentive awards payable to Patrick Andr and Guy Y oung in respect of their services as a Director during 2017 are therefore 106% of prorated salary and 102% of salary respectively.
The total Annual Incentive award payable to Franois Wanecq in respect of 2017 is 101% of salary.
Franois
Wanecq will receive his Annual Incentive payment in cash in line with the Remuneration Policy.
33% of Patrick Andr and Guy Y oungs Annual Incentive payments will be deferred into awards over shares to be held for a period of three years.
2018 Annual Incentive The Remuneration Committee has determined that for 2018 the structure of the Annual Incentive will remain broadly the same as for 2017 60% of the Executive Directors Annual Incentives will therefore be based on Group headline earnings per share 20% on working capital using an updated objective of the Groups working capital to sales ratio based on the 12month moving average and 20% on the achievement of personal objectives.
The Company will not be disclosing the targets set until after the relevant performance period has ended because of commercial sensitivities.
The personal objectives for 2018 are all non nancial or jobspeci c in nature and track performance against key strategic organisational and operational goals.
The maximum Annual Incentive potential for 2018 will be 125% of base salary.
33% of any Annual Incentive earned will be deferred into awards over shares to be held for a period of three years.
MalusClawback Arrangements in 2018 Vesuvius has malus and clawback arrangements in respect of Executive Directors variable remuneration.
The structure of those arrangements is outlined in our Remuneration Policy.
Longerterm Pay L TIPs  Audited Performance Share awards are allocated to the Executive Directors under the Vesuvius Share Plan VSP.
In accordance with the Remuneration Policy and the rules of the VSP  they are eligible to receive on an annual basis a Performance Share award with a face value of up to 200% of salary.
Vesting of 50% of shares awarded is based upon the Companys threeyear TSR performance relative to that of the constituent companies of the FTSE 250 excluding investment trusts and 50% on headline EPS growth.
The level of compound headline EPS growth speci ed in the targets is set by the Remuneration Committee each year taking into account the Groups prospects and the broader global economic environment.
The schedule of EPS targets is designed at the maximum level to be highly challenging whilst remaining an effective incentive for the management team.
The EPS and TSR measures operate independently.
The use of these performance measures is intended to align executive remuneration with shareholders interests.
UK Executives receive awards in the form of nilcost options with a  exible exercise date and nonUK Executives receive awards which are exercised on the date of vesting.
On 16 March 2017  Franois Wanecq and Guy Y oung received allocations of Performance Shares worth 200% and 150% of their base salaries respectively.
Following his appointment as Chief Executive on 1 September 2017  it was agreed that
Andr would receive a prorated top up of his 2017 Performance Share award.
As a result on 1 September 2017 he was granted an additional Performance Share award of 42257 shares.
This award in addition to the Performance Share award of 60413 shares awarded to him on 16 March 2017  brought his total award of Performance Shares in 2017 to 200% of his salary on a prorated basis.
It re ected the increase in his Performance Share percentage entitlement and the increase in his salary for the  nal four months of the year.
The Remuneration Committee has determined that Patrick Andr will receive a Performance Share award in 2018 equivalent in value to 200% of his base salary and Guy Y oung an award equivalent in value to 150% of his base salary.
The performance period applicable to the awards made in 2015 ended on 31 December 2017 .
The TSR performance during this threeyear performance period was assessed against the comparator group and it was determined that the Companys performance was between median and upper quintile.
As a result 27 .
1% of Performance Share awards will vest under the TSR performance element.
The Committee reviewed statistics from various sources which gave a large range of outcomes of global GDP growth.
The Committee concluded that 2% p. to measure the Companys EPS growth of 6.8% p.
20152017 performance period.
As a result the Groups annual compound headline EPS growth above this GDP measure for the period was 4.3%.
Therefore 16.6% of Performance Share awards will vest under the EPS performance element.
These awards will vest in April 2018.
T arget for the 2015 Performance Share Awards  Audited TSR ranking relative to FTSE 250 excluding investment trusts Vesting percentage Annual compound headline EPS growth above global GDP Vesting percentage Below median 0% Below 3% 0% Median 12.50% 3% 12.50% Between median and upper quintile Pro rata between 1 2.50% and 50% Between 3% and 15% Pro rata between 1 2.50% and 50% Upper quintile 50% At or above 15% 50% Governance 11 2 Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7 T argets for the 2016 201 7 and 2018 Performance Share Awards  Audited TSR ranking relative to FTSE 250 excluding investment trusts Vesting percentage Annual compound headline EPS growth Vesting percentage Below median 0% Below 3% 0% Median 12.50% 3% 12.50% Between median and upper quintile Pro rata between 1 2.50% and 50% Between 3% and 6% Pro rata between 1 2.50% and 25 % Upper quintile 50% 6% 25% Between 6% and 15% Pro rata between 25% and 50% At above 15% 50% Vesuvius Performance Share Award Allocations  Audited The following table sets out those Performance Share awards that were allocated in 2014 2015 2016 and 2017 under the Vesuvius Share Plan Grant and type of award Total share allocations as at 31 Dec 2016
Allocations lapsed during the year Shares vested during the year T otal share allocations as at 31 Dec 2017 Market price of the shares on the day before award p
Earliest vesting date Patrick Andr 8 April 2016 Performance Shares 927 46    92746 291.7 8 Apr 2019 16 March 201 7 1 Jan 1 7 Performance Shares  6041 3   60413 524.5 16 Mar 2020 1 September Jan 1 7 Performance Shares  42257   42257 578 1 Sep 2020 Total 927 46 102670   195416 Franois Wanecq 17 March 2014 Performance Shares 2537 48  2537 48   429 .3 1 April 2015 31 Dec 1 7 Performance Shares 221533    221533 491.
1 1 Apr 2018 8 April 2016 Performance Shares 373 938  1 58 1 1 3  215825 291.7 8 Apr 2019 16 March Jan 1 7 Performance Shares  225 967 1 66 1 77  59790 524.5 16 Mar 2020 Total 849219 225967 578038  497  148 Guy Y oung 8 April 2016 Performance Shares 1 28739    128739 291.7 8 Apr 2019 16 March Jan 1 7 Performance Shares  93355   93355 524.5 16 Mar 2020 Total 128739 93355   222094 Annual Report on Directors Remuneration continued 11 3
In 2016 Franois Wanecq and Guy Young received allocations of Performance Shares worth 200% and 125% of their base salaries being 373938 shares and 128739 shares respectively.
In addition prior to his appointment as Chief Executive Patrick Andr received an award of 92746 shares in respect of his role as President Flow Control.
On the date of his retirement from the Company on 31 December 2017 Franois Wanecqs entitlement to the shares he was granted in 2016 was reduced prorata to re ect his departure part way through the vesting period.
As a result 158113 shares lapsed on this date.
On 16 March 2017 Franois Wanecq and Guy Young received allocations of Performance Shares worth 200% and 150% of their base salaries being 225967 shares and 93355 shares respectively.
In addition prior to his appointment as Chief Executive Patrick Andr received an award of 60413 shares in respect of his role as President Flow Control.
These allocations were calculated based upon the average closing midmarket price of Vesuvius shares on the  ve dealing days before the award was made being 5.222.
The total value of these awards based on this share price on the date of grant was 1180000 487500 and 315477 respectively.
On the date of his retirement from the Company on 31 December 2017 Franois Wanecqs entitlement to the shares he was granted in 2017 was reduced prorata to re ect his departure part way through the vesting period.
As a result 166177 shares lapsed on this date.
Patrick Andrs March 2017 Performance Share award is subject to Flow Control performance conditions.
Under these 7552 of the 60413 shares awarded are deemed to have met the performance condition applicable in the  rst year .
The achievement of the performance condition will be reassessed at the end of 2018 and 2019.
Following his promotion to Chief Executive on 1 September 2017 Patrick Andr received an additional award of 42257 Performance Shares in the form of a conditional award.
This award brought his total award of Performance Shares in 2017 to 200% of his salary on a prorated basis which is the maximum annual award for the Chief Executive as determined by the Vesuvius Remuneration Policy.
The allocation was calculated based upon the average closing midmarket price of Vesuvius shares on the  ve dealing days before the award was made being 5.794 per share.
The total value of the award based on this share price on the date of grant was 244837.
The Performance Shares that were allocated in 2014 had performance conditions to be tested over the  nancial years 2014 2015 and 2016.
As the requisite performance was not achieved Franois Wanecqs award lapsed on the third anniversary of grant in March 2017.
The Performance Shares that were allocated in 2015 had performance conditions to be tested over the  nancial years 20152016 and 2017.
The performance period for the LTIP .
In accordance with the Companys achievement of the speci ed performance conditions 43.7% of Franois Wanecqs Performance Shares96809 shares are due to vest on 1 April 2018.
In addition the Remuneration Committee has determined that Mr Wanecq will receive a cash payment of 47872 which is equivalent to the value of the dividends that would have been paid on the number of shares that are due to vest in respect of dividend record dates occurring during the period between the award date and the date of vesting.
Additional notes All of Franois Wanecq and Guy Youngs awards have been made in the form of nil cost options with no exercise price.
Patrick Andrs award were made in the form of conditional awards.
If the performance conditions for these awards are not met then these awards will lapse.
If the threshold level of either of the two performance conditions applicable to these awards is met then 12.50% of the award will vest.
The Remuneration Committee also has the discretion to award cash or shares equivalent in value to the dividend that would have accrued during the vesting period on the number of shares that vest.
The midmarket closing price of Vesuvius shares during 2017 ranged between 400 pence and 606 pence per share and on 29 December 2017 the last dealing day of the year  was 584 pence per share.
Restricted Share Award On Guy Y oungs appointment as Chief Financial Of cer in 2015 the Committee resolved that it would partially compensate him for longterm incentives that he forfeited as a result of joining Vesuvius by granting a oneoff Restricted Share award over 17  1 15 shares under the Vesuvius Share Plan.
The value of this award was included in the Directors Remuneration table in the 2015 Remuneration
Half of this award vested in 2016 and the remainder vested on 1 November 2017  the second anniversary of the date of his commencement of employment.
Details of the portion of the Restricted Share award that vested during 2017 are given in the table below Date of award
1 Jan 2017 Shares vested during the year
31 Dec 2017 1 3 May 2016 8557 8557
8557 shares vested to Guy Young on 1 November 2017.
The midmarket closing price of the Companys shares on the date of vesting was 5.885 per share.
The total value of shares that he received on the date of vesting was therefore 50358.
In addition Guy Young received a cash payment of 2838.78 to re ect the dividends that would have accrued on the shares between his date of joining and the vesting date.
Governance 11 4 Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7 Statement of Directors Shareholding  Audited The interests of Directors and their closely associated persons in ordinary shares as at 31 December 2017  including any interests in share options and shares provisionally awarded under the Vesuvius Share Plan are set out below Bene cial holding
Executive Directors Patrick Andr 195416 Franois Wanecq 1363 930 497  1 48 Guy Y oung 14551 222094 Nonexecutive Directors John Mc Donough CBE Chairman 100000 Christer Gardell Hock Goh 5000 Jane Hinkley 12000 Douglas Hurt 18000 Holly Koeppel 7500
Patrick Andr holds conditional awards of 195416 shares and Franois Wanecq and Guy Young hold 497148 and 222094 nil cost options respectively granted as Performance Shares under the Vesuvius Share Plan.
These are all subject to performance conditions.
Christer Gardell is Managing Partner of and has a  nancial interest in Cevian Capital which held 21.11% of Vesuvius issued share capital as at 31 December 2017 and at the date of this report.
Additional notes None of the other Directors nor their spouses nor their minor children held nonbene cial interests in the ordinary shares of the Company during the year .
There were no changes in the interests of the Directors in the ordinary shares of the Company in the period from 1 January 2018 to the date of this Report.
All awards under the Vesuvius Share Plan are subject to performance conditions and continued employment until the relevant vesting date as set out on pages 112 and 113.
Full details of Directors shareholdings and incentive awards are given in the Companys Register of Directors Interests which is open to inspection at the Companys registered of ce during normal business hours.
Shareholding Guidelines The Remuneration Committee encourages Executive Directors to build and hold a shareholding in the Company.
The required holding of the Chief Executive is to be equivalent in value to at least 2x salary and that required of other Executive Directors is to be equivalent in value to at least 1x salary.
T o this end Executive Directors are required to retain at least 50% measured as the value after tax of any shares received through the operation of share schemes in addition permission to sell shares held  whether acquired through the operation of share schemes or otherwise  will not be given other than in exceptional circumstances if following the disposal the shareholding requirements have not been achieved.
Compliance with the shareholding policy is tested at the end of each year for application in the following year using the average of the closing prices of a Vesuvius ordinary share for the trading days in that December.
Executive Directors Shareholdings  Audited As at 31 December 2017  the Executive Directors shareholdings against the current shareholding guidelines using the Companys share price averaged over the trading days of the period 1 December to 31 December 2017  of 565.97 pence per share were as follows
Actual share ownership as a percentage of salary at 31 Dec 2017 Policy share ownership as a percentage of salary Policy met Patrick Andr 0% 200% In the buildup period Guy Y oung 25% 100% In the buildup period Annual Report on Directors Remuneration continued 11 5 Annual Changes in Chief Executive Pay vs Employee Pay The table below shows the percentage change in the remuneration of the Chief Executive  comprising salary taxable bene ts and Annual Incentive  and comparable data for UK salaried employees.
The UK salaried employee workforce was chosen as a fair representation of a suitable comparator group as both the former Chief Executive Franois Wanecq and the incumbent Chief Executive Patrick Andr are based in the UK albeit with a global role and responsibilities and levels of pay vary widely across the Group depending on geography and local market conditions.
Chief Executive UK salaried employee workforce average per capita 000 % change % change Taxable bene ts Annual bonus 585 371 57 .68 55.30
Salary taxable bene ts and Annual Incentive amounts in respect of the Chief Executive for 2017 re ect the sum of amounts payable to Franois Wanecq in respect of service from 1 January 2017 to 31 August 2017 and amounts payable to Patrick Andr in respect of service from 1 September 2017 to 31 December 2017.
The increase in bene ts principally results from the change in Chief Executive during the year .
Further information on the bene ts paid to Patrick Andr and Franois Wanecq during 2017 can be found in Note 4 to the Directors Remuneration table on page 108.
Annual Spend on Employee Pay vs Shareholders Distributions The charts below show the annual spend on all employees including Executive Directors compared with distributions made and proposed to be made to shareholders for 2016 and 2017
Dividends
90% 10% Relative importance of spend on pay  m
Dividends
90% 10% Relative importance of spend on pay  m 2016 Change Group remuneration of continuing operations see Note 8 441.5 384.8 14.73% Dividends based on  nal proposed dividend 48.6 44.7 8.72% Governance 11 6 Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7 TSR Performance and Chief Executive Pay The TSR performance graph compares Vesuvius TSR performance with that of the same investment in the FTSE 250 Index excluding investment trusts.
This index has been chosen as the comparator index to re ect the size international scope and diversity of the Company.
TSR is the measure of the returns that a company has provided for its shareholders re ecting share price movements and assuming reinvestment of dividends.
A spot rate has been used for this graph.
The demerger of Vesuvius plc was effective on 19 December 2012 and therefore the graph shows the period from 19 December 2012 to 31 December 2017 .
Vesuvius total shareholder return compared against total shareholder return of the FTSE 250 index excluding investment trusts since demerger Franois Wanecq Patrick Andr Chief Executive pay   nancial year ending 311212 311213 311214 311215 311216 311217 311217 T otal remuneration single  gure 000 1227 2447 1519 752 1173 1675 46 1 Annual variable pay % of maximum 0% 100% 64% 0% 63% 101 % 106% Longterm variable pay % of maximum 67% 28% 27% 0% 0% 43.7% na
Amounts shown in respect of Franois Wanecq for 2017 re ect payments in respect of his service as Chief Executive from 1 January 2017 to 31 August 2017 and the full value of his Vesuvius Share Plan award in relation to the performance period 20152017.
Amounts shown in respect of Patrick Andr for 2017 re ect payments in respect of his service as Chief Executive from 1 September 2017 to 31 December 2017.
Statement on Shareholder Voting At the last AGM which was held on 10 May 2017 the resolution concerning the advisory vote on the Remuneration Report for 2017 received 239094321 votes 98.99% in favour and 2434510 votes against 1.01% 1432 104 votes were withheld.
The Remuneration Policy received 238743 173 98.86% in favour and 2762888 votes 1.
14% against 1454874 votes were withheld.
At the AGM to be held on 10 May 2018 shareholders will again be invited to participate in an advisory vote on the
Remuneration Report.
The Directors Remuneration Report has been approved by the Board and is signed on its behalf by Jane Hinkley Chairman Remuneration Committee 28 February 2018 Annual Report on Directors Remuneration continued FTSE 250 Index excluding Investment Trusts Vesuvius plc Directors Report The Directors submit their Annual Report together with the audited accounts of the Group and of the Company Vesuvius plc registered in England and Wales No. ended 31 December 2017 .
The Companies Act 2006 requires the Company to provide a Directors Report for Vesuvius plc for the year ended 31 December 2017 .
The information that ful ls this requirement and which is incorporated by reference into and forms part of this report is included in the following sections of the Annual Report The Our Responsibility section The Governance section Financial Instruments the information on  nancial risk management objectives and policies contained in Notes 20 and 27 to the Group Financial Statements This Directors Report and the Strategic Report contained in pages 1 to 73 together represent the management report for the purpose of compliance with DTR 4.
1.8R of the UK Listing Authoritys Disclosure and T ransparency Rules.
The Company does not have any overseas branches within the meaning of the Companies Act 2006.
Going Concern Information on the business environment in which the Group operates including the factors that are likely to impact the future prospects of the Group is included in the Strategic
The principal risks and uncertainties that the Group faces throughout its global operations are shown on pages 24 and 25.
The  nancial position of the Group its cash  ows liquidity position and debt facilities are also described in the Strategic Report.
In addition the Groups Viability Statement is set out within the Strategic Report on page 23.
Notes 20 and 27 to the Group Financial Statements set out the Groups objectives policies and processes for managing its capital nancial risks  nancial instruments and hedging activities and its exposures to credit market both currency and interest rate related and liquidity risk.
Further details of the Groups cash balances and borrowings are included in Notes 13 14 and 27 to the Group Financial Statements.
The Directors have prepared cash  ow forecasts for the Group for a period in excess of 12 months from the date of approval of the 2017  nancial statements.
These forecasts re ect an assessment of current and future endmarket conditions and their impact on the Groups future trading performance.
The forecasts show that the Group will be able to operate within the current committed debt facilities and show continued compliance with the Companys  nancial covenants.
On the basis of the exercise described above and the Groups available committed debt facilities the Directors consider that the Group and Company have adequate resources to continue in operational existence for a period of at least 12 months from the date of signing of these accounts.
Accordingly they continue to adopt a going concern basis in preparing the  nancial statements of the Group and the Company.
Research and Development The Groups investment in research and development RandD during the year under review amounted to 33.2m representing approximately 2.0% of Group revenue 2.0%.
Further details of the Groups RandD activities can be found in the Innovation section of the Strategic Report.
Dividends
An interim dividend of 5.50 pence 2016 5.
15 pence per Vesuvius ordinary share was paid on 22 September 2017 to Vesuvius shareholders.
The Board is recommending a  nal dividend in respect of 2017 of 12.50 pence 2016 1 1.40 pence per ordinary share which if approved will be paid on 25 May 2018 to shareholders on the register at 13 April 2018.
Accountability and Audit A responsibility statement of the Directors and a statement by the auditor about its reporting responsibilities can be found on pages 121 and 124 to 129 respectively.
The Directors ful l the responsibilities set out in their statement within the context of an overall control environment of central strategic direction and delegated operating responsibility.
As at the date of this report so far as each Director of the Company is aware there is no relevant audit information of which the Companys auditor is unaware and each Director hereby con rms that they have taken all the steps that they ought to have taken as a Director in order to make themselves aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that the Companys auditor is aware of that information.
Auditor Appointments A competitive tender process for the appointment of a statutory auditor was conducted during 2016.
Following the completion of this the Company recommended that PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP PwC be appointed as external auditor for Vesuvius plc for the year ended 31 December 2017 replacing KPMG LLP .
Shareholder approval to con rm the appointment of PwC was given at the 2017 AGM.
PwC has expressed its willingness to continue in of ce as auditor of the Company and consequently resolutions for the reappointment of PwC as auditor of the Company and to authorise the Directors to determine its remuneration are to be proposed at the AGM.
Directors
The Directors of the Company are Patrick Andr Christer Gardell Hock Goh Jane Hinkley Douglas Hurt Holly Koeppel John McDonough CBE and Guy Y oung.
Patrick Andr joined the Board as Chief Executive on 1 September 2017  replacing Franois Wanecq who retired from the Board on 31 August 2017 .
Holly Koeppel joined the Board as an additional independent Nonexecutive Director on 3 April 2017 .
All the Directors will retire at the AGM and offer themselves for election or reelection at the AGM.
Biographical information for the current Directors is given on pages 50 and 51.
Further information on the remuneration of and contractual Directors Report Governance 11 8 Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7 Directors Report continued arrangements for the current Executive and Nonexecutive Directors is given on pages 96 to 1 16 in the Directors
Remuneration Report.
The Nonexecutive Directors do not have service agreements.
Directors Indemnities The Directors have been granted qualifying third party indemnity provisions by the Company and the Directors of the Groups UK Pension Plan T rustee Board none of whom is a Director of Vesuvius plc have been granted qualifying pension scheme indemnity provisions by Vesuvius Pension Plans T rustees
The indemnities for Directors of Vesuvius plc have been in force since the date of their appointment.
The Pension T rustee indemnities were in force throughout the last  nancial year and remain in force.
Annual General Meeting The Annual General Meeting of the Company will be held at The Lincoln Centre 18 Lincolns Inn Fields London WC2A 3ED on Thursday 10 May 2018 at 1 1.00 am.
Amendments of Articles of Association The Company may make amendments to the Articles by way of special resolution in accordance with the Companies Act.
Greenhouse Gas Emissions Information on our reporting of greenhouse gas emissions and the methodology used to record these is set out on page 65 of the Strategic Report.
Donations
In accordance with Company policy no political donations were made in 2017 2016 nil.
Change of Control Provisions The terms of the Groups committed bank facility and US Private Placement Loan Notes contain provisions entitling the counterparties to exercise termination or other rights in the event of a change of control on takeover of the Company.
A number of the arrangements to which the Company and its subsidiaries are party such as other debt arrangements and share incentive plans may also alter or terminate on a change of control in the event of a takeover.
In the context of the Group as a whole these other arrangements are not considered to be signi cant.
Share Capital As at the date of this report the Company had an issued share capital of 278485071 ordinary shares of 10 pence each 7 271 174 of these ordinary shares are held in T reasury.
Therefore the total number of Vesuvius plc shares with voting rights is 271213897 .
Further information relating to the Companys issued share capital can be found in Note 8 to the Company Financial
The Companys Articles specify that subject to the authorisation of an appropriate resolution passed at a General Meeting of the Company Directors can allot relevant securities under Section 551 of the Companies Act up to the aggregate nominal amount speci ed by the relevant resolution.
In addition the Articles state that the Directors can seek the authority of shareholders in a General Meeting to allot equity securities for cash without  rst being required to offer such shares to existing ordinary shareholders in proportion to their existing holdings under Section 56 1 of the Companies Act in connection with a rights issue and in other circumstances up to the aggregate nominal amount speci ed by the relevant resolution.
At the Annual General Meeting on 10 May 2017  the Directors were authorised to issue relevant securities up to an aggregate nominal amount of 9040463 and in connection with a rights issue to issue relevant securities up to a further nominal value of 9040463.
In addition the Directors were empowered to allot equity securities or sell T reasury Shares for cash on a non preemptive basis up to an aggregate nominal amount of 1356069 and for the purposes of  nancing or re nancing if the authority is to be used within six months after the original transaction a transaction which the Board of the Company determines to be an acquisition or other capital investment to allot equity securities or sell T reasury Shares for cash on a non preemptive basis up to an additional nominal amount of 1356069.
Each of the authorities given in these resolutions expires at the earlier of the date of the 2018 Annual General Meeting or 30 June 2018.
The resolutions were all tabled in accordance with the terms of the PreEmption Groups Statement of Principles.
The Directors propose to renew these authorities at the 2018 Annual General Meeting for a further year.
In the year ahead other than in respect of Vesuvius ability to satisfy rights granted to employees under its various sharebased incentive arrangements the Directors have no present intention of issuing any share capital of Vesuvius plc.
Authority for Purchase of Own Shares Subject to the provisions of company law and any other applicable regulations the Company may purchase its own shares.
At the Annual General Meeting of the Company held on 10 May 2017  Vesuvius shareholders gave authority to the Company to make market purchases of up to 27  121389 Vesuvius ordinary shares representing 10% of the Companys issued ordinary share capital as at the latest practicable day prior to the publication of the Notice of AGM.
This authority expires on 30 June 2018 or the date of the AGM to be held in 2018 whichever is the earlier.
The Directors will seek renewal of this authority at the forthcoming AGM.
In 2013 the Company acquired 7 271 174 ordinary shares representing a nominal value of 727  1 17 and 2.6% of the entire calledup share capital of the Company prior to the purchase.
These shares were purchased pursuant to the Boards commitment to return the majority of the net proceeds of the disposal of the Precious Metals Processing division to shareholders.
These shares are currently held as T reasury shares.
The Company has not subsequently disposed of any of the repurchased shares.
During the year the Company did not make any further acquisitions of shares any acquisitions by nominee nor did it dispose of any shares previously acquired.
The Company does not have a lien over any of its shares.
Share Plans Vesuvius operates a number of sharebased incentive plans.
Under these plans the Group can satisfy entitlements by the acquisition of existing shares the transfer of T reasury shares or by the issue of new shares.
Existing shares are held in an employee share ownership plan trust ESOP.
The T rustee of the ESOP purchases shares in the open market as required to enable the Group to meet liabilities for the issue of shares to satisfy awards that vest.
The T rustee does not register votes in respect of these shares and has waived the right to receive any dividends.
Restrictions on T ransfer of Shares and Voting The Companys Articles of Association Articles do not contain any speci c restrictions on the size of a holding or on the transfer of shares.
The Directors are not aware of any agreements between holders of the Companys shares that may result in restrictions on the transfer of securities or voting rights.
No person has any special rights with regard to the control of the Companys share capital and all issued shares are fully paid.
This is a summary only and the relevant provisions of the Articles should be consulted if further information is required.
Interests in the Companys Shares The Company has been noti ed in accordance with DTR 5 of the Disclosure and T ransparency Rules of the following interests of 3% or more of its issued ordinary shares As at 31 Dec 2017 As at 28 Feb 2018 Cevian Capital 21.
Standard Life Aberdeen 5.92 5.92 Artisan Partners 4.97 4.97 Aberforth Partners 4.93 4.93 Pelham Capital Management CfD 4.58 4.58 Phoenix Asset Management 3.
The interests of Directors and their connected persons in the ordinary shares of the Company as disclosed in accordance with the Listing Rules of the Financial Conduct Authority are as set out on pages 1 13 and 1 14 of the Directors Remuneration Report and details of the Directors longterm incentive awards are set out on page 1 14.
Equal Opportunities Employment Vesuvius plc is an equal opportunities employer and decisions on recruitment development training and promotion and other employmentrelated issues are made solely on the grounds of individual ability achievement expertise and conduct.
These principles are operated on a nondiscriminatory basis without regard to race colour nationality culture ethnic origin religion belief gender sexual orientation age disability or any other reason not related to job performance or prohibited by applicable law.
In cases where employees are injured or disabled during employment with the Group support including appropriate training is provided to those employees and workplace adjustments are made as appropriate in respect of their duties and working environment supporting recovery and continued employment.
Employee Communications Vesuvius adopts an open and honest approach to employee communications supported by regular updates from senior management across all businesses and operations within the
Regular communications include direct email updates on the  nancial performance of the Company the industry environment in which Vesuvius operates and other signi cant operational developments.
The Company operates an employee intranet which distributes Company news and events as well as local initiatives for employee engagement on a sitebysite basis.
The HR department is the primary point of contact for employees on employment and workplace matters operating with an opendoor policy and advising employees of any local legal tax pension or other employment changes.
There are numerous employeesponsored and led representative bodies within Vesuvius which differ with respect to jurisdiction and geography.
Senior management supported and facilitated by the HR department encourages open dialogue and seeks opportunities to consult with these employee representative bodies as appropriate.
Pensions
In each country in which the Group operates the pension arrangements in place are considered to be consistent with good employment practice in that particular area.
Independent
Group policy prohibits direct investment of pension fund assets in the Companys shares.
Outside the UK the US Germany and Belgium the majority of pension plans in the Group are of a de ned contribution nature.
In 2016 the main German de ned bene t plan was closed for new entrants and existing members were offered a buyout of their bene ts under this plan.
Those who accepted this buyout then joined the new de ned contribution plan.
The Groups UK de ned bene ts plan the UK Plan and the main US de ned bene ts plans are closed to new entrants and have ceased providing future bene ts accrual with all eligible employees instead being provided with bene ts through de ned contribution arrangements.
Governance 12 0 Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7 For the Groups closed UK Plan a T rustee Board exists comprising employees former employees and an independent trustee.
The Board currently comprises six trustee Directors of whom two are membernominated.
The administration of the UK Plan is outsourced.
The Company is mindful of its obligations under the Pensions Act 2004 and of the need to comply with the guidance issued by the Pensions Regulator.
Regular dialogue is maintained between the Company and the T rustee Board of the UK Plan to ensure that both the Company and T rustee Board are apprised of the same  nancial and other information about the Group and the UK Plan.
This is pertinent to each being able to contribute to the effective functioning of the UK Plan.
Vesuvius continues to seek ways to derisk its existing pension plans through a combination of asset matching buyin opportunities and where prudent voluntary cash contributions.
The Groups worldwide net pension de cit at 31 December 2017 was 16.5m 31 December 2016 29.4m.
The principal reasons for the 12.9m reduction were increases of 1.8m to the de cit arising out of changes to actuarial assumptions attributable to increasing discount rates updated mortality assumptions and pension membership data and additional accrual and administrative expenditure paid for the year 6.8m offest by reductions to the de cit of 10.2m from asset returns and cash contributions of 1 1.6m.
The following disclosures are made in compliance with the Financial Conduct Authoritys Listing Rule 9.8.4C R Disclosure requirement under LR 9.8.6R ReferenceLocation 1  Interest capitalised by the Group during the year See Note 9 .
1 on page 143 2 Publication of unaudited  nancial information Not applicable 3 the appropriateness of adopting the going concern basis of accounting and the Directors assessment of the prospects of the
Page 1 1 7 4 Details of any longterm incentive schemes Pages 99 and 100 5 Director waiver of emoluments Not applicable 6 Director waiver of future emoluments Not applicable 7 Allotment for cash of equity securities made during the year Not applicable 8 Allotment for cash of equity securities made by a major unlisted subsidiary during the year Not applicable 9 Details of participation of parent undertaking in any placing made during the year Not applicable 10 Details of relevant contracts in which a Director or controlling shareholder was interested during the year Not applicable 1 1  Contracts for the provision of services by a controlling shareholder during the year Not applicable 1 2 Details of any arrangement under which a shareholder has waived or agreed to waive any dividends Vesuvius plc holds 7 271 1 7 4 of its 0.
10 ordinary shares as T reasury shares.
No dividends are payable on these shares.
Cookson Investments Jersey Limited the T rustee of the Companys ESOP  has agreed to waive on an ongoing basis any dividends payable on shares it holds on trust for use under the Companys Employee Share Plans details of which can be found on pages 107  1 18 and 1 19 1 3 Details of where a shareholder has agreed to waive future dividends See above 14 Statements relating to controlling shareholders and ensuring company independence Not applicable The Directors Report has been approved by the Board and is signed on its behalf by Henry Knowles Company Secretary 28 February 2018 Directors Report continued 12 1 The Directors are responsible for preparing the Annual Report and the  nancial statements in accordance with applicable law and regulation.
Company law requires the Directors to prepare  nancial statements for each  nancial year.
Under that law the Directors have prepared the Group  nancial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and Company  nancial statements in accordance with United Kingdom Generally Accepted Accounting Practice United Kingdom Accounting Standards comprising FRS 101 Reduced Disclosure Framework and applicable law.
Under company law the Directors must not approve the  nancial statements unless they are satis ed that they give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Group and Company and of the pro t of the Group for that period.
In preparing the  nancial statements the Directors are required to select suitable accounting policies and then apply them consistently state whether applicable IFRSs as adopted by the European Union have been followed for the Group  nancial statements and United Kingdom Accounting Standards comprising FRS 101 have been followed for the Company  nancial statements subject to any material departures disclosed and explained in the  nancial statements make judgements and accounting estimates that are reasonable and prudent and prepare the  nancial statements on the going concern basis unless it is inappropriate to presume that the Group and Company will continue in business.
The Directors are responsible for keeping adequate accounting records that are suf cient to show and explain the Group and Companys transactions and disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the  nancial position of the Group and Company and enable them to ensure that the  nancial statements and the Directors Remuneration Report comply with the Companies Act 2006 and as regards the Group  nancial statements Article 4 of the IAS Regulation.
The Directors are also responsible for safeguarding the assets of the Group and Company and hence for taking reasonable steps for the prevention and detection of fraud and other irregularities.
The Directors are responsible for the maintenance and integrity of the Companys website.
Legislation in the United Kingdom governing the preparation and dissemination of  nancial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
The Directors consider that the Annual Report and Accounts taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Group and Companys performance business model and strategy.
Responsibilities Statement of the Directors in respect of the Annual Financial Report Each of the Directors con rm that to the best of their knowledge the Company  nancial statements which have been prepared in accordance with United Kingdom Generally Accepted Accounting Practice United Kingdom Accounting Standards comprising FRS 101 Reduced Disclosure Framework and applicable law give a true and fair view of the assets liabilities  nancial position and loss of the Company the Group  nancial statements which have been prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union give a true and fair view of the assets liabilities  nancial position and pro t of the Group and the Directors Report includes a fair review of the development and performance of the business and the position of the Group and Company together with a description of the principal risks and uncertainties that it faces.
The names and functions of the Directors of Vesuvius plc are as follows John McDonough CBE Chairman Patrick Andr Chief Executive Guy Y oung Chief Financial Of cer Christer Gardell Nonexecutive Director Hock Goh Nonexecutive Director Jane Hinkley Nonexecutive Director and Chairman of the Remuneration Committee Douglas Hurt Nonexecutive Director Senior Independent Director and Chairman of the Audit Committee Holly Koeppel Nonexecutive Director On behalf of the Board Guy Y oung Chief Financial Of cer 28 February 2018 Statement of Directors Responsibilities in respect of the Annual Report and Financial Statements Governance 12 2 Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7 Section Five
Statements
In this section
Independent Auditors Report
130 Group Income Statement 131 Group Statement of Comprehensive Income 132 Group Statement of Cash Flows Group Balance Sheet Group Statement of Changes in Equity Notes to the Group Financial Statements Company Balance Sheet Notes to the Company Financial Statements Five Y ear Summary Divisional Results Shareholder Information Glossary 12 3 Financial Statements Adam Liszka Operations Director Advanced Refractories NAFT A I relocated to the UAE to help set up our Ras Al Khaimah facility See more about Vesuvius careers People and Community on p67 73 My career with Vesuvius began in Poland in 2001 when I joined the Skawina Brick Plant as Production
After a series of promotions I became Production Manager for the whole Skawina Brick Plant in 2009.
I was later given the exciting opportunity to work overseas relocating  rst to the UAE in 2012 to help start operations at our brandnew manufacturing facility in Ras Al Khaimah and later moved to the United States as Operations Manager at our plant in Chicago Heights Illinois.
Whilst there I worked with our Chicago Heights team to set the foundations for the Yellowstone project targeting increased manufacturing ef ciency at our site.
Following this project I took on my next challenge by becoming the Operations Director for Advanced Refractories NAFT A responsible for the manufacturing operations of sites across the US Canada and
My career at Vesuvius has brought me professional advancement the opportunity to work across cultures and to become a real citizen of the world.
Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7 Report on the audit of the nancial statements
In our opinion Vesuvius plcs Group  nancial statements and Company nancial statements the  nancial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the Groups and of the Companys affairs as at 31 December 2017 and of the Groups pro t and cash  ows for the year then ended The Group  nancial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union The Company  nancial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with United Kingdom Generally Accepted Accounting Practice United Kingdom Accounting Standards comprising FRS 101 Reduced Disclosure Framework and applicable law The  nancial statements have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006 and as regards the Group  nancial statements Article 4 of the IAS Regulation We have audited the  nancial statements included within the Annual Report and Accounts the Annual Report which comprise the Group and Company Balance Sheets as at 31 December 2017 the Group Income Statement and Statement of Comprehensive Income the Group Statement of Cash Flows and the Group and Company Statements of Changes in Equity for the year then ended and the notes to the  nancial statements which include a description of the signi cant accounting policies.
Our opinion is consistent with our reporting to the
Committee.
Basis for Opinion We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing UK ISAs UK and applicable law.
Our responsibilities under ISAs UK are further described in the auditors responsibilities for the audit of the  nancial statements section of our report.
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is suf cient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion.
Independence
We remained independent of the Group in accordance with the ethical requirements that are relevant to our audit of the nancial statements in the UK which includes the FRCs Ethical Standard as applicable to listed public interest entities and we have ful lled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with these requirements.
During the period we identi ed that we had provided a prohibited tax compliance service in respect of payroll taxes to the Group in breach of paragraph 5.
167Raii of the FRCs Ethical Standard.
T otal fees billed in the period in respect of the service amounted to 1800.
Upon identifying the breach we immediately ceased providing this prohibited service.
The prohibited service was provided to a component that did not form part of our audit evidence in respect of the audit of the Group.
We con rm that based on our assessment of this breach and the subsequent actions taken we have not in our view compromised our independence.
Other than the matter referred to above and to the best of our knowledge and belief we declare that no nonaudit services prohibited by the FRCs Ethical Standard were provided to the Group or the Company.
Other than those disclosed in the Audit Committees Report we have provided no other nonaudit services to the Group or the Company in the period from 1 January 2017 to 31 December 2017 .
Independent Auditors Report
T o the Members of V esuvius plc
Overall Group materiality 7 .6m based on 5% of pro t before tax and separately reported items Headline pro t before tax Overall Company materiality 7 .6m based on 1% of total assets capped to the level of Group materiality Audit scope Our audit included fullscope audits of 20 components and speci ed procedures on certain balances and transactions for nine additional components T aken together  the components at which either full scope audit work or speci ed audit procedures were performed enabled us to get coverage on 68% of revenue and 76% of Headline pro t before tax Key audit matters Provisions for exposures Provisions for income tax uncertainties Recognition of deferred tax assets for tax losses Our Audit Approach  Overview
Audit scope Key audit matters 12 5 The Scope of our Audit As part of designing our audit we determined materiality and assessed the risks of material misstatement in the  nancial statements.
In particular we looked at where the Directors made subjective judgements for example in respect of signi cant accounting estimates that involved making assumptions and considering future events that are inherently uncertain.
We gained an understanding of the legal and regulatory framework applicable to the Group and the industry in which it operates and considered the risk of acts by the Group which were contrary to applicable laws and regulations including fraud.
We designed audit procedures at the Group and signi cant component level to respond to the risk recognising that the risk of not detecting a material misstatement due to fraud is higher than the risk of not detecting one resulting from error as fraud may involve deliberate concealment by for example forgery or intentional misrepresentations or through collusion.
We focused on laws and regulations that could give rise to a material misstatement in the Group and Company nancial statements including but not limited to the UK Companies Act 2006 the Listing Rules and global tax compliance matters.
Our tests included but were not limited to review of the  nancial statement disclosures to underlying supporting documentation review of correspondence with legal advisers enquiries of management review of signi cant component auditors work and review of Internal Audit reports in so far as they related to the  nancial statements.
There are inherent limitations in the audit procedures described above and the further removed noncompliance with laws and regulations is from the events and transactions re ected in the  nancial statements the less likely we would become aware of it.
We did not identify any key audit matters relating to irregularities including fraud.
As in all of our audits we also addressed the risk of management override of internal controls including testing journals and evaluating whether there was evidence of bias by the directors that represented a risk of material misstatement due to fraud.
Key Audit Matters Key audit matters are those matters that in the auditors professional judgement were of most signi cance in the audit of the  nancial statements of the current period and include the most signi cant assessed risks of material misstatement whether or not due to fraud identi ed by the auditors including those which had the greatest effect on the overall audit strategy the allocation of resources in the audit and directing the efforts of the engagement team.
These matters and any comments we make on the results of our procedures thereon were addressed in the context of our audit of the nancial statements as a whole and in forming our opinion thereon and we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters.
This is not a complete list of all risks identi ed by our audit.
Key audit matter How our audit addressed the key audit matter Provisions for exposures The Group holds a number of provisions for exposures including those resulting from indirect tax regulatory legal and environmental matters as well as restructuring commitments.
Refer to Restructuring Charges Note 7 Provisions Note 32 Accounting Policies and Critical Accounting Judgements and Estimates Note 3 and Signi cant Issues and Material Judgements in the Audit Committee Report page 87.
Determining the quantum of provisions requires the Directors to use judgement and estimation and for certain provisions obtain specialist knowledge.
We focused on this area due to the judgement and estimates involved.
We obtained an understanding for the basis of each signi cant estimate and the key assumptions used for provisions and in certain cases the related insurance assets.
Restructuring costs related to the Groups rationalisation of its operational and support functions.
The costs predominantly included redundancies and severance payments professional adviser fees and other impairment charges for obsolete inventories and property plant and equipment.
We have tested a sample of restructuring costs to determine that these are directly attributable to the Groups restructuring activities For costs which are provided for at the yearend we have veri ed for a sample of transactions that a legal or constructive obligation exists From our procedures we concluded that restructuring costs were appropriately recognised and classi ed within the  nancial statements For provisions for disposal and closure costs including litigation matters We obtained supporting computations for the estimated costs and tested the mathematical accuracy of these We discussed obligations arising with inhouse and external legal counsel and inspected supporting evidence of the history of claims arising where these were used as inputs into client models used to estimate the provisions We also inspected evidence of available insurance cover and that this was appropriately presented gross of the associated provisions within Other receivables and considered the  nancial condition of insurance providers We found no exceptions in respect of this work Financial Statements 12 6 Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7 Key audit matter How our audit addressed the key audit matter For all provisions we considered whether there is a range of possible outcomes in respect of each estimate.
Where appropriate we veri ed that disclosure is included within the Annual Report of this.
We also considered the impact of the provisions for exposures on the reporting and disclosure of separately reported items and Alternate Performance Measures in the nancial statements and veri ed that appropriate disclosures are made in the Annual Report.
Provisions for income tax uncertainties The Group holds a number of provisions for income tax exposures arising from tax structuring transfer pricing and local authority reviews.
Refer to Income T ax Note 10 Accounting Policies and Critical Accounting Judgements and Estimates Note 3 and Signi cant Issues and Material Judgements in the Audit Committee Report page 87.
Determining the quantum of these provisions requires the Directors to make judgements and estimates and for certain provisions obtain specialist knowledge.
We utilised our tax specialists to provide a view of material judgements made.
Our
Obtaining relevant computations and correspondence in respect of each material element of the provision for income tax uncertainty Understanding the key assumptions made by management in recognising the provision and forming an independent view on the reasonableness of the assumptions Assessing the consistency of approach used to determine provisions compared with prior periods and considering whether such consistency remains appropriate Considering the range of possible outcomes in respect of the estimates and that the Annual Report discloses the nature of the estimation uncertainty From our procedures we concluded that the estimates are reasonable and that appropriate disclosures have been included within the Annual Report.
Recognition of deferred tax assets for tax losses In certain territories such as the US the Group has a material quantum of historical tax losses.
The determination of whether these will be utilised in the future is judgemental particularly as to how much of these could be reasonably expected to be utilised.
In addition the impact of US tax changes enacted in December 2017 requires reassessment of the calculation of total tax losses and the lives attached to these.
There is a risk of error and judgement given these changes are complex and subject to interpretation.
Refer to Income T ax Note 10 Accounting Policies and Critical Accounting Judgements and Estimates Note 3 and Signi cant Issues and Material Judgements in the Audit Committee Report page 87.
We utilised our tax specialists to support with the audit testing of the quantum of tax losses in the US and that this is accurately determined taking into account the yearend US tax reforms.
We concluded the tax losses are accurately determined.
In addition to testing the quantum of tax losses We tested managements forecasts supporting the amounts recognised as a deferred tax asset and considered the likelihood of forecasts being achieved We also considered a range of possible outcomes in the forecast and that an appropriate midpoint was taken in selecting the amount to recognise We considered alternative views and whether a full versus partial recognition approach was appropriate.
We concluded that the current approach which recognises tax losses as deferred tax assets to the extent there is pro t forecast against them which will be utilised remains the most appropriate.
We veri ed that appropriate disclosure of the amount of deferred tax asset not recognised is included within the  nancial statements From our procedures we concluded that the estimate is reasonable and that appropriate disclosures have been included within the Annual Report.
We determined that there were no key audit matters applicable to the Company to communicate in our report.
Independent Auditors Report
T o the Members of V esuvius plc continued 12 7 How We T ailored the Audit Scope We tailored the scope of our audit to ensure that we performed enough work to be able to give an opinion on the  nancial statements as a whole taking into account the structure of the Group and the Company the accounting processes and controls and the industry in which they operate.
Vesuvius has operations in 37 countries and has 66 production sites.
The Group consolidates  nancial information through reporting from its components which include divisions and functions at these sites.
Our audit scope was determined by considering the signi cance of the entitys contribution to revenue and contribution to individual  nancial statement line items with speci c consideration to obtaining suf cient coverage over areas of high risk and locations and entities where we identi ed signi cant or inherent risks.
We identi ed one signi cant component being the Groups German operations which comprise 14% of the Groups revenue.
As the Groups remaining revenue is spread across 74  nancial reporting components there were no other individually nancially signi cant components.
The audit scope including Germany comprised 20 components for which we determined that fullscope audits would need to be performed and nine components for which speci c audit procedures on certain balances and transactions were performed.
This collectively gave us coverage of 68% of the Groups revenue and 76% of the Groups Headline pro t before tax.
This together with the additional procedures performed at the Group level including testing the consolidation process gave us the evidence we needed for our opinion on the  nancial statements as a whole.
In establishing the overall approach to the Group audit we determined the type of work that needed to be performed at the entities by us as the Group engagement team or by component auditors of other PwC network  rms.
Where the work was performed by component auditors we determined the level of involvement and oversight we needed to have in the audit work at those reporting units to be able to conclude whether suf cient appropriate audit evidence had been obtained as a basis for our opinion on the  nancial statements as a whole.
This was achieved through regular update meetings with the component auditors and visits to 17 of the 20 fullscope components by senior members of the Group audit team.
Materiality
The scope of our audit was in uenced by our application of materiality.
We set certain quantitative thresholds for materiality.
These together with qualitative considerations helped us to determine the scope of our audit and the nature timing and extent of our audit procedures on the individual nancial statement line items and disclosures and in evaluating the effect of misstatements both individually and in aggregate on the  nancial statements as a whole.
Based on our professional judgement we determined materiality for the  nancial statements as a whole as follows Group  nancial statements Company  nancial statements Overall materiality 7 .6 million 7 .6 million How we determined it 5% of pro t before tax and separately reported items Headline pro t before tax 1% of total assets capped to the level of Group overall materiality Rationale for benchmark applied We believe that pro t before tax and separately reported items Headline pro t before tax provides us with an appropriate basis for determining our overall Group materiality given it is a key measure used by users of the  nancial statements.
Headline pro t before tax is an Alternative Performance Measure presented and de ned in the Annual Report and Accounts.
We believe that total assets is an appropriate basis for determining materiality for the Parent Company given this entity is an investment holding company and this is an accepted auditing benchmark.
The materiality was capped to the level of Group overall materiality.
The Company is not an inscope component in our Group audit.
For each component in the scope of our Group audit we allocated a materiality that is less than our overall Group materiality.
The range of materiality allocated across components was between 0.
1 million and 7 .3 million.
Certain components were audited to a local statutory audit materiality that was also less than our overall Group materiality.
We agreed with the Audit Committee that we would report to them misstatements identi ed during our audit above 0.4 million Group and Company audit as well as misstatements below those amounts that in our view warranted reporting for qualitative reasons.
Financial Statements 12 8 Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7 Going concern In accordance with ISAs UK we report as follows Reporting obligation Outcome We are required to report if we have anything material to add or draw attention to in respect of the Directors Statement in the  nancial statements about whether the Directors considered it appropriate to adopt the going concern basis of accounting in preparing the  nancial statements and the Directors identi cation of any material uncertainties to the Groups and the Companys ability to continue as a going concern over a period of at least 12 months from the date of approval of the  nancial statements.
We have nothing material to add or to draw attention to.
However because not all future events or conditions can be predicted this statement is not a guarantee as to the Groups and Companys ability to continue as a going concern.
We are required to report if the Directors statement relating to going concern in accordance with Listing Rule 9.8.6R3 is materially inconsistent with our knowledge obtained in the audit.
We have nothing to report.
Reporting on Other Information The other information comprises all of the information in the Annual Report other than the  nancial statements and our
Auditors Report thereon.
The Directors are responsible for the other information.
Our opinion on the  nancial statements does not cover the other information and accordingly we do not express an audit opinion or except to the extent otherwise explicitly stated in this report any form of assurance thereon.
In connection with our audit of the  nancial statements our responsibility is to read the other information and in doing so consider whether the other information is materially inconsistent with the  nancial statements or our knowledge obtained in the audit or otherwise appears to be materially misstated.
If we identify an apparent material inconsistency or material misstatement we are required to perform procedures to conclude whether there is a material misstatement of the nancial statements or a material misstatement of the other information.
If based on the work we have performed we conclude that there is a material misstatement of this other information we are required to report that fact.
We have nothing to report based on these responsibilities.
With respect to the Strategic Report and Directors Report we also considered whether the disclosures required by the UK Companies Act 2006 have been included.
Based on the responsibilities described above and our work undertaken in the course of the audit the Companies Act 2006 CA06 ISAs UK and the Listing Rules of the Financial Conduct Authority FCA require us also to report certain opinions and matters as described below required by ISAs UK unless otherwise stated.
Strategic Report and Directors Report In our opinion based on the work undertaken in the course of the audit the information given in the Strategic Report and Directors Report for the year ended 31 December 2017 is consistent with the  nancial statements and has been prepared in accordance with applicable legal requirements CA06.
In light of the knowledge and understanding of the Group and Company and their environment obtained in the course of the audit we did not identify any material misstatements in the Strategic Report and Directors Report CA06.
The Directors assessment of the prospects of the Group and of the principal risks that would threaten the solvency or liquidity of the Group We have nothing material to add or draw attention to regarding The Directors con rmation on page 23 of the Annual Report that they have carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Group including those that would threaten its business model future performance solvency or liquidity The disclosures in the Annual Report that describe those risks and explain how they are being managed or mitigated The Directors explanation on page 23 of the Annual Report as to how they have assessed the prospects of the Group over what period they have done so and why they consider that period to be appropriate and their statement as to whether they have a reasonable expectation that the Group will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the period of their assessment including any related disclosures drawing attention to any necessary quali cations or assumptions We have nothing to report having performed a review of the Directors Statement that they have carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Group and statement in relation to the longerterm viability of the Group.
Our review was substantially less in scope than an audit and only consisted of making enquiries and considering the Directors process supporting their statements checking that the statements are in alignment with the relevant provisions of the UK Corporate Governance Code the Code and considering whether the statements are consistent with the knowledge and understanding of the Group and Company and their environment obtained in the course of the audit Listing Rules.
Independent Auditors Report
T o the Members of V esuvius plc continued 12 9 Other Code Provisions We have nothing to report in respect of our responsibility to report when The statement given by the Directors on page 121 that they consider the Annual Report taken as a whole to be fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for the Members to assess the Groups and Companys position and performance business model and strategy is materially inconsistent with our knowledge of the Group and Company obtained in the course of performing our audit The section of the Annual Report on pages 85 to 92 describing the work of the Audit Committee does not appropriately address matters communicated by us to the Audit Committee The Directors statement relating to the Companys compliance with the Code does not properly disclose a departure from a relevant provision of the Code speci ed under the Listing Rules for review by the auditors Directors Remuneration In our opinion the part of the Directors Remuneration Report to be audited has been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 2006 CA06.
Responsibilities for the Financial Statements and the Audit Responsibilities of the Directors for the Financial Statements As explained more fully in the Statement of Directors Responsibilities in respect of the Annual Report and Financial Statements set out on page 121 the Directors are responsible for the preparation of the  nancial statements in accordance with the applicable framework and for being satis ed that they give a true and fair view.
The Directors are also responsible for such internal control as they determine is necessary to enable the preparation of  nancial statements that are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error.
In preparing the  nancial statements the Directors are responsible for assessing the Groups and the Companys ability to continue as a going concern disclosing as applicable matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless the Directors either intend to liquidate the Group or the Company or to cease operations or have no realistic alternative but to do so.
Auditors Responsibilities for the Audit of the Financial Statements Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the  nancial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error and to issue an auditors report that includes our opinion.
Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with ISAs UK will always detect a material misstatement when it exists.
Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if individually or in the aggregate they could reasonably be expected to in uence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these  nancial statements.
A further description of our responsibilities for the audit of the  nancial statements is located on the FRCs website at www. rc. iteauditorsresponsibilities.
This description forms part of our Auditors Report.
Use of this Report This report including the opinions has been prepared for and only for the Companys Members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006 and for no other purpose.
We do not in giving these opinions accept or assume responsibility for any other purpose or to any other person to whom this report is shown or into whose hands it may come save where expressly agreed by our prior consent in writing.
Other Required Reporting Companies Act 2006 Exception Reporting Under the Companies Act 2006 we are required to report to you if in our opinion We have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit Adequate accounting records have not been kept by the Company or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us Certain disclosures of Directors remuneration speci ed by law are not made The Company  nancial statements and the part of the Directors Remuneration Report to be audited are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns We have no exceptions to report arising from this responsibility.
Appointment
Following the recommendation of the Audit Committee we were appointed by the Members on 10 May 2017 to audit the nancial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 and subsequent  nancial periods.
This is therefore our  rst year of uninterrupted engagement.
Julian Jenkins Senior Statutory Auditor for and on behalf of PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP Chartered Accountants and Statutory Auditors
28 February 2018 Financial Statements 130 Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7 Group Income Statement For the year ended 31 December 201 7
2017 2016
Separately reported items
Headline performance
Total
Continuing operations Revenue 4 5 1683.9  1683.9 1401.4  1401.4 Manufacturing costs 1219 .8  1219 .8 1018.6  1018.6 Administration selling and distribution costs 298.6  298.6 249 .5  249 .5 Amortisation of acquired intangible assets 16  19 .5 19 .5   17 .
Restructuring charges 7  36.3 36.3  28.5 28.5 Gain on employee bene t plan 28  5.2 5.2 Operating pro tloss 165.5 55.8 109.7 133.3  40.4  92.
Finance expense 1 7 .
Finance income 3.6  3.6 2.9  2.9 Net  nance costs 9 1 3.9  1 3.9 1 4.5  1 4.5 Share of posttax pro t of joint ventures 35 1.3  1.3 1.0  1.0 Pro tloss before tax 152.9 55.8 97 .
Income tax chargecredits 10 36.4 18.0 54.4 31.4 5.0 26.4 Pro tloss from Continuing operations 1 16.5 73.8 42.7 88.4 35.4 53.0 Discontinued operations 22 1.7 1.7 10.210.2 Pro tloss attributable to Owners of the parent 110.
Noncontrolling interests 6.4  6.4 6.3  6.3 Earnings per share pence 11 Continuing operations basic 13.4 17 .3 diluted 13.4 17 .3 T otal operations basic 14.
Headline performance is de ned in Note 4.1 and separately reported items are de ned in Note 2.5.
Financial Statements
Pro t 44.4 63.2 Items that will not subsequently be reclassi ed to income statement Remeasurement of de ned bene t liabilitiesassets 28.6 8.4 9.5 Income tax relating to items not reclassi ed 10.4 2.4 0.7 Items that may subsequently be reclassi ed to income statement Exchange differences on translation of the net assets of foreign operations 38.3 207 .7 Exchange differences on translation of net investment hedges 25 9.8 41.6 Income tax relating to items that may be reclassi ed 0.7 Other comprehensive loss  income net of income tax 23.2 174.
T otal comprehensive income 21.2 238.
T otal comprehensive income attributable to Owners of the parent 15.3 226.2 Noncontrolling interests 5.9 11 .
T otal comprehensive income 21.2 238.
T otal comprehensive income attributable to owners of the parent arises from Continuing operations 13.6 216.0 Discontinued operations 1.7 10.2 T otal comprehensive income attributable to owners of the parent 15.3 226.2 Group Statement of Comprehensive Income For the year ended 31 December Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7 Group Statement of Cash Flows For the year ended 31 December 201 7
Cash  ows from operating activities Cash generated from operations 1 2 175.8 130.2 Interest paid 15.6 1 4.5 Interest received 3.5 2.4 Net interest paid 1 2.
Income taxes paid 38.2 34.2 Net cash in ow from operating activities 125.5 83.9 Cash  ows from investing activities Capital expenditure 39.0 31.3 Proceeds from the sale of property plant and equipment 1.8 1.6 Acquisition of subsidiaries and joint ventures net of cash acquired 21  7 .7 Dividends received from joint ventures 1.7 2.0 Net cash out ow from investing activities 35.5 35.4 Net cash in ow before  nancing activities 90.0 48.5 Cash  ows from  nancing activities Proceeds from borrowings 14 103.5 26.3 Repayment of borrowings 14 92.2 25.5 Borrowing facility arrangement costs 14 1.0 Settlement of forward foreign exchange contracts 10.4 20.6 Dividends paid to equity shareholders 26 45.6 43.
Dividends paid to noncontrolling shareholders 2.5 2.5 Net cash out ow from  nancing activities 48.2 25.0 Net increase in cash and cash equivalents 14 41.8 23.5 Cash and cash equivalents at 1 January 101.0 67 .0 Effect of exchange rate  uctuations on cash and cash equivalents 14 2.8 10.5 Cash and cash equivalents at 31 December 13 140.0 101.0 Alternative performance measure nonstatutory
Discontinued operations total
Discontinued operations total Free cash  ow Note 4.
Net cash in owout ow from operating activities 126.3 0.8 125.5 83.9  83.9 Net retirement bene t obligations 4.8  4.8 7.
Capital expenditure 39.0  39.0 31.3  31.3 Proceeds from the sale of property plant and equipment 1.8  1.8 1.6  1.6 Dividends received from joint ventures 1.7  1.7 2.0  2.0 Dividends paid to noncontrolling shareholders 2.5  2.5 2.5  2.5 Free cash  ow Note 4.
Financial Statements
Assets
Property plant and equipment 15 31 1.3 323.6 Intangible assets 16 743.0 781.9 Employee bene ts  net surpluses 28 92.4 78.8 Interests in joint ventures and associates 35 17 .5 18.0 Investments 1.4 2.6 Income tax recoverable 10 0.4 1.0 Deferred tax assets 10 61.0 92.
Other receivables 32 30.9 30.4 Derivative  nancial instruments 20 0.2 T otal noncurrent assets 1258.
1 1328.4 Cash and shortterm deposits 13 16 1.9 144.4 Inventories 19 222.8 207 .7 T rade and other receivables 18 422.2 394.
Income tax recoverable 10 5.2 3.9 Derivative  nancial instruments 20 0.
T otal current assets 812.2 750.
Total assets 2070.3 2078.5
Issued share capital 23 27 .8 27 .8 Retained earnings 24 2370.3 2370.0 Other reserves 25 1369 .4 1341.4 Equity attributable to the owners of the parent 1028.7 1056.4 Noncontrolling interests 45.4 42.
Total equity 107 4.
1 1098.5
Interestbearing borrowings 27 .2 410.5 330.8 Employee bene ts  net liabilities 28 108.9 108.2 Other payables 30 17 .3 16.5 Provisions 32 34.4 39 .9 Deferred tax liabilities 10 42.7 48.6 T otal noncurrent liabilities 613.8 544.0 Interestbearing borrowings 27 .2 25.7 133.
T rade and other payables 30 292.6 239.7 Income tax payable 10 34.3 34.9 Provisions 32 29.8 26.6 Derivative  nancial instruments 20  0.9 T otal current liabilities 382.4 436.0 T otal liabilities 996.2 980.0 T otal equity and liabilities 2070.3 2078.5 Restated as a result of a change in accounting policy Note 10.1 and the recording of a provision for which a related asset exists Note 32.
The  nancial statements were approved and authorised for issue by the Directors on 28 February 2018 and signed on their behalf by Patrick Andr Guy Y oung Chief Executive Chief Financial Of cer Group Balance Sheet As at 31 December 201 7 134 Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7 Group Statement of Changes in Equity For the year ended 31 December 201 7 Issued share capital
Retained earnings Owners of the parent
Total equity As at 1 January 2016 27 .8 1501.9 2346.5 872.4 32.7 905.
Remeasurement of de ned bene t liabilitiesassets   9.5 9.5  9.5 Income tax relating to items not reclassi ed   0.7 0.7  0.7 Exchange differences on translation of the net assets of foreign operations  202.
Exchange differences on translation of net investment hedges  41.6  41.6  41.6 Other comprehensive income net of income tax  160.5 8.8 169 .3 5.6 1 7 4.9 T otal comprehensive income 160.5 65.7 226.2 11.9 238.1 Recognition of sharebased payments   1.7 1.7  1.7 Dividends paid Note 26   43.9 43.9 2.5 46.4 T otal transactions with owners   42.2 42.2 2.5 44.7 As at 1 January 201 7 27 .8 1341.4 2370.0 1056.4 42.
1 1098.5 Remeasurement of de ned bene t liabilitiesassets   8.4 8.4  8.4 Income tax relating to items not reclassi ed   2.4 2.4  2.4 Exchange differences on translation of the net assets of foreign operations  37 .8  37 .8 0.5 38.3 Exchange differences on translation of net investment hedges  9.8  9.8  9.8 Income tax relating to items that may be reclassi ed   0.7 0.7  0.7 Other comprehensive income  loss net of income tax  28.0 5.3 22.7 0.5 23.2 T otal comprehensive income  loss  28.0 43.3 15.3 5.9 21.2 Recognition of sharebased payments   2.6 2.6  2.6 Dividends paid Note 26   45.6 45.6 2.6 48.2 T otal transactions with owners   43.0 43.0 2.6 45.6 As at 31 December 201 7 27 .8 1369.4 2370.3 1028.7 45.4 1074.
Financial Statements General Information Vesuvius plc Vesuvius or the Company is a public company limited by shares.
It is incorporated and domiciled in England and Wales and listed on the London Stock Exchange.
The nature of the operations and principal activities of the Company and its subsidiary and joint venture companies the Group is set out in the Strategic Report on pages 1 to 73 and its registered address is shown on page 189.
Basis of Preparation 1 Basis of accounting The Group Financial Statements have been prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS as adopted by the European Union and with the Companies Act 2006 applicable to companies reporting under IFRS.
The nancial statements have been prepared under the historical cost convention with the exception of de ned bene t pension plans certain provisions availableforsale investments and derivative  nancial instruments.
2.2 Basis of consolidation The Group Financial Statements incorporate the  nancial statements of the Company and entities controlled by the Company its subsidiaries.
Control exists when the Company has the power to direct the relevant activities of an entity that signi cantly affect the entitys return so as to have rights to the variable return from its activities.
In assessing whether control exists potential voting rights that are currently exercisable are taken into account.
The results of subsidiaries acquired or disposed of during the year are included in the Group Income Statement from the effective date of acquisition or up to the effective date of disposal as appropriate.
The principal accounting policies applied in the preparation of these Group Financial Statments are set out in the Notes.
These policies have been consistently applied to all of the years presented unless otherwise stated.
Where necessary adjustments are made to the  nancial statements of subsidiaries to bring their accounting policies into line with those detailed herein to ensure that the Group  nancial statements are prepared on a consistent basis.
All intraGroup transactions balances income and expenses are eliminated on consolidation.
Noncontrolling interests in the net assets of consolidated subsidiaries are identi ed separately from the Groups interest therein.
Noncontrolling interests consist of the amount of those interests at the date of the original business combination together with the noncontrolling interests share of pro t or loss each component of other comprehensive income and dividends paid since the date of the combination.
T otal comprehensive income is attributed to the noncontrolling interests even if this results in the noncontrolling interests having a de cit balance.
Going concern The Directors have prepared cash  ow forecasts for the Group for a period in excess of 12 months from the date of approval of the 2017  nancial statements.
These forecasts re ect an assessment of current and future endmarket conditions and their impact on the Groups future trading performance.
The forecasts show that the Group will be able to operate within the current committed debt facilities and show continued compliance with the Companys  nancial covenants.
On the basis of the exercise described above and the Groups available committed debt facilities the Directors consider that the Group and Company have adequate resources to continue in operational existence for a period of at least 12 months from the date of signing of these accounts.
Accordingly they continue to adopt a going concern basis in preparing the  nancial statements of the Group and the Company.
2.4 Functional and presentation currency The  nancial statements are presented in millions of pound sterling which is the functional currency of the Company and rounded to one decimal place.
Foreign operations are included in accordance with the policies set out in Note 27 .
2.5 Disclosure of separately reported items IAS 1 Presentation of Financial Statements encourages the disclosure of additional line items and the reordering of items presented on the face of the income statement when appropriate for a proper understanding of the entitys  nancial performance.
The Company has adopted a columnar presentation for its Group Income Statement to separately identify headline performance results as the Directors consider that this gives a better view of the underlying results of the ongoing business.
As part of this presentation format the Company has adopted a policy of disclosing separately on the face of its Group Income Statement within the column entitled Separately reported items the effect of any components of  nancial performance for which the Directors consider separate disclosure would assist both in a better understanding of the  nancial performance achieved and in making projections of future results.
Both materiality and the nature and function of the components of income and expense are considered in deciding upon such presentation.
Such items may include inter alia the  nancial effect of exceptional items which occur infrequently such as major restructuring activity initial recognition and subsequent increase decrease utilisation and impact of tax reform on US deferred tax assets together with items always reported separately such as amortisation charges relating to acquired intangible assets pro ts or losses arising on the disposal of continuing or discontinued operations and the taxation impact of the aforementioned exceptional items and items reported separately.
Notes to the Group Financial Statements 136 Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7 Notes to the Group Financial Statements continued Basis of Preparation continued 2.5 Disclosure of separately reported items continued The amortisation charge in respect of intangible assets recognised on business combniations is excluded from the trading results of the Group since they are noncash charges and are not considered reflective of the core trading performance of the Group.
Restructuring charges are excluded from the trading results of the Group due to the material nature of these nonrecurring transformational initiatives.
In its adoption of this policy  the Company applies an evenhanded approach to both gains and losses and aims to be both consistent and clear in its accounting and disclosure of such items.
2.6 New and revised IFRS Certain new accounting standards and interpretations have been published that are not mandatory for 31 December 2017 reporting periods and have not been early adopted by the Group.
The Groups assessment of the impact of these new standards and interpretations is set out below.
Other new or amended standards or interpretations are not expected to have a signi cant impact on the Groups  nancial statements.
IFRS 9 Financial Instruments IFRS 9 Financial Instruments effective from 1 January 2018 for the year ending 2018 addresses the classi cation measurement and derecognition of  nancial instruments introduces new rules for hedge accounting and a new impairment model for  nancial assets.
It replaces IAS 39 Financial Instruments guidance and comprehensive updates have been made to IFRS 7 Financial Instrument Disclosure and IAS 32 Financial Instruments Presentation.
The Group will apply IFRS 9 and the updated IFRS 7 disclosure requirements from their effective date.
The impact assessment performed by the Group included a review of the classi cation and measurement of  nancial instruments the impairment of  nancial assets and the group hedging policy which resulted in the following conclusions The group reviewed the classi cation and measurement of each of its  nancial instruments.
Although the classi cation of instruments is altered under IFRS 9 this does not result in any changes to the measurement approach apart from the impairment of trade receivables which is addressed below.
The new impairment model for  nancial assets requires the recognition of impairment provisions based on expected credit losses ECL  rather than only incurred credit losses as is the case under IAS 39.
The Group will apply the simpli ed approach to its trade receivables as per the scope exception in IFRS 9 in which all loss allowances for trade receivables will be measured at initial recognition and throughout its life at an amount equal to lifetime ECL.
This is consistent with the nature of the groups trade receivables as they do not include a signi cant  nancing component.
Based on the assessments undertaken to date the group does not expect a material movement in the loss allowance for trade debtors.
The new hedge accounting rules will align the accounting for hedging instruments more closely with the Groups risk management practices.
The Group has con rmed that its current net investment hedge relationship will qualify as a continuing hedge upon the adoption of IFRS 9.
Based on our assessment of the adoption of IFRS 9 the Group does not believe there will be a material impact on its Group Financial Statements.
From 1 January 2018 onwards the Group will amend its  nancial instruments and hedging accounting policies to re ect IFRS 9 terminology and prepare the appropriate disclosures regarding the classi cation and measurement of  nancial instruments impairment of  nancial assets and hedging.
IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers effective after 1 January 2018 for the year ending 2018 establishes a comprehensive framework for determining whether how much and when revenue is recognised.
It replaces existing revenue recognition guidance including IAS 18 Revenue IAS 1 1 Construction Contracts and IFRIC 13 Customer Loyalty Programmes.
The Group will apply IFRS 15 from its effective date.
The impact assessment performed by the Group included a review of revenue streams and customer contracts to identify distinct performance obligations and the appropriate method for allocating the transaction price.
Based on our assessment of the adoption of IFRS 15 the Group does not believe there will be a material impact on its Group Financial
During 2018 the Group will revise the revenue recognition policy to re ect IFRS 15 terminology prepare the additional disclosures for the Group Financial Statements and continue to review contracts across all Segments.
The Group will continue to disaggregate revenue over Steel and Foundry in the Segmental Analysis note.
Financial Statements IFRS 16 Leases IFRS 16 Leases effective after 1 January 2019 for the year ending 2019 replaces the existing guidance in IAS 17 Leases.
IFRS
16 provides a single lessee accounting model requiring lessees to recognise assets and liabilities for all leases unless the lease term is 12 months or less or the underlying asset has a low value.
The present value of the Groups operating lease payments as de ned under the new standard will be shown as lease liabilities on the balance sheet and included in net debt.
There are a number of differences between the two de nitions for example where there is an option to extend the lease payments for the extension period will be included in the IFRS 16 liability if the Group is reasonably certain that it will exercise the option but are not included as commitments under IAS 17 .
The Group is currently assessing the potential impact on its Group Financial Statements resulting from the application of IFRS 16.
IFRIC 23 Uncertainty over Income T ax T reatments IFRIC 23 Uncertainty over Income T ax T reatments effective from 1 January 2019 for the year ending 2019 not yet endorsed clari es how to recognise and measure deferred and current income tax assets and liabilities where there is uncertainty over tax treatment under IAS 12.
The Group is currently assessing the potential impact on its Group Financial Statements resulting from the application of IFRIC 23.
IFRIC Interpretation  Interest and Penalties on T ax The impact of the interpretation regarding the accounting treatment of interest and penalties on tax is set out in Note 10.
Accounting Policies and Critical Accounting Judgements and Estimates Determining the carrying amount of some assets and liabilities requires estimation of the effect of uncertain future events.
The major sources of estimation uncertainty that have a signi cant risk of resulting in a material adjustment to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities are noted below.
All other accounting policies are included within the respective Notes to the nancial statements.
3.1 Provisions Vesuvius has extensive international operations and is subject to various legal and regulatory regimes including those covering taxation and environmental matters.
Several of the Groups subsidiaries are parties to legal proceedings certain of which are insured claims arising in the ordinary course of the operations of the company involved and are aware of a number of issues which are or may be the subject of dispute with tax authorities.
Provisions are made for the expected amounts payable in respect of known or probable costs resulting both from legal or other regulatory requirements or from thirdparty claims as described in Note 32.
As the settlement of many of the obligations for which provision is made is subject to legal or other regulatory process the timing and amount of the associated out ows are subject to some uncertainty.
The Directors use their judgement and experience to make appropriate estimates of provisions in the  nancial statements for amounts relating to such matters.
3.2 Taxation a Current tax Tax bene ts are not recognised unless it is probable that they will result in future economic bene ts to the Group.
In assessing the amount of the bene t to be recognised in the  nancial statements the Directors exercise their judgement in considering the effect of negotiations litigation and any other matters that they consider may impact upon the potential settlement.
The Group operates internationally and is subject to tax in many different jurisdictions.
As a consequence the Group is routinely subject to tax audits and local enquiries which by their very nature can take a considerable period of time to conclude.
Provisions are made for known issues based on all substantively enacted legislation the Directors interpretation of countryspeci c tax law and their assessment of the likely outcome taking into consideration the Groups experience in agreeing tax liabilities with tax authorities and appropriate external advice.
As indicated in Note 10.5 these provisions amount to 23.2m 2016 24.5m at the end of 2017 .
Further discussion of these provisions is contained in that Note.
All income tax liabilities provisions and assets are treated as income tax payable and recoverable in accordance with IAS 12.
The Group has recognised deferred tax assets in respect of unutilised losses and other timing differences arising in a number of the Groups businesses further details of which are given in Note 10.4.
Account has been taken of future forecasts of taxable pro t in arriving at the values at which these assets are recognised.
If these forecast pro ts do not materialise or change or there are changes in tax rates or to the period over which the losses or timing differences might be recognised then the value of deferred tax assets will need to be revised in a future period.
Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7 Accounting Policies and Critical Accounting Judgements and Estimates continued b Deferred tax continued The Group also has losses and other timing differences also analysed in Note 10.4 for which no deferred tax assets have been recognised in these  nancial statements relating either to lossmaking subsidiaries where the future economic bene t of the timing difference is not probable or to where the timing difference is of such a nature that its value is dependent on certain types of pro t being earned such as capital pro ts.
If trading or other appropriate pro ts are earned in the future in these companies these losses and other timing differences may yield bene t to the Group in the form of a reduced tax charge.
As explained in Note 10.2 the US T ax Cuts and Jobs Act TCJA enacted in late December 2017 had a material impact on the Groups deferred tax position.
TCJA was introduced very rapidly and consequently there is much uncertainty about how some of the provisions will operate.
As explained in Note 10.6 Vesuvius currently understands that the Base Erosion and AntiAbuse T ax BEA T will impact its tax charge in the US in 2018 and beyond in relation to certain payments made to nonUS related parties.
Further clari cation is awaited from US T reasury so the precise impact of BEA T cannot be determined with certainty at this point.
Other reasonable estimations have been made in determining how US tax reform will impact on Vesuvius US 2017 deferred tax position in particular in relation to earnings and pro ts of Vesuvius nonUS investments to be included in the deemed repatriation tolling charge calculations included in its 2017 taxable income.
As guidance is given by the US T reasury Department on how these and other provisions of TCJA are to operate Vesuvius tax position may be impacted.
Alternative Performance Measures The Company uses a number of alternative performance measures APMs in addition to those reported in accordance with IFRS.
The Directors believe that these APMs listed below are important when assessing the underlying  nancial and operating performance of the Group and its divisions providing management with key insights and metrics in support of the ongoing management of the Groups performance and cash  ow.
A number of these align with KPIs and other key metrics used in the business and therefore are considered useful to also disclose to the users of the  nancial statements.
The following APMs do not have standardised meaning prescribed by IFRS and therefore may not be directly comparable with similar measures presented by other companies.
4.1 Headline Headline performance reported separately on the face of the Group Income Statement is from continuing operations and before items reported separately on the face of the Group Income Statement.
4.2 Underlying revenue underlying trading pro t and underlying return on sales Underlying revenue underlying trading pro t and underlying return on sales are the headline equivalents of these measures after adjustments to exclude the effects of changes in exchange rates business acquisitions and disposals.
Reconciliations of underlying revenue and underlying trading pro t can be found in the Financial Review.
Underlying revenue growth is one of the Groups key performance indicators and provides an important measure of organic growth of Group businesses between reporting periods by eliminating the impact of exchange rates acquisitions disposals and signi cant business closures.
4.3 Return on sales ROS ROS is calculated as trading pro t divided by revenue.
It is one of the Groups key performance indicators and is used to assess the trading performance of Group businesses.
A reconciliation of ROS is included in Note 5.3.
4.4 Trading pro t T rading pro t reported separately on the face of the Group Income Statement is de ned as operating pro t before separately reported items.
It is one of the Groups key performance indicators and is used to assess the trading performance of Group businesses.
It is also used as one of the targets against which the annual bonuses of certain employees are measured.
4.5 Headline pro t before tax Headline pro t before tax reported separately on the face of the Group Income Statement is calculated as the net total of trading pro t plus the Groups share of posttax pro t of joint ventures and total net  nance costs associated with headline performance.
It is one of the Groups key performance indicators and is used to assess the  nancial performance of the Group as a whole.
4.6 Effective tax rate ETR The Groups ETR is calculated on the income tax costs associated with headline performance divided by headline pro t before tax and before the Groups share of posttax pro t of joint ventures.
Notes to the Group Financial Statements continued 13 9 Financial Statements 4.7 Headline earnings per share Headline earnings per share is calculated by dividing headline pro t before tax less associated income tax costs attributable to owners of the parent by the weighted average number of ordinary shares in issue during the year.
It is one of the Groups key performance indicators and is used to assess the underlying earnings performance of the Group as a whole.
It is also used as one of the targets against which the annual bonuses of certain employees are measured.
Headline earnings per share is disclosed in Note 1 1.
4.8 Operating cash  ow Operating cash  ow is cash generated from continuing operations before restructuring and net retirement bene t obligations but after deducting capital expenditure net of asset disposals.
It is used in calculating the Groups cash conversion.
A reconciliation of cash generated from operations to operating cash  ow can be found in the Financial Review.
4.9 Cash conversion Cash conversion is calculated as operating cash  ow from continuing operations divided by trading pro t.
It is useful for measuring the rate at which cash is generated from trading pro t.
It is also used as one of the targets against which the annual bonuses of certain employees are measured.
The calculation of cash conversion is detailed in the Financial Review.
4.10 Free cash  ow Free cash  ow is de ned as net cash  ow from operating activities after net outlays for the purchase and sale of property plant and equipment dividends from joint ventures and dividends paid to noncontrolling shareholders but before additional funding contributions to Group pension plans.
It is one of the Groups key performance indicators and is used to assess the underlying cash generation of the Group and is one of the measures used in monitoring the Groups capital.
A reconciliation of free cash  ow is included underneath the Group Statement of Cash Flows.
11 Average trade working capital to sales ratio The average trade working capital to sales ratio is calculated as the percentage of average trade working capital balances to the total revenue for the year at constant currency.
Average trade working capital comprising inventories trade receivables and trade payables is calculated as the average of the 12 previous monthend balances.
It is one of the Groups key performance indicators and is useful for measuring the level of working capital used in the business and is one of the measures used in monitoring the Groups capital.
12 Earnings before interest tax depreciation and amortisation EBITDA EBITDA is calculated as the total of trading pro t before depreciation and amortisation of nonacquired intangible assets.
It is used in the calculation of the Groups interest cover and net debt to EBITDA ratios.
A reconciliation of EBITDA is included in Note 12.
4.13 Net interest Net interest is calculated as interest payable on borrowings less interest receivable excluding any item separately reported.
It is used in the calculation of the Groups interest cover ratio.
4.14 Interest cover Interest cover is the ratio of EBITDA to net interest.
It is one of the Groups key performance indicators and is used to assess the nancial position of the Group and its ability to fund future growth.
This measure is also a component of the Groups covenant calculations.
4.15 Net debt Net debt comprises the net total of current and noncurrent interestbearing borrowings and cash and shortterm deposits.
Net debt is a measure of the Groups net indebtedness to banks and other external  nancial institutions.
A reconciliation of the movement in net debt is included in Note 14 of the Group Financial Statements.
16 Net debt to EBITDA Net debt to EBITDA is the ratio of net debt at the yearend to EBITDA for that year.
It is one of the Groups key performance indicators and is used to assess the  nancial position of the Group and its ability to fund future growth and is one of the measures used in monitoring the Groups capital.
17 Return on net assets RONA RONA is calculated as trading pro t plus share of posttax pro t of joint ventures divided by average net operating assets at constant currency being the average over the previous 1 2 months of property plant and equipment trade working capital and other operating receivables and payables.
It is one of the Groups key performance indicators and is used to assess the  nancial performance and asset management of the Group and is one of the measures used in monitoring the Groups capital.
4.18 Constant currency Figures presented at constant currency represent 2016 amounts retranslated to average 2017 exchange rates.
Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7 Segment Information The segment information contained in this Note makes reference to several alternative performance measures de nitions of which can be found in Note 4.
5.1 Business segments Operating segments for continuing operations Operating segments are reported in a manner consistent with the internal reporting provided to the Executive Directors of the Board who make the key operating decisions and are responsible for allocating resources and assessing performance of the operating segments.
Re ecting the Groups management and internal reporting structure segmental information is presented in respect of the two main business segments Steel and Foundry.
The Steel segment aggregates the Flow Control Advanced Refractories and Digital Services divisions which are subject to a similar risk pro le and return.
The principal activities of each of these segments are described in the Strategic Report on pages 32 to 49.
Segment revenue represents revenue from external customers intersegment revenue is not material.
T rading pro t includes items directly attributable to a segment as well as those items that can be allocated on a reasonable basis.
5.2 Revenue recognition Revenue comprises the fair value of the consideration received or receivable for goods supplied and services rendered to customers after deducting rebates discounts and valueadded taxes and after eliminating sales within the Group.
Revenue from the sale of goods is recognised when persuasive evidence exists that the signi cant risks and rewards of ownership have been transferred to the customer recovery of the consideration is probable there is no continuing management involvement with the goods and the amount of revenue can be measured reliably.
A provision for anticipated returns is made based primarily on historical return rates.
Where a contractual arrangement consists of two or more separate elements that can be provided to customers either on a standalone basis or as an extra such as the provision of supplementary materials with equipment revenue is recognised for each element as if it were an individual contractual arrangement.
5.3 Income statement The operating segment results from continuing operations for 2017 and 2016 are presented below.
Steel
Foundry
Continuing operations Segment revenue 1 148.7 535.2 1683.9 Segment EBITDA 128.9 80.3 209 .2 Segment depreciation 28.5 15.2 43.7 Segment trading pro t 100.4 65.
Return on sales margin 8.7% 12.2% 9.8% Amortisation of acquired intangible assets 19 .5 Restructuring charges 36.3 Operating pro t 109.7 Net  nance costs 1 3.9 Share of posttax pro t of joint ventures 1.3 Pro t before tax 97 .
Capital expenditure additions 34.0 10.3 44.3 Notes to the Group Financial Statements continued 14 1 Financial Statements
Foundry
Continuing operations Segment revenue 942.0 459.4 1401.4 Segment EBITDA 107 .0 68.6 1 75.6 Segment depreciation 27 .8 14.5 42.3 Segment trading pro t 79.2 54.
Return on sales margin 8.4% 11.8% 9.5% Amortisation of acquired intangible assets 1 7 .
Restructuring charges 28.5 Gain on employee bene t plan 5.2 Operating pro t 92.9 Net  nance costs 1 4.5 Share of posttax pro t of joint ventures 1.0 Pro t before tax 79.4 Capital expenditure additions 23.7 1 1.5 35.2 5.4 Geographical analysis External revenue Noncurrent assets Germany 232.
China 127 .6 11 3.
Brazil 90.5 70.7 65.
France 55.4 48.0 26.
Rest of the world 649.0 51 5.2 355.6 349.0 Continuing operations 1683.9 1401.4 1 104.7 1 1 58.4 Restated as a result of the recording of a provision for which a related asset exists Note 32.
External revenue disclosed in the table above is based upon the geographical location of the operation.
Noncurrent assets exclude employee bene ts net surpluses and deferred tax assets.
Information relating to the Groups products and services is given in the Strategic Report on pages 36 to 49.
The Group is not dependent upon any single customer for its revenue and no single customer for either of the years presented in the table above accounts for more than 10% of the Groups total external revenue.
Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7 Amounts Payable to PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP and their Associates Fees payable to the Companys auditors and their associates for the audit of the parent Company and Consolidated Financial Statements 0.4 0.4 Fees payable to the Companys auditors and their associates for other services Audit of the Companys subsidiaries 0.8 1.5 Auditrelated assurance services 0.
T ax compliance and advisory T otal auditors remuneration 1.3 2.0 PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP was appointed as the Groups external auditor for the year ended 31 December 2017  replacing KPMG LLP .
T otal auditors remuneration of 1.3m in 2017 all related to continuing operations of which 1.2m related to audit fees and 0.
1m of nonaudit fees in respect of the interim review fee 2016 2.0m including 1.9m of audit fees and 0.
1m of nonaudit fees the latter comprising 0.
1m in respect of the interim review fee and nil for taxation advice.
Mazars LLP was appointed external auditor of the nonmaterial entities within the Group for the year ended 31 December 2017 .
T otal remuneration for the audit of the nonmaterial entities was 0.4m in 2017 .
This amount is not included in the table above.
It is the Groups policy not to use the Groups auditors for nonaudit services other than in very limited circumstances and when they are best placed to do so.
Restructuring Charges The 2017 restructuring charges were 36.3m 2016 28.5m.
The Groupwide restructuring programme initiated in 2015 continued resulting in charges of 36.3m 2016 28.5m re ecting redundancy costs of 22.8m 2016 21.4m plant closure costs of 0.5m 2016 4.2m consultancy fees of 6.8m 2016 2.0m an inventoryasset writeoff of 5.5m 2016 0.9m and travel of 0.7m 2016 nil.
Further details of restructuring programmes are provided in the Financial Review.
The net tax credit attributable to the total restructuring charges was 4.3m 2016 3.8m.
Cash costs of 27 .3m 2016 16.8m Note 12 were incurred in the year in respect of the restructuring programme leaving provisions made but unspent of 22.9m Note 32 as at 31 December 2017 2016 18.5m of which 2.7m 2016 2.7m relates to future costs in respect of leases expiring between one and six years.
Employees
8.1 Employee bene ts expense Wages and salaries 344.0 301.6 Social security costs 52.2 46.7 Redundancy costs 22.8 21.4 Other restructuring costs  0.2 Sharebased payments Note 29 2.6 1.7 Pension costs de ned contribution pension plans Note 28 12.5 10.7 de ned bene t pension plans Note 28 7.0 2.
Other postretirement bene ts Note 28 0.4 0.4 Total employee bene ts expense 441.5 384.8 Of the total employee bene ts expense of 441.5m 2016 384.8m 418.
1m 2016 367 .
1m was charged in arriving at trading pro t nil 2016 5.2m was credited from settlement gains relating to employee bene t plans 0.6m 2016 1.3m was charged within ordinary net  nance costs and 22.8m 2016 21.6m was charged to restructuring costs.
Within redundancy costs reported in the table above are nil 2016 0.3m of de ned bene t pension plan costs and 0.
1m 2016 0.
1m of de ned contribution pension plan costs.
At constant rates the total employee bene ts expense for 2016 was 409.6m.
Notes to the Group Financial Statements continued 14 3 Financial Statements 8.2 Average number of employees no. no.
Steel 7868 7 725 Foundry 3 106 3 101 Continuing operations 10974 10826 Discontinued operations T otal average number of employees 10974 10826 As at 31 December 2017  the Group had 1 1010 employees 2016 10840.
8.3 Remuneration of key management personnel The remuneration of the Directors who are the key management personnel of the Group is set out below in aggregate for each of the categories speci ed in IAS 24 Related Party Disclosures.
Further information about the remuneration of individual Directors is provided in the audited part of the Directors Remuneration Report on pages 106 to 1 16.
Shortterm employee bene ts 1.9 1.5 Postemployment bene ts 0.2 0.3 Sharebased payments 0.7 0.5 T otal remuneration of key management personnel 2.8 2.3 Net Finance Costs 9.1 Accounting policy Borrowing costs that are directly attributable to the acquisition construction or production of an asset that necessarily takes a substantial period of time to get ready for its intended use or sale are capitalised as part of the cost of that asset.
Capitalised borrowing costs for 2017 were nil 2016 nil.
All other borrowing costs are recognised as an expense in the Group Income Statement using the effective interest rate method.
9.2 Total net  nance costs Interest payable on borrowings Loans overdrafts and factoring arrangements 15.9 15.
Obligations under  nance leases 0.2 0.2 Amortisation of capitalised arrangement fees 0.6 0.5 T otal interest payable on borrowings 16.7 15.8 Interest on net retirement bene t obligations 0.6 1.3 Adjustment to discounts on provisions and other liabilities 0.2 0.2 Adjustment to discounts on receivables 0.
Finance income 3.5 2.7 T otal net  nance costs 13.9 14.5 144 Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7 Income Tax 10.1 Accounting policy T ax expense represents the sum of current tax and deferred tax.
Current and deferred tax are recognised in pro t or loss except to the extent that they relate to items charged or credited in the Group Statement of Comprehensive Income or Group Statement of Changes in Equity in which case the associated tax is also recognised in those statements.
In arriving at its current tax charge the Group also makes careful assessment of the likely impact of tax law changes.
In particular it has considered the impact of US tax reform enacted in December 2017 in the US T ax Cuts and Jobs Act TCJA and other recently announced tax reform for example in Belgium.
Current tax Current tax is based on taxable pro t for the year.
T axable pro t differs from pro t before tax as reported in the Group Income Statement because it excludes items of income or expense that are taxable or deductible in other years and it further excludes items that are never taxable or deductible.
The Groups liability for current tax is calculated using tax rates and laws that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the balance sheet date.
A provision is recognised when the Group considers it has a present tax obligation as the result of a past event and it is probable that the Group will be required to settle that obligation.
Provisions established for such uncertain tax positions are made using a best estimate of the tax expected to be paid based on a qualitative and quantitative assessment of all relevant information.
Such a provision is typically required where the underlying tax issue is subject to interpretation and remains to be agreed and therefore is uncertain as to outcome.
Principally the uncertain tax positions for which a provision is made relate to the interpretation of tax legislation and guidance regarding transfer pricing arrangements that have been entered into in the normal course of business.
In accordance with IAS 12 tax provisions are included as income tax payable on the face of the Group Balance Sheet and movements in tax provisions are included within income tax charges or credits in the Group Income Statement.
In assessing any appropriate provision requirements for uncertain tax items the Group considers progress made in discussions with the tax authorities expert advice on the likely outcome and any recent developments in case law.
Due to the uncertainty associated with such tax items it is possible that at a future date on conclusion of the open matters the  nal outcome may vary signi cantly.
Any such variations will affect the  nancial results in the year in which such a determination is made.
Deferred tax Deferred tax is recognised on differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities in the  nancial statements and the corresponding tax bases used in the computation of taxable pro t and is accounted for using the balance sheet liability method.
Deferred tax liabilities are generally recognised for all taxable temporary differences and deferred tax assets are recognised to the extent that it is probable that taxable pro ts will be available against which deductible temporary differences can be utilised.
Such assets and liabilities are not recognised if the temporary difference arises from the initial recognition of goodwill or from the initial recognition other than in a business combination of other assets and liabilities in a transaction that affects neither the taxable pro t nor the accounting pro t.
Deferred tax is calculated at the tax rates that are expected to apply in the period when the liability is settled or the asset is realised based on tax rates and laws that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the balance sheet date.
Deferred tax liabilities are recognised for taxable temporary differences arising on investments in subsidiaries and interests in joint ventures except where the Group is able to control the reversal of the temporary difference and it is probable that the temporary difference will not reverse in the foreseeable future.
The carrying amount of deferred tax assets is reviewed at each balance sheet date and reduced to the extent that it is no longer probable that suf cient taxable pro ts will be available to allow all or part of the asset to be recovered.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are offset when there is a legally enforceable right to set off current tax assets against current tax liabilities and when they relate to income taxes levied by the same taxation authority and the Group intends to settle its current tax assets and liabilities on a net basis.
Change in accounting policy Previously the common understanding and interpretation of IAS 12 allowed a company to include in its tax charges liabilities and provisions any associated delayed settlement interest and penalties.
Vesuvius followed this approach.
The recent clari cation by the IFRS Interpretations Committee previously the International Financial Reporting Interpretations Committee IFRIC however is that a company should include in its tax charges liabilities and provisions only items meeting the strict de nition of taxes under IAS 12.
It con rmed that items not meeting that de nition should be reported in accordance with IAS 37 .
Notes to the Group Financial Statements continued 14 5 Financial Statements Vesuvius has accordingly changed its accounting policy to include interest and penalties on tax in trade and other payables in accordance with IAS 37 .
This has resulted in a change to its Group Balance Sheet as at 31 December 2016 to reclassify 7 .0m from its liabilities and provisions previously reported as tax to trade and other payables.
The effect of this change on its 2016 performance statements is immaterial and no restatement is therefore required to be made.
10.2 Income tax charge Current tax Overseas taxation 37 .
Adjustments in respect of prior years 1.7 2.9 T otal current tax continuing operations 35.4 35.4 Deferred tax Origination and reversal of temporary taxable differences 19 .0 9 .0 Adjustments in respect of prior years T otal deferred tax continuing operations 19.0 9 .0 T otal income tax charge 54.4 26.4 T otal income tax charge attributable to Continuing operations headline performance 36.4 31.4 separately reported 18.0 5.0 T otal income tax charge 54.4 26.4 Included in the Groups total income tax charge are charges and credits meeting the criteria set out in Note 2.5 to be treated as separately reported items as analysed in the following table Separately reported items Impact of US tax reform 24.5 Other utilisation of previously recognised US deferred tax asset 4.2 6.2 Additional recognition of US deferred tax asset 0.4 4.
Net movement in US deferred tax asset 28.3 2.
Restructuring charges 4.3 3.8 Gain on employee bene t plan  0.4 Amortisation and utilisation of acquired intangibles 6.0 3.7 T otal tax chargecredit separately reported 18.0 5.0 The US T ax Cuts and Jobs Act TCJA enacted in the US in December 2017 has had a material impact on the value of the deferred tax asset the Group recognises in the US.
It has reduced the asset by 33.
1m 25.7m of which 31.5m 24.5m is charged to the Group Income Statement and 1.6m 1.2m is charged to the Group Statement of Comprehensive Income as it relates to the effect of the change in the US Federal rate of tax on the value of the deferred tax asset on pension de cits recognised in that statement.
The reduction was principally due to the change in Federal tax rate from 35% to 21% the deemed repatriation tolling charge and the impact of other changes when measuring the value of the asset which is recognised in the Group Balance Sheet.
However no current tax liability has resulted from these provisions in 2017  due to the availability of tax losses and foreign tax credits to offset the resultant additional taxable income.
The impact of US tax reform together with normal changes to the US deferred tax asset resulted in the asset reducing from 81.3m 65.9m at the end of 2016 to 44.0m 32.6m at the end of 2017 .
In 2017  Belgium reduced its tax rate to 29% in 2018 and 25% in 2020.
This has had the impact of reducing the deferred tax asset in Belgium by 1.4m in 201 7 2016 nil.
This impact is included in the total deferred tax charge on continuing operations.
Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7 Income T ax continued 10.2 Income tax charge continued The net tax charge re ected in the Group Statement of Comprehensive Income in the year amounted to 3.
1m 2016 0.7m 2.4m of which related to tax on net actuarial gains and losses on the employee bene ts plan.
In addition 0.7m 2016 nil related to UK tax in respect of foreign exchange differences arising on hedged positions.
The Group operates in a number of countries that have differing tax rates laws and practices.
Changes in any of these areas could adversely or positively impact the Groups tax charge in the future.
Continuing losses or insuf ciency of taxable pro t to absorb all expenses in any subsidiary could have the effect of increasing tax charges in the future as effective tax relief may not be available for those losses or expenses.
Other signi cant factors affecting the tax charge are described in Notes 3.2 10.
1 and 10.6.
In 2016 pro t from discontinued operations Note 22 included a tax credit of 9.0m relating to the release of a provision for possible China taxes arising during the demerger of the Alent business in 2012.
After further consultation with advisers and in light of the publication in 2015 by the Chinese tax authorities of additional guidance on the applicable taxes it was decided this provision was no longer required.
No similar credit has arisen in 2017 .
10.3 Reconciliation of income tax charge to pro t before tax Pro t before tax 97 .
T ax at the UK corporation tax rate of 19.25% 2016 20% 18.7 15.
Impact of tax rate change on deferred tax asset 19 .5 Overseas tax rate differences 9.8 2.7 Withholding taxes 4.4 3.6 Amortisation of intangibles 0.2 0.3 Expenses not deductible for tax purposes 0.2 1.6 Income taxed in advance 3.6 4.6 Nontaxable income  1.2 Deferred tax asset not previously recognised 1.4 4.
Deferred tax assets not recognised 3.5 7.5 Utilisation of previously unrecognised tax losses 2.0 1.0 Adjustments in respect of prior years 1.7 2.9 T otal income tax charge 54.4 26.4 10.4 Deferred tax
Other
Pension costs
Other
Total
As at 1 January 2016 24.
Exchange adjustmentsother 4.5 2.5 1.9 4.2 4.4 9 .
Charge to Group Statement of Comprehensive Income   0.7   0.7 Credit to Group Income Statement 0.2 3.8  5.3 1.8 1 1.
Net chargecredit to Group Income Statement US 2.
Exchange adjustmentsother 1.8 1.8  0.2 0.4 3.8 Impact of tax rate change in Group Income Statement 6.8 8.6 0.8  3.3 19.5 in Group Statement of Comprehensive Income  1.2   1.2 Other charge to Group Statement of Comprehensive Income  1.2   1.2 Other credit to Group Income Statement  0.6 0.
Other net charge credit to Group Income Statement US 8.2 3.0 0.6 0.2 0.6 10.2 As at 31 December 201 7 9.9 1 7 .
Notes to the Group Financial Statements continued 14 7 Financial Statements Recognised in the Group Balance Sheet as Noncurrent deferred tax assets 61.0 92.
Noncurrent deferred tax liabilities 42.7 48.6 Net total deferred tax assets 18.3 43.5 Included in these deferred tax assets and liabilities are amounts to be expected to be utilised in 2018 as follows Deferred tax assets 11.3 16.9 Deferred tax liabilities 7 .6 6.7 As discussed in Note 10.2 US tax reform enacted in TCJA has had a major impact on the Groups US deferred tax position.
Note 3.2 outlines the principal judgements and estimates taken in determining the impact of that reform on the valuation of this asset.
Included in noncurrent deferred tax assets is 32.6m 2016 65.9m in respect of the partial recognition of temporary differences arising in the US computed in accordance with the policy set out in Note 10.
1 above.
The Group remains con dent of the recovery of this asset.
69.2m 2016 100.4m remains unrecognised.
In view of its material size and nature any tax credit re ected in the Group Income Statement arising from the recognition of this asset is presented separately from the tax charge on headline performance in accordance with the principles outlined in Note 2.5.
Subsequent increase decrease and utilisation of the resultant deferred tax asset would similarly be expected to be presented in this manner as the Directors consider that the separate identi cation of deferred tax for material temporary differences would assist both in a better understanding of the  nancial performance achieved and in making projections of future results of the Group.
T ax loss carryforwards and other temporary differences with a tax value of 1m 2016 1.4m were recognised by subsidiaries reporting a loss.
On the basis of approved business plans of these subsidiaries the Directors consider it probable that the tax loss carryforwards and temporary differences can be offset against future taxable pro ts.
The total deferred tax assets not recognised as at 31 December 2017 were 219.9m 2016 263.
1m as analysed below.
In accordance with the accounting policy in Note 10.
1 these items have not been recognised as deferred tax assets on the basis that their future economic bene t is not probable.
In total there was a decrease of 43.2m 2016 6.4m increase in net unrecognised deferred tax assets during the year principally due to the impact of the change in the US Federal tax rate from 35% to 21% enacted in TCJA.
Operating losses further described below 102.3 11 8.6 Unrelieved US interest may be carried forward inde nitely 43.2 66.6 Capital losses available to offset future UK capital gains may be carried forward inde nitely 28.
UK ACT credits may be carried forward inde nitely 13.
US tax credits 16.7 9.
Other temporary differences 16.5 27 .7 T otal deferred tax assets not recognised 219.9 263.
5.5m relating to US tax credits has been reclassi ed from other temporary differences to US tax credits in the 201 6 comparative.
The Group has signi cant net operating losses with a tax value of 1 19.4m 2016 148.5m only 17 .
1m 2016 29.9m of which meet the criteria set out in Note 10.
1 to be recognised on the Group Balance Sheet.
Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7 Income T ax continued 10.4 Deferred tax continued
Operating
Total
Operating
Operating
Total
UK may be carried forward inde nitely  73.5 73.5 78.678.6 USA due to expire 2024  2031  13.3 3.7 1 7 .0 26.5 4.9 31.4 ROW may be carried forward inde nitely 3.5 21.5 25.0 3.4 23.0 26.4 ROW due to expire within 5 years 0.3 3.6 3.9 12.112.1 The 28.9m 2016 38.5m operating losses available to set against future income in the rest of the world arise in a number of countries re ecting the spread of the Groups operations.
As at 31 December 2017  the Group had unrecognised US tax credits with a value of 16.7m 2016 9.
1m as follows US research and experimentation credits due to expire 20182033 12.8 4.9 US foreign tax credits due to expire 20222024 3.9 4.2 US tax credits 16.7 9.
There are no temporary differences associated with investments in subsidiaries and interests in joint ventures for which deferred tax liabilities have not been recognised.
The aggregate temporary differences where the exemption not to provide for the deferred taxation liability has been taken is 197 .
1m 2016 175.9m.
UK corporation tax rate reductions to 17% from 1 April 2020 were enacted in 2016.
Accordingly the Groups closing UK deferred tax liability has been provided using a tax rate of 17% except where the reversals are expected to arise prior to 1 April 2020.
10.5 Income tax payable and recoverable Liabilities for income tax payable 11.
Provisions for uncertain tax provisions 23.2 24.5 Income tax recoverable within one year 5.2 3.9 Income tax recoverable after more than one year 0.4 1.0 T otal income tax recoverable 5.6 4.9 Net liability 28.7 30.0 Provisions for uncertain tax provisions are calculated in accordance with the policy outlined in Note 10.
1 and are treated as income tax payable and recoverable in accordance with IAS 12.
These provisions cover litigated tax matters as well as provisions for other risks where the Group believes it is more likely than not that there would be a successful challenge by a tax authority to positions it has taken in its tax  lings.
By its nature litigation can result in sharp  uctuations in cash  ow both in and out relating to taxes.
Currently management do not expect any material adjustments to these provisions in 2018.
Notes to the Group Financial Statements continued 14 9 Financial Statements 10.6 Key factors impacting the sustainability of the effective tax rate are as follows Material changes in the geographic mix of pro ts The Groups effective tax rate is sensitive to changes in the geographic mix of pro ts and level of pro ts and re ects a combination of higher rates in certain jurisdictions such as India Mexico Germany and Belgium nil effective tax rates in the UK and the US due to the availability of unutilised tax losses and rates that lie somewhere in between.
Changes in tax rates tax reform and its interpretation Changes in tax rates and laws in the jurisdictions in which the Group operates could have a material effect on the Groups effective tax rate.
As stated in Note 10.
1 the Group has taken into account the impact of US and other tax reform enacted in 2017 .
One of the new taxes introduced by the US T ax Cuts and Jobs Act TCJA in the US in December 2017 is the Base Erosion and AntiAbuse T ax BEA T see also Note 3.2b.
This is intended to counter what US tax authorities regard as erosion of the US tax base of a US company caused by payments other than for cost of goods sold to its to nonUS af liates.
In its broadest sense this would establish a base tax of 10% of a US companys normal taxable income as grossed up by such payments.
The rate of tax applied is 5% in 2018 increasing to 10% from 2019.
Whilst this does not impact Vesuvius in 2017  it is currently estimated to result in a US cash tax cost from 2018 onwards and thus increase the Groups effective rate of tax on Headline performance before its share of joint venture income going forward by 0.7% in 2018 and 1.2% in 2019.
The Groups effective tax rate for 2018 onwards is expected to be between 27% and 28% including the expected adverse impact of US tax reform re ecting the bene t of initiatives being taken.
TCJA is a major new piece of legislation introduced very rapidly consequently there is still much uncertainty about how some of the key provisions will operate.
The international provisions in particular are extremely complex and with little issued guidance from the US T reasury are not yet fully understood by the business or adviser community.
Vesuvius has taken advice on how TCJA is likely to impact on its tax position but it is to be expected that as guidance and interpretation clari es these new laws then further changes to its tax charges and balances may need to be made.
Availability of tax advantaged rates Vesuvius in China quali es for a tax advantaged rate of 15% rather than the headline rate of 25% on part of its pro ts due to the hightechnology nature of its business.
Eligibility for this rate is reviewed on a regular basis by the Chinese tax authority and was worth approximately 0.9m in 2017 2016 1.0m.
Without that bene t the Groups effective tax rate on headline performance would have been 0.6% higher in 2017 2016 0.8%.
Resolution of tax judgements At any one time the Group can be subject to a number of challenges by tax authorities in the jurisdictions in which it operates.
The outcome of these challenges is inherently uncertain potentially resulting in a different tax charge from the amounts initially provided.
Recognition of tax bene ts arising from brought forward losses and other temporary differences in the US In accordance with the criteria set out in Note 10.
1 movements in Vesuvius US deferred tax asset are recognised as separately reported items.
Consequently such movements have no impact on the Groups effective tax rate on headline performance.
Should however the 2017 pro ts earned in the US have been fully subject to US Federal and State taxes then the Groups effective tax rate on headline performance excluding the Groups share of posttax pro t of joint ventures would have been approximately 4.2% higher 2016 3.4% higher.
Impact of Brexit on Vesuvius tax position How Brexit impacts on Vesuvius will depend on the terms of Brexit which are as yet unclear and therefore it is not possible at this stage to provide precise guidance on how it will impact on the Group.
If the EU Parent Subsidiary and Interest and Royalty directives were no longer to apply to dividend interest and other payments to Vesuvius in the UK additional withholding taxes would become payable subject to reliefs available under applicable tax treaties.
Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7 Earnings per Share EPS 1 Earnings for EPS Basic and diluted EPS from continuing operations are based upon the pro t attributable to owners of the parent as reported in the Group Income Statement of 36.3m 2016 46.7m being the pro t for the year of 42.7m 2016 53.0m less noncontrolling interests of 6.4m 2016 6.3m basic and diluted EPS from total operations are based on the pro t attributable to owners of the parent of 38.0m 2016 56.9m headline and diluted headline EPS are based upon headline pro t from continuing operations attributable to owners of the parent of 1 10.
1m 2016 82.
1m.
The table below reconciles these different pro t measures.
Continuing operations
Continuing operations
Pro t attributable to owners of the parent 36.3 1.7 38.0 46.7 10.2 56.9 Adjustments for separately reported items Amortisation of acquired intangible assets 19 .5 17 .
Restructuring charges 36.3 28.5 Gain on employee bene t plan  5.2 Income tax charge  credit 18.0 5.0 Headline pro t attributable to owners of the parent 1 10.
11.2 Weighted average number of shares millions millions For calculating basic and headline EPS 270.3 269 .9 Adjustment for potentially dilutive ordinary shares 1.3 0.8 For calculating diluted and diluted headline EPS 271.6 270.7 For the purposes of calculating diluted and diluted headline EPS the weighted average number of ordinary shares is adjusted to include the weighted average number of ordinary shares that would be issued on the conversion of all potentially dilutive ordinary shares expected to vest relating to the Companys sharebased payment plans.
Potential ordinary shares are only treated as dilutive when their conversion to ordinary shares would decrease EPS or increase loss per share.
11.3 Per share amounts
Discontinued operations pence total pence
Discontinued operations pence total pence Earnings per share  basic 1 3.4 0.7 14.
Notes to the Group Financial Statements continued 15 1 Financial Statements Cash Generated from Operations
Discontinued operations total
Discontinued operations total Operating pro t 109.7 1.7 111.4 92.9 1.2 94.
Adjustments for Amortisation of acquired intangible assets Note 16 19 .5  1 9 .5 17 .
Restructuring charges 36.3  36.3 28.5  28.5 Gains relating to employee bene t plans  5.2  5.2 Depreciation 43.7  43.7 42.3  42.3 EBITDA Note 4.
Net increase in inventories 19 .4  19 .4 8.9  8.9 Net increase in trade receivables 36.9  36.9 18.6  18.6 Net increase in trade payables 44.1  44.1 14.5  1 4.5 Net decreaseincrease in other working capital 11.7 2.5 9 .2 7 .9 1.2 9.
Out ow related to restructuring charges 27 .3  27 .3 1 6.8  1 6.8 Net retirement bene t obligations 4.8  4.8 7 .7  7 .7 Cash generated from operations 1 76.6 0.8 1 75.8 130.2  130.2 Cash and Cash Equivalents Cash at bank and in hand 16 1.9 144.4 Cash and shortterm deposits 16 1.9 144.4 Bank overdrafts 21.9 43.4 Cash and cash equivalents in the Group Statement of Cash Flows 140.0 101.0 Bank overdrafts that are repayable on demand and form an integral part of the Groups cash management are included as a component of cash and cash equivalents for the purpose of the Group Statement of Cash Flows.
Reconciliation of Movement in Net Debt Balance as at 1 Jan 2017
Borrowing facility costs capitalised
Cash  ow Balance as at 31 Dec 2017 Cash and cash equivalents Cash at bank and in hand 144.4 4.5   22.0 161.9 Bank overdrafts 43.4 1.7   1 9 .8 21.9 Borrowings excluding bank overdrafts Current 91.
Noncurrent 331.9 12.8   93.0 412.1 Capitalised arrangement fees 1.7  1.0 0.6  2.
Net debt 320.3 14.
Net debt is a measure of the Groups net indebtedness to banks and other external  nancial institutions and comprises the total of cash and shortterm deposits and current and noncurrent interestbearing borrowings.
Property Plant and Equipment 15.1 Accounting policy Freehold land and construction in progress are carried at cost less accumulated impairment losses.
Other items of property plant and equipment are carried at cost less accumulated depreciation and accumulated impairment losses.
Costs are capitalised only when it is probable that they will result in future economic bene ts  owing to the Group and when they can be measured reliably.
Costs are capitalised to construction in progress where an asset is being developed.
This is then transferred and depreciated when the asset is ready for use.
All other repairs and maintenance expenditures are charged to the Group Income Statement in the period in which they are incurred.
Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7 Notes to the Group Financial Statements continued Property Plant and Equipment continued 1 Accounting policy continued Freehold land is not depreciated as it has an in nite life.
Depreciation on other items of property plant and equipment begins when the asset is available for use and is charged to the Group Income Statement on a straightline basis so as to write off the cost less residual value of the asset over its estimated useful life as follows Asset category Estimated useful life Freehold property between ten and 50 years Leasehold property the term of the lease Plant and equipment motor vehicles and information technology equipment between one and  ve years other between three and 15 years The depreciation method used residual values and estimated useful lives are reviewed annually and changed if appropriate.
As described in Note 17 .
1 an assets carrying amount is immediately written down to its recoverable amount if its carrying amount is greater than its estimated recoverable amount.
Gains and losses arising on disposals are determined by comparing sales proceeds with carrying amount and are recognised in the Group Income Statement.
15.2 Movement in net book value
Leasehold property Plant and equipment
Total
Cost
As at 1 January 2016 169 .7 2.3 477 .2 28.8 678.0 Exchange adjustments 29 .9 0.
Capital expenditure additions 1.3  18.3 15.6 35.2 Acquisitions through business combinations   1.
Disposals 1.6  41.9 0.2 43.7 Reclassi cations 4.0  10.5 14.5 Exchange adjustments 3.4 0.
Capital expenditure additions 1.4  19 .4 23.5 44.3 Disposals 5.
Reclassi cations 5.5  9.8 15.3 Accumulated depreciation and impairment losses As at 1 January 2016 64.7 1.4 326.6  392.7 Exchange adjustments 1 1.9  59 .5  71.4 Depreciation charge 5.9 0.2 36.2  42.3 Impairment charge 0.4 0.4 Disposals 1.2  37 .8  39.0 Reclassi cations 1.2  1.2 Exchange adjustments 2.0 0.
Depreciation charge 6.1 0.3 37.3  43.7 Disposals 1.8  10.0  1 1.8 Reclassi cations 0.3  0.3 Net book value as at 31 December 201 7 1 16.2 0.5 152.8 41.8 31 1.3 Net book value as at 31 December 2016 1 20.4 0.8 166.7 35.7 323.6 Net book value as at 1 January 2016 105.0 0.9 150.6 28.8 285.3 15 3 Financial Statements The net book value of the Groups property plant and equipment assets held under  nance lease contracts was 4.6m 2016 4.7m.
Capital expenditure on customerinstallation assets was 10.7m 2016 6.5m.
Intangible Assets Intangible assets comprise goodwill and other intangible assets that have been acquired through business combinations.
16.1 Accounting policy a Goodwill Goodwill arising in a business combination is initially recognised as an asset at cost measured as the excess of the aggregate of the acquisitiondate fair value of the consideration transferred and the amount of any noncontrolling interest acquired over the net of the acquisitiondate fair value amounts of the identi able assets acquired and liabilities assumed.
When the excess is negative a bargain purchase gain is recognised immediately in pro t or loss.
Goodwill is subsequently measured at cost less accumulated impairment losses with impairment testing carried out annually or more frequently when there is an indication that the cashgenerating unit to which the goodwill has been allocated may be impaired.
On disposal of a business the attributable amount of goodwill is included in the calculation of the pro t or loss on disposal.
Intangible assets other than goodwill are recognised on business combinations if they are separable or if they arise from contractual or other legal rights and their value can be measured reliably.
They are initially measured at cost which is equal to the acquisitiondate fair value and subsequently measured at cost less accumulated amortisation charges and accumulated impairment losses.
Other intangible assets are subject to impairment testing when there is an indication that an impairment loss may have been incurred and are amortised over their estimated useful lives.
The Groups research activity involves longrange blue sky investigation the  ndings from which may be used in the future to develop new or substantially improved products.
Expenditure on research activities is recognised in the Group Income Statement as an expense in the year in which it is incurred.
Development is the application of research  ndings for the production of new or substantially improved products processes and services before the start of commercial production.
Development expenditure is capitalised only if the expenditure can be measured reliably the product or process is technically and commercially feasible future economic bene ts are probable and the Group intends to and has suf cient resources to complete development and to use or sell the asset.
Otherwise it is recognised in the Group Income Statement as an expense in the year in which it is incurred.
Capitalised development expenditure where there is any is stated at cost less accumulated amortisation and impairment losses.
In determining whether development expenditure is capitalised as an intangible asset management considers whether the strict intangible asset recognition criteria set out in IAS 38 Intangible Assets have been met at the time the expenditure is incurred.
In making this determination management recognise that a signi cant amount of the development expenditure undertaken by the Group is focused on dealing with local customer technical support issues and incremental developments to existing products as opposed to new or substantially improved products and that at the time the feasibility of the project is determined a signi cant proportion of the development expenditure for that project has already been incurred.
In 2017 no projects met the criteria for IAS 38 capitalisation.
16.2 Movement in net book value
Other
Goodwill
Other
Cost
As at 1 January 662.2 271.9 934.
Exchange adjustments 19.3 0.7 20.0 97 .0 1 7 .4 1 14.4 Business combinations Note 21  0.3  0.3 3.
Accumulated amortisation and impairment losses Exchange adjustments 0.3 0.3 6.9 6.9 Amortisation charge for the year 19.519.5  1 7.
As at 31 December  1 71.4 1 71.4 152.2 152.2 Net book value as at 31 December 643.2 99.8 743.0 662.2 119.7 781.9 154 Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7 Intangible Assets continued 16.3 Analysis of goodwill by cashgenerating unit CGU Goodwill acquired in a business combination is allocated to each of the Groups CGUs expected to bene t from the synergies of the combination.
For the purposes of impairment testing the Directors consider that the Group has two CGUs the Steel division and the Foundry division.
These CGUs represent the lowest level within the Group at which goodwill is monitored.
Foundry 216.9 223.5 T otal goodwill 643.2 662.2 16.4 Analysis of other intangible assets Other intangible assets are amortised on a straightline basis over their estimated useful lives.
The assets acquired and their remaining useful lives are shown below.
Remaining useful life years Net book value as at 31 Dec 2017 trade name useful life 20 years 10.3 37 .
Mould and tundish business of Carboox customer relationships useful life 20 years 18.9 1.7 trade name useful life two years 0.9 0.
Total 99.8 Impairment of T angible and Intangible Assets 17.1 Accounting policy The Directors regularly review the performance of the business and the external business environment to determine whether there is any indication that the Groups tangible and intangible assets have suffered an impairment loss.
If such indication exists the higher of the value in use and the fair value less costs to sell of the asset is estimated and compared with the carrying value in order to determine the extent if any of the impairment loss.
Where it is not feasible to estimate the recoverable amount of an individual asset the Directors estimate the recoverable amount of the CGU to which the asset belongs.
In addition goodwill is tested for impairment on an annual basis.
Goodwill acquired in a business combination is allocated to each of the Groups CGUs expected to bene t from the synergies of the combination and the Directors carry out annual impairment testing of the carrying value of each CGU to assess the need for any impairment of the carrying value of the associated goodwill and other intangible and tangible assets.
For the purpose of impairment testing the recoverable amount of an asset or CGU is the higher of i its fair value less costs to sell and ii its value in use.
If the recoverable amount of a CGU is less than its carrying amount the resulting impairment loss is allocated  rst to reduce the carrying amount of any goodwill allocated to the CGU and then to the other assets of the CGU pro rata on the basis of the carrying amount of each asset in the CGU.
An impairment loss recognised for goodwill is not reversed in a subsequent period.
An impairment loss recognised in a prior year for an asset other than goodwill may be reversed where there has been a change in the estimates used to measure the assets recoverable amount since the impairment loss was recognised.
17.2 Key assumptions The key assumptions used in determining value in use are projected cash  ows growth rates and discount rates.
Projected cash  ow assumptions are based on historical  nancial information adjusted to factor in the anticipated impact of restructuring and rationalisation plans already announced at the balance sheet date.
Notes to the Group Financial Statements continued 15 5 Financial Statements The value in use calculations of the Groups CGUs are based on threeyear business plans and a terminal growth rate of 2.5% 2016 2.5%.
The cash  ows are discounted to their current value using pretax discount rates which represent each CGUs weighted average cost of capital WACC.
Growth rates are determined with reference to current market conditions external forecasts and historical trends for the Groups key endmarkets of Steel and Foundry and expected growth in output within the industries in which each major Group business unit operates.
A perpetuity growth rate of 2.5% 2016 2.5% has been applied.
The pretax discount rate is the WACC calculated for each CGU as at 31 December 2017 based on industryspeci c beta coef cients for the industries in which the CGUs operate riskfree rates and equity risk premiums related to the major countries in which the CGUs are located selecting countries which contribute at least 80% of total CGU revenue.
The pretax discount rate used for the Steel CGU was 1 1.0% 2016 10.9% and for the Foundry CGU was 1 1.6% 2016 13.2%.
The decrease in Foundrys pretax discount rate is driven by improved global economic performance which results in reduced market risk and consequently lower equity risk premiums and the Foundry industry has performed well with limited volatility resulting in a reduced beta.
In the Steel CGU the impact of this decrease in equity risk premiums has been more than offset by increasing contributions from emerging markets providing upward pressure on riskfree rates and equity risk premiums.
A sensitivity analysis undertaken in respect of the 2017 impairment testing assuming a 1.0% increase in each of the CGU discount rates and a 1.0% perpetuity growth rate still resulted in headroom remaining in which the recoverable amount of each CGU exceeded its carrying value.
A pretax discount rate of 16.0% would result in an impairment of Steel intangible assets and 22.7% for Foundry.
17.3 Goodwill impairment The Directors use their judgement to determine the extent to which goodwill and other capitalised intangible assets have a value that will bene t the performance of the Group over future periods.
T o assist in making this judgement the Directors undertake an assessment at least annually of the carrying value of the Groups capitalised goodwill and other intangible assets.
The projection period is in the opinion of the Directors an appropriate period over which to view the future results of the Groups businesses for this purpose.
Changes to the assumptions used in making these forecasts could signi cantly alter the Directors assessment of the carrying value of goodwill and other intangible assets.
In assessing goodwill for impairment management performed its annual test at 31 October 2017 which is consistent with the prior year.
The Directors made use of detailed calculations of the recoverable amount of the Groups CGUs as at 31 October 2017 .
Those calculations resulted in recoverable amounts signi cantly higher than the carrying values of the Groups CGUs and consequently no impairment charges were recognised.
A further assessment for triggers of goodwill impairment was made at the year end and the calculations were also checked against the carrying values of the Groups CGUs as at 31 December 2017 .
No impairment triggers were identi ed.
T rade and Other Receivables 18.1 Accounting policy T rade and other receivables are initially recognised at fair value and subsequently measured at amortised cost using the effective interest method less impairment losses.
18.2 Analysis of trade and other receivables 2017 2016
Impairment
Net
Gross
Impairment
Net
T rade receivables  current 269.0 0.7 268.3 236.7 1.
1 to 30 days past due 59.0 0.8 58.2 51.3 0.5 50.8 31 to 60 days past due 18.4 0.3 18.
6 1 to 90 days past due 8.2 0.5 7 .7 9.5 0.2 9.3 over 90 days past due 43.2 29.4 13.8 52.8 31.
Trade receivables 397 .8 31.7 366.
Other receivables 40.8 42.8 Prepayments and accrued income 15.3 14.8 T otal trade and other receivables 422.2 394.
Restated as a result of the recording of a provision for which a related asset exists Note 32.
Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7 T rade and Other Receivables continued 18.2 Analysis of trade and other receivables continued All the Groups operating companies have policies and procedures in place to assess the creditworthiness of the customers with whom they do business.
Where objective evidence exists that a trade receivable balance may be impaired provision is made for the difference between its carrying amount and the present value of the estimated cash that will be recovered.
Evidence of impairment may include such factors as the customer being in breach of contract or entering bankruptcy or nancial reorganisation proceedings.
Impairment provisions are assessed on an individual customer basis for all signi cant outstanding balances and collectively for all remaining balances based upon historical loss experience.
Historical experience has shown that the Groups trade receivable provisions are maintained at levels that are suf cient to absorb actual bad debt writeoffs without being excessive.
The Group considers the credit quality of  nancial assets that are neither past due nor impaired as good.
18.3 Movements on impairment provisions As at 1 January 33.
Charge for the year 3.7 6.6 Receivables written off during the year as uncollectable 4.8 4.4 Exchange adjustments 0.3 3.8 As at 31 December 31.7 33.
The charge for the year shown in the table above is recorded within administration selling and distribution costs in the Group Income Statement.
Inventories
19.1 Accounting policy Inventories are stated at the lower of cost using the  rst in  rst out method and net realisable value.
Cost comprises expenditure incurred in purchasing or manufacturing inventories together with all other costs directly incurred in bringing the inventory to its present location and condition and where appropriate attributable production overheads based on normal activity levels.
Net realisable value represents the estimated selling price less all estimated costs of completion and costs to be incurred in marketing selling and distribution.
The amount of any writedown of inventories to net realisable value is recognised as an expense in the year in which the writedown occurs.
19.2 Analysis of inventories Raw materials 80.2 75.
Work inprogress 20.2 18.7 Finished goods 122.4 11 3.
T otal inventories 222.8 207 .7 The cost of inventories recognised as an expense and included in manufacturing costs of continuing operations in the Group Income Statement during the year was 609.6m 2016 499.3m.
The net inventories of 222.8m include a provision for obsolete stock of 13.9m 2016 14.4m and inventory writedowns from cost to net realisable value of 1.7m 2016 2.4m.
Notes to the Group Financial Statements continued 15 7 Financial Statements Derivative Financial Instruments 20.1 Accounting policy The Group uses derivative  nancial instruments derivatives in the form of forward foreign currency contracts and interest rate swaps to manage the effects of its exposure to foreign exchange risk and interest rate risk.
The way in which derivatives are used to manage the Groups  nancial risk is detailed in Note 27 .
Derivatives are measured at fair value.
The fair value of forward foreign currency contracts is calculated using market prices at the balance sheet date.
The fair value of an interest rate swap is the estimated amount that the Group would receive or pay to terminate the swap at the balance sheet date taking into account current interest rates and the creditworthiness of the swap counterparty.
The method of recognising the gain or loss on remeasurement to fair value depends upon whether the derivative is designated as a hedging instrument for hedge accounting purposes and if so the nature of the item being hedged.
Strict conditions have to be satis ed in order to qualify for hedge accounting including a determination both at inception of the hedge and on an ongoing basis that the hedge is expected to be highly effective in achieving offsetting changes in fair values or cash  ows attributable to the hedged risk.
The change in fair value of a derivative that is not designated as a hedging instrument for hedge accounting purposes is recognised immediately in the Group Income Statement.
No derivatives are held for speculative purposes.
Net investment hedges The effective part of any gain or loss on a derivative that is designated as a hedge of a net investment in a foreign operation is recognised in other comprehensive income and presented in the translation reserve in equity and is subsequently recognised in the Group Income Statement as part of the pro t or loss on disposal of the net investment.
The ineffective portion of the gain or loss is recognised immediately within trading pro t in the Group Income Statement.
20.2 Analysis of derivative  nancial instruments 2017 2016
Liabilities
Assets
Liabilities
Derivatives not designated for hedge accounting purposes 0.3  0.9 Total derivative  nancial instruments 0.3  0.9 All of the fair values shown in the table above are classi ed under IFRS 13 as Level 2 measurements which have been calculated using quoted prices from active markets where similar contracts are traded and the quotes re ect actual transactions in similar instruments.
All of the derivative assets and liabilities reported in the table above will mature within a year of the balance sheet date.
Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7 Acquisition of Subsidiaries and Joint Ventures Net of Cash Acquired The Group did not acquire any material interests in any companies during the year ended 31 December 2017 .
Prior Year Acquisition On 1 December 2016 the Group acquired a 100% ownership interest in Mastercodi Industrial Ltda the mould and tundish ux business of Carboox for total consideration of 8.0m of which 0.7m was deferred.
The fair value of the net assets acquired was 4.9m and included identi ed intangible assets relating to customer relationships and trade names of 3.8m.
The transaction resulted in the recognition of 3.
1m of goodwill attributable to the synergies which are expected from combining the business with the operations of the Group.
During 2017 the fair values of the acquired assets and liabilities were  nalised and resulted in a 0.3m adjustment to trade and other receivables.
The  nal fair value of net assets acquired was 5.2m and the total goodwill recognised was 3.4m.
Discontinued Operations Discontinued operations income during 2017 of 1.7m related to a release of provisions no longer required.
Discontinued operations income during 2016 of 10.2m comprised a 9.0m tax credit relating to the release of a provision for possible China taxes Note 10.2 and a 1.2m release of provisions no longer required.
1 Results of discontinued operations Other income 1.7 10.2 Pro t before tax  attributable to owners of the parent 1.7 10.2 Earnings per share  pence Basic 0.7 3.8 Diluted 0.6 3.7 22.2 Cash  ows from discontinued operations Net cash out ow from operating activities 0.7 Net cash out ow for the year 0.7 Issued Share Capital 23.1 Accounting policy Equity instruments issued by the Company are recorded as the proceeds received net of direct issue costs.
23.2 Analysis of issued share capital The issued and fully paid ordinary share capital of the Company as at 31 December 2017 was 278.5 million shares of 10 pence each 2016 278.5 million shares of 10 pence each.
Further information relating to the Companys share capital is given in Note 8 attached to the Companys  nancial statements.
Notes to the Group Financial Statements continued 15 9 Financial Statements Retained Earnings
Share option reserve
Total retained earnings As at 1 January 2016 38.0 3.6 2380.9 2346.5 Pro t for the year   56.9 56.9 Remeasurement of de ned bene t liabilitiesassets   9.5 9.5 Recognition of sharebased payments  1.7  1.7 Release of share option reserve on exercised and lapsed options 2.9 2.4 0.5 Income tax on items recognised in other comprehensive income   0.7 0.7 Dividends paid Note 26   43.9 43.9 As at 1 January 201 7 35.
1  2.9 2402.2 2370.0 Pro t for the year   38.0 38.0 Remeasurement of de ned bene t liabilitiesassets  8.4 8.4 Recognition of sharebased payments  2.6  2.6 Release of share option reserve on exercised and lapsed options 0.9 0.9 Income tax on items recognised in other comprehensive income  3.1 3.1 Dividends paid Note 26   45.6 45.6 As at 31 December 201 7 34.2 4.6 2399.9 2370.3 Other Reserves
Translation reserve Total other reserves As at 1 January 2016 1499 .3 2.6 1501.9 Exchange differences on translation of the net assets of foreign operations  202.
Exchange translation differences arising on net investment hedges  41.6 41.6 As at 1 January 201 7 1499 .3 157 .9 1341.4 Exchange differences on translation of the net assets of foreign operations  37 .8 37 .8 Exchange translation differences arising on net investment hedges 9.8 9.8 As at 31 December 201 7 1499.3 129.9 1369.4 Within other reserves as at 31 December 2017 is 1499.0m 2016 1499.0m arising from the demerger of Cookson Group plc being the excess of the Vesuvius plc share capital of 1777 .9m over the total share capital and share premium of Cookson Group plc as at 14 December 2012 of 278.9m.
The translation reserve in the table above comprises all foreign exchange differences attributable to the owners of the parent.
These exchange differences arise from the translation of the  nancial statements of foreign operations and from the translation of  nancial instruments that hedge the Groups net investment in foreign operations.
In addition to foreign exchange differences attributable to the owners of the parent the Group Statement of Comprehensive Income includes foreign exchange differences attributable to noncontrolling interests.
Notes to the Group Financial Statements continued Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7
A  nal dividend for the year ended 31 December 2016 of 30.8m 2015 30.0m equivalent to 1 1.40 pence 2015 1 1. of 14.8m 2016 13.9m equivalent to 5.50 pence 2016 5.
15 pence per ordinary share was paid in September 2017 September 2016.
A proposed  nal dividend for the year ended 31 December 2017 of 33.8m equivalent to 12.5 pence per ordinary share is subject to approval by shareholders at the Companys Annual General Meeting and has not been included as a liability in these  nancial statements.
If approved by shareholders the dividend will be paid on 25 May 2018 to ordinary shareholders on the register at 13 April 2018.
Financial Risk Management
27.1 Accounting policy a Nonderivative  nancial instruments Loans and borrowings are initially recognised at fair value plus directly attributable transaction costs.
After initial recognition they are measured at amortised cost using the effective interest method.
The individual  nancial statements of each Group entity are prepared in their functional currency which is the currency of the primary economic environment in which that entity operates.
For the purpose of the Consolidated Financial Statements the results and  nancial position of each entity are translated into pound sterling which is the presentational currency of the Group.
Reporting foreign currency transactions in functional currency T ransactions in currencies other than the entitys functional currency foreign currencies are initially recorded at the rates of exchange prevailing on the dates of the transactions.
At each subsequent balance sheet date Foreign currency monetary items are retranslated at the rates prevailing at the balance sheet date.
Exchange differences arising on the settlement or retranslation of monetary items are recognised in the Group Income Statement ii Nonmonetary items measured at historical cost in a foreign currency are not retranslated T ranslation from functional currency to presentational currency When the functional currency of a Group entity is different from the Groups presentational currency pound sterling its results and  nancial position are translated into the presentational currency as follows Assets and liabilities are translated using exchange rates prevailing at the balance sheet date ii Income and expense items are translated at average exchange rates for the year except where the use of such average rates does not approximate the exchange rate at the date of a speci c transaction in which case the transaction rate is used iii All resulting exchange differences are recognised in other comprehensive income and presented in the translation reserve in equity and are reclassi ed to pro t or loss in the period in which the foreign operation is disposed of Net investment in foreign operations Exchange differences arising on a monetary item that forms part of a reporting entitys net investment in a foreign operation are initially recognised in other comprehensive income and presented in the translation reserve in equity and reclassi ed to pro t or loss on disposal of the net investment.
27 .2 Financial risk factors The Groups T reasury department acting in accordance with policies approved by the Board is principally responsible for managing the  nancial risks faced by the Group.
The Groups activities expose it to a variety of  nancial risks the most signi cant of which are market risk and liquidity risk.
Market risk is the risk that either the fair values or the cash  ows of the Groups  nancial instruments may  uctuate because of changes in market prices.
The Group is principally exposed to market risk through  uctuations in exchange rates currency risk and interest rates interest rate risk.
Financial Statements Currency risk The Group is exposed to currency risk on its borrowings and  nancial assets being cash and shortterm deposits that are denominated in currencies other than pound sterling.
The Groups general policy is proportionally to match the currency pro le of its core borrowings with the currency pro le of its earnings and net assets.
This is achieved where necessary by the use of forward foreign exchange contracts FX swaps.
The currency pro le of the Groups borrowings and  nancial assets re ecting the effect of the FX swaps is shown in the table below.
2017 2016
FX swaps
Borrowings after FX swaps
Net debt
FX swaps
Borrowings after FX swaps
Net debt Chinese renminbi    34.5 34.5    22.
Other 3.
Capitalised arrangement fees 2.
The overdrawn sterling balance of 4.5m above is included in the cash pooling arrangement s and offset by other currency balances in the pool.
Based upon the currency pro le shown in the table above while not impacting reported pro t the change in net debt arising from a 10% strengthening of sterling would increase reported equity by 13.0m 2016 16.5m and a corresponding 10% weakening of sterling would reduce equity by 15.9m 2016 20.2m.
The tables below show the net unhedged monetary assets and liabilities of Group companies that are not denominated in their functional currency and which could give rise to exchange gains and losses in the Group Income Statement.
Net unhedged monetary assetsliabilities
US dollar
Renminbi
Other
Total
Functional currency Sterling 2.5 5.3 0.1 6.1 1.6 United States dollar  0.5 2.6 2.1 Euro 0.5 7.3 6.8 Chinese renminbi 0.7 15.0 0.4  0.
As at 31 December 201 7 1.9 34.4 5.
Net unhedged monetary assetsliabilities
US dollar
Renminbi
Other
Total
Functional currency Sterling  0.9 1.0 0.
United States dollar   1 3.5  3.6 9 .9 Euro 0.2 3.2  3.4 Chinese renminbi 0.7 5.4 0.5  0.
As at 31 December 2016 1.4 14.7 16.2 1.4 15.3 46.2 Notes to the Group Financial Statements continued Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7
Financial Risk Management continued
27 .2 Financial risk factors continued a Market risk continued Interest rate risk The Groups interest rate risk principally arises in relation to its borrowings.
Where borrowings are held at  oating rates of interest  uctuations in interest rates expose the Group to variability in the cash  ows associated with its interest payments and where borrowings are held at  xed rates of interest  uctuations in interest rates expose the Group to changes in the fair value of its borrowings.
The Groups policy is to maintain a mix of  xed and  oating rate borrowings within certain parameters agreed from time to time by the Board in order to optimise interest cost and reduce volatility in reported earnings.
As at 31 December 2017  the Group had 200.0m and 130.0m 26 1.3m in total of US Private Placement Loan Notes USPP outstanding which carry a  xed rate of interest representing twothirds of the Groups total borrowings outstanding at that date.
The interest rate pro le of the Groups borrowings and net debt is detailed in the tables below.
Financial liabilities gross borrowings
Net debt
Floating rate
Sterling  39.7 39.7 4.5 44.2 United States dollar 148.0 1 1.9 159 .9 1 4.7 145.2 Chinese renminbi    34.5 34.5 Capitalised arrangement fees 2.
Financial liabilities gross borrowings
Net debt
Floating rate
Sterling  32.5 32.5 9 .2 23.4 United States dollar 251.3 50.3 301.6 40.7 260.9 Chinese renminbi    22.
Other  5.2 5.2 49 .
Capitalised arrangement fees 1.7  1.7  1.7 As at 31 December 2016 275.2 189 .5 464.7 144.4 320.3 The  oating rate  nancial liabilities shown in the tables above bear interest at the interbank offered rate of the appropriate currency plus a margin.
The  xed rate  nancial liabilities of 26 1.3m 2016 275.2m have a weighted average interest rate of 3.8% 2016 4.6% and a weighted average period for which the rate is  xed of 6.9 years 2016 4.2 years.
The  nancial assets attract  oating rate interest at the interbank offered rate of the appropriate currency less a margin.
Based upon the interest rate pro le of the Groups  nancial assets and liabilities shown in the tables above a 1% increase in market interest rates would increase both the net  nance costs charged in the Group Income Statement and the net interest paid in the Group Statement of Cash Flows by 0.
1m 2016 0.5m and a 1% reduction in market interest rates would decrease both the net  nance costs charged in the Group Income Statement and the net interest paid in the Group Statement of Cash Flows by 0.
1m 2016 0.5m.
Similarly  a 1% increase in market interest rates would result in a decrease of 1 5.9m 2016 10.7m in the fair value of the Groups net debt and a 1% decrease in market interest rates would result in an increase of 17 .2m 2016 1 1.4m in the fair value of the Groups net debt.
Financial Statements b Liquidity risk Liquidity risk is the risk that the Group might have dif culties in meeting its  nancial obligations.
The Group manages this risk by ensuring that it maintains suf cient levels of committed borrowing facilities and cash and cash equivalents to ensure that it can meet its operational cash  ow requirements and any maturing  nancial liabilities whilst at all times operating within its nancial covenants.
The level of operational headroom provided by the Groups committed borrowing facilities is reviewed at least annually as part of the Groups threeyear planning process.
Where this process indicates a need for additional  nance this is normally addressed 12 to 18 months in advance by means of either additional committed bank facilities or raising nance in the capital markets.
In December 2017 the US dollar portion of the US Private Placement USPP debt of 1 10m matured.
This debt was replaced with a Eurodenominated USPP comprising two 50m tranches.
These were issued with maturity dates of 2027 and 2029 respectively.
As at 31 December 2017  the Group had committed borrowing facilities of 563.4m 2016 576.9m of which 153.7m 2016 158.3m were undrawn.
These undrawn facilities are due to expire in June 2022.
The Groups borrowing requirements are met by USPP and a multicurrency committed syndicated bank facility of 300.0m 2016 300.0m.
The USPP facility was fully drawn as at 31 December 2017 and amounted to 263.4m 200.0m and 130.0m of which 140.0m is repayable in 2020 15.0m in 2021 30.0m in 2023 15.0m in 2025 50.0m in 2027  30.0m in 2028 and 50.0m in 2029 .
During 2017 an option was exercised to extend the maturity date of 300m syndicated bank facility from June 2020 to June 2022.
The maturity analysis of the Groups gross borrowings is shown in the tables below.
Noncurrent Current Total Loans and overdrafts 409.7 329 .4 24.6 132.7 434.3 462.
Obligations under  nance leases 2.4 2.6 1.6 1.7 4.0 4.3 Capitalised arrangement fees 1.6 1.2 0.5 0.5 2.
T otal interestbearing borrowings 410.5 330.8 25.7 133.
Interestbearing borrowings repayable On demand or within one year 22.4 134.4 In the second year 1.4 1.2 In the third year 252.8 0.9 In the fourth year 13.4 255.7 In the  fth year 1.8 12.8 After  ve years 146.5 61 .4 Capitalised arrangement fees 2.
T otal interestbearing borrowings 436.2 464.7 Capitalised arrangement fees shown in the tables above which have been recognised as a reduction in borrowings in the nancial statements amounted to 2.
1m as at 31 December 2017 31 December 2016 1.7m of which 1.0m 2016 0.7m related to the USPP and 1.
1m 2016 1.0m related to the syndicated bank facility.
Notes to the Group Financial Statements continued Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7
Financial Risk Management continued
27.3 Capital management The Company considers its capital to be equal to the sum of its total equity and net debt.
It monitors its capital using a number of KPIs including free cash  ow average working capital to sales ratios net debt to EBITDA ratios and RONA Note 4.
The Groups objectives when managing its capital are T o ensure that the Group and all of its businesses are able to operate as going concerns and ensure that the Group operates within the  nancial covenants contained within its debt facilities T o have available the necessary  nancial resources to allow the Group to invest in areas that may deliver acceptable future returns to investors T o maintain suf cient  nancial resources to mitigate against risks and unforeseen events T o maximise shareholder value through maintaining an appropriate balance between the Groups equity and net debt The Group operated within the requirements of its debt covenants throughout the year and has suf cient liquidity headroom within its committed debt facilities.
Details of the Groups covenant compliance and committed debt facilities can be found in the Strategic Report on page 29.
27 .4 Cash pooling arrangements The Group enters into notional cash pooling arrangements as part of its ongoing T reasury management activities.
Certain cash pooling arrangements meet the criteria for offsetting as clari ed in amendments to IAS 32 Financial Instruments as regards a legally enforceable right of setoff both in the ordinary course of business and in the event of default.
The following tables set out the amounts of recognised  nancial assets and liabilities shown as cash and cash borrowings and those amounts which are subject to these agreements.
Gross amounts of recognised nancial assets liabilities Gross amounts of recognised nancial assets liabilities offset in the statement of nancial position Net amounts of nancial assets liabilities presented in the statement of nancial position Related amounts of  nancial assets liabilities not offset in the statements of  nancial position
Financial assetsliabilities Cash deposits 172.9  1 1.0 1 61.9  9 .5 1 52.4 Cash borrowings 32.9 1 1.0 21.9 9 .5 1 2.4 As at 31 December 201 7 140.0  140.0  140.0 Financial assetsliabilities Cash deposits 160.8 16.4 144.4 30.9 1 1 3.5 Cash borrowings 59 .8 16.4 43.4 30.9 1 2.5 As at 31 December 2016 101.0  101.0  101.0 Employee Bene ts 28.1 Accounting policy The net surplus or net liability recognised in the Group Balance Sheet for the Groups de ned bene t plans is the present value of the de ned bene t obligation at the balance sheet date less the fair value of the plan assets.
The de ned bene t obligation is calculated by independent actuaries using the projected unit credit method and by discounting the estimated future cash  ows using interest rates on highquality corporate bonds that have terms to maturity approximating the terms of the related pension liability.
Any asset recognised in respect of a surplus arising from this calculation is limited to the asset ceiling where this is the present value of any economic bene ts available in the form of refunds or reductions in future contributions in respect of the plans.
The expense for the Groups de ned bene t plans is recognised in the Group Income Statement as shown in Note 28.8.
Actuarial gains and losses arising on the assets and liabilities of the plans are reported within the Group Statement of Comprehensive Income and gains and losses arising on settlements and curtailments are recognised in the Group Income Statement in the same line as the item that gave rise to the settlement or curtailment or if material separately reported as a component of operating pro t.
Financial Statements 28.2 Group postretirement plans The Group operates a number of pension plans around the world both of the de ned bene t and de ned contribution type and accounts for them in accordance with IAS 19.
The Groups principal de ned bene t pension plans are in the UK and the US the bene ts of which are based upon the  nal pensionable salaries of plan members.
The assets of these plans are held separately from the Group in trusteeadministered funds.
The trustees are required to act in the best interests of the plans bene ciaries.
The principal risks faced by these plans comprise i the risk that the value of the plan assets is not suf cient to meet all plan liabilities as they fall due ii the risk that plan bene ciaries live longer than envisaged causing liabilities to exceed the available plan assets and iii the risk that the marketbased factors used to value plan liabilities and assets change materially adversely to increase plan liabilities over the value of available plan assets.
The Group also has de ned bene t pension plans in other territories but with the exception of those in Germany these are not individually material in relation to the Group as a whole.
The Groups main de ned bene t pension plan in the UK the UK Plan is closed to new members and to future bene t accrual.
The existing plan was established under a trust deed and is subject to the Pensions Act 2004 and guidance issued by the UK Pensions Regulator.
A full actuarial valuation of the UK Plan is carried out every three years by an independent actuary for the UK Plan T rustee in line with the requirements of the Pensions Act 2004 and the last full valuation was carried out as at 31 December 2015.
At that date the market value of plan assets was 536.7m and this represented a funding level of 102% of the accrued plan bene ts at the time of 526.4m.
Calculated on a buyout basis using an estimation of the cost of buying out the UK Plan bene ts with an insurance company the liabilities at that date were 687 .5m representing a funding level of 78%.
There is a longterm schemespeci c funding standard in Part 3 of the Pensions Act 2004.
In terms of Part 3 the UK plan is subject to a requirement the statutory funding objective that it must have suf cient and appropriate assets to cover its technical provisions.
Such technical provisions are determined as part of the triennial valuation.
Under the rules of the UK Plan the T rustees after consultation with the company have the power to set the funding contributions taking into account the results of the triennial valuation and the Pension Act 2004 legislation.
Notwithstanding the latest funding valuation surplus the Company agreed to make voluntary contributions of 2.0m in 2017 .
Thereafter the Company will fund the administration cost relating to the management of the UK Plan.
The value of the UK Plan liabilities as at 31 December 2017 decreased to 490.8m 2016 527 .4m.
The decrease in the liabilities was driven mainly by bene ts paid from the scheme of 46.8m 2016 28.
1m in line with the trust deed and relevant legislation requirements.
Correspondingly the UK Plan assets decreased to 580.3m 2016 601.4m as assets were liquidated to fund the bene ts paid resulting in decreases in the values of the annuity insurance contract of 13.5m and the xed income holdings of 33.
1m.
Proposed amendments to IFRIC 14 The Limit on a De ned Bene t Asset Minimum Funding Requirements and their interaction address how the powers of other parties such as the trustees of the plan affect an entitys right of refund of a surplus from the plan.
The Group has assessed the likely impact of the application of the interaction and concluded that it would not impact its ability to continue to recognise a pension surplus.
The Group has a number of de ned bene t pension plans in the US providing retirement bene ts based on  nal salary or a xed bene t.
The Groups principal US de ned bene t pension plans are closed to new members and also to future bene t accrual for existing members.
Actuarial valuations of the US de ned bene t pension plans are carried out every year and the last full valuation was carried out as at 31 December 2016.
At that date the market value of the plan assets was 49.2m representing a funding level of 66.0% of funded accrued plan bene ts at that date using the projected unit method of valuation of 74.3m.
Funding levels for the Groups US de ned bene t pension plans are based upon annual valuations carried out by independent quali ed actuaries and are governed by US Government regulations.
The value of US plan liabilities decreased to 82.0m 2016 86.8m in 2017  which was mainly attributable to bene ts paid of 4.0m in line with scheme rules and exchange gains of 7 .6m due to US dollar weakness.
This signi cant decrease was partially offset by an interest accrual of 3.
1m and a loss of 3.8m due to the lower discount rate.
The loss arising from changes in  nancial assumptions is solely attributable to the decrease in the discount rates to 3.4% 2016 3.8%.
The Groups US de ned bene t pension plans are subject to the minimum contribution requirements of Internal Revenue Code Sections 412 and 430.
Contributions are determined by trustees in consultation with the Company based on the annual valuations which are submitted to the Internal Revenue Service.
For the plan year beginning 1 January 2017  the minimum required contribution was nil as signi cant company contributions of 6m were made in 2016.
However under these funding laws and based on the plan de cit minimum contributions in the period 20182020 are likely to be required and are expected to be in the 3m to 4m range.
Voluntary contributions of 4m were made during 2017 .
Notes to the Group Financial Statements continued Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7 Employee Bene ts continued 28.2 Group postretirement plans continued c De ned bene t pension plans  Germany The Group has a number of de ned bene t pension arrangements in Germany which are unfunded as is common practice in that country.
The main plan was closed to new entrants on 31 December 2016 and replaced by a de ned contribution plan for new joiners.
The net liability of the German plans at 31 December 2017 was 49.4m 2016 45.3m.
The increase was driven by the decrease in discount rate which resulted in an increase in the liability of 1.6m 2016 5.8m increased current service costs of 1.5m 2016 1.2m and exchange losses incurred of 1.9m 2016 5.8m due to the strengthening of the euro against the pound.
The Group has a number of de ned bene t pension arrangements across the rest of the world the majority of which are located in Belgium.
The net liability of the ROW plans at 31 December 2017 was 17 .9m 2016 16.2m.
The increase was mainly attributable to exchange losses of 0.5m 2016 2.
1m due to the weakening of the pound postBrexit and signi cant services costs of 2.0m 2016 2.3m recognised in respect of the Belgian plans.
These losses are offset by the contribution of 1.5m that was paid out during 2017  thereby decreasing the liability.
The total expense for the Groups de ned contribution plans in the Group Income Statement amounted to 1 2.6m 2016 10.8m continuing operations and represents the contributions payable for the year by the Group to the plans.
Due to collective agreements Vesuvius in the US participates together with other enterprises in unionrun multiemployer pension plans for temporary workers hired on sites.
Some of these plans are underfunded and all participating employers are ultimately liable for any de cit.
If a participating employer stops contributing to a plan it is required to make a withdrawal payment to the plan to cover its share of the total de cit in the plan.
No reliable basis exists for allocation of the plans obligations and plan assets to individual employer participants.
De cits in the plans may necessitate increased contributions in the future but the expectation is that this will remain relatively consistent based upon historical trends.
These are currently accounted for as de ned contribution plans.
In 2017 Vesuvius contributed 1.4m 2016 1.2m to these plans.
28.3 Postretirement liability valuation The main assumptions used in calculating the costs and obligations of the Groups de ned bene t pension plans as detailed below are set by the Directors after consultation with independent professionally quali ed actuaries and include those used to determine regular service costs and the  nancing elements related to the plans assets and liabilities.
It is the Directors responsibility to set the assumptions used in determining the key elements of the costs of meeting such future obligations.
Whilst the Directors believe that the assumptions used are appropriate a change in the assumptions used could affect the Groups pro t and  nancial position.
The mortality assumptions used in the actuarial valuations of the Groups UK US and German de ned bene t pension liabilities are summarised in the table below and have been selected to re ect the characteristics and experience of the membership of those plans.
For the UK Plan the assumptions used have been derived from the SelfAdministered Pension Schemes SAPS All table with future longevity improvements in line with the core mortality improvement tables published in 2016 by the Continuous Mortality Investigation CMI with a longterm rate of improvement of 1.25% per annum.
For the Groups US plans the assumptions used have been based on the standard RP2016 fully generational tables with projection scale BB and the MP2017 mortality improvement scale.
The Groups major plans in Germany have been valued using the modi ed Heubeck Richttafeln 2005G mortality tables.
In respect of the life expectancy tables below current pensioners are assumed to be 65 years old while future pensioners are assumed to be 45 years old.
Life expectancy of pension plan members 2017 2016
US years
UK years
Germany years Age to which current pensioners are expected to live  Men 86.3 85.7 84.3 86.5 85.8 84.
Age to which future pensioners are expected to live  Men 87 .7 87 .3 86.9 87 .8 87 .4 86.8 Women 90.4 89.2 90.8 90.7 89.4 90.7 Financial Statements b Other main actuarial valuation assumptions 2017 2016 % p.
US % p.
Germany % p.
UK % p.
US % p.
Germany % p.
Discount rate 2.50 3.40 1.60 2.70 3.80 1.75 Price in ation  using RPI for UK 3.25 2.25 1.80 3.30 2.25 1.70 using CPI for UK 2.15 na na 2.20 na na Rate of increase in pensionable salaries na na 2.55 na na 2.45 Rate of increase to pensions in payment 3.
The discount rate used to determine the liabilities of the UK Plan for IAS 19 accounting purposes is required to be determined by reference to market yields on highquality corporate bonds.
The UK discount rate in the above table is based on the Aon Hewitt AArated corporate bond yield in conjunction with the most recent projected cash  ow data relating to the UK Plan liabilities the US discount rate is based on the Citigroup pension discount curve and the Germany discount rate is based on the yield on the iBoxx over tenyear euro corporates AA index.
The assumptions for UK price in ation are set by reference to the difference between yields on longerterm conventional government bonds and indexlinked bonds except for CPI for which no appropriate bonds exist which is assumed to be 1 points lower 2016 1.
1 points lower than RPIbased in ation.
The following table analyses for the Groups main UK US and Germany pension plans the theoretical estimated impact on plan liabilities and assets resulting from changes to the most signi cant actuarial assumptions used for IAS 19 valuation purposes whilst holding all other assumptions constant.
Following the arrangement of buyin agreements for the UK Plan pensioner liabilities in 2012and the fact that US pensions are not in ation linked the rate of increase in pensionable salaries and of pensions in payment is not signi cant to the valuation of the Groups overall pension liabilities.
As stated above during 2012 the UK Plan entered into pension insurance buyin agreements which eliminate the in ation interest rate investment and longevity risk in respect of the pensioner liabilities covered by the agreements.
The policy and the associated valuation are updated annually.
Please refer to Note 28.7 a for further detail.
In respect of the liabilities so covered which currently represent some 56.5% of the total liabilities of the UK Plan any changes in the valuation assumptions which impact on the value of those liabilities also impact on the associated annuity assets in an equal and opposite way thereby fully mitigating the valuation risk.
This is also re ected in the following table which includes the sensitivity of the groups material de ned bene t obligations and plan assets where applicable to changes in the weighted principal assumptions as follows Assumption Change in assumption UK US Germany
Increasedecrease by 0.
1% impact on plan liabilities Decreaseincrease by 8.2m Decreaseincrease by 1.0m Decreaseincrease by 1.0m impact on plan assets Decreaseincrease by 3.0m na na
Increasedecrease by 0.
1% impact on plan liabilities Increasedecrease by 5.6m na Increasedecrease by 0.3m impact on plan assets Increasedecrease by 2.
1m na na Mortality Increase by one year impact on plan liabilities Increase by 21.4m Increase by 2.9m Increase by 1.8m impact on plan assets Increase by 14.6m na na Notes to the Group Financial Statements continued Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7 Employee Bene ts continued 28.4 De ned bene t obligation The average duration of the obligations to which the liabilities of the Groups principal pension plans relate is 18 years for the UK 19 years for Germany and 1 1.6 years for the US.
De ned bene t pension plans Other post retirement bene t plans
US
Germany
ROW
Total
Total
Present value as at 1 January 201 7 527 .4 86.8 45.3 41.0 700.5 6.9 707 .4 Exchange differences  7 .6 1.9 1.3 4.4 0.
Current service cost  0.5 1.5 3.2 5.2 0.2 5.4 Past service cost    0.
Interest cost 14.0 3.1 0.8 0.7 18.6 0.2 18.8
Remeasurement of liabilities demographic changes 5.4 0.7  0. experience lossesgains  9 .7 0.1 0.1  0.1  9 .6  0.
Bene ts paid 46.8 4.0 1.6 2.4 54.8 1.
Present value as at 31 December 201 7 490.8 82.0 49.4 44.6 666.8 6.5 673.3 De ned bene t pension plans Other post retirement bene t plans
US
Germany
ROW
Total
Total
Present value as at 1 January 2016 464.3 1 1 2.
Exchange differences  1 7 .6 5.8 6.0 29 .4 0.6 30.0 Current service cost  0.5 1.2 3.
Past service cost    0.2 0.2 0.
Interest cost 1 7 .6 4.6 0.9 0.8 23.9 0.2 24.
Settlements   45.
Remeasurement of liabilities demographic changes 1 2.3 1.2   1 3.5  1 3.5 nancial assumptions 76.2 4.4 5.8 0.6 87.0 0.4 87.4 experience lossesgains 9.7 0.4 0.
Present value as at 31 December 2016 527 .4 86.8 45.3 41.0 700.5 6.9 707 .4 Financial Statements 28.5 Fair value of plan assets 2017 2016
US
ROW
Total
UK
US
ROW
Total
Exchange differences  4.5 0.5 4.0  10.8 4.0 14.8 Interest income 16.
Settlements  41.6 1.0 42.6
Remeasurement of assets 5.7 3.8 0.7 10.2 89.7 3.4 0.2 93.3 Contributions from employer 2.0 3.1 2.3 7 .4 2.0 4.4 2.4 8.8 Contributions from members Administration expenses paid 0.8 0.5  1.3 0.9 0.6  1.5 The Groups pension plans in Germany are unfunded as is common practice in that country and accordingly there are no assets associated with these plans.
28.6 Remeasurement of de ned bene t liabilitiesassets total total Remeasurement of liabilities demographic changes 6.0 13.5 nancial assumptions 1 7 .5 87 .4 experience lossesgains 9.7 9 .9 Remeasurement of assets 10.2 93.3 T otal movement 8.4 9.5 The remeasurement of de ned bene t liabilities and assets of 8.4m 2016 9.5m is recognised in the Group Statement of Comprehensive Income.
28.7 Balance sheet recognition The amount recognised in the Group Balance Sheet in respect of the Groups de ned bene t pension plans and other postretirement bene t plans is analysed in the following tables which all relate to continuing operations.
All equity securities and bonds have quoted prices in active markets.
De ned bene t pension plans Other post retirement bene t plans
US
Germany
ROW
Total total Annuity insurance contracts 276.1 17.8 293.9 293.9 Other assets 43.5 1.6 4.0 49.1 49.1 Fair value of plan assets 580.3 49.8 26.7 656.8 656.8 Present value of funded obligations 488.9 70.4  40.0 599 .3  599 .3 Present value of unfunded obligations 1.9 1 1.6 49 .4 4.6 67 .5 6.5 7 4.0 T otal net surplusesliabilities 89.5 32.2 49.4 1 7 .9 10.0 6.5 16.5 Recognised in the Group Balance Sheet as Net surpluses 91.4   1.0 92.4  92.4 Net liabilities 1.9 32.2 49 .4 18.9 102.4 6.5 108.9 T otal net surplusesliabilities 89.5 32.2 49.4 1 7 .9 10.0 6.5 16.5 Notes to the Group Financial Statements continued Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7 Employee Bene ts continued 28.7 Balance sheet recognition continued Based on a detailed assessment performed none of the IFRIC 14 restrictions are applicable and therefore the surplus is recognised.
De ned bene t pension plans Other post retirement bene t plans
US
Germany
ROW
Total total Bonds 216.335.92.0254.2254.2 Annuity insurance contracts 289 .6   16.3 305.9  305.9 Other assets 24.4 3.2  3.9 31.5  31.5 Fair value of plan assets 604.
Present value of funded obligations 525.5 7 4.3  37 .3 637 .
Present value of unfunded obligations 1.9 1 2.5 45.3 3.7 63.4 6.9 70.3 T otal net surplusesliabilities 76.7 37 .7 45.3 16.2 22.5 6.9 29 .4 Recognised in the Group Balance Sheet as Net surpluses 78.6   0.2 78.8  78.8 Net liabilities 1.9 37 .7 45.3 16.4 101.3 6.9 108.2 T otal net surplusesliabilities 76.7 37 .7 45.3 16.2 22.5 6.9 29 .4 a UK Plan asset allocation As at 31 December 2017  of the UK Plans total assets 47 .6% were represented by the annuity insurance contracts covering the UK Plans pension liabilities 1 1.9% were allocated to equities 33.0% to  xed income securities 5.
1% to cash and 2.4% to other assets.
The  xed income asset class of the UK Plan includes a liabilitydriven investment portfolio of  nancial derivative contracts which reduces the risk that the UK Plans assets would fall materially relative to the value of its economic liabilities.
The UK Plan T rustee has entered into a pension insurance buyin agreement with the Pension Insurance Corporation PIC whereby the UK Plan T rustee has paid insurance premiums to PIC to insure a signi cant portion of the UK Plans liabilities.
Under this arrangement the value of the PIC insurance contract matches the value of the liabilities because the in ation interest rate investment and longevity risk for Vesuvius in respect of these liabilities are eliminated.
As at 31 December 201 7 the IAS 19 valuation of the PIC insurance contract value associated with the boughtin liabilities was 276.
1m 2016 289.6m.
The buyin agreement ensures that the UK pension plan obligations in respect of all its retired members and their approved dependants are insured.
The policy and the associated valuation are updated annually to re ect retirements and mortality.
In the current year the agreement based on speci c membership data covers 56.5% of UK pension plan obligations removing all  nancial risks associated with this tranche of the liability.
In 2018 the Group is expected to make contributions into its de ned bene t pension and other postretirement bene ts plans of around 5.3m with speci c contributions of approximately 3.0m and 0.8m anticipated for the US Plan and UK Plan respectively.
Financial Statements 28.8 Income statement recognition The expense recognised in the Group Income Statement in respect of the Groups de ned bene t retirement plans and other postretirement bene t plans is shown below.
2017 2016 De ned bene t pension plans
Total
De ned bene t pension plans
Total
Current service cost 5.2 0.2 5.4 4.8 0.
Past service cost 0.
Settlements   5.2  5.2 Administration expenses 1.3  1.3 1.5  1.5 Net interest cost 0.4 0.2 0.6 1.
T otal net charge 7 .0 0.4 7 .4 2.4 0.4 2.8 No settlement gain arose in 2017 in contrast to the 5.2m recognised in 2016 in relation to the buyout of members of the US Plan and German members moving their existing plans into a new de ned contribution plan.
These settlements reduced the Groups de ned bene t obligations by 50.
1m effected by utilising 42.6m of pension assets and additionally in respect of the unfunded German plan 2.3m of the Groups cash.
The total net charge of 7 .4m 2016 2.8m recognised in the Group Income Statement in respect of the Groups de ned bene t pension plans and other postretirement bene ts plans is recognised in the following table In arriving at trading pro t within other manufacturing costs 2.4 2.0 within administration selling and distribution costs 4.4 4.4 In arriving at pro t before tax  within restructuring charges  0.3 gain on employee bene t plan  5.2 within net  nance costs 0.6 1.3 T otal net charge 7.4 2.8 Sharebased Payments 29.1 Accounting policy The Group operates equitysettled sharebased payment arrangement for its employees.
Equitysettled sharebased payments are measured at fair value at the date of grant.
The fair value determined at the grant date takes account of the effect of marketbased conditions such as total shareholder return target upon which vesting for some awards is conditional and is expensed on a straightline basis over the vesting period with a corresponding increase in equity.
The cumulative expense recognised is adjusted for the best estimate of the shares that will eventually vest and for the effect of other nonmarketbased conditions such as growth in headline earnings per share which are not included in the fair value determined at the date of grant.
For grants with marketbased conditions attached to them fair value is measured using a form of stochastic option pricing model.
For all other grants fair value is measured using the BlackScholes option pricing model.
29.2 Income statement recognition The total expense recognised in the Group Income Statement is shown below.
Long T erm Incentive Plan 1.8 1.0 Other plans 0.8 0.7 Total expense 2.6 1.7 The Group operates a number of different sharebased payment plans the most signi cant of which is the Long T erm Incentive Plan L TIP details of which can be found on pages 1 1 1 to 1 13 of the Directors Remuneration Report.
The Groups other sharebased payment plans are not considered signi cant in the context of the Groups results or  nancial position.
Notes to the Group Financial Statements continued Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7 Sharebased Payments continued 29.3 Details of outstanding options Outstanding awards As at 1 Jan 2017 no.
Granted no.
Exercised no.
Forfeited lapsed no.
As at 31 Dec 2017 no.
LTIP 2398 185 825653  943745 2280093 Weighted average exercise price nil nil nil nil nil Other plans 219479 1 18722 180 104 5660 152437 Weighted average exercise price nil nil nil nil nil For the options exercised during 2017  the share price at the date of exercise ranged from 402 pence to 592 pence.
Outstanding awards As at 1 Jan 2016 no.
Granted no.
Exercised no.
Forfeited lapsed no.
As at 31 Dec 2016 no.
L TIP 1585838 1211928  399581  2398 185 Weighted average exercise price nil nil nil nil nil Other plans 7 43666 86867 607  1 39 3915 219 479 Weighted average exercise price nil nil nil nil nil For the options exercised during 2016 the share price at the date of exercise ranged from 287 pence to 347 pence.
Details of market performance conditions are included in the Directors Remuneration Report.
2017 2016
31 Dec 2017 no.
Weighted average outstanding contractual life of awards years Range of exercise prices pence
31 Dec 2016 no.
Weighted average outstanding contractual life of awards years Range of exercise prices pence LTIP 4.8 5.2 Weighted average exercise price na na Other plans 1.0 0.4 Weighted average exercise price na na 29.4 Options granted under the L TIP during the year 2017 March Grant 2017 Sept Grant 2016
TSR element
TSR element
TSR element Fair value of options granted per share 524.5p 401.0p 578.0p 467.0p 292.0p 1 1 2.0p Share price on date of grant per share 524.5p 524.5p 578.0p 578.0p 292.0p 292.0p Expected volatility na 30.9% na 33.00% na 26.0% Risk free interest rate na 0.
17% na 0.
16% na 0.4% Exercise price per share nil nil nil nil nil nil Expected term years 33 33 44 Expected dividend yield nil nil nil nil nil nil The fair value of share options with nonmarket performance conditions has been calculated using the BlackScholes option pricing model.
The fair value of options with marketrelated performance conditions has been measured using the Monte Carlo model.
Expected volatility was determined by calculating the historical volatility of the Groups share price over the 2.8 years 2016 2.75 years prior to the grant date.
The riskfree rate of return was assumed to be the yield to maturity on a UK xed gilt with the term to maturity equal to the expected life of the option.
At the discretion of the Remuneration Committee award holders receive the value of dividends that would have been paid on their vested shares in the period between grant and vesting.
Accordingly there is no discount to the valuation for dividends foregone during the vesting period.
Financial Statements T rade and Other Payables 30.1 Accounting policy T rade and other payables are initially recognised at fair value and subsequently measured at amortised cost using the effective interest method.
30.2 Analysis of trade and other payables
Accruals and other payables 14.4 12.6 Deferred purchase and contingent consideration 2.9 3.9 T otal noncurrent other payables 17 .3 16.5
Trade payables 185.9 139.
Other taxes and social security 32.6 32.3 Deferred purchase and contingent consideration 0.8 0.8 Accruals and other payables 73.3 67 .5 T otal current trade and other payables 292.6 239.7 Restated as a result of a change in accounting policy Note 10.1.
There is no signi cant difference between the fair value of the Groups trade and other payables balances and the amount at which they are reported in the Group Balance Sheet.
Included within trade payables in the table above is 1.8m 2016 nil subject to a supplier  nancing agreement.
Under the terms of this agreement which the Group entered into as one of a series of measures aimed at improving control over its working capital invoices received by the Group from approved suppliers are assigned to a thirdparty  nance company which assumes legal responsibility for settling the amount owing directly with the supplier.
The Group subsequently settles the amount owing to the  nance company.
There is no cost to the Group from this arrangement.
Leases
31.1 Accounting policy Leases are classi ed as  nance leases whenever the terms of the lease transfer substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership to the lessee.
All other leases are classi ed as operating leases.
Rentals payable under operating leases are charged to the Group Income Statement on a straightline basis over the term of the lease.
Bene ts received and receivable as an incentive to enter into an operating lease are also spread on a straightline basis over the lease term.
31.2 Operating lease commitments The future aggregate minimum lease payments under noncancellable operating leases are payable as follows Not later than one year 8.3 9.0 Later than one year and not later than  ve years 13.4 15.8 Later than  ve years 7.
T otal operating lease commitments 29.6 31.8 The Groups property plant and equipment assets are either purchased outright or held under lease contracts.
Where the terms of the lease transfer substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership of the asset to the Group the asset is capitalised in the Group Balance Sheet and the corresponding liability to the lessor is recognised as a  nance lease obligation.
Where all the risks and rewards of ownership are not transferred to the Group the lease is classi ed as an operating lease and neither the asset nor the corresponding liability to the lessor is recognised in the Group Balance Sheet.
The net book value of the Groups property plant and equipment assets held under  nance lease contracts at 31 December 2017 was 4.6m 2016 4.7m.
The cost incurred by the Group in the year in respect of assets held under operating leases all of which was charged within trading pro t amounted to 18.6m 2016 17 .3m.
Notes to the Group Financial Statements continued Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7
32.1 Accounting policy Provisions are recognised when the Group has a present obligation as a result of a past event and it is probable that the Group will be required to settle that obligation.
Provisions are measured at the Directors best estimate of the expenditure required to settle the obligation at the balance sheet date.
Where the effect of the time value of money is material provisions are discounted using a pretax discount rate that re ects both the current market assessment of the time value of money and the speci c risks associated with the obligation.
Where discounting is used the increase in the provision due to the passage of time is recognised as a  nance cost.
32.2 Analysis of provisions Disposal and closure costs
Other
Total
As at 1 January 201 7  41.
Exchange adjustments 2.6 0.3 0.4 2.7 Charge to Group Income Statement 36.3 11.7 48.0 Unused amounts released to Group Income Statement 1.7   1.7 Adjustment to discount 0.
Cash spend 1.9 27 .3 1 1.9 41.
T ransferred to other balance sheet accounts  5.0  5.0 As at 31 December 201 7 35.0 22.9 6.3 64.2 Restated to more appropriately re ect a provision for which an associated insurance asset exists.
Of the total provision balance as at 31 December 2017 of 64.2m 2016 66.5m 34.4m 2016 39.9m is recognised in the Group Balance Sheet within noncurrent liabilities and 29.8m 2016 26.6m within current liabilities.
The provision for disposal and closure costs includes the Directors current best estimate of the costs to be incurred both in the ful lment of obligations incurred in connection with former Group businesses resulting from either disposal or closure together with those related to the demolition and cleanup of closed sites.
The provision comprises amounts payable in respect of known or probable costs resulting both from legal or other regulatory requirements or from thirdparty claims including claims relating to product liability.
As the settlement of many of the obligations for which provision is made is subject to legal or other regulatory process the timing of the associated cash out ows is subject to some uncertainty but the majority of the amounts provided are expected to be utilised over the next ten years and the underlying estimates of costs are regularly updated to re ect changed circumstances with regard to individual matters.
The opening balance has been restated by 7 .9m to present a provision for which an associated insurance asset exists.
There was no material impact on the 2016 performance statements and no restatement is required.
Where insurance cover exists for any of these known or probable costs a related asset is recognised in the Group Balance Sheet only when its value can be reliably measured by management.
As at 31 December 2017  21.6m 2016 22.8m was recorded in receivables in respect of associated insurance reimbursements of which 20.7m 2016 21.9m is noncurrent.
In assessing the probable costs and realisation certainty of provisions or related assets reasonable assumptions are made.
Changes to the assumptions used could signi cantly alter the Directors assessment of the value timing or certainty of the costs or related amounts.
The provision for restructuring charges includes the costs of all of the Groups recognised initiatives to rationalise its operating activities.
The balance of 22.9m as at 31 December 2017 comprises 2.7m in relation to onerous lease provisions in respect of leases terminating between one and six years and 20.2m in relation to expenditure on restructuring initiatives that have been announced which is expected to be paid out over the next year.
Other provisions comprise amounts payable in respect of known or probable costs resulting both from legal or other regulatory requirements workers compensation and medical claims and from thirdparty claims.
As the settlement of many of the obligations for which provision is made is subject to reasonable assumptions legal or other regulatory process the timing of the associated out ows is subject to some uncertainty but the majority of amounts provided are expected to be utilised over the next  ve years and the underlying estimates of costs are regularly updated to re ect changed circumstances with regard to individual matters.
During 2017 the Group recognised net charges of 1 1.7m 2016 10.2m in the Group Income Statement to provide for various litigation settlements and other claims.
Financial Statements OffBalance Sheet Arrangements In compliance with current reporting requirements certain arrangements entered into by the Group in its normal course of business are not reported in the Group Balance Sheet.
Of such arrangements those considered material by the Directors are future lease payments in relation to assets used by the Group under noncancellable operating leases Note 31 .
Contingent Liabilities Guarantees given by the Group under property leases of operations disposed of amounted to 1.
1m 2016 1.6m.
Details of guarantees given by the Company on behalf of the Group are given in Note 10 to the Company Financial Statements.
Vesuvius has extensive international operations and is subject to various legal and regulatory regimes including those covering taxation and environmental matters.
Several of Vesuvius subsidiaries are parties to legal proceedings certain of which are insured claims arising in the ordinary course of the operations of the company involved and the Directors are aware of a number of issues which are or may be the subject of dispute with tax authorities.
Provisions are made for the expected amounts payable in respect of known or probable costs resulting both from legal or other regulatory requirements and from thirdparty claims.
Certain of Vesuvius subsidiaries are subject to lawsuits predominantly in the US relating to a small number of products containing asbestos manufactured prior to the acquisition of those subsidiaries by Vesuvius.
These suits usually also name many other product manufacturers.
T o date Vesuvius is not aware of there being any liability verdicts against any of these subsidiaries.
A number of lawsuits have been withdrawn dismissed or settled and the amount paid including costs in relation to this litigation has not had a material adverse effect on Vesuvius  nancial position or results of operations.
As the settlement of many of the obligations for which reserve is made is subject to legal or other regulatory process the timing and amount of the associated out ows is subject to some uncertainty see Note 32 for further information.
Investments in Subsidiaries Joint Ventures and Associates 1 Investment in subsidiaries A subsidiary is an entity over which the Group has control.
The Group controls an entity when the Group is exposed to or has rights to variable returns from its involvement with the entity and can affect those returns through its power over the entity.
Subsidiaries are fully consolidated from the date on which control is transferred to the Group.
The subsidiaries  joint ventures and associates of Vesuvius plc and the countries in which they are incorporated are set out below.
With the exception of Vesuvius Holdings Limited whose ordinary share capital was directly held by Vesuvius plc the ordinary capital of the companies listed below was wholly owned by a Vesuvius plc subsidiary as at 31 December 2017 .
Company legal name Registered of ce address Jurisdiction Advent Process Engineering Inc.
333 Prince Charles Drive Welland Ontario L3B 5P4 Canada
Ontario
Avemis SAS Saint Symphorien Sur Coise au 2 Hotel dEntreprises ZI Grange Eglise France
BMI Refractory Services Inc.
600 N 2nd Street Suite 401 Harrisburg PA 17101 1071 United States
Pennsylvania
Brazil 1 Limited 165 Fleet Street London EC4A 2AE England
Cookson
Dominicana SRL Km 7 12 Autopista San Isidro Edi cio Modelo A Zona Franca San Isidro Santo Domingo Oeste Dominican Republic
Republic
Cookson
Investments
Jersey Limited 13 Castle Street St Helier JE4 5UT  Jersey
Cookson Jersey
13 Castle Street St Helier JE4 5UT  Jersey
East Moon
HK Holding Company Limited 36F T ower T wo Times Square 1 Matheson Street Causeway Bay Hong Kong Hong Kong
FloCon
Holding Inc.
CT Corporation 1209 Orange Street The Corporation T rust Company Wilmington DE 19801 United States US Delaware
Systems LLC CT Corporation 208 South LaSalle Street Chicago Cook County Illinois IL 60604 United States US Illinois Foseco FS
1 Midland Way Central Park Barlborough Links Derbyshire S43 4XA England
Foseco GB
165 Fleet Street London EC4A 2AE England
Foseco Jersey
44 Esplanade St Helier JE4 9WG Jersey
Foseco MRL
165 Fleet Street London EC4A 2AE England
Foseco RUL
165 Fleet Street London EC4A 2AE England
Foseco UK
165 Fleet Street London EC4A 2AE England
Foseco Canada
181 Bay Street Suite 1800 T oronto Ontario M5J 2T9 Canada
Ontario
Foseco
Espanola SA 5 Barrio Elizalde Izurza Bizkaia 48213 Spain Spain Notes to the Group Financial Statements continued Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7
Foseco Foundry China Limited Room 819 Shekou Zhaoshang Building Nanshan District Shenzhen China
Foseco
Fundicin Holding Espanola S.
5 Barrio Elizalde Izurza Bizkaia 48213 Spain
Foseco Holding Europe Limited 165 Fleet Street London EC4A 2AE England
Foseco Holding South Africa Pty Limited 12 Bosworth Street Alrode Aberton 1449 South Africa South Africa
Holding BV 165 Fleet Street London EC4A 2AE England
Foseco Holding
Limited
165 Fleet Street London EC4A 2AE
England
Foseco Holding
165 Fleet Street London EC4A 2AE England
Foseco Industrial e Comercial Ltda Km 15 Rodovia Raposo T avares Butanta Cep So Paulo 05577 100 Brazil
Foseco International Holding Thailand
17069 22nd Floor Ocean T ower 1 Ratchadapisek Road Klongtoey Bangkok 101 10 Thailand
Foseco
International
Limited
1 Midland Way Central Park Barlborough Links Derbyshire S43 4XA England
Foseco Japan Ltd 9th Floor Orix Kobe Sannomiya Building 6 1 10 Goko dori Chuoku Kobe Hyogo 6510087  Japan
Foseco Korea
74 Jeongjuro Wonmigu Bucheonsi Gyeonggido 14523 South Korea South Korea Foseco Limited 165 Fleet Street London EC4A 2AE England
Foseco
Metallurgical Inc CT Corporation 1209 Orange Street The Corporation T rust Company Wilmington DE 19801 United States US Delaware
Nederland BV Binnenhavenstraat 20 7553 GJ Hengelo OV
Netherlands
Foseco Overseas
165 Fleet Street London EC4A 2AE England
Foseco Pension Fund T rustee
165 Fleet Street London EC4A 2AE England
Foseco
Philippines Inc Unit 401 4th Floor 8 Antonio Centre Prime St.
Madrigal
Business Park 2 Ayala Alabang Muntinlupa City Philippines
Foseco Portugal Produtos para Fundio Lda Rua 25 de Abril Lote 3 Aveleda  4485010 VCD Vila do Conde Portugal
Foseco Pty
7  Stuart Street Padstow NSW 221 1 Australia
Foseco SAS Le Newton C 7 Mail Barthlmy Thimonnier 77185 Lognes France
Company legal name Registered of ce address Jurisdiction Foseco Steel
China Limited 165 Fleet Street London EC4A 2AE
England
Foseco Steel UK Limited 1 Midland Way Central Park Barlborough Links Derbyshire S43 4XA England
Foseco T echnology
165 Fleet Street London EC4A 2AE England
Foseco
Transnational
Limited
165 Fleet Street London EC4A 2AE
England
Foseco
Vietnam Limited 1 Me Linh Point T ower no 2 Ngo Duc Ke Ben Nghe Ward Dist 1 Ho Chi Minh Vietnam
HGAC
Participaes
Limitada
Street Duque de Caxias 563 Room 2 Centro Barueri SP  06401010 Brazil
ISID Limited Beaver House 23 38 Hythe Bridge Street Oxford OX1 2EP  England
J.
France
Refractories
Company
CT Corporation 1209 Orange Street The Corporation T rust Company Wilmington DE 19801 United States US Delaware John G.
Stein and Company
1 Midland Way Central Park Barlborough Links Derbyshire S43 4XA England
Mainsail Insurance Company Limited Canons Court 22 Victoria Street Hamilton HM 12 Bermuda
Mascinco
Empreendimentos e Participaes
Avenida Brasil 49550  parte Distrito Industrial de Palmares Campo Grande  Cep 23065480 Rio de Janeiro RJ Brazil
Mastercodi
Industrial Ltda Avenida Giovanni Gronchi 5174 sute 1 1 Vila Andrade 05724002 So Paulo State of So Paulo Brazil
Mercajoya S.
Capitn Haya 56  1H 28020 Madrid Spain
Metal Way
Metalurgicos Ltda Estrada Santa Isabel 7655 KM37 Bairro Do Una Itaquaquecetuba So Paulo  SP  CEP 08580 000
Brazil
Micro Jewels
10 Frere Felix De Valois Street Port Louis Mauritius
Minerals
Separation Limited 165 Fleet Street London EC4A 2AE England
New Foseco UK Limited 1 Midland Way Central Park Barlborough Links Derbyshire S43 4XA England
Premier Refractories Belgium S.
17 Rue de Douvrain Ghlin 701 1 Belgium
Process Metrix
6622 Owens Drive Pleasanton CA 94588 United States
California
PT Foseco
25 Jalan Rawagelam Kawasan Industry 2No.5 Pulogadung Jakarta Timur 13930 Indonesia
PT Foseco T rading Indonesia 25 Jalan Rawagelam Kawasan Industry 2No.5 Pulogadung Jakarta Timur 13930 Indonesia
Investments in Subsidiaries Joint Ventures and Associates continued 1 Investment in subsidiaries continued Financial Statements
Realisations
789 LLC CT Corporation 1209 Orange Street The Corporation T rust Company Wilmington DE 19801 United States US Delaware S G Blair and
Limited
1 Midland Way Central Park Barlborough Links Derbyshire S43 4XA England
SERT Metal SAS 3 Avenue de lEurope Parc Les Pivolles DecinesCharpieu 69150 France
SIDERMES Inc.
175 CalixaLavalle Verchres Qubec J0L2R0 Canada
SIDERMES
Latinoamericana
CA
Zona Industrial San Vicente Av.
Anton Phillips Grupo Industrial San Vicente Local 4 Maracay
Venezuela
SIDERMES
S.
Urquiza 919 Piso 2 Rosario Santa Fe Argentina CP 2000
SIDERMES
S.
Via Mantova 10 20835 Muggi MB Italy
SIDERMES
SENSORES
TERMICOS DO BRASIL L TDA Estrada Municipal PDD 436 SN Prdio C Bairro da Boa Vista Municipio de Piedade Estado de So Paulo Brazil
SIR
Feuerfestprodukte
GmbH
Siegener Strasse 152 Kreuztal D57223
Germany
SOLED SAS Parc dActivits Belle Fontaine 57780 Rosselange France
Tamworth
UK Limited 165 Fleet Street London EC4A 2AE England
Thomas Marshall Loxley Limited Beaver House 23 38 Hythe Bridge Street Oxford OX1 2EP  England
Unicorn
Industries Limited 165 Fleet Street London EC4A 2AE England
Veservice Ltda Av Brasil 49550 Distrito Industrial de Palmares Campo Grande Rio de Janeiro 23065480 Brazil
Vesuvius
Thailand Co.
Ltd
17069 22nd Floor Ocean T ower 1 Ratchadapisek Road Klongtoey Bangkok 101 10 Thailand
Vesuvius
V .
S.
Street Urquiza 919Floor 2 Rosario Provincia de Santa F Argentina
Vesuvius Advanced Ceramics China
Ltd
221 Xing Ming Street China Singapore Suzhou Ind Park Suzhou Jiangsu Province  China
Vesuvius
America Inc.
1209 Orange Street Wilmington DE 19801 United States US Delaware Vesuvius Americas Holdings Inc Corporation T rust Center 1209 Orange Street Wilmington New Castle County DE 19801 United States US Delaware Vesuvius Australia Holding Pty
4046 Gloucester Boulevarde Port Kembla NSW 2505
Australia
Vesuvius
Australia Pty Ltd 4046 Gloucester Boulevarde Port Kembla NSW 2505 Australia
Vesuvius
Belgium N.
Zandvoordestraat 366 Oostende B8400 Belgium
Vesuvius
Canada Inc 181 Bay Street Suite 1800 T oronto Ontario M5J 2T9 Canada
Vesuvius
Ceramics Limited 165 Fleet Street London EC4A 2AE England
Company legal name Registered of ce address Jurisdiction Vesuvius China Holdings Co.
Limited
Of ce 813 8F  Paul Y centre 51 Hung T o Road Kwun T ong Kowloon Hong Kong Hong Kong
China Limited 165 Fleet Street London EC4A 2AE England
Vesuvius
Colombia SAS Street 90 number 13 A  31 oor 6 Bogota Colombia
Vesuvius
Corporation S.
Salita delle Ginestre 10 Lugano Cassarate CH 6900 Switzerland
Vesuvius Crucible
CT Corporation  1209 Orange Street The Corporation T rust Company Wilmington DE 19801 United States US Delaware
CSD Sp z.
Poland
Poland
Vesuvius
Emirates FZE Warehouse No 1J093 P O Box 4926 1 Hamriyah Free Zone Sharjah United Arab Emirates United Arab
Vesuvius Financial 1 Limited 165 Fleet Street London EC4A 2AE England
Vesuvius
Finland OY Pajamentie 10 00360 Helsinki
Finland
Vesuvius Foundry Products Suzhou
Ltd.
1 2 Wei Wen Road ChinaSingapore Suzhou Ind Park Suzhou Jiangsu Province  China
Vesuvius Foundry
Jiangsu Co.
Ltd
2 Changchun Road Economic Development Area Changshu Jiangsu China
Vesuvius France
Rue Paul Deudon 68 Boite Postale 19 Feignies 59750 France
Vesuvius GmbH Gelsenkirchener Strasse 10 Borken D46325 Germany
Vesuvius Group
165 Fleet Street London EC4A 2AE England
Vesuvius Group S.
17 Rue de Douvrain Ghlin 701 1 Belgium
Vesuvius Holding Deutschland GmbH Gelsenkirchener Strasse 10 Borken D46325 Germany
Vesuvius Holding France S.
68 Rue Paul Deudon BP 19 Feignies 59750 France
Vesuvius Holding Italia  Societ a
Limitata
Piazza Borgo Pila 40 Genoa Italy
Vesuvius
Holdings Limited 165 Fleet Street London EC4A 2AE England
Vesuvius Ibrica Refractarios S.
Capitn Haya 56  1H 28020 Madrid Spain
Vesuvius
International
Corporation
CT Corporation 1209 Orange Street The Corporation T rust Company Wilmington DE 19801 United States US Delaware
Investments
Limited
165 Fleet Street London EC4A 2AE England
Vesuvius Istanbul Sanayi ve Ticaret
Gebze OSB2 Mh.
1700.
Sok No17041 Cayirova Kocaeli 41420 T urkey
Vesuvius Italia SPA Piazza Borgo Pila 40 Genoa Italy Italy
Japan Inc.
DainiNaruse Akihabara Bldg.
3F  27 10 1chome T aito Taitoku Tokyo 1 100016 Japan Japan Notes to the Group Financial Statements continued Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7
Vesuvius
K.
Limited
1 Midland Way Central Park Barlborough Links Derbyshire S43 4XA United Kingdom
Vesuvius Life Plan T rustee Limited 165 Fleet Street London EC4A 2AE England
Vesuvius LLC 10 Ul.
Kooperativnaya
Zhukovsky Moscow Russian Federation
Vesuvius
Malaysia Sdn
Level 18 The Gardens North T ower Mid Valley City Lingkaran Syed Putra Kuala Lumpur 59200 Malaysia
Vesuvius
Management
Limited
165 Fleet Street London EC4A 2AE England
Vesuvius Mexico de C.
V .
Av.
Ruiz Cortinez Num.
Colonia Jardines de San Rafael Guadalupe Nuevo Len CP 671 19
Mexico
Vesuvius
MidEast Limited 56 rd 15 Apt 103 Maadi Cairo Egypt
Vesuvius
Minerals Limited 165 Fleet Street London EC4A 2AE England
Vesuvius Moravia s.
Konska c.
740 T rinec 739 6 1 Czech Republic
Republic
Vesuvius New Zealand Limited 18 Cryers Road East T amaki Auckland New Zealand New Zealand
OOO
Afanasyevsky Pereulok 41 A Moscow Russia 1 19019 Russian Federation
Vesuvius Overseas Investments Limited 165 Fleet Street London EC4A 2AE England
Vesuvius
Overseas Limited 165 Fleet Street London EC4A 2AE England
Vesuvius Pension Plans T rustees
165 Fleet Street London EC4A 2AE England
Vesuvius Pigments Holdings Limited 165 Fleet Street London EC4A 2AE England
Vesuvius Poland Splka z.
Ul T yniecka 12 Skawina 32050 Poland
Vesuvius
Ras Al Khaimah FZ LLC Street No.
F14 RAK Investment Authority Free Zone Al Hamra Ras Al Khaimah PO Box 86408 United Arab Emirates United Arab
Vesuvius
Refractarios de Chile SA Street San Martin 870 Room 308 T ower B Concepcion
Chile
Vesuvius
Refractories
Tianjin Co.
Ltd
56 13th Avenue TEDA Tianjin
China
Company legal name Registered of ce address Jurisdiction
Refractories S.
Galati Marea Unire avenue 107 Galati county Romania
Vesuvius
Refratrios Ltda Av Brasil 49550 Distrito Industrial de Palmares Campo Grande Rio de Janeiro 23065480 Brazil
Vesuvius Refractory India Private
Room No.
9 3rd Floor 7 Ganesh Chandra Avenue Kolkata WB  India
Vesuvius
Scandinavia AB 4 Forradsgatan Amal S662 34 Sweden
Vesuvius Solar Crucible Suzhou
Ltd.
58 KuaChun Road Kua T ang ChinaSingapore Suzou Ind Park Suzhou Jiangsu Province
China
Vesuvius
South Africa Pty Limited Pebble Lane Private Bag X2 Olifantsfontein Gauteng Province 1665 South Africa South Africa Vesuvius SSC Sp z.
Poland
Vesuvius UK
1 Midland Way Central Park Barlborough Links Derbyshire S43 4XA United Kingdom
Vesuvius Ukraine
27  Udarnykiv Street City of Dnipropetrovsk Ukraine
Vesuvius USA
CT Corporation 208 South LaSalle Street Chicago Cook County IL 60604 United States US Illinois Vesuvius VA Limited 165 Fleet Street London EC4A 2AE England
Vesuvius Zyalons Holdings Limited Brown Street Newmilns Ayrshire KA 16 9AG Scotland
Vesuvius Zyarock
Suzhou Co.
Ltd
58 KuaChun Road Kua T ang ChinaSingapore Suzou Ind Park Suzhou Jiangsu Province
China
VesuviusPremier
Refractories
Holdings Limited 1 Midland Way Central Park Barlborough Links Derbyshire S43 4XA England
VSV Advanced Ceramics Anshan
Ltd
Xiaotaizi Village Ningyuan T own Qianshan District Anshan Liaoning Province China
WilkesLucas
Limited
165 Fleet Street London EC4A 2AE England
Yingkou Bayuquan Refractories Co.
Ltd
Qing Long Shan Street Bayuquan District Liaoning Province YingKou
35.2 Investment in joint ventures and associates A joint venture is a type of joint arrangement whereby the parties that have joint control of the arrangement have rights to the net assets of the joint venture.
Joint control is the contractually agreed sharing of control of the arrangement which exists only when decisions about the relevant activities require unanimous consent of the parties sharing control.
An associate is an entity over which the Group has signi cant in uence.
Signi cant in uence is the power to participate in the  nancial and operating policy decisions of an entity but is not control or joint control over those policies.
Investments in Subsidiaries Joint Ventures and Associates continued 1 Investment in subsidiaries continued Financial Statements The Groups investments in its associates and joint ventures are accounted for using the equity method from the date signi cant in uencejoint control is deemed to arise until the date on which signi cant in uencejoint control ceases to exist or when the interest becomes classi ed as an asset held for sale.
The Consolidated Income Statement re ects the Groups share of pro t after tax of the related associates and joint ventures.
Investments in associates and joint ventures are carried in the Consolidated Balance Sheet at cost adjusted in respect of postacquisition changes in the Groups share of net assets less any impairment in value.
At 1 January 18.0 16.
Additions 0.4 Share of posttax pro t of joint ventures 1.3 1.0 Dividends received from joint ventures 1.7 1.0 Foreign exchange 0.5 1.9 At 31 December 17 .5 18.0 Joint ventures Set out below is the summarised  nancial information in respect of joint ventures.
Amounts relate to the Groups share.
Revenue 53.9 44.6 T rading pro t 2.1 1.6 Net  nance costs 0.
Pro t before tax 2.2 1.6 Income tax expense 0.9 0.6 Pro t after tax 1.3 1.0 Noncurrent assets 5.9 7.6 Current assets 41.7 42.0 Noncurrent liabilities Current liabilities 30.8 32.0 Net assets 16.8 17 .6 The purpose of the Chinese joint venture companies is to research develop manufacture and sell refractory products.
The role of Vesuvius is to provide technical personnel training and access to the Groups international sales network.
Name of entity Registered address Jurisdiction % ownership Angang Vesuvius Refractory Company Ltd T axi District Anshan City  Liaoning Province China China 50 Wuhan WugangVesuvius Advanced CCR Co.
Ltd
Gongnong Village Qingshan District Wuhan Hubei Province  China China 50 Wuhan WugangVesuvius Advanced Ceramics
Ltd
Gongnong Village Qingshan District Wuhan Hubei Province  China China 50 Beauvac Participaes S A Street Libero Badaro 293 cj.
20D So Paulo Centro 01009000 Brazil Brazil 50 INT AHSA SA Street Duque de Caxias 563 house 04 Room 01 Barueri So Paulo Centro 06401010 Brazil Brazil 25 Newshelf 480 Proprietary Limited 44 Main Street Johannesburg 2001 South Africa
Africa
Notes to the Group Financial Statements continued Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7 Investments in Subsidiaries Joint Ventures and Associates continued 35.2 Investment in joint ventures and associates continued
During 2017  the Group acquired a 14.9% interest in Sapotech Oy a Finnish technology company for total consideration of 0.4m.
Name of entity Registered address Jurisdiction % ownership Sapotech Oy Paavo Havaksen tie 5 D 90570 Oulu Finland Finland 14.90 35.3 Noncontrolling interest Noncontrolling interests represent the portion of the equity of a subsidiary not attributable either directly or indirectly to the parent company and are presented separately in the Consolidated Income Statement and within equity in the Consolidated Balance Sheet distinguished from parent company shareholders equity.
The total noncontrolling interest at 31 December 2017 is 6.4m 2016 6.3m of which 4.6m relates to Vesuvius India Ltd 2016 4.3m.
The noncontrolling interests in respect of the Groups other subsidiaries are not considered to be material.
Name of entity Registered address Jurisdiction % ownership Vesuvius India Limited P 104 T aratala Road Kolkata 700 088 India India 55.57 Foseco India Limited 922923 Gat Sanaswadi T aluka Shirur  Pune 41 2208 India India 74.98 Foseco Golden Gate Company Limited 6 Kung Y eh 2nd Road Ping T ung Dist Ping T ung 90049  T aiwan Taiwan 5 1 Foseco Thailand Limited 1 7069  22nd Floor Ocean T ower 1 Ratchadapisek Road Klongtoey Bangkok 101 10 Thailand Thailand 74 VESUVIUS CESK REPUBLIKA a.
Prumyslov 726 Konsk T rinec 739 6 1 Czech Republic
Republic
Details of subsidiaries exempt from audit of their individual  nancial statements by virtue of Section 479A of the Companies Act 2006 are disclosed in Note 6 to the Company Financial Statements.
As with Vesuvius plc all of the above companies have a 31 December yearend.
Related Parties All transactions with related parties are conducted on an armslength basis and in accordance with normal business terms.
T ransactions between related parties that are Group subsidiaries are eliminated on consolidation.
The related parties identi ed by the Directors include joint ventures associates and key management personnel.
T o enable users of our  nancial statements to form a view on the effects of related party relationships on the Group we disclose the related party relationship when control exists irrespective of whether there have been transactions between the related parties.
1 T ransactions with joint ventures and associates All transactions with joint ventures and associates are in the normal course of business.
Further details of joint ventures and associates are included in Note 35.
36.2 T ransactions with key management personnel There have been no transactions with key management personnel of the Group other than the Directors remuneration.
Directors remuneration is disclosed in Note 8 of the Group Financial Statements and in the Directors Remuneration Report.
36.3 T ransactions with other related parties There are no controlling shareholders of the Group as de ned by IFRS.
There have been no material transactions with the shareholders of the Group.
Pension contributions to Group schemes are disclosed in Note 28 of the Group Financial Statements.
Other than the parties disclosed above the Group has no other material related parties.
Financial Statements
Fixed assets Investment 6 1778.0 1778.0 Total  xed assets 1778.0 1778.0 Current assets Debtors  amounts falling due within one year 5.
T otal current assets 5.
Creditors  amounts falling due within one year Bank overdraft 0.4 Other creditors 7 1 1 24.7 107 4.5 Net current liabilities 1 120.0 1072.7 T otal assets less current liabilities 658.0 705.3 Net assets 658.0 705.3 Equity capital and reserves Issued share capital 8 27 .8 27 .8 Retained earnings 630.2 677 .5 T otal shareholders funds 658.0 705.3 Company number Under Section 408 of the Companies Act 2006 the Company is exempt from the requirement to present an income statement.
During 2017 the Company incurred a loss of 4.3m 2016 3.0m loss.
The  nancial statements were approved and authorised for issue by the Directors on 28 February 2018 and signed on their behalf by Patrick Andr Guy Y oung Chief Executive Chief Financial Of cer Company Balance Sheet As at 31 December 201 7 182 Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7
Retained earnings
As at 1 January 2016 27 .8 722.7 750.5 Loss recognised for the year 3.0 3.0 Recognition of sharebased payments  1.7 1.7 Dividend paid  43.9 43.9 As at 1 January 201 7 27 .8 677 .5 705.3 Loss recognised for the year 4.3 4.3 Recognition of sharebased payments 2.6 2.6 Dividend paid  45.6 45.6 As at 31 December 201 7 27 .8 630.2 658.0 The Company had distributable reserves of 630.2m as at 31 December 2017 2016 677 .5m.
Company Statement of Changes in Equity As at 31 December 201 7 183 Financial Statements General Information Vesuvius plc Vesuvius or the Company is a public company limited by shares.
It is incorporated and domiciled in England and Wales and listed on the London Stock Exchange.
The nature of the company is a holding company.
The address of its registered of ce is 165 Fleet Street London EC4A 2AE.
Basis of Preparation 1 Basis of accounting The  nancial statements of the Company have been prepared in accordance with Financial Reporting Standard 101 Reduced Disclosure Framework FRS 101  and the Companies Act 2006.
The  nancial statements have been prepared under the historical cost convention.
In these  nancial statements the Company has applied the exemptions available under FRS 101 in respect of the following disclosures A cash  ow statement and related notes Disclosures in respect of transactions with wholly owned subsidiaries Disclosures in respect of capital management The effects of new but not yet effective IFRSs Disclosures in respect of the compensation of key management personnel Under Section 408 of the Companies Act 2006 the Company is exempt from the requirement to present its own pro t and loss account.
The accounting policies set out below have unless otherwise stated been applied consistently to all periods presented in these  nancial statements.
There were no identi ed critical accounting estimates or judgements.
2.2 Going concern The Directors have a reasonable expectation that the Group and the Company have adequate resources to continue in operational existence for period of at least 12 months from the date of signing of these accounts.
Accordingly they continue to adopt a going concern basis in preparing the  nancial statements of the Group and the Company.
2.3 Accounting policy
Both current and deferred tax are calculated using tax rates and laws that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the balance sheet date.
Current tax payable is based on the taxable result for the year.
Deferred taxation is recognised without discounting in respect of all timing differences that have originated but not reversed at the balance sheet date with the exception that deferred taxation assets are only recognised if it is considered more likely than not that there will be suitable future pro ts from which the reversal of the underlying timing differences can be deducted.
Provision is made for the tax that would arise on remittance of the retained earnings of overseas subsidiaries only to the extent that at the balance sheet date dividends have been accrued as receivable.
All other accounting policies are set out within the respective notes.
Employee Bene ts Expense Wages and Salaries 3.7 2.4 Social security costs 0.6 0.4 Sharebased payments 0.7 0.6 Pension costs  de ned contribution pension plans  0.
Total employee bene ts expense 5.0 3.5 The total average number of employees for 2017 was 3 2016 3.
As at 31 December the Company had 4 employees.
Details of the Directors remuneration are disclosed in the Directors Remuneration Report.
Notes to the Company Financial Statements 184 Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7 Notes to the Company Financial Statements continued Audit and NonAudit Fees Amounts payable to PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP in relation to audit and nonaudit fees are disclosed within Note 6 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Dividends
A  nal dividend for the year ended 31 December 2016 of 30.8m 2015 30.0m equivalent to 1 1.40 pence 2015 1 1. of 14.8m 2016 13.9m equivalent to 5.50 pence 2016 5.
15 pence per ordinary share was paid in September 2017 September 2016.
A proposed  nal dividend for the year ended 31 December 2017 of 33.8m 2016 30.8m equivalent to 12.5 pence per ordinary share 2016 1 1.40 pence is subject to approval by shareholders at the Companys Annual General Meeting and has not been included as a liability in these  nancial statements.
If approved by shareholders the dividend will be paid on 25 May 2018 to ordinary shareholders on the register at 13 April 2018.
Investment in Subsidiaries Associates and Joint Ventures 6.1 Accounting policy Shares in subsidiaries associates and joint ventures are stated at cost less any impairment in value.
6.2 Analysis of investment in subsidiaries associates and joint ventures Shares in subsidiaries As at 1 January 201 7 and 31 December 201 7 1778.0 The subsidiaries joint ventures and associates of Vesuvius plc their country of incorporation and % ownership is set out in Note 35 of the Notes to the Group Financial Statements.
With the exception of Vesuvius Holdings Ltd whose ordinary share capital was directly held by Vesuvius plc the ordinary share capital of the other companies was owned by a Vesuvius plc subsidiary as at 31 December 2017 .
6.3 Auditexempt subsidiaries The following UK subsidiaries are exempt from audit of their individual  nancial statements by virtue of Section 479A of the Companies Act 2006.
Brazil 1 Limited John G.
Stein and Company Limited Foseco Limited S G Blair and Company Limited Foseco T echnology Limited Vesuvius China Limited Foseco T ransnational Limited Vesuvius Group Limited Foseco FS Limited Vesuvius Minerals Limited Foseco GB Limited Vesuvius Pigments Holdings Limited Foseco Steel Holdings China Limited VesuviusPremier Refractories Holdings Limited Foseco UK Limited Vesuvius VA Limited Other Creditors Amounts owned to subsidiary undertakings 1 1 22.4 1073.2 Accruals and other creditors 2.3 1.3 T otal amounts falling due within one year 1 124.7 107 4.5 Amounts owed to subsidiary undertakings are interest free have no  xed date of repayment and are repayable on demand.
Financial Statements Issued Share Capital 8.1 Accounting policy Equity instruments issued by the Company are recorded at the proceeds received net of direct issue costs.
8.2 Analysis of issued share capital The issued and fully paid ordinary share capital of the Company as at 31 December 2017 was 278.5 million shares of 10 each 2016 278.5 million shares of 0.
10 each.
Of this 7 .3 million 2016 7 .3 million shares were held in T reasury and 0.9 million 2016 1.
1 million shares were held by the Vesuvius Group employee share ownership plan trust ESOP.
The Company only has one class of shares in issue ordinary shares.
All shareholders enjoy the same rights in relation to these shares including rights in relation to voting at General Meetings of the Company distribution of dividends and repayment of capital.
Sharebased Payments 9.1 Accounting policy The Company operates equitysettled sharebased payment arrangements for its employees.
Equitysettled sharebased payments are measured at fair value at the date of grant.
The fair value determined at the grant date takes account of the effect of marketbased conditions such as the total shareholder return target upon which vesting for some of the awards is conditional and is expensed on a straightline basis over the vesting period with a corresponding increase in equity.
The cumulative expense recognised is adjusted for the best estimate of the shares that will eventually vest and for the effect of other nonmarketbased vesting conditions such as growth in headline earnings per share which are not included in the fair value determined at the date of grant.
For grants with marketbased conditions attaching to them fair value is measured using a form of stochastic option pricing model.
For all other grants fair value is measured using the BlackScholes option pricing model.
9.2 Pro t and loss account recognition The Company operates a number of different sharebased payment schemes the main features of which are detailed between pages 99 to 105 of the Directors Remuneration Report.
A total of 0.7m was charged to the pro t and loss account in the year with regard to sharebased payments 2016 0.5m.
9.3 Details of outstanding options Outstanding awards As at 1 Jan no.
Granted no.
Exercised no.
Forfeited lapsed no.
As at 31 Dec no.
Awards exercisable as at 31 Dec no.
Weighted average outstanding contractual life of awards years Range of exercise prices pence LTIP 1 156560 409453  631095 934918  4.8 na Weighted average exercise price nil nil nil nil nil  na Other plans 8557  8557  na Weighted average exercise price nil nil nil nil nil  na For options exercised during 2017 included in Other plans the share price at the date of exercise was 592 pence.
Outstanding awards As at 1 Jan no.
Granted no.
Exercised no.
Forfeited lapsed no.
As at 31 Dec no.
Awards exercisable as at 31 Dec no.
Weighted average outstanding contractual life of awards years Range of exercise prices pence L TIP 91 6 1 63 581 901  341504 1 1 56560  8.5 n a Weighted average exercise price nil nil nil nil nil  na Other plans 8226 1  51859 21845 8557  0.8 na Weighted average exercise price nil nil nil nil nil  na For options exercised during 2016 included in Other plans the share price at the date of exercise was 333 pence.
Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7 Notes to the Company Financial Statements continued Sharebased Payments continued 9.3 Details of outstanding options continued Details of market performance conditions are included in the Directors Remuneration Report.
As at 31 December 2017  the total options exercisable by all Group employees over the 0.
10 ordinary shares and capable of being satis ed through new allotments of shares or through shares held by the Companys ESOP were as follows Years of awardgrant
Latest year of exercise vesting
Long T erm Incentive Plan 2015201 7 nil 201 7 2027 2280093 Medium T erm Incentive Plan 2016201 7 nil 2019 141302 Restricted rights 2016201 7 nil 20182020 1 1 1 35 Fair value of options granted under the L TIP during the year 2017 March Grant 2017 Sept Grant 2016
TSR element
TSR element
TSR element Fair value of options granted per share 524.5p 401.0p 578.0p 467.0p 292.0p 1 1 2.0p Share price on date of grant per share 524.5p 524.5p 578.0p 578.0p 292.0p 292.0p Expected volatility na 30.90% na 33.00% na 26.00% Risk free interest rate na 0.
17% na 0.
16% na 0.40% Exercise price per share nil nil nil nil nil nil Expected term years 333 3 44 Expected dividend yield nil nil nil nil na na The fair value of share options with nonmarket performance conditions has been calculated using the BlackScholes option pricing model.
The fair value of options with marketrelated performance conditions has been measured using the Monte Carlo model.
Expected volatility was determined by calculating the historical volatility of the Groups share price over the 2.8 years 2016 2.75 years prior to the grant date.
The riskfree rate of return was assumed to be the yield to maturity on a UK  xed gilt with the term to maturity equal to the expected life of the option.
At the discretion of the Remuneration Committee award holders receive the value of dividends that would have been paid on their vested shares in the period between grant and vesting.
Accordingly there is no discount to the valuation for dividends foregone during the vesting period.
Contingent Liabilities Where the Company enters into  nancial guarantee contracts to guarantee the indebtedness of other companies within its Group the Company considers these to be insurance arrangements and accounts for them as such.
In this respect the Company treats the guarantee contract as a contingent liability until such time as it becomes probable that the Company will be required to make a payment under the guarantee.
Guarantees provided by the Company as at 31 December 2017 in respect of the liabilities of its subsidiary companies amounted to 563.4m 2016 569.4m which includes guarantees of 200.0m and 130.0m 2016 310.0m and 30.0m in respect of US Private Placement Loan Notes and 146.3m 2016 141.7m in respect of drawings under the syndicated bank facility together with 150.8m 2016 150.8m in relation to a guarantee provided to the Companys UK subsidiary which acts as T rustee for the Groups UK pension plan.
The guarantee is over all present and future pension liabilities of the plan and the contingent liability amount represents the net de cit on a buyout basis as shown in the most recent triennial valuation.
Vesuvius has extensive international operations and is subject to various legal and regulatory regimes including those covering taxation and environmental matters.
Several of the Companys subsidiaries are parties to legal proceedings certain of which are insured claims arising in the ordinary course of the operations of the company involved and are aware of a number of issues which are or may be the subject of dispute with tax authorities.
Whilst the outcome of litigation and other disputes can never be predicted with certainty having regard to legal advice received and the insurance arrangements of the Company and its subsidiaries the Directors believe that none of these matters will either individually or in the aggregate have a materially adverse effect on the Companys  nancial condition or results of operations.
Financial Statements Related Parties All transactions with related parties are conducted on an armslength basis and in accordance with normal business terms.
T ransactions between related parties that are wholly owned Company subsidiaries are not disclosed in this Note.
The related parties identi ed by the Directors include joint ventures associates and key management personnel.
T o enable users of our  nancial statements to form a view on the effects of related party relationships on the Company we disclose the related party relationship when control exists irrespective of whether there have been transactions between the related parties.
T ransactions with joint ventures and associates All transactions with joint ventures and associates are in the normal course of business.
Further details of joint ventures and associates is included in Note 35 of the Notes to the Group Financial Statements.
T ransactions with key management personnel There have been no transactions with key management personnel of the Company other than the Directors remuneration.
Directors remuneration is disclosed in the Annual Report on Directors Remuneration.
T ransactions with other related parties There are no controlling shareholders of the Company as de ned by IFRS.
There have been no material transactions with the shareholders of the Company.
Pension contributions are disclosed in Note 28 of the Group Financial Statements.
Other than the parties disclosed above the Company has no other material related parties.
Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7tel 2014 2013 Steel Division T rading pro tm 100.4 79.2 79.5 96.4 88.7 Return on sales % 8.7 8.4 8.9 9.8 8.7 Employees year end no.
Foundry Division T rading pro tm 65.
Return on sales % 12.2 1 1.8 10.5 10.0 10.4 Employees year end no.
3080 3058 3 129 3443 3330 Five Y ear Summary Divisional Results from Continuing Operations 189 Financial Statements Shareholder Information
The share register is managed by Equiniti who can be contacted regarding shareholding queries.
Equiniti Limited Aspect House Spencer Road Lancing West Sussex BN99 6DA T el UK onlytel T el nonUK 44tel For the hard of hearing Equiniti offers a T extel service which can be accessed by diallingtel or 44tel if calling from outside the UK.
Any shareholder enquiries not related to the share register should be sent by email to shareholder. the Company Secretary at the registered of ce.
Registered Of ce and Group Head Of ce Vesuvius plc 165 Fleet Street London EC4A 2AE T eltelFaxtelRegistered in England and Wales No.
LEI ORZ521W585SY02 Vesuvius Website Shareholder and other information about the Company including details of the current and historical share price can be accessed on the Vesuvius website site Shareview and Electronic Communication Equinitis website site enables shareholders to access details of their shareholdings online.
The website provides answers to frequently asked questions and information useful for the management of investments.
T o access online information on your shareholding you will require your shareholder reference number which can be found at the top of your share certi cate.
Shareholders can register to receive shareholder communications electronically including the Companys Annual Report and Accounts rather than in paper form using
The registration process requires shareholders to input their shareholder reference number which can be found at the top of Vesuvius share certi cates.
In order to receive shareholder communications in electronic form shareholders should select email as their mailing preference.
Once
Share Dealing Service The Companys shares can be traded through most banks building societies or stockbrokers.
UK resident shareholders can also buy and sell shares online or by telephone using Equinitis Shareview dealing service by either logging on to sitedealing or by callingtel between 8.00 am and 4.30 pm on any business day excluding bank holidays.
The shareholder reference number found at the top of Vesuvius share certi cates is required to use the dealing facility.
ShareGift
ShareGift the charity share donation scheme is a free service for shareholders wishing to give shares to charitable causes.
It is particularly useful for those shareholders who may wish to dispose of a small quantity of shares where the market value makes it uneconomic to sell on a commission basis.
Further information can be obtained from ShareGifts website at www. haregift. emailing email. rg.
Dividend Reinvestment Plan Equiniti offers a dividend reinvestment plan through which shareholders can use any cash dividends declared to buy additional shares in Vesuvius.
Further details including how to sign up and the terms and conditions of the plan are available from Equiniti by calling the Share Dividend Helpline ontel or 44tel if calling from outside the UK.
Overseas Payment Service Equiniti provides a dividend payment service in over 90 countries that automatically converts payments into local currency and pays the funds into a shareholders bank account.
Further details including an application form and the terms and conditions of the service are available at site or from Equiniti by calling 44 0tel or writing to Equiniti Aspect House Spencer Road Lancing West Sussex BN99 6DA United Kingdom please quote Overseas Payment Service the Companys name and your shareholder reference number.
Financial Calendar 2018 Annual General Meeting 10 May 2018 Announcement of 2018 halfyear results 26 July 2018 190 Vesuvius plc Annual Report and Accounts 201 7 Analysis of ordinary shareholders Investor type Shareholdings As at 31 December 2017 Private
Number of holders 2566 600 3166 2Percentage of holders 81.05% 18.95% 100% 77 .95% 15.73% 4.
1 7% 2.
15% Percentage of shares held 0.92% 99.08% 100% 0.
13% 1.61% 8.26% 90.00% Share Fraud  Spot the Warning Signs Investment scams are designed to look like genuine investments.
Have you been Contacted out of the blue Promised tempting returns and told the investment is safe Called repeatedly T old the offer is only available for a limited time If so you might have been contacted by fraudsters.
How to Avoid Share Fraud Reject cold calls If you have been contacted by telephone email or post or via a third party or at a seminar or exhibition with an offer to buy or sell shares the chances are that its a highrisk investment or a scam.
Y ou should treat any offer with extreme caution.
The safest thing to do is to ignore the approach and if you were contacted by phone to hang up on the call.
Check if the  rm is authorised by the Financial Conduct Authority FCA and recorded on the Financial Services register at www. ca.
The Financial Services Register is a public record of all the  rms and individuals in the  nancial services industry that are or have been regulated by the Prudential Regulation Authority andor the FCA.
Get impartial advice Think about getting impartial  nancial advice before you hand over any money.
Seek advice from someone unconnected to the rm that has approached you.
Reporting a Scam If you suspect that you have been approached by fraudsters please tell the FCA by contacting them on  or 44tel from outside the UK or by using the share fraud reporting form at www. ca. can  nd out more about investment scams.
If you have lost money to investment fraud you should report it to Action Fraud ontel or online at www. ctionfraud.
Find out more at www. ca. itescamsmart.
Shareholder Information continued Designed and produced by Friend.
Print Pureprint Group This report has been printed on Claro Bulk which is
Free ECF pulp.
The mill and the printer are both certi ed to ISO 14001 environmental management system and registered to EMAS the eco management Audit Scheme.
The report was printed using vegetable based inks by a printer.
5S Five Steps to improve housekeeping and therefore workplace safety and ef ciency separate sort shine standardise and sustain 8D Eight Disciplines an eightstep methodology to resolve customer supplier and internal quality issues AGM Annual General Meeting CIS Commonwealth of Independent States Russian Commonwealth
Carbon dioxide
Company Vesuvius plc DSBP Deferred Share Bonus Plan DTR The Disclosure and T ransparency Rules of the UK Financial Conduct Authority EBITDA T rading pro t before depreciation and amortisation of nonacquired intangible charges EMEA Europe Middle East and Africa EPS Earnings per share EU European Union FRC Financial Reporting Council FRS Financial Reporting Standards FTSE 250 Equity index whose constituents are the 101st to 350th largest companies listed on the London Stock Exchange in terms of their market capitalisation FX Foreign exchange GHG Greenhouse gas Group Vesuvius plc and its subsidiary companies IAS International Accounting Standard IFRS International Financial Reporting Standards KPI Key Performance Indicator LTI Lost time injury LTIFR Lost time injury frequency rate a KPI which calculates the number of L TIs per million hours worked Median The middle number in a sorted list of numbers NAFT A The area to which the North American Free T rade Agreement applies OEMs Original Equipment Manufacturers
An ordinary share of 10 pence in the capital of the Company RandD Research and development TSR T otal shareholder return TurboS The Vesuvius safety training programme UK GAAP UK Generally Accepted Accounting Principles VSP Vesuvius Share Plan Glossary V esuvius plc 165 Fleet Street
EC4A 2AE telwww .
