A world leader in an emerging field 4D pharma plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 4D pharma plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 We are pioneers in harnessing bacteria as a novel and revolutionary class of medicines Live Biotherapeutics Worldclass science is the foundation of medical discovery.
To turn this into lifechanging medicines that requires something more.
T o turn this into a whole new class of medicines that requires something special.
We are building something special at 4D pharma.
Live Biotherapeutics have the potential to transform the way in which many diseases are treated.
But to realise that potential the sector needs robust clinical data.
We are well positioned to deliver that data.
In 2017 we laid foundations that have positioned 4D to transform the sector with four clinical programmes set to deliver data and a number of development programmes heading towards the clinic 4D will play the lead role in defining the sector.
What makes us different We understand that bacteria in the human intestine  known as the gut microbiome  have an important function in health and disease but importantly we understand how they function and how they function as a drug.
Understanding how they function means that our Live Biotherapeutics are potentially providing new and effective treatments for IBS and Crohns Disease and gamechanging treatments for cancer asthma and autoimmune conditions such as rheumatoid arthritis and multiple sclerosis.
4D and the Live Biotherapeutics we develop have the potential to transform the way in which many challenging diseases are treated.
What sets us apart We are targeting a new safer approach to drug development We are a fully integrated microbiome company with the capability to progress from research to production to clinic We understand mechanism how our products exert their therapeutic effects and act as a drug site Highlights Operational highlights Successful progression of our proprietary clinical programmes in Irritable Bowel Syndrome and Paediatric Crohns Disease Completion of the first clinical trial of the MicroDx diagnostic and patient stratification platform validating the platform and representing achievement of the initial milestone from the acquisition of 4D Pharma Cork Limited in February 2016 Data generated in this clinical study demonstrated our ability to use patient microbiome and metabolite profiles to differentiate IBS subjects from healthy individuals and the commonalities of the microbiome across all IBS subtypes supporting the use of Blautix our Live Biotherapeutic for the treatment of IBS in all these subgroups Development of our intellectual property estate the largest in the microbiome sector to help secure and consolidate our leading position in the field having at year end 207 granted patents and 320 patent applications from 32 patent families Securing GMP certification for the production of Live Biotherapeutics at our development and manufacturing facility in Len Spain with the potential capacity to run up to 100 million capsules per annum Strategic report 02 4D pharma at a Glance
04 Chairmans Statement
05 Chief Executive Officers Report
08 Our Business Model and Strategy 10 Our Key Performance Indicators
11 Risk and Risk Management
Corporate governance 14 Board of Directors
15 Corporate Governance Statement
18 Report of the Audit and Risk Committee 20 Report of the Remuneration Committee 22 Directors Report 24 Statement of Directors Responsibilities Financial statements
25 Independent Auditors Report
28 Group Statement of Total Comprehensive Income 29 Group Statement of Financial Position 30 Company Statement of Financial Position 31 Group Statement of Changes in Equity 32 Company Statement of Changes in Equity 33 Group Cash Flow Statement 34 Company Cash Flow Statement 35 Notes to the Financial Statements 61 Company Information Financial highlights Basic and diluted.
Adjusted loss per share excludes nonrecurring costs see note 9.
Cash cash equivalents and cash on deposit m djusted loss per share pence otal comprehensive loss after tax m xpenditure on research and development m otal equity m ite Developing science delivering therapies.
Live Biotherapeutics  disruptive new medicines Live Biotherapeutics are a regulated emerging and disruptive new class of medicines which have the potential to transform the way in which we treat many diseases.
Our Live Biotherapeutics are strains of gut commensal bacteria which have been originally isolated from healthy humans.
These are then cultured and grown before being encapsulated administered orally and delivered selectively to the gut where they exert their therapeutic effects on the patient.
Beyond gastrointestinal disease Live Biotherapeutics are delivered to the gut but can have farreaching effects at anatomically distant sites of the body.
Gut bacteria have evolved to manipulate the human immune system and we are harnessing this to develop Live Biotherapeutics.
Utilising this we are developing Live Biotherapeutics for diseases as diverse as cancer and asthma and even conditions of the central nervous system such as Parkinsons disease and multiple sclerosis.
Why mechanism matters Human gut bacteria contain thousands of genes.
Understanding which of these genes  and their products  interact with the human body in a beneficial way is key to identifying new Live Biotherapeutics.
Our scientists have deep expertise in microbiology immunology and bioinformatics which allows us to select our candidates based on an understanding of interactions at the molecular level.
4D pharma at a Glance Leaders in an emerging field We are well positioned to turn worldclass microbiome science into safer new therapies for patients.
4D has grown from pioneering microbiome research to the only integrated worldleading Live Biotherapeutics company.
Watch our new videosite Highly attractive safety profile Toxicity and unwanted side effects are a constant challenge in drug development.
Safety concerns account for more than 50% of drug programme terminations and can also lead to suboptimal treatment regimens a concern for both patients and clinicians.
Our Live Biotherapeutics are originally isolated from healthy human donors and consequently have excellent safety profiles.
This allows us to safely expedite our products into the clinic getting them to the patients that need them more rapidly.
4D pharma plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 02 STRATEGIC REPORT An integrated biopharma company MicroRx  our proprietary discovery platform Our discovery platform MicroRx allows us to rapidly identify strains of gut bacteria which may have a therapeutic effect in specific diseases.
Using MicroRx we interrogate our proprietary library of more than 6000 bacterial strains for pathwayspecific effects on the host immune system.
Importantly we understand mechanism.
We elucidate the mechanisms by which our Live Biotherapeutics exert their effects with exquisite detail including the identification of bacterial effector molecules and their cognate human receptors.
Unlike traditional drug discovery which involves multiple rounds of hit and lead optimisation to identify a clinical candidate  a process which can take a number of years  we can progress from concept to clinicready product in as little as 24 months helping us get our therapies to patients who need them more rapidly.
Inhouse development and manufacturing We have a 1500m2 GMPcertified development and manufacturing facility with the capacity to produce up to 100 million capsules of product per year.
Our team has decades of expertise in anaerobic fermentation and the knowhow to scale and produce our Live Biotherapeutics ready for clinical testing and beyond.
Clinical operations Our expanded clinical operations team is in place to manage our multiple clinical studies as we advance through the clinic.
By the end of 2018 we plan to have four clinical programmes underway in parallel and with programmes in areas such as multiple sclerosis and rheumatoid arthritis in the final stages of development.
Functional screen
Immunology
Gut physiology Mechanism of action
Immunology
Gut physiology
RCB
Scaleup
Lyophilisation
Stability
Safety
Potency
Source
Gut microbiota from healthy humans
Individual bacterial strains on selective media
Mechanisms
Preclinical models
Preclinical models
Blautix Irritable Bowel Syndrome Rosburix Ulcerative colitis Thetanix Crohnsite
S Chairmans Statement
With its upcoming programme of trials 4D is well placed to deliver meaningful clinical data to support the use of Live Biotherapeutics across multiple indications increasing intellectual property estate helps secure our leading position in the field.
As we move forward our key goal is to deliver meaningful clinical data to support the use of Live Biotherapeutics across multiple indications.
I believe that through our upcoming programme of clinical trials we are well positioned to achieve this.
Governance and Board The Board is committed to maintaining high standards of governance both at Board level and operationally throughout the business.
The Companys Corporate Governance Statement can be found on pages 15 to 17.
Our people We could not have achieved what we have without the continued support of our staff throughout our sites in Europe and also those involved in our wider collaborations.
I would like to thank them all for their contribution to the progress we have made in 2017.
David Norwood NonExecutive Chairman 20 April 2018 Strategic objectives Since the Group s initial public offering 4D has grown rapidly to become a world leader in the development of Live Biotherapeutics an endtoend microbiome company from research to development and manufacture.
Our research teams continue to further the understanding both of our programmes and their mechanisms and of the microbiome generally.
The past twelve months have seen the validation of MicroDx our diagnostic platform enabling the stratification of IBS patients.
Our GMPcertified facility in Len Spain has enabled the development scaleup for our candidate strains and has increased clinicalproduction capacity to up to 100 million capsules per annum.
Meanwhile our Consistent progress to lead a burgeoning field 4D pharma is founded and MicroRx platform developed Second clinical trial in paediatric Crohn s Disease GMP certification for manufacturing facility and 200 patents granted Target four programmes in the clinic and two immunooncology clinical studies in UK and US First clinical trial in IBS and MRx0518 discovered
Companies
Companies Publications
4D pharma plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 04
STRATEGIC REPORT Chief Executive Officers Report
In 2017 4D has made significant progress towards its goal of delivering Live Biotherapeutics as safe and effective therapies 4Ds approach If we step back and look at what 4D is trying to do namely to bring to market not only new drugs but a new therapeutic modality it is not an easy task.
The FDA approved only 22 new drugs in 2016 and only eight of those were first in class.
Nevertheless we believe 4D is well positioned to achieve its goals.
With any new drug whether or not first in class or new modality there is risk.
Any new drug or modality brings concern over safety and it is rightly the top priority for the industry and regulators.
More than 50% of traditional drug programme failures can be attributed to safety.
Notwithstanding this given the pull for new or better medicines industry and investors are prepared to accept such risks and as we have recently seen with the interest in CART therapies successfully bringing a new therapeutic class to market can deliver significant value to investors.
It is widely believed that Live Biotherapeutics and the microbiome will go some way to address such risks by bringing a different approach to treatment regimes and to disease and doing so safely.
This puts a high expectation on Live Biotherapeutics and the field of microbiome research and to date the field has fallen short of this expectation.
Building upon our work and investment in research clinical progression and manufacturing capability we believe 4D is well positioned to change this.
During 2017 we have laid the groundwork to take our products into patients across a host of disease areas with the aim to provide robust clinical data to demonstrate the potential of Live Biotherapeutics.
Current clinical programmes We have worked with regulators and clinicians both in Europe and the United States to develop Blautix our clinical programme in Irritable Bowel Syndrome IBS.
Building on the patient data from the phase I trials which both reinforced the safety of our Live Biotherapeutics and highlighted promising efficacy signals we believe Blautix to address a key underlying cause of the disease and not just the symptoms as is the case with current available treatments.
Consequently we are looking to address the IBS subtypes IBSC constipation and IBSD diarrhoea in our upcoming phase II trial.
Targeting commencement of dosing in the second half of 2018 the trial will be conducted in both Europe and the United
The trial will look to dose up to 500 patients to give sufficient power to indicate efficacy as well as providing further insights into a disease which is estimated to affect over 10% of the global population but irrespective of its prevalence is not yet well understood.
We have completed dosing in the phase I study of Thetanix our clinical programme in Paediatric Crohns Disease and we will report the outcome of this study in the coming months.
Moving to the next stage of the development of Thetanix we have decided to initially focus our efforts on the adult population.
The rationale for this is that whilst the need for a safe and effective paediatric solution remains high it is a reflection of the severe nature of the disease that our recruitment for the phase Ib trial was slow with a number of eligible patients screened experiencing flare before they could enter the trial.
We will explore opportunities to remain active with this group of patients and continue to involve those patients and clinicians we have been working with.
The Thetanix phase II study will recruit adult Crohns Disease patients and we anticipate making regulatory submissions for this study in the second half of 2018.
Oncology and other pending clinical programmes An area of increasing interest in the microbiome field and one 4D has long focussed on is oncology.
In late 2015 our proprietary MicroRx discovery platform identified a bacterium MRx0518 that had shown efficacy in preclinical cancer models.
Through 2017 we have concentrated on two areas of MRx0518 development firstly unpicking the mode of action and secondly preparing for clinical studies.
We believe understanding mechanism is critical to the development of Live Biotherapeutics as a therapeutic class we do not believe the field can continue to take an ecobiotic approach to therapeutics simply relying on a correlation of the presence absence of bacteria.
We aim to understand how the bacteria influence disease by using MicroRx to pick out strains that have a functional effect on pathways that are known by clinicians regulators and industry alike to be associated with disease.
As recently announced 4D has highlighted key aspects of the mode of action of MRx0518 identifying a specific component of the bacteria that stimulates pathways known to be associated with the bodys response to cancer these findings are to be investigated further in upcoming clinical trials.
S Chief Executive Officers Report continued
This observational study was completed in August and we are now well advanced in preparation for a larger multicentre trial to further validate this work at sites in the UK Ireland and the US.
In tandem with research we have focussed on developing our intellectual property estate the largest in the microbiome sector to help secure and consolidate our leading position in the field having at year end 207 granted patents and 320 patent applications from 32 patent families.
To enable this focus we have had to postpone our desire to publish our work but now having gained a marketleading intellectual property position over the coming year we will be actively seeking to publish our research in leading publications and at conferences.
Financial summary In the year to December 2017 our cash and cash equivalents and shortterm deposits reduced from 68.8 million to 50.0 million with a loss before tax of 24.0 million compared with 11.7 million in the year to December 2016 though this included 3.5 million of nonrecurring costs arising from the revaluation of the contingent consideration on Cork after it achieved the first milestone.
Our claim for research and development tax credit was 3.5 million compared with 1.8 million in the year to December 2016.
Our cash burn for the year was in line with expectation reflecting among other things the increased costs of taking our existing clinical programmes forward and preparing our next wave of programmes for upcoming phase I and II trials.
In a similar way to the development of our cancer programmes we are continuing to advance our programme in asthma.
Targeting regulatory submission for the study in Q3 2018 4D will investigate the use of MRx0004 in a phase III study in asthma patients with poorly controlled symptoms.
The trial will primarily investigate the safety of MRx0004 and will additionally have a suite of secondary endpoints to give an indication of efficacy.
Development
Key to the success of our programmes is the ability to deliver therapies to patients.
During 2017 4D further upgraded its development and manufacturing facility in Len in Spain and it is now a standalone fully operational GMPcertified facility for the production of Live Biotherapeutics.
The team at Len has now provided multiple batches of clinical material across a number of programmes and with 4Ds development team is working on the development and scaleup of the next strains coming through the RandD platform.
Research and intellectual property Coming full circle back to research and from where 4D started our scientific teams continue to lead in the understanding of mechanisms of action of our existing programmes to discover new potential disease areas of interest and to support our clinical efforts.
2017 was particularly significant in the development of our understanding of how the microbiome and metabolite profiles of patients can be used in both the diagnosis of disease and the identification of patients likely to respond to our Live Biotherapeutics.
In March 2017 we reported interim clinical data demonstrating our ability to differentiate IBS patients from healthy individuals based Oncology and other pending clinical programmes continued Our approach to the clinical development of MRx0518 encompasses parallel studies to evaluate safety efficacy and antitumour immunity in the monotherapy and combination settings.
Our first trial in oncology is a monotherapy study investigating the effect of MRx0518 on patients with solid tumours in the neoadjuvant setting.
We are treating patients between diagnosis where a biopsy is taken and resection with a followup postsurgery.
In addition to the safety data this trial will generate for MRx0518 the study will provide 4D the opportunity to investigate the impact on MRx0518 on a clean immune system.
Patients enrolled in the study will have early stage disease and thus their immune system will not have been previously exposed to cycles of other cancer therapies.
The early stage of intervention in this trial further demonstrates the lower risk our Live Biotherapeutics represent in terms of safety but also provides potential insights into how MRx0518 may influence treatment regimes postsurgery.
Working with leading institutions as partners such as Imperial College as well as the MD Anderson Cancer Center in Houston one of the worlds most respected institutions focussed on cancer patient care and research our work in oncology has led to the development of strategies to understand the potential of Live Biotherapeutics whether as a single agent adjuvant or in combination.
Furthermore our involvement with these groups and in this space has led us to look at the potential of addressing other diseases associated with the side effects of cancer treatment with our Live Biotherapeutics further demonstrating the impact we believe Live Biotherapeutics can have in the oncology space.
4D pharma plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 06 STRATEGIC REPORT Outlook Throughout 2017 4D made significant progress towards its goal of producing Live Biotherapeutics as safe and effective therapies.
Over the next twelve to 24 months the Group will through its clinical programmes seek to lead the way in generating robust clinical data to support the use of this new class of drugs across multiple indications.
Duncan Peyton
Chief Executive Officer
20 April 2018 The Group continues to manage its cash deposits prudently and invests its funds across a number of financial institutions which have investment grade credit ratings.
The deposits range from instant access to twelvemonth term deposits and are regularly reviewed by the Board.
Cash forecasts are updated monthly to ensure that there is sufficient cash available for the Groups foreseeable requirements.
More details on the Groups treasury policies are provided in note 24 to the financial statements.
Immunooncology
Clinical study Phase Ib LBP candidate MRx0518 Anticipated study opening Q2 2018
Clinical study Phase III LBP candidate MRx0004 Anticipated study regulatory submission Q3 2018 Irritable Bowel Syndrome Clinical study Phase II LBP candidate Blautix Anticipated study opening H2 2018 Crohns Disease Clinical study Phase II LBP candidate Thetanix Anticipated study regulatory submissionsite S Our Business Model and Strategy Leading pharma in a rapidly emerging field Worldleading research
4D seeks via its research base to lead the understanding of how the microbiome functions in health and disease and advance the potential of Live Biotherapeutics including by way of longterm collaborations with worldleading academic institutions.
Performance
4D mines its discovery platform MicroRx to identify Live Biotherapeutics that show therapeutic effect with defined functional mechanisms of action applicable to target indications.
In MicroDx 4D is building a platform to exploit the microbiome for diagnosis to aid the treatment of disease via patient stratification and provide better patient outcomes.
Focus areas 4D focusses on understanding the functionality of Live Biotherapeutics and the mechanisms by which they affect host biology and influence disease and to do so across a number of disease areas to broaden the impact of the microbiome.
Rapid costeffective development
4D seeks to dramatically reduce the development timelines of its programmes by reference to traditional pharma establishing accelerated development processes for its Live Biotherapeutics.
4D targets its programmes to be ready for patient trials within 24 months from concept.
Performance
4D exploits the enhanced safety profiles of therapeutics that originate from a healthy human.
This reduces preclinical testing and lead optimisation timelines and allows firstinman clinical studies in patients as well as healthy individuals.
Focus areas 4D seeks to leverage on every key element of the development process to mine clinically relevant data which can be accessed more swiftly due to the accelerated timelines.
We source and isolate gut bacteria from healthy human donors The Live
We work with partners and through our trials we develop and prove encapsulation We manufacture Live Biotherapeutics in our primary site We deliver our products to our clinic and ultimately to the patient Creating value for Patients Partners Employees Regulators 4D pharma plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 08 STRATEGIC REPORT New regulatory framework
Live Biotherapeutics are a class of drugs whose regulatory environment is new and evolving.
Performance
4D is working with the regulators and clinicians both in Europe and the United States to help understand and define this emerging class of therapeutics and the clinical processes affecting them.
4D seeks to set new standards for safety and delivery building upon its increasing clinical knowhow and experience.
Focus areas 4D regularly engages with worldrenowned key opinion leaders in its target indications to help understand and inform new approaches to disease and to its cause diagnosis and treatment.
Development and delivery
4D has long recognised the need to address and control manufacture and delivery issues early on to ensure against any loss of flexibility and pace of development and maintain speed to the clinic and further to enable multiple programmes to be run in parallel.
Performance
In 2016 4D established its own development and manufacturing facility in Len Spain via the acquisition of the production assets of Instituto Biomar S.
Since then 4D has taken it to a GMPcertified facility enabling the development scaleup for its candidate strains and increasing clinicalproduction capacity to up to 100 million capsules per annum.
Focus areas By bringing in house both manufacture for current and pending clinical programmes and development and scaleup of the strains coming through the RandD programme 4D is continually expanding and refining proprietary knowhow key to the development of Live Biotherapeutics.
Intellectual property rights
In this rapidly developing field 4D believes it is vital to actively pursue patent protection for the innovations made.
Performance
4D has built up its intellectual property estate the largest in the microbiome space in terms of coverage and geographical scope to help secure and consolidate its leading position in the field.
Focus areas Having successfully established this leading position 4D is commencing an extended programme of publications and conferences.
Our Key Performance Indicators Measuring our performance Although we are still in the early stages of our development we track a series of metrics focussed primarily on science and product development whilst ensuring the business has sufficient resources which are being effectively allocated to ensure achievement of our strategic goals.
The Board of 4D and management monitor the progress of our business maintaining discipline throughout the different functions of the business as part of our strategic aim of delivering therapeutic products to the market and becoming a selfsustaining and cashgenerative business.
As we are currently in the prerevenue stage of our development the core focus of the business is on innovation and progression of candidates in our pipeline through the clinic into approved products.
Number of clinical studies commenced 2 0% Pipeline progression performance measure  development of research Longterm value will be created via successful progression of the pipeline through clinical trials into commercial products.
We currently have 17 wholly owned Live Biotherapeutic programmes in the pipeline across various stages of development.
Number of candidates manufactured for clinical trials 5 0% Pipeline progression performance measure  development of product Without the ability to manufacture the products coming through the pipeline we will not be able to commercialise these.
Number of patents granted 207 149% Research and innovation performance measure 4D was born out of innovation and this continues to be a cornerstone of the Group and in 2017 we continued to invest in people facilities and technology.
Our strategic aim is to commercialise Live Biotherapeutic products and as such a comprehensive portfolio of intellectual property is vital to the Group s ability to achieve this.
The Group s portfolio of intellectual property is therefore a valuable asset and a significant amount of resource has been allocated to strengthening this portfolio during the year.
RandD spend 16.9m 66% Financial allocation of resources The split of overheads between research and development RandD and other costs whilst not necessarily highlighting the qualitative aspects of that spend does enable us to ensure that we are directing sufficient operating funds towards the advancement of our technology.
Financial resource measure We need to ensure that we have sufficient cash in hand and on deposit to cover the anticipated future costs of developing the science through our various strategic milestones.
Cash cash equivalents and cash on deposit m 50.0m 27% 4D pharma plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 10 STRATEGIC REPORT Risk and Risk Management Identifying and understanding key risks to the business The Board Ensures comprehensive and appropriate systems of risk management and control are in place across the Group Review of the principal risks within the Group and approval of the Group Risk Register Reports to the shareholders about the risk management within the Group Executive Leadership Team Responsible for the design and implementation of the risk management and internal control systems Review of the Groupwide risk registers and reporting to the Board Department and subsidiary heads Maintenance of the department risk registers implementation and monitoring of all internal controls Reporting to the Executive Leadership Team Setting the tone Designing the system Implementation of the system and completion of review Review of process and outputs Review of high risk areas Risk registers During the year the Group has continued to grow and with this growth the management and mitigation of risk has become more important.
In line with the development of the business we have continued to develop our internal systems of risk management.
4D operates within a complex regulatory environment which is subject to change.
The nature of Live Biotherapeutic product development exposes us to a number of additional risks and uncertainties which could affect our ability to meet our strategic goals our business model and our operating environment.
The Board is accountable for carrying out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Group and has developed a risk management framework which provides the structure within which the principal risks affecting our business are managed and sets the tone culture and appetite for risk.
The key objectives for this process are to ensure that the risk appetite of the Board is embedded throughout the Group and fully understood by all members of the team who have responsibility for managing the risk and making key business decisions.
This will then be encoded in systems of internal controls which will seek to mitigate the principal risks that could affect the strategy and operation of our business model and finally to ensure that identified risks are reported to the relevant stakeholders in a timely manner.
We are continuously developing and improving our risk management process through ongoing review and evaluation of the risks clarifying our risk appetite and reviewing the longerterm viability of the business to make sure that we fully understand our risks and are managing them appropriately.
These systems can be summarised as followssite S Why is it important A thirdparty patent could be granted that affects a 4D technology or product.
This could lead to us having to negotiate a licence seeking to revoke the patent in legal proceedings or even being unable to commercialise the future product materially affecting future revenues.
Thirdparty patents could limit the Groups freedom to operate Current mitigating actions 4D is diligent in carrying out searches to identify potential thirdparty IP a comprehensive freedom to operate strategy has been developed and implemented to ensure that no blocking patents owned by third parties are unexpectedly granted.
The thirdparty patent landscape is under continuous review.
The Group has developed and continues to develop comprehensive and wideranging filings of detailed patents across the Groups technology portfolio.
There have been a significant number of patents granted since the inception of 4D including US and European patents on each of the lead projects with a substantial yearonyear growth of the portfolio and an increasing number of new applications filed.
Change in level of risk No change Why is it important Live Biotherapeutic products are a novel and emerging technology neither 4D nor anyone else has taken a product through development to the marketplace.
We are currently working on a number of wholly owned development programmes of our pipeline which will provide the Group with the opportunity to selfcommercialise.
Failure to complete development activities to plan may impact on the Groups ability to bring products to market on time which would affect the timings of future revenues and hinder the Groups ability to deliver its strategic goals.
Product development in a breakthrough technology could encounter unforeseen delays to programmes Current mitigating actions As we complete each stage of development and move through the clinic we broaden our understanding of how to bring Live Biotherapeutic products to market.
In addition as we widen our programmes in different disease areas we further mitigate the risk of failure of a single programme.
While Live Biotherapeutic products are novel the associated regulatory and clinical pathways are based on existing frameworks.
During the year we have continued to make significant investments in our clinical team and we plan for this to continue in 2018 as we head into the clinic for both phase I and phase II trials.
Change in level of risk
Why is it important In any business but particularly in a business growing so readily in terms of staff and sites and in an emerging field it is vital that we know that our systems are secure and efficient to protect our data and ensure efficient collaboration.
Security and resilience of our IT systems and data Current mitigating actions We commissioned a review of our systems in 2016 and in 2017 these were successfully rolled out across the Group.
These systems provide the Group with a secure efficient platform through which we are able to share information and collaborate effectively across all sites and with external partners.
Change in level of risk
Risk and Risk Management continued
4D pharma plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 12 STRATEGIC REPORT Why is it important The biotechnology and pharmaceutical markets are highly regulated by government authorities in the UK the US and Europe.
These regulatory requirements are a major factor in determining whether a substance can be developed into a marketable product and the amount of time and cost associated with such development.
Even if products are approved they may still face subsequent regulatory difficulties which could result in delays and therefore financial loss.
Failure to gain regulatory approval Current mitigating actions We have continued to invest in the clinical and regulatory team during the year.
Change in level of risk
Why is it important Although 4D reports its results in Sterling a significant proportion of our operations trade in local currency and as such the Group has a large exposure to the Euro and to a lesser extent the US Dollar.
Fluctuations in these currencies could therefore impact the Sterling operating costs and therefore the cash flows of the Group.
Current mitigating actions We constantly monitor currencies and their movements against Sterling.
As the Group is currently prerevenue the exposure affects the cost of operations and although the size of the exposure is significant we have sufficient cash resources to manage these changes and have planned these prudently into our forward forecasts.
Change in level of risk No change Exchange rate movements Why is it important The UK decision to leave the EU could have a significant impact on the way the Group operates both in terms of our foreign subsidiaries overseas suppliers and in eventual revenue from any products which get to market.
At the moment we are not certain of the impact that this will have on trade tariffs taxation the impact on the nature of international trade including access to trade and the exchange rate which affects the relative cost and income that will be recognised in the accounts and in future planning.
Current mitigating actions As the Group is currently prerevenue the impact is currently limited to fluctuations in costs and as a result of the exchange rate and any cross border tariffs.
Through constant monitoring of the situation the Group remains reactive and looks to adjust its policies accordingly to minimise any adverse factors resulting from the ongoing negotiations.
The Group reviews its cash flow projections for changes in exchange rates and the impact it would have and manages its holdings in funds accordingly.
Change in level of risk
UK referendum to leave the European Union EU  Brexit The Strategic Report on pages 2 to 13 was approved by the Board on 20 April 2018 and signed on its behalf bysite S Audit and Risk Committee A Remuneration Committee R
Board of Directors We believe in the importance of good corporate governance David Norwood NonExecutive Chairman David has had a long career building a number of science technology and investment companies.
He is the founder of IP Group plc one of the UKs leading technology commercialisation businesses and a shareholder in the Company.
Previously he was chief executive of stockbroker Beeson Gregory acquired by Evolution Group plc after it acquired IndexIT Partnership a technology advisory boutique he had founded in 1999.
He was a founding shareholder of Evolution Group plc recently acquired by Investec and also cofounder of Ora Capital plc.
He has been a founder and director of many UK technology companies including Oxford Nanopore Technologies Limited Proximagen Limited Synairgen plc Ilika Technologies Limited Oxford Catalysts and Plectrum Petroleum acquired by Cairn Energy plc.
He has also acted as seed investor andor advisor to Wolfson Microelectronics Limited Nanoco Technologies Limited Tissue Regenix Group plc and Arc International now part of Synopsys.
He is also nonexecutive chairman of Abaco Capital plc and Genomics plc.
Duncan Peyton
Chief Executive Officer
Duncan has a proven track record in identifying investing and growing businesses within the pharmaceutical sector.
He was the founder of Aquarius Equity a specialist investor in businesses within the life sciences sector which provided investors with access to innovative high growth potential companies that delivered significant capital growth.
Duncan started his career in a bioscience startup business which ultimately went on to list on the London Stock Exchange subsequently qualified as a corporate finance lawyer with Addleshaw Goddard then Addleshaw Booth and Co and later joined 3i plc as an investment manager.
Duncan founded Aquarius in 2005 which made founding investments into Nanoco Technologies Limited Auralis Limited subsequently sold to ViroPharma Tissue Regenix Group plc Brabant Pharma subsequently sold to Zogenix and C4X Discovery plc.
Alexander Stevenson Chief Scientific Officer Alex began his career as a microbiologist working in research for a number of years before joining an NYSEquoted drug development company.
He subsequently moved into pharmaceutical and healthcare investment and has fulfilled a number of boardlevel investment and operational management roles.
He was a director and shareholder in Aquarius Equity from 2008 where he was responsible for identifying new investments and developing and implementing scientific strategies both pre and postinvestment.
These included Tissue Regenix Group plc C4X Discovery Holdings plc and Brabant Pharma subsequently sold to Zogenix Inc.
Prior to joining Aquarius Equity Alex worked for IP Group plc where he specialised in life sciences investments identifying developing and advising a number of companies in its portfolio some of which went on to list on AIM.
He joined IP Group following its acquisition of Techtran Group Limited in 2005.
Thomas Engelen NonExecutive Director Thomas has been a founder andor nonexecutive director of a number of UK life sciences companies including Colonis Pharma Limited Warneford Partners Limited Martindale Pharma Limited and Pneumagen Limited.
Thomas has supported private equity and other investors in over 50 potential deal transactions on targets in Europe and the USA from cash constrainedchapter 11 to cash rich with enterprise value of up to 1 billion.
Before this Thomas worked in life sciences for over 20 years in senior executive roles.
Starting in 1987 at Akzo Nobel Pharma he worked with hospital products diagnostics and medical equipment as general manager for the Middle East and Africa.
After this he led Rosemont Pharmaceuticals in Leeds in niche oral liquid medicines followed by being president of Organon in Brazil.
He was promoted to VP The Americas and lastly to CMO at Organon in charge of the global product portfolio based in the USA.
Returning to Europe he led Novartis Consumer Health in the UK.
Thomas has also acted as nonexecutive chairman at Akcros Holdings Limited Penlan Healthcare and Quantum Pharmaceutical.
4D pharma plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 14 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE This section of the Annual Report describes the Groups corporate governance structures and processes and how they have been applied during the year ended 31 December 2017.
The Companys ordinary shares have been admitted to trading on AIM of the London Stock Exchange and the Company is subject to the continuing requirements of the AIM Rules.
The UK Corporate Governance Code sets out the principles of good practice in relation to corporate governance which should be followed by companies with a full listing on the London Stock Exchange.
Although the Company is not required to comply with the UK Corporate Governance Code by virtue of being an AIMquoted company the Board seeks to apply the QCA Corporate Governance Code for Small and MidSize Quoted Companies QCA Guidelines to the extent appropriate and practical for a company of its nature and size.
This section provides general information on the Groups adoption of the QCA Guidelines.
Board composition and responsibility The Board consists of four Directors two of whom are NonExecutive.
The names of the Directors together with their biographical details are set out on page 14.
The Board has determined that Thomas Engelen is independent in character and judgement and that there are no relationships or circumstances which could materially affect or interfere with the exercise of his independent judgement.
Thomas previously provided ad hoc consultancy services to the Companys subsidiary 4D Pharma Research Limited which were consequential to his former role as one of its NonExecutive
Such services ceased in early 2015 prior to 4D Pharma Research Limited becoming a wholly owned subsidiary and the Board does not believe that such historical services compromise his independence in any way.
The Board has determined that David Norwood is not independent by virtue only of his holding of ordinary shares in the Company summarised on page 23.
The Board has nevertheless determined that save only for his holding of ordinary shares there are no relationships or circumstances which could materially affect or interfere with the exercise of his independent judgement.
The Board remains satisfied with its composition and the balance between Executive and NonExecutive Directors which allows it to exercise objectivity in decision making and proper control of the Groups business.
The Board notes the recommendation in the QCA Guidelines that a company should have at least two independent nonexecutive directors and should not be dominated by one person or a group of people.
The Board believes it meets this recommendation save only in respect of the holding of ordinary shares in the Company by David Norwood.
Decision making The Boards primary objective is to focus on adding value to the assets of the Group by identifying and assessing business opportunities and ensuring that potential risks are identified monitored and controlled.
Material issues are reserved to a decision of the Board including approval and review of performance of the Groups strategic aims and objectives approval of the annual operating and capital expenditure budgets and any material changes to them approval of all financial statements and results and maintenance of a sound system of internal control and risk management.
The implementation of Board decisions and daytoday operations of the Group are delegated to Executive Directors.
Corporate Governance Statement
Chairmans introduction On behalf of the Board I am pleased to present our Corporate Governance Statement for the year ended 31 December 2017.
Since the Companys initial public offering as the Company and the Group have grown the Board has maintained a regular review and evaluation of its effectiveness and that of the wider governance structure of the Group.
As an AIMquoted company the Company is not required to comply with the UK Corporate Governance Code.
The Board has nevertheless always sought to apply policies and procedures which reflect the principles of good governance and best practice reflected in the Code as appropriate to the size nature and stage of development of the Company.
We believe the Companys governance structure has facilitated the growth and development of the Group.
However as set out in the Corporate Governance Statement as the Group continues to grow we will maintain this evaluation and take the governance steps necessary to support the Groups development.
G Decision making continued The Board meets both at regular intervals and also at short notice to consider specific matters for example proposed material transactions.
The Board receives appropriate and timely information prior to each meeting with a formal agenda and Board and Committee papers being distributed several days before meetings take place.
Any Director may challenge Group proposals and decisions are taken democratically after discussion.
Any Director who feels that any concern remains unresolved after discussion may ask for that concern to be noted in the minutes of the meeting.
Any specific actions arising from such meetings are agreed by the Board and then followed up by management.
The NonExecutive Directors constructively challenge and help develop proposals on strategy and bring strong independent judgement knowledge and experience to the Boards deliberations.
The Directors are given access to independent professional advice at the Groups expense when the Directors deem it is necessary in order for them to carry out their responsibilities.
The Group has effective procedures in place to deal with conflicts of interest.
The Board is aware of other commitments of its Directors and changes to these commitments are reported to the Board.
Appointment and reelection of Directors All Directors of the Company have been appointed or reappointed by shareholders the Chairman was appointed to the Board by resolution of the shareholders of the Company on 5 February 2014 prior to the admission of the Company shares to trading on AIM on 18 February 2014 and will offer himself for reelection at the forthcoming Annual General Meeting of the Company.
Corporate Governance Statement continued
Each of the Directors is subject to retirement by rotation and reelection in accordance with the articles of association of the Company.
All Directors appointed by the Board are subject to election by shareholders at the first Annual General Meeting after their appointment.
Board evaluation Given its composition and flexibility the Board has been able since the admission of the Companys shares to trading on AIM to maintain a regular evaluation of its effectiveness and that of its Committees.
It is believed that the Board and its Committees have functioned well throughout this period meeting with appropriate regularity and with Directors free to voice differing opinions.
In particular the Board still considers its composition to be appropriate in view of the size and requirements of the Groups business and the need to maintain a practical balance between Executives and NonExecutives.
However it also considers that the Group is nearing the position where the Board would benefit from additional independent input.
The Board is actively considering potential candidates for a further independent NonExecutive Director.
Committees
The Board has established an Audit and Risk Committee and a Remuneration Committee with formally delegated duties and responsibilities.
The Board has since the admission of the Companys shares to trading on AIM kept under regular review the possible establishment of a nomination committee.
The Board remains of the view that given the current composition of the Board it is not appropriate to have a nomination committee.
This will continue to be kept under regular review by the Board.
Board composition members Executive 2 NonExecutive 2 4D pharma plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 16 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE The Audit and Risk Committee The Audit and Risk Committee comprises Thomas Engelen as Chairman and David Norwood as the other member of the Committee.
Thomas Engelen is an independent Director and has recent and relevant financial experience.
The
Committee has primary responsibility for monitoring the quality of internal controls ensuring that the financial performance of the Company is properly measured and reported on and reviewing reports from the Companys auditor relating to the Companys accounting and internal controls in all cases having due regard to the interests of shareholders.
A report from the Chairman of the Audit and Risk Committee is on pages 18 and 19.
The Remuneration Committee The Company has established a formal and transparent procedure for developing policy on Executive remuneration and for fixing the remuneration packages of individual Directors and senior management.
The
Remuneration Committee comprises Thomas Engelen as Chairman and David Norwood as the other member of the Committee.
The Committee reviews the performance of the Executive Directors and senior management and determines their terms and conditions of service including their remuneration and the grant of incentives having due regard to the interests of shareholders.
A report from the Chairman of the Remuneration Committee is on pages 20 and 21.
The Board believes that in accordance with the QCA Guidelines the Audit and Risk Committee and the Remuneration Committee have the necessary character skills and knowledge to discharge their duties and responsibilities effectively notwithstanding that given the overall composition of the Board there is not a majority of members who are independent NonExecutive Directors.
Each Committee is however chaired by an independent NonExecutive Director.
Meetings
The number of Board and Committee meetings attended by each of the Directors during the year is shown below Audit and Risk Remuneration Full Board Committee Committee Number of meetings in year 7 1 1
Executive Directors Duncan Peyton 7 Dr Alexander Stevenson 7 NonExecutive Directors David Norwood 7 1 1 Thomas Engelen 6 1 1 Approach to risk and internal control The Board is responsible for establishing and maintaining the Groups systems of internal control.
The primary responsibility for monitoring the quality of internal control has been delegated to the Audit and Risk
Reference is made to the statement on Risk and Risk Management on pages 11 to 13.
Communicating vision and strategy The Directors seek to visit institutional shareholders at least twice a year.
In addition all shareholders can attend the Companys Annual General Meeting where there is an opportunity to question the Directors as part of the agenda or more informally after the meeting.
Communication with shareholders is seen as an important part of the Boards responsibilities and care is taken to ensure that all pricesensitive information is made available to all shareholders at the same time.
G Report of the Audit and Risk Committee The Committee acts independently of management to ensure the interests of shareholders are protected in relation to financial reporting internal controls and risk management.
As Chairman of the Audit and Risk Committee I am pleased to present our report for the year ended 31 December 2017.
The
Audit and Risk Committee is a subcommittee of the Board and is responsible for reviewing all aspects of the financial reporting of the business and all aspects of internal control.
The Committee represents the interests of our shareholders in relation to the integrity of information and the effectiveness of the audit processes in place.
Key responsibilities The Committee acts independently of management to ensure the interests of shareholders are protected in relation to financial reporting internal controls and risk management.
The principal duties of the Committee are to monitor the integrity of the Groups financial reporting including the review of significant financial reporting judgements advise the Board on whether taken as a whole the Annual Report and Accounts are fair balanced and understandable advise the Board on principal risks their mitigation and risk appetite review the robustness of our risk management and internal controls oversee the external audit process including monitoring the auditors independence objectivity effectiveness and performance and approve any engagement by the external auditor outside of the Groups audit.
The Committee manages the relationship with the external auditor on behalf of the Board to ensure that the external auditor continues to be independent objective and effective in its work and also considers the reappointment of the auditor each year.
RSM UK Audit LLP was appointed as auditor in 2014 following a comprehensive tender process.
Each year the Committee considers the continued independence of the external auditor and the effectiveness of the external audit process to determine whether to recommend to the Board that the current auditor be reappointed.
The Committee has reviewed the external audit process in the year through meetings and reviewing the reports from the external audit team.
The Committee has concluded that the external audit process was effective and is satisfied that the scope of the audit is appropriate and that significant judgements have been robustly challenged.
Composition and meetings The Audit Committee during the year under review has consisted of two NonExecutive
The Committee is chaired by me Thomas Engelen with David Norwood as the other member.
I am an independent Director and have recent and relevant financial experience.
There was one meeting held in the year ended 31 December 2017 in April.
Committee meetings are also attended by Stephen Dunbar the Finance Director and representatives from the external auditor.
Members
Thomas Engelen Chairman David Norwood 4D pharma plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 18 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE Significant issues relating to the financial statements The specific issues considered by the Audit Committee in the year under review in relation to the financial statements are shown below.
Valuation of goodwill and other intangible assets Testing of goodwill and other intangible assets for potential impairment is complex and requires a number of management estimates and sensitivities to be applied which inevitably requires judgement and is a recurring matter.
The forecasting tools developed by management to help assess the values of intangible assets and goodwill were updated for variables that were known to have changed.
The Committee reviewed the reports together with the assumptions judgements and sensitivities applied to the valuations and underlying models for impairment testing purposes.
Following this review and after discussions with management the Committee is satisfied that no impairment charge should be recorded in the year to 31 December 2017 and that the disclosures in the financial statements are appropriate.
G Report of the Remuneration Committee The Committee aims to attract retain and motivate the executive management of the Company and set remuneration at an appropriate level.
As Chairman of the Remuneration Committee I am pleased to present our report for the year ended 31 December 2017.
This report does not constitute a Directors remuneration report in accordance with the Companies Act 2006.
As a company whose shares are admitted to trading on AIM the Company is not required by the Companies Act 2006 to prepare such a report.
Key responsibilities The Remuneration Committee is a subcommittee of the Board.
Its principal purpose is to determine and agree with the Board the framework and broad policy for remuneration and to determine the remuneration packages and service contracts of the Executive Directors the Company Secretary and such other members of the executive management as it considers appropriate.
Among other things the Committee shall approve the design of and determine targets for any performance incentive schemes operated by the Company and approve the awards made under such schemes.
Composition and meetings During the year the members of the Committee were me Thomas Engelen an independent NonExecutive Director and David Norwood the NonExecutive Group Chairman.
All members served on the Committee throughout the year and to the date of this report.
I was Chairman of the Committee throughout this period.
There was one meeting held of the Committee in the year ended 31 December 2017 held in April.
The meeting was convened to consider and review the Groups remuneration policy and to approve annual awards to senior management under the Groups Long Term Incentive Plan.
There were no changes to the remuneration or service agreements of the Executive Directors during the period.
Policy on Executive remuneration The Committee aims to attract retain and motivate the executive management of the Company and set remuneration at an appropriate level to promote the longterm success of the Group in line with its strategic objectives.
The overall policy of the Board is to ensure that executive management is provided with appropriate incentives to encourage enhanced performance and in a fair and responsible manner rewarded for its contribution to the success of the Group.
The main elements of the remuneration packages for Executive Directors and senior management are as follows Basic annual salary The base salary is reviewed annually.
The review process is undertaken by the Remuneration Committee and takes into account several factors including the current position and development of the Group individual contributions and market salaries for comparable organisations.
The Company does not provide an occupational pension scheme for Executive Directors nor does it make contributions into the private pension schemes of Executive Directors.
Members
Thomas Engelen Chairman David Norwood 4D pharma plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 20 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE Discretionary annual bonus All Executive Directors and senior managers are eligible for a purely discretionary annual bonus.
This takes into account exceptional individual contribution business performance and technical and commercial progress along with financial results.
Longterm incentives The Group operates a longterm share incentive scheme all Group Executive Directors and employees are eligible for the granting of awards under the scheme.
Details of the awards made under the scheme during the year are provided in note 21 to the financial statements.
All such awards vest after three years and are subject to individual performance criteria.
There were no awards during the year to the Directors of the Company.
Benefits in kind The Company provides taxable healthcare benefits for Executives.
Policy on NonExecutive Directors remuneration NonExecutive Directors receive a fixed fee and do not receive any pension payments or other benefits nor do they participate in bonus or incentive schemes.
The Board reviews NonExecutive remuneration to ensure that it is in line with current market rates in order to attract and retain high calibre individuals.
Service contracts Duncan Peyton and Dr Alexander Stevenson have service agreements with an indefinite term providing for a maximum of twelve months notice by either party.
NonExecutive Directors are employed on letters of appointment which may be terminated on not less than three months notice.
Directors interests in share capital At 31 December 2017 and at the date of this report David Norwood held 7000000 ordinary shares in the Companys share capital or 10.7% 31 December 2016 10.8% each of Duncan Peyton and Dr Alexander Stevenson held 6250286 ordinary shares in the Companys share capital or 9.5% 31 December 2016 9.6% and Thomas Engelen held 500000 shares in the Companys share capital or 0.8% 31 December 2016 0.8%.
No Director was granted any share options in the year ended 31 December 2017 none of the Directors held any share options at 31 December 2017.
Thomas Engelen Chairman of the Remuneration Committee 20 April 2018 Directors remuneration The remuneration of the Directors who served on the Companys Board during the year to 31 December 2017 is as follows 31 December 2017 31 December 2016 Base salary and fees Total Base salary and fees Total Executive Directors Duncan Peyton 10telDr Alexander Stevenson 10telNonExecutive Directors David Norwood Thomas Engelen 25 25 25 2tel252 There were no bonus or pension schemes for the Directors during the year ended 31 December 2017.
G Directors Report The Directors present their report together with the audited consolidated financial statements along with the Auditors Report for the year ended 31 December 2017.
Pages 2 to 24 inclusive together with sections of the Annual Report incorporated by reference comprise a Directors Report that has been drawn up and presented in accordance with and in reliance upon applicable English company law and the liabilities of Directors in connection with that report shall be subject to the limitations and restrictions provided by such law.
Strategic Report In accordance with section 414C11 of the Companies Act 2006 and the Companies Act 2006 Strategic Report and Directors Report Regulations 2013 the Group has chosen to set out in the Strategic Report information required by schedule 7 of the Large and Mediumsized Companies and Groups Accounts and Reports Regulations 2008.
Directors
The Directors who held office during the year and as at the date of signing the financial statements and brief biographical descriptions of the Directors are set out on page 14.
The beneficial and nonbeneficial interests of the Directors in the Companys ordinary shares of 0.25 pence are disclosed in the Report of the Remuneration Committee on pages 20 and 21.
No Director had an interest in any contract that was significant in relation to the Groups business at any time during the year.
Directors indemnity insurance The Group has maintained insurance throughout the year for its Directors and officers against the consequences of actions brought against them in relation to their duties for the Group.
Such provision remains in force as at the date of approval of the Directors Report.
Research and development activities The principal activity of the Group is research and development a review of which is included in the CEOs Report on pages 5 to 7.
T otal research and development spend in the year to 31 December 2017 was 16.9 million 31 December 2016 10.2 million.
No development expenditure was capitalised in the current year or the year to 31 December 2016.
Subsequent events There have been no important events affecting the Company or the Group since the year end.
Dividends
The Directors do not recommend payment of a dividend nor was there a dividend in the year to 31 December 2016.
Employment policies The Group is committed to ensuring the health and safety of its employees in the workplace.
This includes the provision of regular medical checks.
The Group is committed to keeping employees as fully informed as possible with regard to the Groups performance and prospects and seeks their views wherever possible on matters which affect them as employees.
Financial instruments Details of the Groups financial risk management objectives and policies are disclosed in note 24 to the financial statements.
Research and development spend 68 32L RandD 2017 16.9m 2016 10.2m 4D pharma plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 22 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE Share capital and funding As at 31 December 2017 share capital comprised 65493842 ordinary shares of 0.25 pence each.
There is only one class of share and all shares are fully paid.
No share carries any right to fixed income and each share carries the right to one vote at general meetings of the Company.
Full details of the Group s and the Company s share capital movements during the year are given in note 20 to the financial statements.
Details of shares under option are provided in note 21 to the financial statements.
Corporate Governance Statement
The Groups statement on corporate governance can be found in the Corporate Governance Statement on pages 15 to 17.
Going concern The CEOs Report on pages 5 to 7 outlines the business activities of the Group along with the factors which may affect its future development and performance and discusses the Groups financial position along with details of its cash flow and liquidity.
Reference is made to the statement on Risk and Risk Management on pages 11 to 13.
Having prepared management forecasts and made appropriate enquiries the Directors are satisfied that the Group has adequate cash and other resources for the foreseeable future as the Group is at the startup stage of its business lifecycle.
Accordingly they have continued to adopt the going concern basis in preparing the Group and Company financial statements.
Disclosure of information to the auditor The Directors who held office at the date of approval of this Directors Report confirm that so far as they are each aware there is no relevant audit information of which the Groups auditor is unaware and each Director has taken all the steps that he ought to have taken as a Director to make himself aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that the Groups auditor is aware of that information.
Auditor
RSM UK Audit LLP has indicated its willingness to continue in office.
Ordinary
Annual General Meeting The Annual General Meeting of the Company will be held on 21 May 2018 at 11 a.
1 Pancras Square London N1C 4AG.
Recommendation
The Board considers that the resolutions to be proposed at the Annual General Meeting are in the best interests of the Company and it is unanimously recommended that shareholders support these proposals as the Board intends to do in respect of its own holdings.
The Directors Report was approved by the Board on 20 April 2018 and was signed on its behalf by Duncan Peyton
Chief Executive Officer
20 April 2018 Substantial shareholders The Company has been notified of the following interests of shareholders of 3% or more of the issued ordinary share capital of the Company at 31 December 2017 based on the ordinary shares in issue of 65493842 31 December 2016 64858150 Number of 0.25 pence ordinary Number of 0.25 pence ordinary shares as at 31 December 2017 % of issued capital shares as at 31 December 2016 % of issued capital Woodford Investment Management 17514561 26.7 17514561 27.0 Invesco Asset Management Limited 9163617 14.0 9163617 14.1 David Robert Norwood 7000000 10.7 7000000 10.8 Duncan Joseph Peyton 6250286 9.5 6250286 9.6 Dr Alexander James Stevenson 6250286 9.5 6250286 9.6 Lansdowne Partners 3000000 4.6 3000000 4.6 There were no notified significant changes in these holdings between 31 December 2017 and the date of the signing of these financial statements.
G Statement of Directors Responsibilities In relation to the Annual Report and financial statements The Directors are responsible for preparing the Strategic Report the Directors Report and the financial statements in accordance with applicable law and regulations.
Company law requires the Directors to prepare Group and Company financial statements for each financial year.
The
Directors are required by the AIM Rules of the London Stock Exchange to prepare Group financial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS as adopted by the European Union EU and have elected under company law to prepare the Company financial statements in accordance with IFRS as adopted by the EU.
The Group financial statements are required by law and IFRS adopted by the EU to present fairly the financial position of the Group and the Company and the financial performance of the Group.
The
Companies Act 2006 provides in relation to such financial statements that references in the relevant part of that Act to financial statements giving a true and fair view are references to their achieving a fair presentation.
Under company law the Directors must not approve the financial statements unless they are satisfied that they give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Group and the Company and of the profit or loss of the Group and the Company for that period.
In preparing each of the Group and Company financial statements the Directors are required to a. b. c. d.
Group and the Company will continue in business.
The Directors are responsible for keeping adequate accounting records that are sufficient to show and explain the Groups and the Companys transactions and disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the financial position of the Group and the Company and enable them to ensure that the financial statements comply with the Companies Act 2006.
They are also responsible for safeguarding the assets of the Group and the Company and hence for taking reasonable steps for the prevention and detection of fraud and other irregularities.
The Directors are responsible for the maintenance and integrity of the corporate and financial information included on the 4D pharma plc website.
Legislation in the United Kingdom governing the preparation and dissemination of financial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
4D pharma plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 24 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE Opinion We have audited the financial statements of 4D pharma plc the parent company and its subsidiaries the group for the year ended 31 December 2017 which comprise the group statement of consolidated total comprehensive income the group and parent company statements of financial position the group and parent company statements of changes in equity the group and parent company statements of cash flows and notes to the financial statements including a summary of significant accounting policies.
The financial reporting framework that has been applied in their preparation is applicable law and International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and as regards the parent company financial statements as applied in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006.
In our opinion the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the groups and of the parent companys affairs as at 31 December 2017 and of the groups loss for the year then ended the group financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union the parent company financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and as applied in accordance with the Companies Act 2006 and the financial statements have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006.
Basis for opinion We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing UK ISAs UK and applicable law.
Our
We are independent of the group and parent company in accordance with the ethical requirements that are relevant to our audit of the financial statements in the UK including the FRCs Ethical Standard as applied to listed entities and we have fulfilled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with these requirements.
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion.
Conclusions relating to going concern We have nothing to report in respect of the following matters in relation to which the ISAs UK require us to report to you where the directors use of the going concern basis of accounting in the preparation of the financial statements is not appropriate or the directors have not disclosed in the financial statements any identified material uncertainties that may cast significant doubt about the groups or the parent companys ability to continue to adopt the going concern basis of accounting for a period of at least twelve months from the date when the financial statements are authorised for issue.
Key audit matters Key audit matters are those matters that in our professional judgement were of most significance in our audit of the financial statements of the current period and include the most significant assessed risks of material misstatement whether or not due to fraud we identified including those which had the greatest effect on the overall audit strategy the allocation of resources in the audit and directing the efforts of the engagement team.
These matters were addressed in the context of our audit of the financial statements as a whole and in forming our opinion thereon and we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters.
Impairment of intangible assets Refer to pages 38 and 39 regarding the accounting policy in respect of intangible assets page 36 in respect of critical judgements and estimates applied by the Directors and note 11 to the financial statements on pages 48 and 49.
The risk No amortisation was provided against the intellectual property as whilst they were deemed to be separately identifiable under IFRS 3 Business Combinations they are not yet generating economic benefit.
Due to the regulatory and other uncertainties inherent in the development and the success of the Groups programmes there is a risk that if programme scales are not achieved an impairment may need to be required.
Our response We have challenged managements workings and calculation by reference to the underlying valuation models and assumptions.
We have assessed whether the models used in the prior year are still appropriate and have assessed the sensitivity analysis to consider whether there is appropriate headroom.
We highlight that management have used the base case valuation outcome in respect of the valuation models in each assessment which is considered to be prudent and appropriate given the stage of the programme lifecycles.
We have assessed the adequacy of the financial statement disclosures.
Independent Auditorsite F Independent Auditors Report continued To the members of 4D pharma plc Carrying value of intragroup balances Refer to page 40 regarding the accounting policy in respect of investments page 40 regarding the accounting policy in respect of financial assets and note 12 to the financial statements on pages 50 and 51.
The risk The Company has material receivables from subsidiary undertakings that are currently loss making.
As a consequence there is a significant risk that these are impaired and need to be written down.
At the 31 December 2017 the carrying value of amounts due from group undertakings amounted to 33159k 2016 24114k in the Company Statement of Financial Position.
Our response As part of our procedures we obtained managements impairment review and underlying calculations and challenged the assumptions used therein before concluding whether or not there are any indicators of impairment against the carrying value of amounts due from group undertakings.
We reviewed forecasts and considered whether they were consistent with the forecasts prepared by management in relation to going concern.
We challenged management and obtained explanations as to how future income estimates were calculated assessing whether they were reasonable and corroborated to supporting evidence.
Our application of materiality When establishing our overall audit strategy we set certain thresholds which help us to determine the nature timing and extent of our audit procedures and to evaluate the effects of misstatements both individually and on the financial statements as a whole.
During planning we determined a magnitude of uncorrected misstatements that we judge would be material for the financial statements as a whole FSM.
During planning FSM was calculated as 1124500 which was not changed during the course of our audit.
We agreed with the Audit Committee that we would report to them all unadjusted differences in excess of 10000 as well as differences below those thresholds that in our view warranted reporting on qualitative grounds.
An overview of the scope of our audit As part of our planning we assessed the risk of material misstatement including those that required significant auditor consideration at the component and group level.
Procedures were then performed to address the risk identified and for the most significant assessed risks of material misstatement the procedures performed are outlined above in the key audit matters section of this report.
Other information The directors are responsible for the other information.
The other information comprises the information included in the annual report other than the financial statements and our auditors report thereon.
Our opinion on the financial statements does not cover the other information and except to the extent otherwise explicitly stated in our report we do not express any form of assurance conclusion thereon.
In connection with our audit of the financial statements our responsibility is to read the other information and in doing so consider whether the other information is materially inconsistent with the financial statements or our knowledge obtained in the audit or otherwise appears to be materially misstated.
If we identify such material inconsistencies or apparent material misstatements we are required to determine whether there is a material misstatement in the financial statements or a material misstatement of the other information.
If based on the work we have performed we conclude that there is a material misstatement of this other information we are required to report that fact.
We have nothing to report in this regard.
Opinions on other matters prescribed by the Companies Act 2006 In our opinion based on the work undertaken in the course of the audit the information given in the Strategic Report and the Directors Report for the financial year for which the financial statements are prepared is consistent with the financial statements and the Strategic Report and the Directors Report have been prepared in accordance with applicable legal requirements.
Matters on which we are required to report by exception In the light of the knowledge and understanding of the group and the parent company and their environment obtained in the course of the audit we have not identified material misstatements in the Strategic Report or the Directors Report.
We have nothing to report in respect of the following matters in relation to which the Companies Act 2006 requires us to report to you if in our opinion adequate accounting records have not been kept by the parent company or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or 4D pharma plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 26 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS the parent company financial statements are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns or certain disclosures of directors remuneration specified by law are not made or we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit.
Responsibilities of directors As explained more fully in the directors responsibilities statement set out on page 24 the directors are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements and for being satisfied that they give a true and fair view and for such internal control as the directors determine is necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error.
In preparing the financial statements the directors are responsible for assessing the groups and the parent companys ability to continue as a going concern disclosing as applicable matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless the directors either intend to liquidate the group or the parent company or to cease operations or have no realistic alternative but to do so.
Auditors responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error and to issue an auditors report that includes our opinion.
Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with ISAs UK will always detect a material misstatement when it exists.
Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if individually or in the aggregate they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these financial statements.
A further description of our responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements is located on the Financial Reporting Councils website at httpwww. rc. auditorsresponsibilities.
This description forms part of our auditors report.
This report is made solely to the companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006.
Our audit work has been undertaken so that we might state to the companys members those matters we are required to state to them in an auditors report and for no other purpose.
To the fullest extent permitted by law we do not accept or assume responsibility to anyone other than the company and the companys members as a body for our audit work for this report or for the opinions we have formed.
Graham Bond FCA Senior Statutory Auditor For and on behalf of RSM UK AUDIT LLPsite F Group Statement of Total Comprehensive Income For the year ended 31 December 2017 Year to Year to 31 December 31 December 2017 2016 Notes 000 000 Research and development costs 4 16911 10220 Administrative expenses 4 3529 2866 Foreign currency lossesgains 4 431 799 Operating loss before nonrecurring costs 20871 12287 Nonrecurring costs 5 3474 Operating loss after nonrecurring costs 24345 12287 Finance income 7 482 652 Finance expense 7 123 71 Loss before taxation 23986 11706 Taxation 8 3541 1843 Loss for the year 20445 9863 Other comprehensive income Exchange differences on translating foreign operations 1057 389 Loss for the year and total comprehensive income for the year 19388 10252 Loss per share Basic and diluted for the year 9 31.41p 15.21p The basic and diluted loss per share are the same as the effect of share options is antidilutive.
The notes on pages 35 to 61 form an integral part of these financial statements.
4D pharma plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 28 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS At At 31 December 31 December 2017 2016 Notes 000 000
Noncurrent assets Property plant and equipment 10 5211 3859 Intangible assets 11 14674 14299 Taxation receivables 15 56 23 19941 18181 Current assets Inventories 13 253 238 Trade and other receivables 14 3238 2651 Taxation receivables 15 4308 3315 Shortterm investments and cash on deposit 16 38133 40111 Cash and cash equivalents 16 11865 28661 57797 74976 Total assets 77738 93157
Current liabilities Trade and other payables 17 4982 4937 4982 4937 Noncurrent liabilities Deferred tax 18 965 963 Other payables 19 2005 774 2970 1737 Total liabilities 7952 6674 Net assets 69786 86483 Capital and reserves Share capital 20 164 162 Share premium account 20 108296 105909 Merger reserve 958 958 Translation reserve 668 389 Other reserve 864 864 Sharebased payments reserve 21 440 138 Retained earnings 39876 19431 Total equity 69786 86483 Approved by the Board and authorised for issue on 20 April 2018.
The notes on pages 35 to 61 form an integral part of these financial statements.
Duncan Peyton
20 April 2018 Group Statement of Financial Position At 31 December 2017 Registered no.
F At At 31 December 31 December 2017 2016 Notes 000 000
Noncurrent assets Property plant and equipment 10 576 256 Intangible assets 11 849 889 Investment in subsidiaries 12 11671 6128 13096 7273 Current assets Loans to subsidiaries 12 33159 24114 Trade and other receivables 14 428 350 Taxation receivables 15 478 455 Shortterm investments and cash on deposit 16 38133 40111 Cash and cash equivalents 16 11060 27778 83258 92808 Total assets 96354 100081
Current liabilities Trade and other payables 17 1345 1018 1345 1018 Noncurrent liabilities Other payables 19 1979 774 1979 774 Total liabilities 3324 1792 Net assets 93030 98289 Capital and reserves Share capital 20 164 162 Share premium account 20 108296 105909 Merger reserve 958 958 Sharebased payments reserve 21 440 138 Retained earnings 16828 8878 Total equity 93030 98289 The Company has elected to take the exemptions under section 408 of the Companies Act 2006 not to present the parent companys Statement of Comprehensive Income.
The Companys loss for the year was 7.950 million 31 December 2016 3.489 million.
Approved by the Board and authorised for issue on 20 April 2018.
The notes on pages 35 to 61 form an integral part of these financial statements.
Duncan Peyton
20 April 2018 Company Statement of Financial Position At 31 December 2017 Registered no.
4D pharma plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 30 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Share based Share Share Merger Translation Other payment Retained Total capital premium reserve reserve reserve reserve earnings equity At 1 January tel003 958  864 7 9568 92697 Issue of share capital net of expenses 1 3906      3907 Total transactions with owners recognised in equity for the year 1 3906      3907 Loss and total comprehensive income for the year       9863 9863 Foreign currency losses arising on consolidation of subsidiaries    389    389 Issue of sharebased compensation      131  131 At 31 December tel909 958 389 864 138 19431 86483 Issue of share capital net of expenses 2 2387      2389 Total transactions with owners recognised in equity for the year 2 2387      2389 Loss and total comprehensive income for the year       20445 20445 Foreign currency gains arising on consolidation of subsidiaries    1057    1057 Issue of sharebased compensation      302  302 At 31 December tel296 958 668 864 440 39876 69786 Details regarding the purpose of each reserve within equity are given in note 22.
F Company Statement of Changes in Equity For the year ended 31 December 2017
Share Share Merger payment Retained capital premium reserve reserve earnings Total At 1 January tel003 958 7 5389 97740 Issue of share capital net of expenses 1 3906    3907 Total transactions with owners recognised in equity for the year 1 3906    3907 Loss and total comprehensive income for the year     3489 3489 Issue of sharebased compensation    131  131 At 31 December tel909 958 138 8878 98289 Issue of share capital net of expenses 2 2387    2389 Total transactions with owners recognised in equity for the year 2 2387    2389 Loss and total comprehensive income for the year     7950 7950 Issue of sharebased compensation    302  302 At 31 December tel296 958 440 16828 93030 Details regarding the purpose of each reserve within equity are given in note 22.
4D pharma plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 32 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Year to Year to 31 December 31 December 2017 2016 Notes 000 000 Loss after taxation 20445 9863 Adjustments for Depreciation of property plant and equipment 10 730 405 Amortisation of intangible assets 11 252 213 Lossprofit on disposal of property plant and equipment 79 2 Finance income 7 482 652 Finance expense 7 123 71 Contingent consideration 5 3474 Sharebased compensation 21 302 131 Cash flows from operations before movements in working capital 15967 9697 Changes in working capital Increase in inventories 15 210 Increase in trade and other receivables 588 762 Increase in taxation receivables 1009 715 Increasedecrease in trade and other payables 389 2142 Cash outflow from operating activities 17190 13526 Cash flows from investing activities Purchases of property plant and equipment 1885 2243 Purchase of software and other intangibles 11 194 76 Acquisition of subsidiaries net of cash acquired  1615 Cash received on disposal of assets  15 Interest received 509 776 Monies drawn from deposit 1978 43553 Net cash inflow from investing activities 408 40410 Cash flows from financing activities Hire purchase payments 14 Net cash outflow from financing activities 14 Decreaseincrease in cash and cash equivalents 16796 26884 Cash and cash equivalents at the start of the year 28661 1777 Cash and cash equivalents at the end of the year 16 11865 28site F Company Cash Flow Statement For the year ended 31 December 2017 Year to Year to 31 December 31 December 2017 2016 Notes 000 000 Loss after taxation 7950 3489 Adjustments for Depreciation of property plant and equipment 10 95 63 Amortisation of intangible assets 11 221 201 Loss on disposal of property plant and equipment 79 Finance income 481 652 Finance expense 120 71 Contingent consideration 5 3474 Sharebased compensation 131 131 Cash flows from operations before movements in working capital 4311 3675 Changes in working capital Increasedecrease in trade and other receivables 83 1466 Increasedecrease in taxation receivables 23 81 Increasedecrease in trade and other payables 303 1750 Cash outflow from operating activities 4114 3878 Cash flows from investing activities Purchases of property plant and equipment 10 493 104 Purchase of software and other intangibles 11 182 14 Investment in share capital in subsidiary  2 Loans to subsidiary undertakings 12 14416 14237 Interest received 509 776 Monies placed on deposit 1978 43553 Net cash outflowinflow from investing activities 12604 29972 Decreaseincrease in cash and cash equivalents 16718 26094 Cash and cash equivalents at the start of the year 27778 1684 Cash and cash equivalents at the end of the year 16 11060 27778 During the year 4D pharma plc converted 5.372 million of loans to subsidiary undertakings into investments in 4D Pharma Leon S. a subsidiary undertaking.
Since this represented the conversion of existing loans no further cash was transferred and so is not noted in the Cash Flow Statement above.
Further details on the transaction can be found in note 12.
4D pharma plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 34 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 1.
General information 4D pharma plc the Company is an AIMquoted company incorporated and domiciled in the UK.
The locations and principal activities of the subsidiaries are set out in note 12.
The Company is incorporated in England and Wales.
The registered office is 9 Bond Court Leeds LS1 2JZ.
These Group financial statements consolidate those of the Company and its subsidiaries together referred to as the Group and individually as Group entities for the year ended 31 December 2017.
The principal activities of the Group are the research and development of Live Biotherapeutic drug products.
The financial statements of 4D pharma plc and its subsidiaries the Group for the year ended 31 December 2017 were authorised for issue by the Board of Directors on 20 April 2018 and the Statement of Financial Position was signed on the Boards behalf by Duncan Peyton.
The significant accounting policies adopted by the Group are set out in note 3.
Basis of preparation a Statement of compliance The Groups financial statements have been prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as adopted by the European Union IFRS and IFRS Interpretations Committee IFRSIC interpretations as they apply to the financial statements of the Group for the year ended 31 December 2017 and the requirements of the Companies Act 2006 applicable to companies reporting under IFRS.
The parent company and Group financial statements have been prepared on the historical cost basis except for the methods used to measure fair values of assets and liabilities which are discussed in the respective notes and in note 3.
The Chief Executive Officers Report on pages 5 to 7 outlines the business activities of the Group along with the factors which may affect its future development and performance.
The Groups financial position is discussed in the Financial Review on pages 6 and 7 along with details of its cash flow and liquidity.
Note 24 to the financial statements sets out the Groups financial risks and the management of those risks.
Having prepared management forecasts and made appropriate enquiries the Directors are satisfied that the Group has adequate resources for the foreseeable future.
Accordingly they have continued to adopt the going concern basis in preparing the Group and Company financial statements.
These financial statements are presented in Pounds Sterling which is the Groups functional currency.
All financial information presented has been rounded to the nearest thousand.
The preparation of financial statements requires management to make estimates and judgements that affect the amounts reported for assets and liabilities as at the reporting date and the amounts reported for revenues and expenses during the year.
The nature of estimation means that actual amounts could differ from those estimates.
Estimates and judgements used in the preparation of the financial statements are continually reviewed and revised as necessary.
While every effort is made to ensure that such estimates and judgements are reasonable by their nature they are uncertain and as such changes in estimates and judgements may have a material impact on the financial statements.
The key sources of estimation uncertainty and critical accounting policies that have a significant risk of causing material adjustment to the carrying amount of assets and liabilities within the next financial year are discussed below.
Management judgement is required to determine the amount of tax assets that can be recognised based upon the likely timing and level of future taxable profits together with an assessment of the effect of future taxplanning strategies.
The value of the unrecognised tax losses for the Group at 31 December 2017 was 32.691 million.
The value of the additional deferred tax asset not recognised at the year end is 5.645 million.
Further information is included in note 8.
Careful judgement by the Directors is applied when deciding whether the recognition requirements for development costs have been met.
This is necessary as the economic success of any product development is uncertain until such time as technical viability has been proven and commercial supply agreements are likely to be achieved.
Judgements are based on the information available at each reporting date which includes the progress with testing and certification and progress on for example establishment of commercial arrangements with third parties.
In addition all internal activities related to research and development of new products are continuously monitored by the Directors.
Further information is included in note 3.
F 2.
Basis of preparation continued e Use of estimates and judgements continued iii Intangible fixed assets and goodwill Estimated impairment of intangible fixed assets and goodwill The Group tests annually whether intangible fixed assets and goodwill have suffered any impairment in accordance with the accounting policy stated in note 3.
The potential recoverable amounts of intangible fixed assets and goodwill have been determined based on valueinuse calculations.
These calculations require the use of estimates both in arriving at the expected future cash flows and the application of a suitable discount rate in order to calculate the present value of these flows.
There is a degree of judgement involved in making assessments of attributable values on acquisition and making impairment assessments.
More detail is given in notes 3h and 3i.
Valuation of intangibles on acquisition Valuation of an early stage drug discovery pharmaceutical company is a notoriously difficult task.
Analysis of financial history gives little indication of future performance.
Despite this for products currently in development sales potentials can be estimated and management has used its own experience as well as consulting with external experts to establish best estimates of sales pricing and revenue forecasting and these can provide the starting point for valuing these products and ensuring that their value has not been impaired.
In addition clinical development risks measured as product attrition failure rates incurred as drugs progress through the clinic are reasonably well documented and can be applied as meaningful risk adjusters to account for the chance of development failure.
Significant accounting policies The accounting policies set out below are applied consistently by Group entities.
Business combinations are accounted for using the acquisition method as at the acquisition date  i. to the Group.
Control is the power to govern the financial and operating policies of an entity so as to obtain benefits from its activities.
In assessing control the Group takes into consideration potential voting rights that are currently exercisable.
The Group measures goodwill at the acquisition date as the fair value of the consideration transferred plus the recognised amount of any noncontrolling interests in the acquiree plus if the business combination is achieved in stages the fair value of the preexisting equity interest in the acquiree less the net recognised amount generally fair value of the identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed.
Transaction costs other than those associated with the issue of debt or equity securities that the Group incurs in connection with a business combination are expensed as incurred.
Subsidiaries are entities controlled by the Group.
The financial statements of subsidiaries are included in the consolidated financial statements from the date that control commences until the date that control ceases.
Notes to the Financial Statements continued For the year ended 31 December 2017 4D pharma plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 36 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 3.
Significant accounting policies continued a Basis of consolidation continued iii Transactions eliminated on consolidation Intragroup balances and transactions and any unrealised income and expenses arising from intragroup transactions are eliminated in preparing the consolidated financial statements.
Unrealised gains arising from transactions with equityaccounted investees are eliminated against the investment to the extent of the Groups interest in the investee.
Unrealised losses are eliminated in the same way as unrealised gains but only to the extent that there is no evidence of impairment.
Transactions in foreign currencies are initially recorded in the functional currency by applying the spot rate ruling at the date of the transaction.
Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are retranslated at the functional currency rate of exchange ruling at the reporting date.
All foreign currency transaction differences are recognised in the Income Statement.
Nonmonetary items that are measured in terms of historical cost in a foreign currency are translated using the exchange rates as at the date of the transaction.
Nonmonetary items measured at fair value in a foreign currency are translated using the exchange rates at the date when the fair value was determined.
These values are retranslated at the yearend rates with the movement between the original cost and retranslated cost being included in other comprehensive income and the translation reserve.
An operating segment is a component of an entity that engages in business activities from which it may earn revenues and incur expenses whose operating results are regularly reviewed by the Groups chief operating decision maker being the Chief Executive Officer to make decisions about resources to be allocated to the segment and assess its performance and for which discrete financial information is available.
As at the reporting date the Group operated as a single segment.
Leases are classified as finance leases wherever the terms of the lease transfer substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership to the lessee.
All other leases are classified as operating leases which are expensed directly to the Income Statement.
Assets held under hire purchase agreements and finance leases are recognised as assets of the Group at their fair value or if lower at the present value of the minimum lease payments each determined at the inception of the lease.
The corresponding liability is included in the Group Statement of Financial Position as a hire purchase obligation.
Lease payments are apportioned between finance charges and a reduction of the lease obligations so as to achieve a constant rate of interest on the remaining balance of the liability.
Finance charges are charged to the Group Income Statement.
Rentals payable under operating leases are charged to the Group Income Statement on a straightline basis over the term of the lease.
Finance income comprises interest income on funds invested and changes in the fair value of financial assets at fair value through profit or loss.
Interest income is recognised as interest accrues using the effective interest rate method.
Finance expense comprises interest expense on borrowings changes in the fair value of financial assets at fair value through the Group Statement of Comprehensive Income impairment losses recognised on financial assets and losses on hedging instruments that are recognised in profit or loss.
All borrowing costs are recognised using the effective interest method.
F 3.
Significant accounting policies continued f Income tax Income tax expense comprises current and deferred tax.
Income tax expense is recognised in the Income Statement except to the extent that it relates to items recognised directly in equity or in other comprehensive income.
Current income tax assets and liabilities for the current and prior years are measured at the amount expected to be recovered from or paid to the tax authorities.
The tax rates and tax laws used to compute the amount are those that are enacted or substantively enacted by the reporting date.
Deferred income tax is recognised on all temporary differences arising between the tax bases of assets and liabilities and their carrying amounts in the financial statements with the following exceptions where the temporary difference arises from the initial recognition of goodwill or of an asset or liability in a transaction that is not a business combination and that at the time of the transaction affects neither accounting nor taxable profit or loss and in respect of taxable temporary differences associated with investments in subsidiaries where the timing of the reversal of the temporary differences can be controlled and it is probable that the temporary differences will not reverse in the foreseeable future.
Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are measured on an undiscounted basis using the tax rates and tax laws that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the date and which are expected to apply when the related deferred tax asset is realised or the deferred tax liability is settled.
Deferred income tax assets are recognised to the extent that it is probable that future taxable profits will be available against which differences can be utilised.
An asset is not recognised to the extent that the transfer or economic benefits in the future is uncertain.
Property plant and equipment are recognised initially at cost.
After initial recognition these assets are carried at cost less any accumulated depreciation and any accumulated impairment losses.
Cost comprises the aggregate amount paid and the fair value of any other consideration given to acquire the asset and includes costs directly attributable to making the asset capable of operating as intended.
Depreciation is computed by allocating the depreciable amount of an asset on a systematic basis over its useful life and is applied separately to each identifiable component.
The following bases and rates are used to depreciate classes of assets Plant and machinery straightline over five to ten years Fixtures fittings and office equipment  straightline over three to five years Leasehold improvements straightline over five to ten years The carrying values of property plant and equipment are reviewed for impairment if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable and are written down immediately to their recoverable amount.
Useful lives and residual values are reviewed annually and where adjustments are required these are made prospectively.
A property plant and equipment item is derecognised on disposal or when no future economic benefits are expected to arise from the continued use of the asset.
Any gain or loss arising on the derecognition of the asset is included in the Income Statement in the year of derecognition.
Intellectual property and patents The carrying value of intangible fixed assets is reviewed annually for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value may not be recoverable.
At each reporting date the Group reviews the carrying value of its intangible assets to determine whether there is any indication that those assets have suffered an impairment loss.
If any such indication exists the recoverable amount of the asset is estimated in order to determine the extent of the impairment loss.
Where the asset does not generate cash flows that are independent from other assets the Group estimates the recoverable amount of the cashgenerating unit to which the asset belongs.
A cashgenerating unit is the smallest identifiable group of assets that generates cash inflows from other assets or groups of assets.
Notes to the Financial Statements continued For the year ended 31 December 2017 4D pharma plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 38 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 3.
Significant accounting policies continued h Intangible assets continued Intellectual property and patents continued Recoverable amount is the higher of fair value less costs to sell and value in use.
In assessing value in use the estimated future cash flows are discounted to their present value using a pretax discount rate that reflects current market assessments of the time value of money and the risks specific to the asset for which the estimates of future cash flows have not been adjusted.
If the recoverable amount of an asset is estimated to be less than its carrying amount the carrying amount of the asset is reduced to its recoverable amount.
An impairment loss is recognised as an expense immediately.
Where an impairment loss subsequently reverses the carrying amount of the assets is increased to the revised climate of its recoverable amount but so that the increased carrying amount does not exceed the carrying amount that would have been determined had no impairment loss been recognised for the asset in prior years.
A reversal of an impairment loss is recognised in profit or loss immediately.
Amortisation is provided on the fair value of the asset and is calculated on a straightline basis over its useful life.
Amortisation is recognised within the Statement of Comprehensive Income.
Intellectual property and patents acquired as part of a business combination are only amortised once technical viability has been proven and commercial agreements are likely to be achieved.
Patents includes the costs associated with acquiring and registering patents in respect of intellectual property rights.
Patents are amortised on a straightline basis over their useful lives of up to 20 years from the date of filing the patent.
Goodwill
Goodwill on acquisitions being the excess of the fair value of the cost of acquisition over the Groups interest in the fair value of the identifiable assets and liabilities acquired is capitalised and tested for impairment on an annual basis.
Any impairment is recognised immediately in profit or loss and is not subsequently reversed.
For the purpose of impairment testing goodwill is allocated to cashgenerating units of 4D pharma plc which represent the smallest identifiable group of assets that generates cash inflows that are largely independent of the cash inflows from other assets or groups of assets.
Software
Software is recognised initially at cost.
After initial recognition these assets are carried at cost less any accumulated amortisation and any accumulated impairment losses.
Cost comprises the aggregate amount paid and the fair value of any other consideration given to acquire the asset and includes costs directly attributable to making the asset capable of operating as intended.
Amortisation is computed by allocating the amortisation amount of an asset on a systematic basis over its useful life and is applied separately to each identifiable component.
Amortisation is applied to software over three to five years on a straightline basis.
The carrying value of software is reviewed for impairment if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable and is written down immediately to their recoverable amount.
Useful lives and residual values are reviewed annually and where adjustments are required these are made prospectively.
A software item is derecognised on disposal or when no future economic benefits are expected to arise from the continued use of the asset.
Any gain or loss arising on the derecognition of the asset is included in the Income Statement in the year of derecognition.
Internally generated intangible assets Expenditure on research activities is recognised in the Statement of Comprehensive Income as incurred.
Expenditure arising from the Groups development is recognised only if all of the following conditions are met an asset is created that can be identified it is probable that the asset created will generate future economic benefits the development cost of the asset can be measured reliably the Group has the intention to complete the asset and the ability and intention to use or sell it the product or process is technically and commercially feasible and sufficient resources are available to complete the development and to either sell or use the asset.
Where these criteria have not been achieved development expenditure is recognised in profit or loss in the year in which it is incurred.
The Group has adopted the industry standard approach to the treatment of development expenditure by capitalising development costs at the point where regulatory approval is reached and the probability of generating future economic benefits is high.
F 3.
Significant accounting policies continued i Impairment of assets An assets recoverable amount is the higher of an assets or cashgenerating units fair value less costs to sell and its value in use and is determined for an individual asset unless the asset does not generate cash inflows that are largely independent of those from other assets or groups of assets.
Where the carrying value of an asset exceeds its recoverable amount the asset is considered impaired and is written down to its recoverable amount.
In assessing value in use the estimated future cash flows are discounted to their present value using a pretax discount rate that reflects current market assessments of the time value of money and the risks specific to the asset.
In determining fair value less costs of disposal an appropriate valuation model is used these calculations are corroborated by valuation multiples or other available fair value indicators.
Impairment losses on continuing operations are recognised in the Income Statement in those expense categories consistent with the function of the impaired asset.
Investments in and loans to subsidiaries are stated in the Companys Statement of Financial Position at cost less provision for any impairment plus the cost of any share options issued to employees of subsidiary companies.
See note 3o for further details.
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost and net realisable value.
Cost based on latest contractual prices includes all costs incurred in bringing each product to its present location and condition.
Net realisable value is based on estimated selling price less any further costs expected to be incurred to disposal.
Provision is made for slowmoving or obsolete items.
Cash and cash equivalents comprise cash at hand and deposits with maturities of three months or less.
Shortterm investments comprise deposits with maturities of more than three months but no greater than twelve months.
Trade and other payables are noninterest bearing and are initially recognised at fair value.
They are subsequently measured at amortised cost using the effective interest rate method.
Financial assets and liabilities are recognised when the Group becomes party to the contracts that give rise to them and are classified as financial assets and liabilities at fair value through the Group Statement of Comprehensive Income.
The Group determines the classification of its financial assets and liabilities at initial recognition and reevaluates this designation at each financial year end.
A financial asset or liability is generally derecognised when the contract that gives rise to it is settled sold or cancelled or expires.
At the year end the Group had no financial assets or liabilities designated at fair value through the Group Statement of Comprehensive Income.
Equitysettled sharebased payment transactions are measured with reference to the fair value at the date of grant recognised on a straightline basis over the vesting period based on the Companys estimate of shares that will eventually vest.
Fair value is measured using a suitable option pricing model.
At each reporting date before vesting the cumulative expense is calculated representing the extent to which the vesting period has expired and managements best estimate of the achievement or otherwise of nonmarket conditions and the number of equity instruments that will ultimately vest.
The movement in cumulative expense since the previous reporting date is recognised in the Group Statement of Comprehensive Income with a corresponding entry in equity.
Where the terms of an equitysettled award are modified or a new award is designated as replacing a cancelled or settled award the cost based on the original award terms continues to be recognised over the remainder of the original vesting period.
In addition an expense is recognised over the remainder of the new vesting period for the incremental fair value of any modification based on the difference between the fair value of the original award and the fair value of the modified award both as measured on the date of modification.
No reduction is recognised if this difference is negative.
Where awards are granted to the employees of the subsidiary company the fair value of the awards at grant date is recorded in the Companys financial statements as an increase in the value of the investment with a corresponding increase in equity via the sharebased payment reserve.
Notes to the Financial Statements continued For the year ended 31 December 2017 4D pharma plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 40 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 3.
Significant accounting policies continued p Share capital Proceeds on issue of shares are included in shareholders equity net of transaction costs.
The carrying amount is not remeasured in subsequent years.
Adoption of IFRS The Group and Company financial statements have been prepared in accordance with IFRS IAS and IFRS Interpretations Committee IFRSIC effective as at 31 December 2017.
The Group and Company have not chosen to adopt any amendments or revised standards early.
IFRS issued but not yet effective At the date of issue of these financial statements the following accounting standards and interpretations which have not been applied were in issue but not yet effective.
The potential effects for the implementation of IFRS 16 are currently under consideration as they are expected to be significant.
However for the remaining standards listed below the Directors do not anticipate adoption will have a material impact on the financial statements or they consider the implementation too uncertain to speculate on the impact on the accounts at this point in time.
IFRS 9 Financial Instruments Effective 1 January 2018 IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers Effective 1 January 2018 IFRS 17 Insurance Contracts Effective 1 January 2021 IFRIC 22 Foreign Currency Transactions and Advance Consideration Effective 1 January 2018 IFRIC 23 Uncertainty over Income Tax Treatments Effective 1 January 2019 Various standards Annual Improvements to IFRSs 20152017 Cycle Various Amendments to IAS 40 Transfers of Investment Property Effective 1 January 2018 Amendments to IAS 28 Longterm Interests in Associates and Joint Ventures Effective 1 January 2019 Amendments to IFRS 9 Prepayment Features with Negative Compensation Effective 1 January 2019 Amendments to IFRS 4 Applying IFRS 9 Financial Instruments with IFRS 4 Insurance Contracts Effective 1 January 2018 Amendments to IFRS 2 Classification and Measurement of Sharebased Payment Transactions Effective 1 January 2018 IFRS 16 Leases IFRS 16 introduces a comprehensive model for the identification of lease arrangements and accounting treatments for both lessors and lessees.
IFRS 16 will supersede the current guidance including IAS 17 Leases and the related interpretations when it becomes effective.
IFRS 16 distinguishes leases and service contracts on the basis of whether an identifiable asset is controlled by a customer.
Distinctions of operating leases off Statement of Financial Position and finance leases on Statement of Financial Position are removed for lessee accounting and are replaced by a model where a rightofuse asset and corresponding liability have to be recognised for all leases by lessees i. all on Statement of Financial Position except for shortterm leases and leases of low value assets.
The rightofuse asset is initially measured at cost and subsequently measured at cost subject to certain exceptions less accumulated depreciation and impairment losses adjusted for any measurement of the lease liability.
The lease liability is initially measured at the present value of the lease payments that are not paid at that date.
Subsequently the lease liability is adjusted for interest and lease payments as well as the impact of lease modifications amongst others.
Furthermore the classification of cash flows will also be affected as operating lease payments under IAS 17 are presented as operating cash flows whereas under the IFRS 16 model the lease payments will be split into a principal and interest portion which will be presented as financing and operating cash flows respectively.
In contrast for finance leases where the Group is a lessee as the Group has already recognised an asset and a related finance lease liability for the lease arrangement the Directors of the Company do not anticipate that the application of IFRS 16 will have a significant impact on the amounts recognised in the Groups consolidated financial statements.
The Directors are currently assessing the impact of IFRS 16 as the changes are likely to have a significant impact on the financial results.
F 4.
Operating loss Year to Year to 31 December 31 December 2017 2016 By nature 000 000 Operating loss is stated after charging Research and development expense Depreciation of property plant and equipment 686 349 Amortisation of intangible assets 229 213 Staff costs see note 6 3335 1604 Operating lease rentals Land and buildings 118 457 Equipment 37 2 Other contractual commitments 1916 1837 Other research and development costs 10590 5758 16911 10220 Administrative expenses Depreciation of property plant and equipment 44 34 Amortisation of intangible assets 23 22 Lossprofit on disposal of property plant and equipment 79 2 Staff costs see note 6 1141 840 Operating lease rentals Land and buildings 113 44 Equipment 1 Auditors remuneration 49 56 Legal and professional 253 838 Consultancy 5 202 Other administrative costs 1821 832 3529 2866 Foreign currency lossesgains 431 799 Auditors remuneration Audit services Fees payable to Company auditor for the audit of the parent and the consolidated accounts 35 38 Auditing the financial statements of subsidiaries pursuant to legislation 10 10 Nonaudit services 4 8 Total auditors remuneration 49 56 Nonrecurring costs As detailed in other payables see note 19 on 23 August 2017 contingent consideration became due following the achievement of 4D Pharma Cork Ltds initial milestone.
The contingent liability was initially calculated upon the acquisition based on the discounted probability of the potential liability at the time of acquisition.
With the successful completion of the first milestone the management has had to reassess the probability of success of subsequent milestones and therefore increase the contingent liability.
This has resulted in the nonrecurring cost in the year to 31 December 2017 of 3.474 million 31 December 2016 Nil.
Notes to the Financial Statements continued For the year ended 31 December 2017 4D pharma plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 42 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 6.
Staff costs Year to 31 December 2017 Year to 31 December 2016 Research and Research and development Administrative Total development Administrative Total Wages and salaries 2597 Social security costs 52tel74 Pension contributions Sharebased compensation 159 3335 1141 4476 1604 840 2444 Directors remuneration including benefits in kind included in the aggregate remuneration above comprised Emoluments for qualifying services  252 252  252 252 Directors emoluments excluding social security costs but including benefits in kind disclosed above include 101323 31 December 2016 101238 paid to the highest paid Director.
The Directors were not granted any share options in the year ended 31 December 2017 or the year ended 31 December 2016 and none of the Directors held any share options at 31 December 2017.
An analysis of the highest paid Directors remuneration is included in the Report of the Remuneration Committee.
The average number of employees during the year including Directors was as follows Year to Year to 31 December 31 December 2017 2016 Group Number Number Directors 4 4 Scientific and administrative staff Year to Year to 31 December 31 December 2017 2016 Company Number Number Directors 4 4 Scientific and administrative staff .
Finance income and finance expense Year to Year to 31 December 31 December 2017 2016 Finance income Bank interest receivable 482 652 Finance expense Hire purchase interest 2 Unwinding of discount 120 71 Other interest payable 1 Bank interest receivable includes 128926 31 December 2016 156681 which is receivable after the year end.
F 8.
Taxation
The tax credit is made up as follows Year to Year to 31 December 31 December 2017 2016 Current income tax Total current income tax 3557 1843 Adjustment in respect of prior years 16 Current deferred tax Current year charge Total deferred tax Total income tax credit recognised in the year 3541 1843 The income tax credit can be reconciled to the accounting loss as follows Year to Year to 31 December 31 December 2017 2016 Loss before taxation 23986 11706 Tax at the average standard rate of 18.95% 31 December 2016 20.1% 4544 2356 Effects of Expenses not deductible for tax purposes 714 56 Adjustments to foreign currency translations on subsidiaries  8 Enhanced research and development expenditure 2561 1410 Property plant equipment and software timing differences 6 20 Deferred tax not provided on losses 1853 1154 Adjustment in respect of prior years 17 Effects of variation on tax reclaims over the standard rate 974 685 Tax income tax credit recognised in the year 3541 1843 The tax rate for the current year is lower than the prior year due to changes in the UK corporation tax rate from 20% to 19% from 1 April 2017.
Further reductions to the UK corporation tax rates were substantively enacted as part of the Finance Bill 2016 on 6 September 2016.
These reduce the main rate to 17% from 1 April 2020 with the revised rate forming the basis for the UK portion of the deferred tax calculation noted below.
At 31 December 2017 the Group had tax losses available for carry forward of approximately 32.691 million 31 December 2016 12.262 million.
The Group has not recognised deferred tax assets relating to such earned forward losses of approximately 5.645 million 31 December 2016 2.452 million.
At 31 December 2017 the Company had tax losses available for carry forward of approximately 7.827 million 31 December 2016 2.974 million.
The Company has not recognised deferred tax assets relating to such earned forward losses of approximately 1.331 million 31 December 2016 0.595 million.
Groups management considers that there is insufficient evidence of future taxable income taxable temporary differences and feasible taxplanning strategies to utilise all of the cumulative losses.
If future income differs from current projections this could significantly impact the tax charge or benefit in future years.
The management has therefore concluded that a deferred tax asset should not be recognised until such point that the probability of its realisation becomes more certain.
Notes to the Financial Statements continued For the year ended 31 December 2017 4D pharma plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 44 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 9.
Loss per share a Basic and diluted Year to Year to 31 December 31 December 2017 2016 Loss for the year attributable to equity shareholders 20445 9863 Weighted average number of shares Ordinary shares in issue 65084561 64858150 Basic loss per share 31.41p 15.21p The basic and diluted loss per share are the same as the effect of share options is antidilutive.
Adjusted loss per share is calculated after adjusting for the effect of nonrecurring expenses in relation to the reassessment of the contingent liability.
Reconciliation of adjusted loss after tax Year to Year to 31 December 31 December 2017 2016 Reported loss after tax 20445 9863 Nonrecurring costs 3474 Adjusted loss after tax 16971 9863 Adjusted basic loss per share 26.08p 15.21site Property plant and equipment Fixtures fittings Plant and and office Leasehold machinery equipment improvements Total
At 31 December 2015 1124 94 104 1322 Additions 1894 88 261 2243 Additions on business combinations 625  334 959 Disposals 15   15 Exchange rate adjustment 44 2 16 62 At 31 December 2016 3584 180 683 4447 Additions 1381 102 446 1929 Disposals  1 111 112 Reclassifications 24 73  49 Exchange rate adjustment At 31 December 2017 5246 209 1079 6534
At 31 December 2015 201 6  207 Provided during the year Released on disposal 2   2 Exchange rate adjustment 20  2 22 At 31 December Provided during the year Released on disposal   33 33 Reclassifications 2 12  10 Exchange rate adjustment 38  10 48 At 31 December 2017 1129 60 134 1323 Net book value At 31 December 2017 4117 149 945 5211 At 31 December 2016 3087 142 630 3859 At 31 December 115 Included in the totals above are the following assets held under hire purchase or finance leases these agreements are secured against the assets to which they relate.
Notes to the Financial Statements continued For the year ended 31 December 2017 4D pharma plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 46 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 10.
Property plant and equipment continued Plant and machinery Total Group assets under hire purchase and finance lease agreements 000 000
At 31 December 2015 and 31 December 2016 Additions 44 44 Exchange rate adjustment 2 2 At 31 December 2017 46 46
At 31 December 2015 and 31 December 2016 Provided during the year 8 8 At 31 December 2017 8 8 Net book value At 31 December 2017 38 38 At 31 December 2015 and 31 December 2016 During the year the Group reviewed the assets capitalised under computer equipment and identified the components relating to software.
Where components relate to software these have been reclassified in tangible fixed assets with the value included in intangibles under the software heading.
See note 11 for details.
Fixtures fittings Plant and and office Leasehold machinery equipment improvements Total
At 31 December Additions Transfer to subsidiary entities 168   168 At 31 December 2016 8telAdditions Disposals  1 111 112 Reclassifications 34 34 At 31 December tel298 696
At 31 December 2015 7 3  10 Provided during the year Released on disposal 14   14 At 31 December Provided during the year Released on transfer to subsidiary entities   33 33 Reclassifications 5 6  1 At 31 December Net book value At 31 December tel274 576 At 31 December At 31 December There were no assets held under hire purchase or finance leases in the Company.
Intangible assets
Software Patents property Goodwill Total
At 31 December 2015 15 1076 1923 3316 6330 Additions 71 5   76 Additions on business combinations   2584 5683 8267 Exchange rate adjustment 2    2 At 31 December 2016 84 1081 4507 8999 14671 Additions 194    194 Reclassifications 49    49 Exchange rate adjustment 4   391 395 At 31 December 2017 331 1081 4507 9390 15309
At 31 December 2015 2 157   159 Provided during the year 13 200   213 At 31 December 2016 15 357   372 Provided during the year 52 200   252 Reclassifications 10    10 Exchange rate adjustment 1    1 At 31 December 2017 78 557   635 Net book value At 31 December tel4507 9390 14674 At 31 December 2016 69 724 4507 8999 14299 At 31 December 2015 13 919 1923 3316 6171 Notes to the Financial Statements continued For the year ended 31 December 2017 4D pharma plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 48 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 11.
Intangible assets continued Software Patents Total Company 000 000 000
At 31 December 2015  1076 1076 Additions 14  14 At 31 December 2016 14 1076 1090 Additions 182  182 At 31 December 2017 196 1076 1272
At 31 December 2015 Provided during the year 2 199 201 At 31 December Provided during the year 22 199 221 Reclassifications 1  1 At 31 December Net book value At 31 December tel849 At 31 December At 31 December 2015  1076 1076 Goodwill amounting to 9.390 million intellectual property amounting to 4.507 million and patent rights amounting to 1.081 million relate to a single cashgenerating unit CGU contained in the acquisitions of 4D Pharma Research Limited 4D Pharma Leon S. and 4D Pharma Cork Limited formerly Tucana Health Limited.
These entities together provide the necessary facilities and resources to enable the Group to successfully research manufacture gain approval for and commercialise Live Biotherapeutic products.
Goodwill which has arisen on the business combinations represents staff and accumulated knowhow after fair value has been attributed to all other assets and liabilities acquired.
Intellectual property of 1.923 million recognised on the business combinations represents bacteria identified by the Groups knowhow and processes and at different stages of research and development from early identification to patented strains of bacteria.
Intellectual property of 2.584 million represents the methods and knowhow in relation to the MicroDx platform acquired as part of 4D Pharma Cork Limited formerly Tucana Health Limited.
During the year goodwill intellectual property patents and associated property plant and equipment was tested for impairment in accordance with IAS 36 Impairment of Assets.
The recoverable amount of the CGU exceeds the carrying amount of goodwill intellectual property patents and associated property plant and equipment.
The recoverable amount of the CGU has been measured using a valueinuse calculation and as such no impairment was deemed necessary.
The key assumptions used which are based on both managements past experience as well as externally provided reports obtained in the prior year for the valueinuse calculations are those relating to the riskadjusted net present value of candidates that have been identified as potential future products as at 31 December 2017 and for which estimated potential peak sales and future cash flows have been estimated.
In addition an external valuation of intellectual property contained via the acquisition of 4D Pharma Cork Limited formerly Tucana Health Limited has been used.
Valuation of an early stage drug discovery pharmaceutical company is a notoriously difficult task and an analysis of financial history gives little indication of future performance.
Despite this for products currently in development sales potentials can be estimated and management has used its own experience as well as consulting with external experts to establish best estimates of sales pricing and revenue forecasting and these can provide the starting point for valuing these products and ensuring that their value has not been impaired.
The recoverable amount of goodwill intellectual property patents and associated property plant and equipment exceeds the carrying amount by 4985%.
The key assumption considered most sensitive for the valueinuse calculation is that regarding the discount rate applied to the net present value calculations.
Management has performed sensitivity analysis on this key assumption and increased this from 10% to 20%.
Due to the headroom which exists between the recoverable amount and the carrying value there is no reasonable possible change in this assumption that would cause the CGUs carrying value to exceed its recoverable amount.
Investment and loans to subsidiaries Ordinary shares Company 000 Noncurrent assets At 31 December 2015 2323 Additions in the year 3805 At 31 December 2016 6128 Loans converted to shares 5372 Sharebased payments issued to employees in subsidiaries 171 At 31 December 2017 11671 By subsidiary 4D Pharma Research Limited 2403 4D Pharma Cork Limited 3837 4D Pharma Leon S.
At 31 December 2017 11671 Loans to subsidiary undertakings Company 000 Current assets At 31 December 2015 8916 Additions in the year 15198 At 31 December 2016 24114 Additions in the year 14417 Loans converted to shares 5372 At 31 December 2017 33159 By subsidiary 4D Pharma Research Limited 29251 4D Pharma Cork Limited 1215 4D Pharma Leon S.
At 31 December 2017 33159 On 3 October 2017 the Company converted 6.052 million of existing loans into ordinary shares in 4D Pharma Leon S. of 1.127 1 creating an additional investment in shares of 5.372 million and reducing the Group loans by a corresponding amount.
Details of the sharebased payments issued to employees in subsidiaries are included in note 21.
Notes to the Financial Statements continued For the year ended 31 December 2017 4D pharma plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 50 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 12.
Investment and loans to subsidiaries continued Subsidiary undertakings Holding at 31 December Subsidiary undertaking Country of incorporation Registered office Principal activity 2017 4D Pharma Research Limited Scotland Life Sciences Innovation Building Cornhill Road Aberdeen AB25 2ZS Research and development 100% 4D Pharma Cork Limited Ireland Room 447 Food Sciences Building University College Cork Western Road Cork T12 YN60 Research and development 100% 4D Pharma Leon S.
Spain Parque Tecnolgico de Len Parcela M10.4 24009 Armunia Len Spain Production of Live
100% Microbiomics Limited England and Wales 9 Bond Court Leeds LS1 2JZ Dormant 100% The Microbiota Company Limited England and Wales 9 Bond Court Leeds LS1 2JZ Dormant 100% The shares in all the companies listed above are held by 4D pharma plc.
The following wholly owned subsidiaries were dormant and were wound up during the year to 31 December 2017 Subsidiary undertaking Country of incorporation Schosween 18 Limited England and Wales The following companies were exempt from the requirements of the Companies Act 2006 relating to the audit of individual accounts for the financial year ended 31 December 2017 by virtue of section 479A of the Companies Act 2006 Subsidiary undertaking Company number The Microbiota Company Limited Microbiomics Limited
At At At At 31 December 31 December 31 December 31 Decembertel 2016 Group Company Group Company Consumables and materials 253  238 The Directors consider that the carrying amount of inventories is the lower of cost and market value.
During the year 1.388 million 31 December 2016 1.641 million of inventories were expensed to the Income Statement.
Trade and other receivables At At At At 31 December 31 December 31 December 31 Decembertel 2016 Group Company Group Company Prepayments 3238 428 2651 350 3238 428 2651 350 The Directors consider that the carrying amount of trade and other receivables approximates to their fair value.
Taxation receivables At At At At 31 December 31 December 31 December 31 Decembertel 2016 Group Company Group Company Noncurrent receivables 000 000 000 000 Corporation tax 56  23 Noncurrent assets include research and development tax claims in overseas subsidiaries that are repayable in more than one year.
At At At At 31 December 31 December 31 December 31 Decembertel 2016 Group Company Group Company Current receivables 000 000 000 000 Corporation tax 3522 445 2269 410 VAT 786 33 1046 45 4308 478 3315 455 The Directors consider that the carrying amount of taxation receivables approximates to their fair value.
Cash cash equivalents and deposits At At At At 31 December 31 December 31 December 31 Decembertel 2016 Group Company Group Company Shortterm investments and cash on deposit 38133 38133 40111 40111 Cash and cash equivalents 11865 11060 28661 27778 49998 49193 68772 67889 Under IAS 7 Statement of Cash Flows cash held on longterm deposits being deposits with maturity of greater than three months and no more than twelve months that cannot readily be converted into cash has been classified as a shortterm investment.
The maturity on this investment was less than twelve months at the reporting date.
Cash and cash equivalents at 31 December 2017 include deposits with original maturity of three months or less of 5 million Group and 5 million Company.
The Directors consider that the carrying value of cash and cash equivalents approximates their fair value.
For details on the Groups credit risk management refer to note 24.
Trade and other payables At At At At 31 December 31 December 31 December 31 Decembertel 2016 Group Company Group Company Trade payables 1803 1000 1163 254 Other payables Contingent consideration   2560 Taxation and social security 26telHire purchase and finance leases 10 Accruals 221tel4982 1345 4937 1018 Trade and other payables principally comprise amounts outstanding for trade purchases and ongoing costs.
Trade payables are noninterest bearing and are typically settled on 30 to 45day terms.
Notes to the Financial Statements continued For the year ended 31 December 2017 4D pharma plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 52 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 17.
Trade and other payables continued The Directors consider that the carrying value of trade payables other payables and accruals approximates to their fair value.
The Group has financial risk management policies in place to ensure that any trade payables are settled within the credit time frame and no interest has been charged by any suppliers as a result of late payment of invoices during the reporting year presented herein.
Deferred tax
At 31 December 2015 385 Arising on the fair value of intellectual property on the acquisition of subsidiaries 578 At 31 December 2016 963 Exchange rate movement 2 At 31 December 2017 965 All deferred tax liabilities relate to the tax arising on fair value adjustment on the acquisition of subsidiaries and as such there is no provision for deferred tax in the Company.
Other payables At At At At 31 December 31 December 31 December 31 Decembertel 2016 Group Company Group Company Noncurrent payables 000 000 000 000 Contingent consideration 1979 1979 774 774 Hire purchase and finance leases 26 2005 1979 774 774 Contingent consideration The noncurrent contingent consideration is made up as follows At At At At 31 December 31 December 31 December 31 Decembertel 2016 Group Company Group Company Brought forward 774 774 Contingent consideration   985 985 Reassessment of contingent consideration to be satisfied in shares 4395 4395 Discounting of estimated future cash flows 921 921 282 282 Part settlement of contingent consideration in shares 2389 2389 Unwinding of discount 979 1979 774 774 Analysed as follows Within one year More than one year 1979 1979 774 774 1979 1979 774 774 The above contingent consideration relates to the amounts due on the remaining milestones which form part of the original contingent acquisition costs for the entire issued share capital in Tucana Health Limited now 4D Pharma Cork Limited on 10 February 2016.
The contingent consideration is based on milestones the first of which reflects the technical validation of the MicroDx diagnostic platform enabling the stratification of IBS patients.
MicroDx has been designed to diagnose stratify and monitor the treatment of patients based on their gut microbiome the bacteria which colonise the human gastrointestinal tract.
Other payables continued Contingent consideration continued On 23 August 2017 635692 ordinary shares were allotted in 4D pharma plc for an aggregate value of 2.6 million at 3.7575 per 4D pharma plc share being the average midmarket price of a 4D share for the five business days immediately preceding the date of allotment and were admitted on 31 August 2017.
The following table lists the inputs used in valuing the provision The Group and the Company 2017 2016 Share price 755p 757p Cost of capital 17.50% 17.50% Hire purchase and finance leases At At At At 31 December 31 December 31 December 31 Decembertel 2016 Group Company Group Company Hire purchase and finance leases 26 Analysed as follows Due between one and two years 11 Due between two to five years 15 Repayment and interest rates on hire purchase and finance lease agreements are fixed at the contract date.
The average effective borrowing rate for hire purchase and finance leases at 31 December 2017 was 3.95% over a weighted average remaining period of 39 months there were no such agreements during the year to 31 December 2016.
All hire purchase and finance lease agreements are secured by the Group against the assets to which they relate.
Share capital
Ordinary shares capital Share premium Total The Group and the Company Number 000 000 000 Allotted called up and fully paid ordinary shares of 0.25p At 1 January 2016 64365198 161 102003 102164 Shares issued on 10 February 2016 410603 1 3099 3100 Shares issued on 8 April 2016 82349  807 807 At 31 December 2016 64858150 162 105909 106071 Shares issued on 23 August 2017 635692 2 2387 2389 At 31 December 2017 65493842 164 108296 108460 The balances classified as share capital and share premium include the total net proceeds nominal value and share premium respectively on issue of the Companys equity share capital comprising 0.25 pence ordinary shares.
The Company issued 635692 shares equating to 2.6 million in share capital at a five previous working day midmarket value of 3.7575 per share on 23 August 2017 with the payment representing the settlement of deferred consideration on the acquisition of 4D Pharma Cork Limited formerly Tucana Health Limited on achievement of its first milestone.
The milestone achieved reflects the technical validation of the MicroDx diagnostic platform enabling the stratification of IBS patients.
MicroDx has been designed to diagnose stratify and monitor the treatment of patients based on their gut microbiome the bacteria which colonise the human gastrointestinal tract.
Notes to the Financial Statements continued For the year ended 31 December 2017 4D pharma plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 54 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 21.
Sharebased payment reserve The Group and the Company 000 At 31 December 2015 7 Sharebased compensation 131 At 31 December 2016 138 Sharebased compensation 302 At 31 December 2017 440 The sharebased payment reserve accumulates the corresponding credit entry in respect of sharebased payment charges.
Movements in the reserve are disclosed in the Group Statement of Changes in Equity.
A charge of 301570 has been recognised in the Statement of Comprehensive Income for the year 31 December 2016 131336.
Share option schemes The Group operates the following unapproved share option scheme 4D pharma plc 2015 Long Term Incentive Plan LTIP Share options were granted to staff members on 10 November 2015 11 May 2016 and 24 May 2017.
Share options are awarded to management and key staff as a mechanism for attracting and retaining key members of staff.
These options vest over a threeyear period from the date of grant and are exercisable until the tenth anniversary of the award.
Exercise of the award is subject to the employee remaining a fulltime member of staff at the point of exercise.
The fair value benefit is measured using a Black Scholes model taking into account the terms and conditions upon which the share options were issued.
2017 2016 The Group and the Company Number Number Outstanding at the start of the year 101056 40909 Granted during the year 240406 60147 Outstanding at 31 December 341462 101056 Exercisable at 31 December Weighted average exercise price of options 2017 2016 The Group and the Company Pence Pence Outstanding at the start of the year 0.25 0.25 Granted during the year 0.25 0.25 Outstanding at 31 December 0.25 0.25 For the share options outstanding as at 31 December 2017 the weighted average remaining contractual life is 2.03 years 31 December 2016 2.13 years.
No share options were exercised during the year 31 December 2016 none and no share options were exercisable at 31 December 2017 or at 31 December 2016.
The following table lists the inputs to the models used at the respective year ends The Group and the Company 2017 2016 Expected volatility 52.50% 52.50% Riskfree interest rate 0.41% 1.4% Expected life of options 3 years 3 years Weighted average exercise price 0.25p 0.
Sharebased payment reserve continued Share option schemes continued The range of exercise prices of share options outstanding at the end of the reporting period is between 321 pence and 771 pence per share option.
The expected life of the options is based on historical data and is not necessarily indicative of exercise patterns that may occur.
The expected volatility reflects the assumption that the historical volatility is indicative of future trends which may also not necessarily be the actual outcome.
No dividends were assumed to be paid in the foreseeable future.
The model assumes within the calculation of the charge delivery of options that are dependent on a judgemental comparison to the total shareholder return against a specified comparator group of companies upon passing of the vesting period.
No other features of options granted were incorporated into the measurement of fair value.
Capital and reserves The components of equity are as follows Share capital The share capital account includes the par value for all shares issued and outstanding.
Share premium account The share premium account is used to record amounts received in excess of the nominal value of shares on issue of new shares.
Merger reserve The merger reserve comprises the premium arising on shares issued as consideration for the acquisition of subsidiary undertakings where merger relief under section 612 of the Companies Act 2006 applies.
Translation reserve The translation reserve is composed of the exchange rate movements in noncash assets for foreign subsidiaries which arise on the translation of foreign subsidiaries.
Movements in the reserve are disclosed in the Group Statement of Changes in Equity.
Other reserve The other reserve represents the balance arising on the acquisition of the former noncontrolling interest in 4D Pharma Research Limited.
Sharebased payment reserve The sharebased payment reserve accumulates the corresponding credit entry in respect of sharebased compensation charges.
Movements in the reserve are disclosed in the Group Statement of Changes in Equity.
Retained earnings Retained earnings includes the accumulated profits and losses arising from the Group Statement of Comprehensive Income and certain items from other comprehensive income attributable to equity shareholders net of distributions to shareholders.
Notes to the Financial Statements continued For the year ended 31 December 2017 4D pharma plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 56 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 23.
Commitments
Operating lease commitments The Group leases premises under noncancellable operating lease agreements.
The future aggregate minimum lease and service charge payments under noncancellable operating leases are as follows At At At At 31 December 31 December 31 December 31 Decembertel 2016 Group Company Group Company Land and buildings Not later than one year  After one year but not more than five years 108telOther leases Not later than one year 2 2 After one year but not more than five years 3 3 138telCapital expenditure The Group has no committed capital expenditure at 31 December 2017 nor at 31 December 2016.
The Company has no committed capital expenditure at 31 December 2017 nor at 31 December 2016.
Contractual commitments The Group has the following noncancellable contractual commitments at the balance sheet date At At At At 31 December 31 December 31 December 31 Decembertel 2016 Group Company Group Company Research and development Not later than one year 2642 2099 1220 1220 After one year but not more than five years 5146 4738 1874 438 7788 6837 3094 1658 Financial risk management
This note presents information about the Groups exposure to various kinds of financial risks the Groups objectives policies and processes for measuring and managing risk and the Groups management of capital.
The Board of Directors has overall responsibility for the establishment and oversight of the Groups risk management framework.
The Executive Directors report regularly to the Board on Group risk management.
It is and has been throughout the year the Groups policy that no speculative trading in financial instruments is undertaken.
Capital risk management The Company reviews its forecast capital requirements on a halfyearly basis to ensure that entities in the Group will be able to continue as a going concern while maximising the return to stakeholders.
The capital structure of the Group consists of equity attributable to equity holders of the parent comprising issued share capital reserves and retained earnings as disclosed in note 20 and in the Group Statement of Changes in Equity.
Total equity was 69.786 million at 31 December 2017 31 December 2016 86.483 million.
The Company is not subject to externally imposed capital requirements.
Liquidity risk The Groups approach to managing liquidity is to ensure that as far as possible it will always have sufficient liquidity to meet its liabilities when due under both normal and stressed conditions without incurring unacceptable losses or risking damage to the Groups reputation.
Financial risk management continued Liquidity risk continued The Group manages all of its external bank relationships centrally in accordance with defined treasury policies.
The policies include the minimum acceptable credit rating of relationship banks and financial transaction authority limits.
Any material change to the Groups principal banking facility requires Board approval.
The Group seeks to mitigate the risk of bank failure by ensuring that it maintains relationships with a number of investment grade banks.
At the reporting date the Group was cash positive with no outstanding borrowings except for a hire purchase agreement secured against the assets to which it relates.
Fixed Floating Noninterest Categorisation of financial instruments rate rate bearing Total 31 December 2017 000 000 000 000
Cash cash equivalents and shortterm deposits 38133 11865  49998 Trade and other payables   4944 4944 Hire purchase and finance leases 36   36 38097 11865 4944 45018
Cash cash equivalents and shortterm deposits 38133 11060  49193 Intercompany loans   33159 33159 Trade and other payables   1321 1321 38133 11060 31838 81031 Fixed Floating Noninterest Categorisation of financial instruments rate rate bearing Total 31 December 2016 000 000 000 000
Cash cash equivalents and shortterm deposits 50111 18661  68772 Trade and other payables   3758 3758 50111 18661 3758 65014
Cash cash equivalents and shortterm deposits 50111 17778  67889 Intercompany loans   24114 24114 Trade and other payables   289 289 50111 17778 23825 91714 All categories of financial assets and liabilities are measured at amortised cost with the exception of the contingent consideration which is measured at fair value through the Statement of Total Comprehensive Income using a level 3 valuation technique.
The values disclosed in the above table are carrying values.
The Board considers that the carrying amount of financial assets and liabilities approximates to their fair value.
Interest rate risk As the Group has no significant borrowings the risk is limited to the reduction of interest received on cash surpluses held at bank which receive a floating rate of interest.
The exposure to interest rate movements is immaterial.
Maturity profile The Directors consider that the carrying amount of the financial liabilities approximates to their fair value.
As all financial assets are expected to mature within the next twelve months an aged analysis of financial assets has not been presented.
Notes to the Financial Statements continued For the year ended 31 December 2017 4D pharma plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 58 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 24.
Financial risk management continued Maturity of liabilities and cash outflows 2017 2016 Between Between Between Between Less than one and two and Less than one and two and one year two years five years one year two years five years Trade and other payables 4943   3758 Hire purchase and finance leases 10 11 15 4953 11 15 3758 As all financial liabilities in the Company are expected to mature within the next twelve months no maturity of liabilities has been presented.
Foreign currency risk The Groups principal functional currency is Sterling.
However the Group has two subsidiaries whose functional currency is the Euro and the Group as a whole undertakes certain transactions denominated in foreign currencies.
The Group is exposed to currency risk on sales and purchases that are denominated in a currency other than the respective functional currency of the Company.
These are primarily US Dollars USD and Euros EUR.
Transactions outside of these currencies are limited.
The Group may use forward exchange contracts as an economic hedge against currency risk where cash flow can be judged with reasonable certainty.
Foreign exchange swaps and options may be used to hedge foreign currency receipts in the event that the timing of the receipt is less certain.
There were no open forward contracts as at 31 December 2017 or at 31 December 2016 and the Group did not enter into any such contracts during these years.
The split of Group assets between Sterling and other currencies at the year end is analysed as follows 2017 2016 GBP USD EUR Total GBP USD EUR Total Cash cash equivalents and deposits 48676 90 1232 49998 67413 11 1348 68772 Trade and other payables 3439 35 1469 4943 831 80 2847 3758 Hire purchase and finance leases   36 36 45237 55 273 45019 66582 69 1499 65014 Sensitivity analysis to movement in exchange rates The Directors have considered the transactions in foreign currency and have concluded that as there is no sales revenue and the majority of the Group transactions are denominated in Sterling the exposure to exchange rate risk is negligible.
Related party transactions Year to Year to 31 December 31 December 2017 2016 Key management compensation 000 000 Executive Directors Salaries and shortterm benefits 202 202 Employers National Insurance and social security costs Fees for services provided as NonExecutive Directors Salaries and shortterm benefits 50 50 Employers National Insurance and social security costs Other key management Salaries and shortterm benefits 775 451 Employers National Insurance and social security costs 134 54 Employers pension contributions 26 Sharebased payment charge 302 131 1237 636
Transactions with Directors and related entities During the year Aquarius Equity Partners Limited an entity controlled by Duncan Peyton and Dr Alexander Stevenson charged the Group 2116 for office expenses 31 December 2016 8368.
As at 31 December 2017 Nil was due from Aquarius Equity Partners Limited 31 December 2016 3144.
Transactions with key personnel and related entities During the year summ.
31 December 2016 3199.
At the year end 5065 was due to summ. t assist llp 31 December 2016 6766.
3C SAS an entity owned by Christophe Carit provided consultancy services to the Group of Nil 31 December 2016 182324 and recharged costs of Nil 31 December 2016 73029.
At the year end Nil was due to 3C SAS 31 December 2016 Nil.
Biomar Microbial Technologies an entity in which Antonio Fernandez is a director charged rent and building service costs to the Group of 302487 31 December 2016 104987.
At the year end 5469 was due to Biomar Microbial Technologies 31 December 2016 27411.
Company
Transactions between 100% owned Group companies have not been disclosed as these have all been eliminated in the preparation of the Group financial statements.
Transactions with Directors and related entities During the year Aquarius Equity Partners Limited an entity controlled by Duncan Peyton and Dr Alexander Stevenson charged the Company 2116 for office expenses 31 December 2016 8368.
As at 31 December 2017 Nil was due from Aquarius Equity Partners Limited 31 December 2016 3144.
Notes to the Financial Statements continued For the year ended 31 December 2017 4D pharma plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 60 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 25.
Related party transactions continued Company continued Transactions with key personnel and related entities During the year summ.
31 December 2016 3199.
At the year end 5065 was due to summ. t assist llp 31 December 2016 5854.
3C SAS an entity owned by Christophe Carit provided consultancy services to the Company of Nil 31 December 2016 182324 and recharged costs of Nil 31 December 2016 73029.
At the year end Nil was due to 3C SAS 31 December 2016 Nil.
All related party transactions during the current and previous year were considered to be at arms length.
Auditor
RSM UK Audit LLP 3 Hardman Street Manchester M3 3HF Nominated advisor and joint broker Zeus Capital Limited 82 King Street Manchester M2 4WQ and 10 Old Burlington Street London W1S 3AG Country of incorporation United Kingdom Company number
DR Norwood NonExecutive Chairman DJ Peyton AJ Stevenson T Engelen NonExecutive Company secretary and registered office LS Dale 4D pharma plc 9 Bond Court Leeds LS1 2JZ Joint broker Bryan Garnier and Co.
Limited
Beaufort House 15 St.
Botolph Street London EC3A 7BB
Link Asset Services The Registry 34 Beckenham Road
