Camellia Plc Annual Report 2017 Perivan Financial Print CAMELLIA PLC Camellia RandA Cover Spread Page 1 CONTENTS page Camellia at a glance 2 Directors and advisers 4 Chairmans statement 5 Chief Executives report 6 Chief Financial Ocers report 17 Strategic report 20 Report of the Directors 26 Corporate governance 29 Statement of Directors responsibilities 33 Remuneration report 34 Consolidated income statement 36 Statement of comprehensive income 37 Consolidated balance sheet 38 Company balance sheet 39 Consolidated cash ow statement 40 Company cash ow statement 41 Statement of changes in equity 42 Accounting policies 43 Notes to the accounts 54 Report of the independent auditors 102 Five year record 109 REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 CAMELLIA PLC Camellia RandA pp01pp19 Page 1 CAMELLIA PLC Camellia Plc is an international group  a global family of diverse companies with a 130year history employing approximately 80000 people worldwide.
Our operations are in Agriculture Engineering Food Service and the holding of Investments.
From the outset Camellias ethos has been based on the highest moral and professional integrity and a commitment to doing the right thing  ethically and commercially globally and locally.
Prots are our lifeblood but not our soul.
Our business is built on two fundamental principles
We see ourselves as custodians holding our businesses in trust for future generations.
We believe we have a responsibility to ensure the stability security and continuity of all our businesses so they can be passed on to the next generation as enduring operations.
We recognise that people and businesses take time to establish and grow to their full potential and we are happy to wait for that to happen.
We are deeply committed to improving the longterm stability and wellbeing of our businesses the communities and the environments in which we operate.
Sustainability.
We are committed not only to the ultimate welfare of our employees but also to the communities in which they live.
We believe our businesses can and should grow with respect and care for the environment rather than at the cost of it.
We proactively invest in ensuring that the environments where we do business are continually protected and improved and seek to minimise any damage our activities may cause.
Our continuing business is made up as follows
2017 Turnover  239.4 million Trading prot  35.6 million Mature Immature area area Core crops Locations Ha.
Ha.
Tea India Bangladesh Kenya Malawi 32292 2511 Macadamia Kenya South Africa Malawi 2474 1224 Avocados Kenya 415 192 Speciality crops Arable Brazil 3437 Forestry Kenya Malawi Brazil 2488 3378 Rubber Bangladesh 1610 365 Citrus USA 169 8 Pistachios USA 131 Wine grapes South Africa 63 12 Almonds USA 56 Pineapples Kenya 24
Joint Projects Kenya 1580 Cattle Kenya 4409 head CAMELLIA AT A GLANCE Camellia RandA pp01pp19 Page 2 3
2017 Turnover  20.5 million Trading loss  2.6 million Subsidiary Locations Abbey Metal Finishing UK Germany AJT Engineering UK XiMo Switzerland Hungary FOOD SERVICE 2017 Turnover  37.8 million Trading prot  1.8 million Subsidiary Locations ACSandT UK Jing Tea UK Ash The Netherlands Wylax The Netherlands
Market value at Investment type Locations m Investment Portfolio Global 47.0 Investment Property UK Malawi Isle of Man Brazil 23.4 Collections UK India Bangladesh Kenya South Africa 9.4 Collections are stated at cost
2017 Share of results after taxation  2.0 million
Location Activity % BFandM Bermuda Life and Nonlife insurance 36.3 United Finance Bangladesh Banking 38.4 United Insurance Bangladesh Nonlife insurance 37.0 ASSETS HELD FOR SALE BMT Great Yarmouth UK GU Cutting and Grinding UK Property in Loddon UK CAMELLIA AT A GLANCE CAMELLIA PLC Camellia RandA pp01pp19 Page 3 Directors Malcolm Perkins FCA Chairman iii Chris Relleen FCA Deputy Chairman independent nonexecutive Director and senior independent Director i ii iii Tom Franks FCA Chief Executive Graham Mclean MSc Managing Director of Agriculture Susan Walker FCCA Chief Financial Ocer William Gibson Independent nonexecutive Director i ii iii Frdric Vuilleumier Independent nonexecutive Director i Gautam Dalal FCA Independent nonexecutive Director i Audit committee ii Remuneration committee iii Nomination committee Secretary Julia Morton ACIS Registered oce Linton Park
Maidstone
Kent ME17 4AB Registered number Nominated adviser and Panmure Gordon UK Limited broker One New Change London EC4M 9AF Registrars Link Asset Services The Registry 34 Beckenham Road Kent BR3 4ZF Independent auditors Deloitte LLP Statutory Auditors 2 New Street Square London EC4A 3BZ Website www. amellia.
DIRECTORS AND ADVISERS CAMELLIA PLC Camellia RandA pp01pp19 Page 4 5 I am pleased to report the results for 2017 which reect a prot for the year of 28.6 million 2016 loss 5.9 million this includes the previously disclosed exceptional gain on the sale of Duncan Lawries UK asset management business of 19.2 million about which more is set out in the Chief Financial Ocers report.
There were no other signicant changes to the Group structure in the year however in line with our strategy and as set out in more detail in the Chief Executives report we made a small acquisition of a packet tea business in India during the year and since the year end we have acquired a majority shareholding in Jing Tea.
Jing Tea is a UK based distributor of branded speciality teas to the retail and food service sectors internationally.
In pursuing our strategic objectives we have decided to sell two of our smaller engineering businesses BMT Great Yarmouth and GU Cutting and Grinding although the sales have yet to complete.
More details are provided in the Chief Executives report.
Trading in 2017 was mixed with a weak start being followed by a much better second half.
Our tea operations performed well as good yields combined with an improving tea price as the year progressed.
However for the second year running the macadamia crop was impacted by drought which led to disappointing volumes.
Our speciality crops continue to provide an excellent return which once again demonstrates the benets of our diversied agricultural strategy.
Elsewhere as previously disclosed our associate BFandM reported a signicant reduction in protability as a result of the two major hurricanes in September 2017.
Camellia is a business with operations across a number of geographical areas particularly in emerging markets all of which are vulnerable to a global political atmosphere which is relatively unstable by recent historical standards.
Furthermore changing weather patterns led to a severe drought in the Cape and Kenya ooding in Bangladesh and an unprecedented hurricane season in the Caribbean.
It is a credit to our sta across the world that they continue to operate successfully in the face of these challenges.
Board Members I was delighted to announce the appointment of Gautam Dalal to the Board as a nonexecutive Director with eect from 1 March.
Gautams wide experience of the markets in which we operate will be of great benet to the executive team.
Dividend
Your Board is recommending a nal dividend of 98p per share which together with the interim dividend already paid of 37p per share brings the total distribution for the year to 135p per share compared with 130p per share for 2016.
Outlook
As so much of our result depends on crop volumes in the second half of the year it is not possible to forecast outturns with any degree of condence.
However early signs of a better macadamia crop some good prices for tea in the rst quarter of 2018 and continuing strength in our UK markets give us reasons to be optimistic at this stage.
Sta
As always my thanks go out to all our sta for their eorts in 2017.
Malcolm Perkins
18 April 2018
CHAIRMANS STATEMENT
CAMELLIA PLC Camellia RandA pp01pp19
Page 5 CHIEF EXECUTIVES REPORT
Camellia is a unique group not only in our ethos and culture but also in the diversity and quality of our assets.
Our nancial position is strong and following our withdrawal from the UK nancial services market our nancial risks are substantially reduced.
In his statement the Chairman rightly reects on the diculties of operating in emerging markets however this access to some of the worlds fastest expanding economies also provides us with opportunities for growth.
In the Agriculture division whilst climate change and political uncertainty in many of our operating countries are largely outside our control we have four key advantages.
First we are growing a selection of crops which are increasingly in demand from an urbanising longer living and more health conscious consumer who is ever more concerned with the provenance of their food.
Second our focus on sustainability has put us in a strong position to benet from these global trends.
Third we have been operating in many of our territories for a very long time.
Fourth we have the resources to pursue our strategic goals.
Furthermore whilst our expenditure on sustainability may not always be immediately apparent our long standing investment in irrigation community welfare and better agricultural practices is an integral part of our success.
We will continue to build on these strong foundations for the benet of all our stakeholders.
In our other divisions we continue to take steps to invest where we believe that it is in the long term interests of the Group and to divest where we no longer believe that to be the case.
Over the last three years we have disposed of Duncan Lawrie Asset Management at a substantial prot and closed or sold Duncan Lawrie Private Bank AKD Engineering and Loddon all of which were loss making.
This process of rening our portfolio is an important part of our long term strategy and a summary of the acquisitions made during 2017 and since the year end is set out below Tea City.
A collection of Indian packet tea brands which was bought by Goodricke to add to its existing brand portfolio.
Jing Tea.
A UK based branded speciality teas business selling to the retail and food service sectors internationally.
Both of these acquisitions will help to bring us closer to our market place and its changing trends Jing Tea will also enable us to distribute our high end teas more protably.
In addition to these acquisitions we are proposing to make a number of small disposals and other changes to the portfolio as follows BMT Great Yarmouth and GU Cutting and Grinding.
Both of these companies have been with the Group for many years and whilst both remain cash generative they are too small and too niche to represent good investment opportunities or to deliver long term growth for the Group.
I am pleased to say that each is in the process of being sold to its respective management team.
XiMo.
Having now successfully demonstrated production of sample quantities of its catalysts the next stage is to conrm the same capabilities on a larger scale in order to prove that the process is viable commercially.
This stage will require signicant additional investment and we are actively seeking third party funding for this next step.
I strongly believe that these changes to the portfolio support our long term strategy and will make a positive contribution to the Group in the future.
I am also pleased that we have been able to raise the dividend again this year.
Other than in 2008 when we held the dividend we have raised the dividend every year since the merger with Linton Park in 2005.
On other matters I am pleased that the 2017 triennial UK pension scheme valuation shows a small surplus of 7.1 million as against a previous decit of 7.9 million.
We will continue to monitor the position carefully mindful of our continuing and future obligations to the members.
CAMELLIA PLC Camellia RandA pp01pp19 Page 6 7
CHIEF EXECUTIVES REPORT
BUSINESS STRATEGY The overall Group strategy which is set out on page 20 remains unchanged with each division expected to perform against an agreed divisional strategy with goals and targets for the short medium and long term.
These are summarised below
To focus on our core crops of tea macadamia and avocado where we have scale and geographic spread.
Where appropriate opportunities arise to add to our production capability in these three crops as well as to make aligned acquisitions and investments to enable us to capture more of the value chain.
To maintain and potentially to grow our portfolio of noncore crops in order to retain the diversity of location and crop which has historically proved so valuable in shielding the Group from the impact of climate change and commodity price uctuations.
To utilise our agricultural expertise to make the most of the estates that we already have and to develop new estates where possible and appropriate.
Agriculture is the largest division and is the area where we see the best long term investment opportunities for the Group.
This will remain our focus for future investment.
Engineering
Engineering North.
To take advantage of the recovering oil sector whilst diversifying into adjacent sectors in order to create a sustainably protable engineering business.
Engineering South.
To continue to grow Abbey Metal Finishing and its joint venture in Germany Atn as quality suppliers to the aerospace industry.
XiMo.
To nd new investors to take the technology to the next phase in its development.
Food Service
To continue to operate as a high quality business in the storage and distribution of frozen foods aiming to achieve critical mass by protable growth and if appropriate acquisition.
Ash and Wylax.
To establish a sustainably protable business model that works in the European sh distribution market.
Investments
Investment Portfolio.
The Group has a portfolio principally of listed investments the strategy for which remains to invest in high quality companies where we believe that there is long term value.
This portfolio also enables us to balance our geographic risk exposure.
Investment Property.
The strategy is to continue to invest in quality assets where an appropriate yield may be realised.
The process of developing some of our existing properties to enhance yield will continue.
Collections.
The Group has collections of art philately and manuscripts which are regularly reviewed and are added to or sold as appropriate.
Associates
The Group has three associate companies in the nancial services sector of which BFandM the listed Bermudian insurance business is the most signicant.
With all our associates we continually monitor our investment and may increase or decrease our holding in the future.
CAMELLIA PLC Camellia RandA pp01pp19
Page 7 CHIEF EXECUTIVES REPORT
CAMELLIA PLC
Agriculture
Tea Production 2017 saw the Groups second highest ever production levels through our own and managed clients factories.
Total Made Tea produced was 95.0 million kgs 2016 99.1 million kgs.
Mature Immature 2017 2016 area area Volume Volume
Ha. mkg mkg India 14369 1394 27.6 28.6 Bangladesh 8578 635 13.6 14.1 Kenya 4101 55 13.5 15.1 Malawi 5244 427 17.0 15.6 Total 32292 2511 71.7 73.4 Estate volumes only in addition 19.3 million kg of tea was produced for smallholders 2016 20.3 million kg and a further 4.0 million kg for managed clients 2016 5.4 million kg.
Tea pricing and operations
India had a record production year in the Dooars gardens.
Volumes in Darjeeling for the year were materially impacted by the previously reported strike.
A new dedicated Bought Leaf factory Jogopur was successfully opened at our Danguajhar factory site and Bought Leaf production was restarted in Assam on Sessa and Borpatra gardens.
Tea prices for India were generally lower than the previous year other than those from the Dooars region.
Prices at the start of the year were under pressure due to high volumes of unsold teas from 2016s record production but improved from the midyear point to levels above the previous years particularly for the Dooars and Assam CTCs whilst the Assam orthodox market was down on the previous year.
Darjeeling prices were volatile due to the supply constraints inicted by the strike.
First ush teas sold well but the majority of the second ush and main season teas were lost.
The situation was not helped by the implementation of GST in India which hindered both the auctions and tea sales in general as the market familiarised itself with the new system.
Our average selling price over the year was 6.4% lower than the previous year.
Goodricke Groups Good Manufacturing Practice GMP certicate was renewed as were other certications including FSSC and RFA for all our Assam Darjeeling and Cachar gardens.
The Trust Tea certication for the Bought Leaf initiative is being implemented across all our gardens in the Dooars and Goodricke won a social sustainability Bronze award for their WASH Water Air and ventilation Sanitation and Hygiene programme at the North American Tea Sustainability Awards.
In total Indias national production volumes for 2017 were up on 2016 primarily due to higher production in south India and increasing volumes from the Bought Leaf sector.
Costs continue to rise through wage and general ination which without compensatory increases in the market price creates margin pressure.
To mitigate this eorts continue to reduce seasonal labour requirements through the mechanisation of planting pruning spraying and plucking.
During the year Goodricke acquired a number of wellknown Indian brands including Tea City Supercup and Samovar.
This will result in increased volumes of packet tea being produced and sold in 2018 in line with our strategy of moving up the value chain.
Camellia RandA pp01pp19 Page 8 9
CHIEF EXECUTIVES REPORT
Bangladesh
Our Bangladesh operations had another successful year achieving their second highest ever production despite the heavy rainfall which led to signicant ooding in many areas.
As in India prices in the Bangladesh market were under pressure during the rst half of the year due to high levels of prior years stock remaining unsold.
Import tari levels were raised again during the year and prices recovered well in the third quarter and remained rm through to the end of the year.
Our
Production trials were conducted on both orthodox and green teas with some very encouraging results and feedback from the domestic and export markets.
These trials will continue with the aim of reaching commercial production in 2018.
Trials have started on shear plucking in an eort to reduce harvesting costs through improved productivity.
RFA certication was achieved on all gardens in September.
Duncan Brothers being only the second but by far the largest producer to achieve this certication in Bangladesh.
Kenya
Our production was impacted by drought during the rst half of the year but saw an upturn as the weather improved in the nal quarter.
Tea prices in Kenya rmed at the start of the year as it became apparent that the dry conditions were going to have an impact on national production.
These growing conditions did not improve until the 4th quarter which saw record production.
However despite this our average selling price for the year was 21.5% ahead of the previous year.
The wage negotiations remain unresolved for the Collective Bargaining Agreement years of 201415 and 201617 which creates uncertainty in the cost base and agitation frustration and industrial action at the operational level.
To mitigate the risk of escalating labour costs our eorts to develop more mechanised processes continue.
To this end automated withering has been installed on a trial basis in our Chemomi factory and the area under mechanised tea harvesting has expanded and will continue to do so.
The research and development initiative into new harvester technology continues with the engagement of a UK specialist engineering company to design and fabricate a new prototype.
The number of smallholders continues to increase as does the volume derived from this sector.
Smallholder production represents a signicant proportion of our total volumes in Kenya and remains a critical factor in the wider social responsibility and sustainability strategy of our tea operations.
All the estates and registered smallholders are RFA and FSSC certied and Eastern Produce Kenya won an environmental sustainability Gold award for our Wise Use programme at the North American Tea Sustainability Awards.
Malawi
Our Malawi operations achieved an alltime record crop and also began a project to produce and sell commercial volumes of green tea which has met with signicant interest from buyers.
Tea prices in Malawi were rm throughout 2017 due to strong demand resulting from an undersupplied Kenyan market.
Our average tea selling price for the year was 21.2% higher than the previous year.
The Malawi Tea Revitalisation 2020 programme continues with the roll out of some excellent initiatives in nutrition gender empowerment and smallholder production.
Eastern Produce Malawi won a social sustainability Gold award at the North American Tea Sustainability Awards for its Diversity Inclusion and Womens Welfare policy in line with the UN Sustainable Development Goal 5 to achieve gender equality and empowerment of women and girls.
All estates and smallholders are RFA certied and three factories have FSSC 22000 certication the rst tea factories in Malawi to achieve this.
CAMELLIA PLC Camellia RandA pp01pp19
Page 9 CHIEF EXECUTIVES REPORT
CAMELLIA PLC Macadamia Production Macadamia production in 2017 was disappointing and showed a slight decrease from the already signicantly reduced volumes in Malawi and South Africa seen in 2016.
This was due to drought conditions that aected both regions and the consequential reduction in nut volumes and size.
Mature Immature Volume Volume area area 2017 2016
Ha.
Tonnes Tonnes Malawi 129telSouth Africa 80telKenya 37tel Total 2474 1224 780 791 Macadamia Pricing Due to rising demand for macadamia products prices remained rm and in line with the previous years levels during the rst half of the year.
As it became apparent in the market that supply was once again impacted by drought particularly in southern Africa prices reached record highs our average selling price for the year was 7.4% ahead of the prior year.
Signicant progress was made in the development of the Maclands brand.
Macadamia Operations
Overall Malawi volumes were below those of 2016 and the lowest seen in the last 15 years which is indicative of the drought impact.
The operation is focusing on agronomic activities to mitigate the impacts of climate change and to improve the resilience of the orchards to a changing growing environment.
Such initiatives include heavy mulching tree thinning plant density reduction and replanting.
Currently over 50% of our orchards are still young in production potential terms so the prospects for improved volumes going forward are positive.
The processing factory is FSSC 22000 certied.
South Africa Volumes were disappointing though marginally up on the previous year.
As with the Malawi operations the focus is on agronomic activities which will improve the ability of the orchards to cope with more extreme climate challenges.
There is also signicant investment being made to expand water resources for irrigation from the Simpson Dam on Mambedi estate.
Due to the rising costs of labour investment is being made in the mechanisation of certain activities including harvesting sorting and processing.
The development of Mambedi estate to macadamia continues with over 80Ha of new planting completed bringing the total development to just under 300Ha.
The processing factory successfully completed the second phase of upgrading and is FSSC 22000 certied.
The renewal of the lease for our Wales estate is under negotiation.
If unsuccessful it will result in Eastern Produce South Africa having to vacate the property at the expiry of the lease in March 2020 with the last harvest from the estate likely to be that for 2019.
Kenya
Production volumes were up on the previous years levels but were also impacted by the dry conditions experienced in Kenya in the rst half of the year.
To combat this similar initiatives to those of Malawi and South Africa are under way.
Camellia RandA pp01pp19 Page 10 11
CHIEF EXECUTIVES REPORT
The footprint of the orchards continues to grow with an additional 73Ha planted to bring the total development to 1027Ha.
The age prole of the orchards is very young and volumes are expected to grow rapidly with the developing maturity prole.
The cracking facility successfully completed its second full season of processing and is FSSC 22000 certied.
Avocado Production Mature Immature Volume Volume area area 2017 2016
Ha. mkg mkg Kenya .37.1 Estate volumes only.
In addition 0.9 million kg of smallholder fruit was packed 2016 1.8 million kg Avocado Pricing and Operations Avocado production was in line with expectations for the year despite the dry conditions which had a negative impact on fruit size.
We exported an increased volume of Hass but Pinkerton volumes were down on the previous year.
Fruit sourced from smallholders was signicantly reduced as unscrupulous exporters took advantage of European demand to export immature fruit.
As a result of these exports and the associated reputational damage Kenyan fruit is now frequently being discounted in the European market.
However by maintaining the standard of our own fruit pricing achieved through the year was rm and in line with the previous year for similar sized fruit.
New avocado development continues with 60Ha of orchards planted.
The total orchard footprint now stands at 607Ha.
In addition Eastern Produce Kenya is undertaking a three year trial of Hass avocado near Kitale in western Kenya to investigate the viability of avocado production in that region.
Speciality Crops Production Mature Immature Volume Volume area area 2017 2016
Ha.
Tonnes Tonnes Arable Brazil 3437  24472 24078 Rubber Bangladesh 161telCitrus USA 169 8 8851 4293 Pistachio USA 131  30 Wine grapes South Africa Almonds USA 56  100 94 Pineapples Kenya 24  1414 1656 Forestry 2488 3378 93758 ii ii i 2017 was an o year for Pistachios ii Volumes quoted are for conversion to value added products rather than own use as fuel wood Speciality Crops Pricing and Operations
Record yields were once again achieved in soya and establishing forward contracts early for the 2017 crop ensured that the prices achieved were in line with the prior year despite an oversupplied market.
Record yields were also achieved in the maize crop which more than compensated for the lower than expected prices which arose from oversupply in the market.
Rubber.
Production was in line with the previous year.
Demand was disappointing leading to sustained low prices throughout the year.
CAMELLIA PLC Camellia RandA pp01pp19
Page 11 CHIEF EXECUTIVES REPORT
CAMELLIA PLC
In California we had a good year with record yields being achieved for the Murcotts without an impact on prices.
Navel oranges also performed well with good yields and prices.
Wine.
The continuing drought in the Cape meant that grape production was below expectations but in line with the previous years volumes.
Wine sales were also disappointing.
Investment was made in the winery to improve handling and quality in production.
Almonds.
Production and pricing was in line with expectation for this relatively immature development.
Pineapples.
These are being phased out at Kakuzi and will be replaced with Pinkerton avocado.
Forestry.
Better sales of large poles at Kakuzi led to a much improved result.
We continue to raise cattle on those areas of the Kakuzi estate in Kenya unsuitable for crop development.
In total the Agriculture division made a trading prot of 35.6 million 2016 29.9 million on revenue of 239.4 million 2016 207.1 million.
Engineering
Engineering North Engineering North continued to struggle in 2017 as the anticipated pick up in the oil industry failed to translate into signicant additional sales or prots.
The new Site Services division which provides services to the hydroelectric sector has made an encouraging start.
As a result total revenue at AJT Engineering rose to 8.0 million from 6.9 million in 2016.
Engineering South Abbey Metal Finishing and its subsidiary Atn made a substantially increased operating prot in 2017 as demand grew for their services to the aerospace industry.
The two other companies in this division are in the process of being sold.
XiMo
XiMo our industrial catalyst research and development business continues to develop products with the objective of commercial use.
In common with other research based businesses it is expected to lose money pending the outcome of commercial trials.
As stated earlier we are now seeking partners to nance the next stage of its development.
In total the Engineering division made a trading loss of 2.6 million 2016 trading loss 2.6 million on revenue of 20.5 million 2016 18.8 million.
Food Service ACSandT saw revenue and prots grow substantially in 2017 as demand increased for its services from its major customers.
In the Netherlands both Ash and Wylax succeeded in increasing revenue but due to exchange rate movements and a competitive market ended the year loss making.
In total the Food Service division made a trading prot of 1.8 million 2016 0.8 million on revenue of 37.8 million 2016 31.6 million.
Investments
Investment Portfolio.
The gains on sale for the year were 0.7 million 2016 1.5 million.
The total value of the portfolio at 31 December 2017 was 47.0 million 2016 37.2 million.
Investment Property.
We continue to work on our estate of investment properties in order to maximise the value and the return.
Following refurbishment in 2016 No.
6 Hobart Place was let during the year as was a property in Queen Square in Bristol.
On the Linton Park estate work has commenced to convert surplus buildings into residential property for rent.
Collections.
The collections are held at cost.
A number of minor additions and disposals were made during the year.
Camellia RandA pp01pp19 Page 12 Associates BFandM recorded a strong operating year from its core insurance and investment advisory services.
However two category 5 hurricanes in the Caribbean in September 2017 Irma and Maria resulted in signicant costs and the need to purchase additional reinsurance cover which has led BFandM to report a reduced prot before tax of Bermudian Dollar 1.9 million 2016 Bermudian Dollar 17.9 million.
Our two associate companies in Bangladesh United Insurance and United Finance saw marginally lower prots than in 2016 as a result of falling interest rates and political uncertainty.
In total the share of the results of associates amounted to 2.0 million 2016 5.1 million.
Discontinued Operation  Duncan Lawrie As previously stated the wind down of the remaining assets of Duncan Lawrie continued throughout 2017 and the banking license was nally returned in December indicating that the regulators in the UK are satised that all issues have been dealt with.
The full nancial impact of the disposals and closure are summarised in the Chief Financial Ocers Report.
POLITICAL LEGISLATIVE and LEGAL ISSUES The Group is present in many jurisdictions and is subject to local legislation.
The following issues may have a material impact on the Group At the start of 2016 the Government of Malawi put forward new legislation which proposed inter alia the conversion of all freehold property into 50 year leaseholds.
The Group continues to monitor and assess the impact of the UKs exit from the EU.
To date the impact of the decision has been broadly conned to currency movements which may impact the costs of imports particularly tea and the prices paid to producers.
CAPITAL INVESTMENT and DEVELOPMENT We continued to invest in our assets during the year and 15.0 million was spent on property plant and equipment and investment property 2016 10.2 million including the following key projects Starting the rebuilding of the Simpson Dam in Mambedi South Africa to assist with water retention for the macadamia estates.
Trialing a new automated withering system at Chemomi factory Kenya in order to improve quality and reduce labour costs.
Building a Bought Leaf factory at our Dangujuar garden in India.
Continuing improvements to Linton Park winery in South Africa.
Developing the Ruo factory and irrigation in Malawi.
Development of our investment properties in the UK.
In addition to our continuous programme of replanting our tea areas a programme to extend our planted areas in macadamia and avocado has been underway for a number of years and in 2017 91Ha 2016 65Ha of new avocado plantings were completed in Kenya.
73Ha 2016 97Ha of new macadamia plantings were carried out in Kenya 82Ha 2016 47Ha in South Africa and 48Ha 2016 12Ha in Malawi.
CHIEF EXECUTIVES REPORT
CAMELLIA PLC Camellia RandA pp01pp19 Page 13 SUSTAINABILITY AND CSR
The Groups businesses are fundamentally connected to the welfare of our communities and the environments in which we operate.
We proactively invest to ensure these environments are protected and improved.
Our focus is on the longterm stability security and continuity of our businesses and those communities.
We support and integrate the UN Sustainable Development Goals into our sustainability strategy.
We invest in monitor and report on both Environmental and Social sustainability initiatives across all our divisions.
In 2017 the Group launched a new online system for capturing data relating to our global environmental footprint.
The system allows us to monitor our energy use Greenhouse Gas emissions Water and Waste the results of which are summarised below.
As part of our wider drive towards greater sustainability we have developed a range of mid to longterm targets to reduce in some cases substantially the environmental impact of our operations.
As an example strategic improvements in our usage and sourcing of energy supports our ambition to align with Science Based Targets.
Targets adopted by companies to reduce Greenhouse Gas emissions are considered sciencebased if they are in line with the level of decarbonisation required to keep the global temperature increase below 2 degrees Celsius compared with preindustrial temperatures.
Whilst monitoring and reducing our environmental footprint is critical so too is ensuring the wellbeing of the communities in which we operate.
We refer to this social sustainability as our licence to trade.
The level of health and educational facilities available from state governments varies widely across our operations and consequently so does the focus and scale of our social sustainability projects.
The level of support provided to many of these communities by the Group is substantial and is summarised below.
We also need to ensure that all our operations can demonstrate that they meet the requirements of our customers in terms of certications and traceability.
The vast majority of our tea gardens are RFA certied and all our macadamia avocado and winery operations are FSSC 22000 certied.
Further details of these are included in the operational reports above.
Environmental Sustainability The key metrics for the Group include Greenhouse Gas emissions water usage and waste produced.
The table below sets out the Baseline average of the three years 20132015 and how we have progressed since that time.
2017 2016 Baseline Energy and Carbon Total Energy Consumed TWh 1.25 1.22 1.22 Total Carbon Emissions tonnes CO2e 222775 224277 272685 Scope 1 tonnes CO2e 167321 161620 151138 Scope 2 tonnes CO2e 55455 62657 61546
Total water withdrawal million m ii
Total waste tonnes iii 3773 7561 8282 i A 1.4% decrease in Greenhouse Gas emissions in 2017 has been achieved through a focus on more ecient use of energy reduced tea production in 2017 and a reduction in emissions of electricity from the grid oset by an increase in fossil fuel usage in certain of our operations. our operations to help address the impact of drought have increased water use. waste.
There are ongoing initiatives to increase our waste recycling rates in a number of our operations.
CAMELLIA PLC
CHIEF EXECUTIVES REPORT
Camellia RandA pp01pp19 Page 14 Some of the initiatives we are undertaking include Pursuing limited resource use eciency this year alone we identied over 200 energy and water management projects across the Group.
Ongoing investment in energy ecient technology includes upgrading lighting and trialing energy ecient motors and variable speed drives continued growth in the use of renewable energy via solar projects and the increasing use of energy ecient transport across the Group.
Development of modern water management solutions is aligned with energy eciency and improved sanitation projects in many of our operations.
Precision Agriculture is increasingly used to determine the water status of both soil and plant for ecient use of water in irrigation.
We also implement systemic water management processes by encouraging water recycling water harvesting through rainwater capture and by building dams.
Social Sustainability We believe that all employees should be remunerated fairly and that they and their families should have access to education healthcare and housing.
The table below shows the provision of schools and healthcare by the Group in 2017.
In addition we continue to provide housing for over 200000 people.
Schools 284 School children educated annually 33259 Hospitalsclinics 114 Patient treatments annually 795581 The funding and operation of schools and hospitals provided for our employees and their communities varies by location in accordance with local culture practice and requirement.
Some facilities are owned and operated by us directly whilst others are fully or partly funded by us whilst being state andor NGO managed and owned.
Through a broad range of CSR initiatives across the Group we contribute to improved health and nutrition hygiene and sanitation of our communities.
We assist with the improvement of local infrastructure by supporting road water healthcare and education projects.
In 2017 our work in this area was recognised by the Tea Association USA.
Our continued focus on developing sustainable housing for our working communities is reected in major housing renewal projects in India Bangladesh Kenya and
Health
All our tea estates have a hospital clinic or dispensary.
In addition in India and Bangladesh sta have access to central Group operated hospitals to which more serious cases can be referred.
We provide medical services including where appropriate antiretroviral drugs in those communities where HIVAIDs is prevalent.
We also give medical support to schools that are either run locally or by our operations.
During 2017 in India we made our hospital facilities available to visiting surgeons to perform over 400 medical treatments for cleft palates club feet and eye conditions.
In Bangladesh our Primary Health Care initiative is extended to all estates and provides the communities with comprehensive and specialist health programmes.
Education
We are committed to providing the opportunity for development for all.
We provide schools in areas where we operate either by building and running the schools or by supporting state educational projects in our communities.
Aiming to develop education and opportunity for all employees we provide skills development programmes and adult education.
For example in Malawi we support students from technical colleges by providing employment opportunities.
In India over 350 adults received educational support through a range of initiatives including the Peter Leggatt Educational Stipend.
CHIEF EXECUTIVES REPORT
CAMELLIA PLC Camellia RandA pp01pp19 Page 15 16
CHIEF EXECUTIVES REPORT
CAMELLIA PLC Female economic empowerment In order to support our working mothers and enable them to take part in the economic process we provide over 16000 places at xed and mobile crches across our operations.
Smallholders
Demonstrating our commitment to responsible sourcing we continue to develop smallholder programmes including agricultural training days in Kenya Malawi and India.
In 2017 we produced 19.2 million kgs of smallholder Made Tea across the Group.
In Kenya 220000 cartons of avocados were packed for smallholders during the year.
These initiatives enabled over 30000 local farmers to improve their earnings by beneting from our agricultural expertise infrastructure and access to market.
Wages
We are committed to paying fair wages benets and allowances in accordance with local legislation and trade union agreements and have received certications from Fairtrade the Rainforest Alliance and WEITA among others all of which require an audit of the Groups employment practices as part of maintaining the accreditations.
We are part of a number of other initiatives to address the issue of low pay in developing countries.
All our UK companies are Living Wage accredited employers.
Senior Appointments Following the retirement of Arun Singh Chief Executive of Goodricke since 2006 I am pleased to report the appointment of Atul Asthana who will also take his place on the Agriculture Executive Committee.
I am also pleased to report the appointment of Amarpal Takk who joins us as Group General Counsel and Company Secretary with eect from 20 April 2018 following the resignation of Julia Morton.
I would like to thank both Arun and Julia for their service to the Group over the years.
Tom Franks Chief Executive 18 April telCamellia RandA pp01pp19 Page 16 CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICERS REPORT Overview of results The prot for the year ending 31 December 2017 was 28.6 million 2016 loss 5.9 million.
The prot improvement reects inter alia the discontinuation of Duncan Lawrie which straddled two nancial years and resulted in a gain in 2017 on the sale of Duncan Lawries asset management business while the losses on the sale of the loan books were reected in the 2016 results.
In addition a signicant increase in prots in Agriculture as a result of a recovery in tea prices in the second half of 2017 led to the trading prot from our continuing businesses increasing to 26.4 million 2016 19.0 million.
These gains were partly oset by lower results from BFandM and provisions and impairments in respect of GU Cutting and Grinding and BMT Great Yarmouth.
The Group had net assets of 417.9 million 2016 379.6 million and net cash and cash equivalents of 106.8 million 2016 71.8 million excluding balances relating to our banking operations.
Discontinued operation During 2017 the Group completed the sale of Duncan Lawries UK asset management business as well as the disposals of various businesses operated by Duncan Lawries Isle of Man subsidiaries.
The disposal of Duncan Lawries UK asset management business generated a gain on sale of 19.2 million which is reected in the results for 2017 as is a small net prot on the sale of the Isle of Man asset management business and trust operations.
In December 2016 we completed the sale of the UK loan book.
Duncan
Lawries banking licences were surrendered in 2017 and the business is now closed.
The prot from the discontinued operation in 2017 was 14.8 million 2016 loss 20.0 million comprising the following 2017 2016 m m Duncan Lawries operating loss 5.5 7.5 Prot on sale of Duncan Lawries UK asset management business 19.2 Prot on sale of Duncan Lawries Isle of Man asset management and trust businesses 1.1 Costs associated with the closure of the operations including sta termination contract termination and advisors fees  10.3 Impairment of property plant equipment intangibles loans and advances to customers  1.2 Loss on sale of UK loan book and provision for loss on sale of Isle of Man loan book  2.8 Prot on sale of available for sale nancial assets  1.2 Prot on sale of held to maturity nancial assets  0.6 Protloss from discontinued operation 14.8 20.0
Following the two signicant hurricanes during 2017 BFandMs share price fell signicantly.
However due to its conservative underwriting policies there has been no impact on its balance sheet strength.
The prospects for BFandM remain good and the underlying net asset value of the business remains signicantly ahead of the share price and accordingly no impairment provision has been made.
GU Cutting and Grinding and BMT Great Yarmouth As a consequence of the decision to sell GU Cutting and Grinding and BMT Great Yarmouth these businesses have been reclassied as held for sale at the end of 2017 and an impairment charge of 1.8 million has been recognised 2016 nil.
The trading prots for these businesses 0.3 million in 2017 are reported within Engineering.
CAMELLIA PLC Camellia RandA pp01pp19 Page 17 CAMELLIA PLC
CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICERS REPORT
Currencies
Over the course of the year ending 31 December 2017 Sterling strengthened substantially against all our key operating currencies.
This has resulted in a loss on foreign exchange translation of 28.4 million 2016 gain 52.0 million which is reected in the Statement of Comprehensive Income.
Despite the signicant movement in exchange rates against Sterling between the beginning and end of the year had we translated our prot before tax for the year using the same average rates as last year our results for 2017 would have been 0.5 million lower.
Our prot before tax from continuing operations includes an exchange loss of 0.1 million on transactions during the year 2016 gain 0.4 million.
Cash
The Groups net cash position increased to 106.8 million at 31 December 2017 2016 71.8 million excluding net cash balances held within Duncan Lawrie reecting inter alia strong net cash inows from continuing operating activities of 30.9 million 2016 inow 21.5 million and the discontinuation of the Duncan Lawrie business.
The Group has loans outstanding amounting to 4.5 million.
A number of the Groups key trading subsidiaries have minority shareholders such that when cash is repatriated to the UK by way of dividends those minorities are entitled to their share of the relevant dividend.
In a number of cases withholding taxes are also payable from our share of those dividends.
Funds are reserved within our subsidiary companies for Long term development projects within our core crop portfolio.
Ongoing wage negotiations the largest of which is the multiyear Kenyan Collective Bargaining Agreement referred to below which has been ongoing for 4 years.
Disputed taxation assessments see below.
These will reduce the net cash available to the Group in future years as they are resolved.
However following the nalisation of the triennial valuation for the UK dened benet pension scheme no decit reduction payments are required for the time being.
Dividends
In line with the Groups long term strategy the key use of cash is reinvestment in the business.
Despite this Camellia has a long track record of steady dividend growth and it is hoped that this historical trend is maintained.
Dividend cover in 2017 is 5.9x the total dividend for the year of 135p per share.
The dividend is covered 2.0x from our prot after tax from continuing operations.
Taxation
The Groups eective tax rate of 32.5% 2016 190.8% reects the prot from the various Duncan Lawrie sales which are expected to be nontaxable and available UK losses.
The 2016 tax charge reects the losses incurred in the UK in respect of the discontinued operation which were not able to be relieved due to the lack of taxable prots in the UK.
Tax and other provisions The wage negotiations in Kenya remain unresolved for the Collective Bargaining Agreement years of 201415 and 201617 which creates uncertainty as to the cost base of our businesses in Kenya.
We also have ongoing wage negotiations in India and Bangladesh.
While we consider we have made adequate provision for the likely outcome of this ongoing negotiation it is dicult to be denitive.
We are carrying provisions for taxation arising from assessments raised by the Malawi Revenue Authority for unpaid taxes from prior years.
The amount of this provision is 2.3 million at 31 December 2017.
Camellia RandA pp01pp19 Page 18 19 CAMELLIA PLC We have been advised that the gain on sale of Duncan Lawries asset management business should be exempt from tax because of the nature of the assets sold.
Accordingly no provision has been made for tax on this gain.
In India assessments have been received for 3.8 million of excise duties and 1.3 million of income taxes.
These are being contested and no provisions have been made.
In India a long running dispute between our local subsidiaries and the Government of West Bengal over the payment of a land tax locally called Salami remains unresolved.
Lawyers acting for the Group have advised that payment of Salami does not apply accordingly no provisions have been made.
The sums contested amount to 1.4 million excluding penalties.
In some of our jurisdictions the tax authorities have levied assessments in respect of prior years.
In a number of situations the liability position under statute and case law is clear and provision has been made in line with those.
Unfortunately in other situations the law is either unclear or under developed and in these instances we make provisions on a best estimate basis for the liabilities likely to arise having taken advice as appropriate.
Pensions and postemployment benets The Group operates a number of dened benet pension schemes the largest of which is in the UK.
Our
2017 triennial valuation for the UK scheme has been agreed and shows a surplus of 7.1 million.
I am pleased to report that as a consequence of this surplus no further decit reduction contributions are required for the meantime.
The overseas dened benet schemes are located in Bangladesh India and the Netherlands.
The UK scheme was closed to future accrual during 2016.
Our businesses in Kenya India and Bangladesh also have obligations to pay terminal gratuities based on years of service and in some cases based on salaries.
In aggregate our employee benet schemes currently show decits on an IAS 19 basis of 30.9 million 2016 66.7 million decit.
Accounting for dened benet schemes is prescribed by IAS 19 and the quantum of the decit continues to be volatile and sensitive to small changes in assumptions as regards ination and gilt yields in the relevant jurisdictions.
This year a net actuarial gain of 34.3 million 2016 net actuarial loss of 24.3 million is reected in the Statement of Comprehensive Income.
The gain this year reects For the UK Scheme the eect of updating the mortality assumptions to bring them in line with the latest tables available together with better than expected returns on the schemes assets.
For the overseas schemes higher discounts rates in India oset in part by higher than expected salary increases elsewhere.
In addition 2.7 million 2016 2.2 million has been charged to our Income Statement in respect of employee benet obligations.
Contributions to externally funded dened benet schemes are determined after consultation with the respective trustees and actuaries.
Shareholders funds Equity attributable to Camellias shareholders at the 2017 year end was 368.4 million 2016 330.8 million.
A reconciliation is set out in the Group statement of changes in equity.
Susan Walker Chief Financial Ocer 18 April 2018
CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICERS REPORT
Camellia RandA pp01pp19 Page 19 CAMELLIA PLC
Business review
The Company is required to set out in this report a fair review of the business of the Group during the year ended 31 December 2017 and a description of the principal risks and uncertainties facing the Group.
A fair review of the business of the Group is incorporated within the Chairmans Statement and the Chief Executives Report on pages 6 to 16.
The Chairmans statement and the Chief Executives report together with information contained within the Report of the Directors highlight the key factors aecting the Groups development and performance.
Further details of the nancial performance and position of the Group are set out in the Chief Financial Ocers Report on pages 17 to 19.
Other matters are dealt with below.
Group strategy The Board has adopted the following strategy for the Group To develop a worldwide group of businesses requiring management to take a long term view.
The achievement of longterm shareholder returns through sustained and targeted investment.
Investing in the environment and sustainability of the communities in which we do business.
Ensuring that the quality and safety of our products and services meet the highest international standards.
The continuous renement and improvement of the Groups existing businesses using our internal expertise and nancial strength.
The progress against this strategy during the year is set out in further detail in the Chief Executives report shown on pages 7 to 16 and within the Report of the Directors.
Business model The Group consists of businesses engaged in Agriculture Engineering and Food Service.
The Group also holds a range of Investments.
Businesses are managed on a divisional basis with regular reports made to the Board on performance against the annual budget.
Principal risks and uncertainties There are a number of possible risks and uncertainties that could impact the Groups operations.
As the Groups businesses are widely spread both in terms of activity and location it is unlikely that any one single factor could have a material impact on the Groups longterm performance.
The Group regularly monitors the risks at a local and central level.
Information on the Groups nancial risks is disclosed in note 39 to the
The following risks relating to the Groups principal operations have been identied
Risk Potential Impact Mitigation Climate change
Price volatility
Geographical spread of operations to lessen the impact of extreme weather on the Group as a whole.
Current agricultural patterns and practices become unsustainable.
Use of forward contracts product and crop diversication and building long term strategic relationships with key customers.
Changes in prices at auction impact protability each season.
Level of rainfall aecting crop yields.
Investment in irrigation water storage and drought resistant crop varieties.
Monitoring of foreign exchange rates and cash management.
Prot volatility arising from sales in US dollars and Euros where there is no natural hedge against the cost of production in local currency.
STRATEGIC REPORT Camellia RandA pp20pp35 Page 20 21 CAMELLIA PLC STRATEGIC REPORT Agriculture continued Risk Potential Impact Mitigation Cost of labour Monitoring local land issues with the assistance of lawyers and local trade associations.
Maintaining collaborative relationships with governments at local and national levels.
Increasing security for our workers and operations during times of civil unrest.
Corruption Strict adherence to antibribery legislation and the implementation of the Group AntiBribery Policy.
Engineering
Risk Potential Impact Mitigation Losing a major customer.
Diversication of the customer base and careful customer relationship management.
Eorts to diversify into other sectors.
Close monitoring of the current sectors.
Health and safety Strict compliance with legislation and training employees to adopt safe working practices.
Regular external audits.
Environmental Strict compliance with legislation training employees to adopt safe working practices and lessen the impact on the environment.
Regular external audits.
Food Service Risk Potential Impact Mitigation Key customer Losing a major customer.
Diversication of the customer base and dependence careful customer relationship management.
Health and safety Strict compliance with legislation and training employees to adopt safe working practices.
Regular external audits.
Introduction of more ecient labour and eld practices and the increased use of mechanisation and automation in processing.
Increased cost of production and lower protability.
Paying more for existing property for example if freeholds become leaseholds or potentially losing access to farms and estates.
Long term political issues over land ownership in Kenya Malawi and South Africa Periodic interruptions to the operation of the businesses at a local level.
Civil unrest and political instability Inability to carry on business in a manner which is legal and ethical.
Key customer dependence Changes in market conditions leading to lower demand for services.
Dependence on the oil and gas and aerospace sectors Vulnerability of the employees to injury at work due to the use of machinery and chemicals.
Payment of nes and claims and reputational damage.
Contamination of the local and wider environment due to the use of machinery and chemicals.
Payment of nes and claims and reputational damage.
Vulnerability of the employees to injury at work due to the use of machinery and chemicals.
Payment of nes and claims criminal prosecutions and reputational damage.
Camellia RandA pp20pp35 Page 21 Food Service continued Risk Potential Impact Mitigation Environmental Strict compliance with legislation training employees to adopt safe working practices and lessen the impact on the environment.
Regular external audits.
IT systems Interruption to services for customers.
Implementation of a disaster recovery plan.
Investments
Risk Potential Impact Mitigation Market Decline in the value of investments.
Portfolio diversication careful stock selection and the regular monitoring of individual company stock performance.
Group
Risk Potential Impact Mitigation The Board monitors the funding position of the pension scheme.
Regular monitoring of the funding position investment strategy and performance of the assets.
Regular reviews of the funding position of the pension schemes and local legislation using external advisors where appropriate.
Taxation risk Uncertainties exist in relation to the interpretation of complex tax legislation changes in tax laws and the amount and timing of future taxable income.
In some jurisdictions agreeing tax liabilities with local tax authorities can take several years.
This could necessitate future adjustments to taxable income and expenses already recorded.
At the yearend tax liabilities and assets are based on managements best judgements around the application of the tax regulations and an estimate of the future amounts that will be settled.
Management considers tax exposures individually and arrives at judgements with support from experienced tax professionals and external advisors.
There is however a risk that the Groups judgements are challenged by the tax authorities resulting in a dierent tax payable or tax recoverable from the amounts that have been provided.
Contamination of local and wider environment due to the use of machinery and chemicals.
Payment of nes and claims criminal prosecutions and reputational damage.
Increase in the nal salary pension scheme decit with a resultant increase in the funding requirement.
Increase in the pension scheme decits with a resultant increase in the funding requirement.
UK Pensions.
Increases in ination andor reductions in long term government bond yields.
Overseas
Pensions.
Increases in ination andor reductions in long term government bond yields.
Changes in local laws prohibiting the investment of the schemes assets.
CAMELLIA PLC STRATEGIC REPORT Camellia RandA pp20pp35 Page 22 23 STRATEGIC REPORT CAMELLIA PLC Uncertainties impacting taxation also arise from potential changes to legislation.
The OECDs Base Erosion and Prot Shifting project is one of the most signicant multilateral initiatives in recent years modifying international tax rules.
As these recommendations are introduced into local tax legislation over the coming years this may impact the Groups eective tax rate.
Social and environmental policies Further information on the Groups activities and policies on corporate and social responsibility is set out in the Chief Executives report on page 6 to 16.
Equality
We have consciously and continuously worked towards encouraging equality in management positions across our operations.
Disability
The Group complies with local regulations to encourage employees with disabilities to work in our operations and where appropriate makes adjustments to working practices.
Child Labour The use of child labour is prohibited across the Group.
In some countries it is both the cultural norm and permissible for parents to involve their children in the productive process.
We do not subscribe to this approach.
Modern Slavery The Group continues to comply with the requirements of the Modern Slavery Act 2015 to ensure that modern slavery and human tracking is not taking place either within the wider group or in the supply chains of our businesses.
A copy of the statement of compliance for the year to 31 December 2017 is available on the Companys website.
AntiBribery and Corruption The Board has adopted an antibribery policy which complies with the requirements of the UK Bribery Act 2010.
The policy has been introduced across the Group and its compliance is monitored at both Group and local level.
The Board strictly prohibits bribery as part of its normal business practices.
Performance against our policies There are no current employment or environmental issues that prejudice the continuing development of the Group.
None of the Groups businesses were prosecuted for any signicant breach of employment legislation during the year.
The Board has established a process for ensuring that the corporate social responsibility policy is enforced across the Group.
Key nancial performance indicators The nature of the Groups principal activities is such that the Board takes a longterm view on its operations particularly in Agriculture.
The Board reviews monthly reports with a range of nancial and other indicators to monitor the performance of each division depending on the nature of its operations.
For the Agriculture division the Board receives monthly data on sales prices and volumes cost of production and crop yields against budget.
Rainfall and other climate data are also reviewed.
For the Engineering division the Board receives monthly data on revenue prot and margins.
In addition the value of the outstanding order book is reviewed.
For the Food Service division the Board receives monthly data on revenue prot and margins.
In addition cold store utilisation is monitored.
For Investments the value and performance of the share portfolio is reviewed each month and the collections are periodically valued against market price.
Camellia RandA pp20pp35 Page 23 Key nonnancial performance indicators The following information has been compiled based on data provided by the Groups subsidiaries.
The
Board considers that this information demonstrates the level of compliance with important elements of the Groups principles.
The Board will regularly review which key nonnancial performance indicators are most appropriate.
1 Compliancetel aProsecutions The number of prosecutions brought in the nancial year by the ocial regulatory bodies responsible for enforcing regulations in the areas of
Worker health and safety Environmental protection bFormal The number of written warnings during the nancial year warnings by the ocial regulatory bodies responsible for enforcing regulations in the areas of
Worker health and safety 1 13 Environmental protection 2 Child Labour aMinimum age The number of employees who were less than 16 years old during the nancial year bAccess to The number of employees who were younger than the education age for completing compulsory education in their country during the nancial year 3 Accidents aInjury The number of injuries received at work resulting in either absence from work for more than three days or the injured person being unable to do the full range of their normal duties for more than three days Health aSickness The number of employee days absence as a result of absence sickness during the nancial year 235265 237527 238160 bSickness The number of claims for compensation arising from claims occupational health issues received during the nancial year in respect of continuing operations Industrial Disputes Strikes The number of employee days absence as a result of industrial disputes 321409 33331 951 i This excludes the relevant number of days for tea garden workers in India who have a contractual entitlement to fourteen days sickness absence.
In Malawi there is high level of sickness due to HIVAIDS related conditions and malaria. ii As reported elsewhere in 2017 all the Darjeeling tea gardens were subject to prolonged strikes.
Employees
The Group keeps employees informed through internal publications the website and social media on the performance of the Group and on matters aecting them as employees and arrangements to that end are made by the local management.
It is also Group policy that due consideration be given to employment applications received from disabled persons and to give employees who become disabled every opportunity to continue their employment.
CAMELLIA PLC STRATEGIC REPORT Camellia RandA pp20pp35 Page 24 25 CAMELLIA PLC STRATEGIC REPORT The table below provides a breakdown of the gender of the directors and employees at 31 December 2017 Men Women Company Directors Other senior managers ii All employees 40559 34454 i Company Directors consists of the companys Board as detailed on page 4.
Regulations 2013 and includes persons responsible for planning directing or controlling the activities of the Company or a strategically signicant part of the Company other than Company Directors.
By order of the Board Julia Morton
18 April telCamellia RandA pp20pp35 Page 25 CAMELLIA PLC REPORT OF THE DIRECTORS The Directors present their report together with the audited consolidated accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017.
Principal activities The Company is a public limited company which is quoted on the AIM Market of the London Stock Exchange and incorporated and domiciled in England and Wales.
The principal activities of its subsidiary and associated undertakings comprise
Engineering
Food Service
Further details of the Groups activities are included in the Chief Executives report on pages 6 to 16.
Results and dividends The prot after tax for the year amounted to 28.6 million 2016 loss 5.9 million.
The Board has proposed a nal dividend for the year of 98p per share payable on 13 July 2018 to holders of the ordinary shares registered at the close of business on 15 June 2018.
The total dividend payable for 2017 is therefore 135p per share 2016 130p per share.
Details are shown in note 12 to the Accounts.
Directors
The Directors are listed on page 4.
The following Directors had benecial interests in the shares of the
Camellia Plc ordinary shares of 10p each 31 December 1 January 2017 2017 Malcolm Perkins 1673 1673 Tom Franks 100 100 Susan Walker 100 100 Under the Companys articles of association all the Directors are required to retire annually.
Accordingly
Malcolm Perkins Tom Franks Susan Walker Graham Mclean Chris Relleen Frdric Vuilleumier and William Gibson will retire and being eligible will seek reelection at the AGM on 7 June 2018.
Gautam
Dalal was appointed as a Director on 1 March 2018 and will seek election to the Board at the AGM.
None of the Directors or their families had a material interest in any contract of signicance with the Company or any subsidiary during or at the end of the nancial year.
Executive Directors Malcolm Perkins was appointed a Director in 1999 and Chairman in 2001 having joined Eastern Produce Holdings Limited now Linton Park Plc in 1972.
He is a chartered accountant and Chairman of the nomination committee.
Tom Franks was appointed as Chief Executive with eect from 1 September 2015.
He joined Camellia as Deputy Chief Executive in October 2014.
He is a chartered accountant and a Fellow of the Chartered Institute of Securities and Investment.
Graham Mclean a qualied agriculturalist was appointed as Managing Director of Agriculture in October 2014.
He was previously regional director of the Groups operations in Africa and has worked for the Group for 25 years.
He is Chairman and nonexecutive director of Kakuzi Limited.
Susan Walker was appointed Chief Financial Ocer for the Group on 4 June 2015.
She joined Camellia as Finance Director Designate on 1 July 2014.
She is a chartered certied accountant and a nonexecutive director of Goodricke Group Limited and United Finance Limited.
Camellia RandA pp20pp35 Page 26 27 CAMELLIA PLC NonExecutive Directors Chris Relleen was formerly a partner at PricewaterhouseCoopers.
He was appointed as an independent nonexecutive Director and Deputy Chairman in January 2006 having previously been a nonexecutive Director of Linton Park Plc.
He is senior independent Director chairman of the audit committee and a member of the nomination and remuneration committees.
William Gibson was appointed as an independent nonexecutive Director in September 2014.
He was previously chairman and managing director of Westminster Press and an executive director of the Financial Times Group.
He is chairman of the remuneration committee and a member of the audit and nomination committees.
Frdric Vuilleumier was appointed as an independent nonexecutive director in March 2013.
He is partner of Oberson Abels SA a law oce based in Geneva Switzerland.
He is a member of the audit committee.
Gautam Dalal was appointed as an independent nonexecutive director in March 2018.
He is a non executive director and the vice chair of the Barts Health NHS Trust a nonexecutive director of ZincOx Resources plc a trustee and treasurer of SOAS University of London.
He was previously a partner at KPMG London from 1990 to 2010 a founderdirector of the UK India Business Council a member of the Asian Business Association a trustee of The National Gallery and a director of AMREF Health Africas International Board.
Substantial shareholdings As at 18 April 2018 the Company has been advised of the following interests in its share capital % of total Benecial shareholder Shareholder No.
Camellia Private Trust Company Limited Camellia Holding AG 1427000 51.67 Fide Holding NV Lynchwood Nominees Limited 360500 13.05 Quaero Capital SA HSBC Global Custody Nominee UK Limited 133588 4.84 Controlled by Alcatel Bell Pensioenfonds VZW.
Share capital and purchase of own shares The Companys share capital comprises one class of ordinary shares of 10 pence each which carry no restrictions on the transfer of shares or on voting rights other than as set out in the Companys articles of association.
There are no agreements known to the Company between shareholders in the Company which may result in restrictions on the transfer of shares or on voting rights in relation to the Company.
Details of the issued share capital are contained in note 34 to the Accounts.
At the AGM in 2017 shareholders gave authority for the Company to purchase up to 276200 of its own shares.
This authority expires at the conclusion of this years AGM at which a resolution proposing renewal of the authority will be submitted to shareholders.
Disclosure of information to auditors A resolution proposing the reappointment of Deloitte LLP will be put to the AGM on 7 June 2018.
Each of the persons who were Directors at the time when this Directors report was approved has conrmed that So far as each Director is aware there is no relevant audit information of which the Companys auditors are unaware.
Each Director has taken all the steps that ought to have been taken as a Director including making appropriate enquiries of fellow Directors and of the Companys auditors for that purpose in order to be aware of any information needed by the Companys auditors in connection with preparing their report and to establish that the Companys auditors are aware of that information.
REPORT OF THE DIRECTORS Camellia RandA pp20pp35 Page 27 CAMELLIA PLC REPORT OF THE DIRECTORS
Details in relation to employees are set out on pages 24 and 25.
RandD
The Group undertakes some RandD projects within its operations in order to improve eciency and grow revenues and in the case of XiMo as the core of its business.
Future development Details of future developments are set out in the Chief Executives Report.
Going concern After reviewing the Groups budget for 2018 and other forecasts the Directors have a reasonable expectation that the Group has adequate resources to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future.
Therefore they continue to adopt the going concern basis in preparing the accounts.
Corporate governance The Companys statement on corporate governance can be found in the Corporate Governance Report on pages 29 to 32.
By order of the Board Julia Morton
18 April telCamellia RandA pp20pp35 Page 28 29 CAMELLIA PLC Statement of compliance This statement on pages 29 to 32 describes how the Company applies the principles of the Quoted Companies Alliances Corporate Governance Code for Small and Midsize Quoted Companies QCA guidelines.
The Chairman considers the application of standards of corporate governance that are appropriate for the Groups nature status prole size and circumstances play an important part in ensuring the Group is managed for the longterm benet of all stakeholders.
The Group consists of a portfolio of businesses which are grouped into independently managed divisions.
These divisions report into the Board by function against a variety of metrics including budgets and business plans.
The Board The Board currently comprises eight Directors four of whom are independent nonexecutive Directors.
The remaining Directors are executive Directors including the executive Chairman.
Chris Relleen the Deputy Chairman has been designated as the senior independent director.
The names and brief biographical details of each Director appear on pages 26 and 27.
There is ongoing dialogue between the Chairman and the Chief Executive with the majority shareholder whose views are reported to the Board.
The Company is also in contact with other signicant shareholders.
The Board has established remuneration audit and nomination committees.
Terms of reference of each of the committees can be viewed on the Companys website.
The Board has agreed to undertake a performance evaluation by way of an internal review every three years.
The last evaluation was conducted in 2015.
Details of the evaluation procedures will be disclosed when the next review is completed at the end of 2018.
The Board is responsible for managing the Groups business and has adopted a schedule of matters reserved for its approval.
The schedule is reviewed periodically and covers inter alia the following areas
Acquisitions and disposals Financial reporting and control Internal controls Approval of expenditure above specied limits Approval of transactions and contracts above specied limits Responsibilities for corporate governance Board membership and committees Approval of changes to capital structure A full copy of the schedule is available on the Companys website.
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE Camellia RandA pp20pp35 Page 29 CAMELLIA PLC CORPORATE GOVERNANCE A report summarising the Groups nancial and operational performance including detailed information on each of its businesses is sent to Directors each month.
Each Director is provided with sucient information in advance of Board meetings to enable the Directors to make informed judgements on matters referred to the Board.
The Board met nine times in 2017.
Attendance by Directors at Board and committee meetings held during the year was as follows Director Board Audit Remuneration Nomination Malcolm Perkins 99   11 Chris Relleen 99 33 33 11 Tom Franks 99 Graham Mclean 99 Susan Walker 99 William Gibson 99 33 33 11 Frdric Vuilleumier 89 33 Executive committees The Board has established the Strategy Group consisting of the Chairman and the executive Directors of the Board and two Executive Committees.
The Agriculture Executive Committee is chaired by the Managing Director of Agriculture and includes the Chief Executive Chief Financial Ocer and heads of all the key agricultural operations.
The Engineering and Food Service Executive Committee is chaired by the Chief Executive and includes the Chief Financial Ocer the divisional heads of Engineering North Engineering South and Food Service the Managing Director of Jing Tea the Company Secretary and the UK Head of HR.
Investments and Associates report directly to the Chief Executive.
Nomination committee The nomination committee is chaired by Malcolm Perkins.
Its other members are William Gibson and Chris Relleen.
The principal responsibilities of the nomination committee are set out below Review the balance and composition including gender and diversity of the Board ensuring that they remain appropriate.
Be responsible for overseeing the Boards succession planning requirements including the identication and assessment of potential Board candidates and making recommendations to the Board for its approval.
Keep under review the leadership needs of and succession planning for the Group in relation to both its executive and nonexecutive Directors and other senior executives.
The committee met once during the year to recommend the appointment of a nonexecutive Director.
Audit committee The audit committee is chaired by Chris Relleen.
The other members of the committee are Frdric Vuilleumier and William Gibson.
During 2017 the committee met on three occasions.
Camellia RandA pp20pp35 Page 30 31 CAMELLIA PLC Principal responsibilities The principal responsibilities of the audit committee are set out below and were undertaken during the year To monitor the eectiveness of the Groups risk management practices.
To review the eectiveness of the Groups internal control system.
The committee regularly reviews the eectiveness of internal audit activities carried out by the Groups accounting function and senior management.
To review and monitor the nancial statements of the Company and the audit of those statements and to monitor compliance with relevant nancial reporting requirements and legislation.
To monitor the eectiveness and independence of the external auditors.
To review nonaudit services provided by the external auditors.
Signicant issues in relation to nancial statements The audit committee assesses whether suitable accounting policies have been adopted and whether management has made appropriate estimates and judgements.
In the year under review the audit committee considered the following matters in relation to the nancial statements Biological assets.
One of the key areas of judgement that the committee considered in reviewing the nancial statements was the valuation of the biological assets in accordance with IAS 41.
Valuations are carried out by external professional valuers or are based on discounted cash ows.
These were considered for consistency of approach and assumptions agreed as reasonable.
For more details see note 19 to the accounts.
Pensions.
A key area of judgement is in relation to the value of the pension scheme obligation.
Whilst this is conducted by independent actuaries the size of the obligation means that a relatively minor dierence in the assumptions could result in a material change in the obligation.
The committee considered the competence of the actuaries and the key assumptions adopted and concluded that the work performed is sucient to support the value.
Assets held for sale.
The committee considered the reclassication of BMT Great Yarmouth and GU Cutting and Grinding as assets held for sale including reviewing the impairment provisions required.
Tax and other uncertain provisions.
The basis of provisions for material uncertain tax situations were considered by the committee as were the provision in respect of the ongoing Collective Bargaining Agreement negotiations for 201415 and 201617.
The committee is satised that the provisions represent best estimates of the likely liabilities.
External auditor To assess the eectiveness of the external audit process the external auditor is required to report to the audit committee and conrm their independence in accordance with ethical standards and that they had maintained appropriate internal safeguards to ensure their independence and objectivity.
In addition to the steps taken by the Board to safeguard auditor objectivity Deloitte operates a ve year rotation policy for audit partners for a listed entity.
The committee reviewed those nonaudit services provided by the external auditor and satised itself that the scale and nature of those services were such that the external auditors objectivity and independence were safeguarded.
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE Camellia RandA pp20pp35 Page 31 CAMELLIA PLC CORPORATE GOVERNANCE Following the appointment of Deloitte LLP as the Groups external auditor the committee oversaw the transition from PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP.
The committee conrms that the annual report and accounts taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Companys performance business model and strategy.
Remuneration committee The remuneration committee is chaired by William Gibson and the other member is Chris Relleen.
The responsibilities of the committee include The review of the Groups policy relating to remuneration of the Chairman executive Directors and the Company Secretary.
To determine the terms of employment and remuneration of the Chairman executive Directors and Company Secretary with a view to ensuring that those individuals are fairly but responsibly rewarded.
To approve compensation packages or arrangements following the severance of any executive Directors service contract.
The Remuneration Report appears on pages 34 to 35.
Insurance
The Company purchases insurance to cover its Directors in respect of legal actions against them in their capacity as Directors of the Company.
All Directors have access to independent professional advice at the Companys expense.
Share capital structure The share capital of the Company is set out in note 34.
Internal control and risk management systems The Directors acknowledge that they are responsible for maintaining a sound system of internal control.
During the year the audit committee on behalf of the Board reviewed the eectiveness of the framework of the Groups system of internal control the principal features of which are described below.
Decentralisation is a key management philosophy with responsibility for ecient day to day operations delegated to local management.
Accountability and delegation of authority are clearly dened with regular communication between Group head oce and local management.
Our key operating businesses have internal audit functions reporting to local audit committees.
The performance of each company is continually monitored centrally including a critical review of annual budgets forecasts and monthly sales prots and cash reports.
Financial results and key business statistics and variances from approved plans are carefully monitored.
Group senior management regularly visit and review the Groups operating units.
However any system of internal control can provide only reasonable and not absolute assurance against material misstatement or loss.
By order of the Board Julia Morton
18 April telCamellia RandA pp20pp35 Page 32 33 CAMELLIA PLC The Directors are responsible for preparing the Annual Report and the Financial Statements in accordance with applicable law and regulations.
Company law requires the Directors to prepare nancial statements for each nancial year.
Under that law the Directors are required to prepare the Group nancial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the EU and Article 4 of the IAS Regulation and have also chosen to prepare the parent company nancial statements under IFRSs as adopted by the EU.
Under Company law the Directors must not approve the accounts unless they are satised that they give a true and fair view of the state of aairs of the company and of the prot or loss of the Company for that period.
In preparing these nancial statements International Accounting Standard 1 requires that
Properly select and apply accounting policies.
Present information including accounting policies in a manner that provides relevant reliable comparable and understandable information.
Provide additional disclosures when compliance with the specic requirements in IFRSs are insucient to enable users to understand the impact of particular transactions other events and conditions on the entitys nancial position and nancial performance and Make an assessment of the Companys ability to continue as a going concern.
The Directors are responsible for keeping adequate accounting records that are sucient to show and explain the Companys transactions and disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the nancial position of the Company and enable them to ensure that the nancial statements comply with the Companies Act 2006.
They are also responsible for safeguarding the assets of the Company and hence for taking reasonable steps for the prevention and detection of fraud and other irregularities.
The Directors are responsible for the maintenance and integrity of the corporate and nancial information included on the companys website.
Legislation in the UK governing the preparation and dissemination of nancial statements may dier from legislation in other jurisdictions.
Responsibility statement We conrm that to the best of our knowledge The nancial statements prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as adopted by the EU give a true and fair view of the assets liabilities nancial position and prot or loss of the Company and the undertakings included in the consolidation taken as a whole.
The strategic report includes a fair review of the development and performance of the business and the position of the Company and the undertakings included in the consolidation taken as a whole together with a description of the principal risks and uncertainties that they face.
The Annual Report and nancial statements taken as a whole are fair balanced and understandable and provide the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Companys position and performance business model and strategy.
On behalf of the Board Malcolm Perkins
18 April 2018 STATEMENT OF DIRECTORS RESPONSIBILITIES Camellia RandA pp20pp35 Page 33 CAMELLIA PLC
REMUNERATION REPORT
This report is drawn up in accordance with the Companies Act 2006 and the AIM Rules for Companies.
Remuneration committee Details of the remuneration committee the committee are set out on page 32.
Policy on Directors remuneration The policy agreed by the committee is as follows To seek to provide remuneration packages that will attract retain and motivate the right people for the roles.
So far as is practicable to align the interests of the executives with those of shareholders.
To reect the overriding remuneration philosophy and the principles of the wider Group.
In implementing the second point the Company does not operate prot related bonus share option or share incentive schemes for Directors as the Groups activities are based largely on agriculture which is highly dependent on factors outside management control such as the weather and market prices.
The policy is designed to ensure that the Directors manage the Groups businesses for the long term in line with the strategy of the Group.
In determining this remuneration policy and the remuneration of Directors consideration has been given to the relevant provisions of the QCA guidelines.
The remuneration policy was approved by shareholders at the 2017 AGM.
The committee considers any views of the shareholders expressed on Directors remuneration.
At the AGM on 1 June 2017 the Remuneration Report for the year to 31 December 2016 was approved by shareholders with 99.46% of the votes cast in favour 0.53% of the votes cast against and 0.01 votes withheld.
Service contracts Malcolm Perkins Tom Franks Graham Mclean and Susan Walker are each employed on rolling service contracts.
Director Date of Service Contract Malcolm Perkins 25 April 2002 Tom Franks 8 April 2015 Graham Mclean 10 April 2015 Susan Walker 14 April 2015 The service contracts are terminable at any time by a one year period of notice from the Company or the
Following their initial appointment nonexecutive Directors may seek reelection by shareholders at each subsequent annual general meeting.
Nonexecutive Directors do not have service agreements.
There are no specic contractual provisions for compensation upon early termination of a nonexecutive Directors employment.
Camellia RandA pp20pp35 Page 34 35 CAMELLIA PLC The following sections on Directors remuneration and pensions have been audited.
Directors remuneration
Remuneration Benets in Kind Pension Contribution Totalteltel 2017 2016
Malcolm Perkins 442344 442344 76630 33212   518974 475556 Tom Franks 522500 495000 55887 68095   578387 563095 Susan Walker 295625 250000 24695 30676 5500 20000 325820 300676 Graham Mclean 322500 275000 26770 37209 4475 22000 353745 334209
William Gibson 44651 43350  44651 43350 Chris Relleen 68077 87500  68077 87500 Frdric Vuilleumier 42024 40800  42024 40800 Totals 1737721 1633994 183982 169192 9975 42000 1931678 1845186 insurance spousepartner travel and cash alternatives to company cars. nonexecutive directorship of Duncan Lawrie Limited. iii William Gibson received an additional annual fee for his chairmanship of the remuneration committee.
Directors pensions Malcolm Perkins received no payment for pensionable service during 2017.
Tom Franks receives an excess nonpensionable salary supplement equivalent to 10% of base salary.
Graham Mclean and Susan Walker were members of the Linton Park Group Personal Pension Scheme which is a dened contribution based scheme until 5 April 2017.
As a result of the change to the taxation rules on pension annual allowances the company ceased contributions to the Linton Park Group Personal Pension Scheme on 6 April for Graham Mclean and Susan Walker.
They instead receive an excess nonpensionable salary supplement equivalent to 10% of base salary.
These payments are included in Remuneration in the table above.
In addition to the above an unfunded pension of US200000 per annum is paid to Gordon Fox a former Director of the Company.
By order of the Board Julia Morton
18 April 2018
REMUNERATION REPORT
Camellia RandA pp20pp35 Page 35 CAMELLIA PLC CONSOLIDATED INCOME STATEMENT for the year ended 31 Decembertel Notes m m Continuing operations Revenue 2 298.3 257.9 Cost of sales 219.3 188.5 Gross prot 79.0 69.4 Other operating income 2.4 2.3 Distribution costs 13.9 14.7 Administrative expenses 3 41.1 38.0 Trading prot 1 3 26.4 19.0 Share of associates results 4 2.0 5.1 Impairment of property plant and equipment and provisions 5 1.8 Prot on disposal of availableforsale investments 6 0.7 1.5 Investment income 0.6 0.6 Finance income 7 3.0 2.7 Finance costs 7 0.5 0.6 Net exchange lossgain 7 0.1 0.4 Employee benet expense 7 2.7 2.2 Net nance costincome 7 0.3 0.3 Prot before tax from continuing operations 27.6 26.5 Taxation 8 13.8 12.4 Prot after tax from continuing operations 13.8 14.1 Protloss from discontinued operation 10 14.8 20.0 Protloss for the year 28.6 5.9 Protloss attributable to Owners of the parent 22.2 10.7 Noncontrolling interests 6.4 4.8 Earnings per share  basic and diluted 13 803.8p 387.4p Earnings per share  continuing operations 13 268.0p 336.7p Earnings per share  discontinued operation 13 535.8p 724.1p Camellia RandA pp36pp42 Page 36 37 CAMELLIA PLC 2017 2016 Notes m m
Protloss for the year 28.6 5.9 Other comprehensive incomeexpense Items that will not be reclassied subsequently to prot or loss Remeasurements of post employment benet obligations 33 34.3 24.3 Deferred tax movement in relation to post employment benet obligations 32 1.0 1.2 Items that may be reclassied subsequently to prot or loss Foreign exchange translation dierences 28.4 52.0 Availableforsale investments Valuation gains taken to equity 23 10.9 3.5 Transferred to income statement on sale 23 0.3 1.2 Share of other comprehensive income of associates  0.2 Other comprehensive income for the year net of tax 15.5 31.4 Total comprehensive income for the year 44.1 25.5 Total comprehensive income attributable to Owners of the parent 41.1 13.8 Noncontrolling interests 3.0 11.7
Prot for the year 3.9 4.0 Total comprehensive income for the year 3.9 4.0 STATEMENT OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME for the year ended 31 December telCamellia RandA pp36pp42
Notes m m Noncurrent assets Intangible assets 16 3.2 1.1 Property plant and equipment 17 216.3 232.2 Investment properties 18 17.6 17.0 Biological assets 19 12.8 13.9 Prepaid operating leases 20 0.9 1.0 Investments in associates 22 55.4 61.0 Deferred tax assets 32 0.2 0.2 Availableforsale nancial assets 23 47.0 37.2 Other investments  heritage assets 25 9.4 9.2 Retirement benet surplus 33 0.3 0.1 Trade and other receivables 27 1.9 1.8 Total noncurrent assets 365.0 374.7 Current assets Inventories 26 47.4 50.6 Biological assets 19 6.6 7.2 Trade and other receivables 27 43.7 40.6 Current income tax assets 0.9 1.0 Cash and cash equivalents 28 108.0 72.9 Assets classied as held for sale 9 4.9 Assets classied as held for sale  discontinued operation 10  266.9 Total current assets 211.5 439.2 Current liabilities Borrowings 30 1.8 1.7 Trade and other payables 29 56.5 58.7 Current income tax liabilities 7.9 6.5 Employee benet obligations 33 0.7 0.9 Provisions 31 15.2 8.6 Liabilities directly associated with assets classied as held for sale 9 1.8 Liabilities directly associated with assets classied as held for sale discontinued operation 10  244.2 Total current liabilities 83.9 320.6 Net current assets 127.6 118.6 Total assets less current liabilities 492.6 493.3 Noncurrent liabilities Borrowings 30 4.0 4.5 Deferred tax liabilities 32 40.2 43.3 Employee benet obligations 33 30.5 65.9 Total noncurrent liabilities 74.7 113.7 Net assets 417.9 379.6
Called up share capital 34 0.3 0.3 Share premium 15.3 15.3 Reserves 352.8 315.2 Equity attributable to owners of the parent 368.4 330.8 Noncontrolling interests 49.5 48.8 Total equity 417.9 379.6 CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEET at 31 December 2017 CAMELLIA PLC Camellia RandA pp36pp42 Page 38 39 CAMELLIA PLC 2017 2016 Notes m m Noncurrent assets Investments in subsidiaries 21 73.5 73.5 Availableforsale nancial assets 23  0.2 Other investments  heritage assets 25 10.6 10.4 Total noncurrent assets 84.1 84.1 Current assets Amounts due from group undertakings 3.5 18.3 Current income tax asset 0.1 0.1 Cash and cash equivalents 28 0.1 Total current assets 3.7 18.4 Current liabilities Trade and other payables 29 0.2 0.1 Amounts due to group undertakings 20.7 35.7 Total current liabilities 20.9 35.8 Net current liabilities 17.2 17.4 Total assets less current liabilities 66.9 66.7 Noncurrent liabilities Deferred tax liabilities 32 0.2 0.2 Total noncurrent liabilities 0.2 0.2 Net assets 66.7 66.5
Called up share capital 34 0.3 0.3 Share premium 15.3 15.3 Reserves 51.1 50.9 Total equity 66.7 66.5 The prot for the Company is shown in note 11.
The notes on pages 43 to 101 form part of the nancial statements.
The nancial statements on pages 36 to 101 were approved on 18 April 2018 by the board of Directors and signed on their behalf by M C Perkins
Registered Number COMPANY BALANCE SHEET at 31 December telCamellia RandA pp36pp42
Notes m m Cash generated from operations Cash ows from operating activities 35 40.7 35.3 Interest paid 0.5 0.7 Income taxes paid 12.3 15.8 Interest received 3.0 2.7 Net cash ow from operating activities 30.9 21.5 Cash ows from investing activities Purchase of intangible assets 2.5 0.2 Purchase of property plant and equipment 20.6 14.2 Proceeds from sale of noncurrent assets 1.3 0.3 Purchase of investment property 0.2 0.5 Biological assets noncurrent  additions 0.2 0.3 Part disposal of subsidiaries 0.2 1.2 Cash balances transferred to assets held for sale 0.3 Investment in associates 1.0 Dividends received from associates 2.8 2.3 Purchase of investments 4.0 2.4 Proceeds from sale of investments 1.8 5.6 Income from investments 0.6 0.6 Purchase of other investments  heritage assets 0.2 0.2 Net cash ow from investing activities 22.3 7.8 Cash ows from nancing activities Equity dividends paid 3.6 3.6 Dividends paid to noncontrolling interests 2.5 3.3 New loans 0.1 0.1 Loans repaid 0.6 0.6 Net cash ow from nancing activities 6.6 7.4 Net increase in cash and cash equivalents from continuing operations 2.0 6.3 Net cash inowoutow from discontinued operation 10 38.2 10.5 Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of year 28 71.8 65.6 Exchange lossesgains on cash 5.2 10.4 Cash and cash equivalents at end of year 28 106.8 71.8 For the purposes of the cash ow statement cash and cash equivalents are included net of overdrafts repayable on demand.
These overdrafts are excluded from the denition of cash and cash equivalents disclosed on the balance sheet.
CONSOLIDATED CASH FLOW STATEMENT for the year ended 31 December 2017 CAMELLIA PLC Camellia RandA pp36pp42 Page 40 41 CAMELLIA PLC 2017 2016 Notes m m Cash generated from operations Prot before tax 3.9 4.0 Adjustments for Impairment of availableforsale nancial assets 0.2 Interest income 0.2 0.3 Dividends from group companies 5.2 4.8 Increase in trade and other payables 0.1 Net movement in intragroup balances 0.2 2.3 Cash used in operations 1.4 3.4 Interest received 0.2 0.3 Net cash ow from operating activities 1.2 3.1 Cash ows from investing activities Purchase of other investments  heritage assets 0.2 0.2 Dividends received 5.2 4.8 Net cash ow from investing activities 5.0 4.6 Cash ows from nancing activities Equity dividends paid 3.7 3.7 Net cash ow from nancing activities 3.7 3.7 Net movement in cash and cash equivalents 0.1 2.2 Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of year 28  2.2 Exchange gain on cash Cash and cash equivalents at end of year 28 0.1 COMPANY CASH FLOW STATEMENT for the year ended 31 December telCamellia RandA pp36pp42 Page 41 Non Share ShareTreasuryRetained Other controlling Total capital premium shares earnings reserves Total interests equity m m m m m m m m
Total comprehensive expenseincome for the year    33.6 47.4 13.8 11.7 25.5 Dividends    3.6  3.6 3.3 6.9 Noncontrolling interest subscription    0.3  0.3 0.9 1.2 Share of associates other equity movements    0.6  0.6  0.6 Total comprehensive incomeexpense for the year    55.2 14.1 41.1 3.0 44.1 Dividends    3.6  3.6 2.5 6.1 Noncontrolling interest subscription  0.2 0.2 Share of associates other equity movements    0.1  0.1  0.1
At 1 January 2016 0.3 15.3  38.5 12.1 66.2  66.2 Total comprehensive income for the year    4.0  4.0  4.0 Dividends    3.7  3.7  3.7 At 31 December 2016 0.3 15.3  38.8 12.1 66.5  66.5 Total comprehensive income for the year    3.9  3.9  3.9 Dividends    3.7  3.7  3.7 At 31 December 2017 0.3 15.3  39.0 12.1 66.7  66.7 Other reserves of the Group include net exchange dierences of 26.1 million decit 2016 1.3 million decit.
Group retained earnings includes 157.4 million 2016 159.0 million which would require exchange control permission for remittance as dividends.
STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY for the year ended 31 December 2017 CAMELLIA PLC Camellia RandA pp36pp42 Page 42 ACCOUNTING POLICIES CAMELLIA PLC The principal accounting policies applied in the preparation of these nancial statements are set out below.
These policies have been consistently applied to all years presented unless otherwise stated.
Basis of preparation The consolidated nancial statements have been prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS as adopted by the EU IFRS IC interpretations and the Companies Act 2006 applicable to companies reporting under IFRS.
The consolidated nancial statements have been prepared on the historical cost basis as modied by the revaluation of biological assets availableforsale investments nancial assets and nancial liabilities and assets held for sale.
Where necessary comparative gures have been adjusted to conform with changes in presentation in the current year.
During the year 8.6 million of comparative amounts previously classied as other payables have been reclassied as provisions.
Going concern The Directors have at the time of approving the nancial statements a reasonable expectation that the Company and the Group have adequate resources to continue to operate for the foreseeable future.
They therefore continue to adopt the going concern basis of accounting in preparing the nancial statements.
Basis of consolidation
The consolidated nancial statements incorporate the nancial statements of the Company and entities controlled by the Company its subsidiaries made up to 31 December each year.
On acquisition the assets and liabilities of a subsidiary are measured at their fair values at the date of acquisition.
Any excess of the cost of acquisition over the fair values of the identiable net assets acquired is recognised as goodwill.
Any deciency of the cost of acquisition below the fair values of the identiable net assets acquired i. period of acquisition.
The Group recognises any noncontrolling interest in the acquiree on an acquisitionbyacquisition basis at the noncontrolling interests proportionate share of the recognised amounts of acquirees identiable net assets.
The results of subsidiaries acquired or disposed of during the year are included in the consolidated Income Statement from the eective date of acquisition or disposal as appropriate.
Where necessary adjustments are made to the nancial statements of subsidiaries to bring the accounting policies used into line with those used by the Group.
All IntraGroup transactions balances income and expenses are eliminated on consolidation.
Associates
An associate is an entity over which the Group is in a position to exercise signicant inuence but not control or joint control through participation in the nancial and operating policy decisions of that entity.
Investments in associates are accounted for by the equity method of accounting.
Under this method the Groups share of the postacquisition prots or losses of associates is recognised in the Income Statement and its share of postacquisition movements in reserves is recognised in reserves.
Foreign currency translation Transactions in currencies other than pounds sterling are recorded at the rates of exchange prevailing on the dates of the transactions.
At each balance sheet date monetary assets and liabilities that are denominated in foreign currencies are retranslated at the rates prevailing on the balance sheet date.
Translation dierences on nonmonetary items carried at fair value are reported as part of the fair value gain or loss.
Gains and losses arising on retranslation are included in the Income Statement except for exchange dierences arising on nonmonetary items where the changes in fair value are recognised directly in equity.
Camellia RandA pp43pp53 Page 43 The consolidated nancial statements are presented in sterling which is the Companys functional and presentation currency.
On consolidation income statements and cash ows of foreign entities are translated into pounds sterling at average exchange rates for the year and their balance sheets are translated at the exchange rates ruling at the balance sheet date.
Exchange dierences arising from the translation of the net investment in foreign entities and of borrowings designated as hedges of such investments are taken to equity.
When a foreign entity is sold such exchange dierences arising since 1 January 2004 are recognised in the Income Statement as part of the gain or loss on disposal.
Goodwill and fair value adjustments arising on the acquisition of a foreign entity are treated as assets and liabilities of the foreign entity and translated at the exchange rate ruling on the date of acquisition.
The
Group has elected to treat goodwill and fair value adjustments arising on acquisitions prior to 1 January 2004 the date of the Groups transition from UK GAAP to IFRS as sterling denominated assets and liabilities.
Revenue recognition Revenue is measured at the fair value of the consideration received or receivable and represents amounts receivable for goods and services provided in the normal course of business net of discounts value added tax and other sales related taxes and after eliminating intragroup sales.
Revenue from the sale of goods is recognised when all the following conditions are satised i The Group has transferred to the buyer the signicant risks and rewards of ownership of the goods ii The Group retains neither continuing managerial involvement to the degree usually associated with ownership nor eective control over the goods sold iii The amount of revenue can be measured reliably iv It is probable that the economic benets associated with the transaction will ow to the entity and v The costs incurred or to be incurred in respect of the transaction can be measured reliably.
Invoices are raised when goods are despatched or when the risks and rewards of ownership otherwise irrevocably pass to the customer.
In respect of food storage and distribution services revenue for handling is recognised at the point that the goods are actually handled.
In respect of engineering services revenue is recognised based upon the stage of completion and includes costs incurred to date plus accrued prots.
Investment income Investment income is recognised when the right to receive payment of a dividend is established.
Segmental reporting The adoption of IFRS 8 requires operating segments to be identied on the basis of internal reports used to assess performance and allocate resources by the chief operating decision maker.
The chief operating decision maker has been identied as the Group Strategy Committee led by the Chief Executive.
Intersegment sales are not signicant.
Exceptional items Exceptional items are those signicant items which are separately disclosed by virtue of their size or incidence to enable a full understanding of the Groups nancial performance.
Full disclosure of exceptional items are set out in notes 5 and 6.
Intangible assets i Goodwill Goodwill arising on consolidation represents the excess of the cost of acquisition over the Groups interest in the fair value of the identiable assets liabilities and contingent liabilities of a subsidiary or associate at the date of acquisition.
CAMELLIA PLC ACCOUNTING POLICIES Camellia RandA pp43pp53 Page 44 ACCOUNTING POLICIES CAMELLIA PLC Goodwill is recognised as an asset and reviewed for impairment at least annually or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate a potential impairment.
Any impairment is recognised immediately in the income statement and is not subsequently reversed.
On disposal of a subsidiary or associate the attributable amount of goodwill is included in the determination of the prot or loss on disposal.
Indenite life identiable intangible assets include certain brands acquired.
They are not amortised but tested for impairment annually or more frequently if an impairment indicator is triggered any impairment is charged to the income statement as it arises.
The assessment of the classication of intangible assets as indenite is reviewed annually.
Finite life identiable intangible assets include certain brands customer relationships and other intangible assets acquired on the acquisition of subsidiaries.
Acquired intangible assets with nite lives are initially recognised at cost and amortised on a straightline basis over their estimated useful lives not exceeding 20 years.
Intangible assets estimated lives are reevaluated annually and an impairment test is carried out if certain indicators of impairment exist.
Acquired computer software licences are capitalised on the basis of the costs incurred to acquire and bring to use the specic software.
Computer software licences are held at cost and are amortised on a straightline basis over 3 to 7 years.
Costs associated with developing or maintaining computer software programmes are recognised as an expense as incurred.
Costs that are directly associated with identiable and unique software products controlled by the Group and which are expected to generate economic benets exceeding costs beyond one year are recognised as an intangible asset and amortised over their estimated useful lives.
Property plant and equipment Property plant and equipment now includes biological assets bearer plants which are accounted for under IAS 16.
Land and buildings comprises mainly factories and oces.
All property plant and equipment is shown at cost less subsequent depreciation and impairment except for land which is shown at cost less impairment.
Cost includes expenditure that is directly attributable to the acquisition of these assets.
On transition to IFRS the Group followed the transitional provisions and elected that previous UK GAAP revaluations be treated as deemed cost.
Subsequent costs are included in the assets carrying amount only when it is probable that future economic benets associated with the item will ow to the Group and the cost of the item can be measured reliably.
Repairs and maintenance are charged to the income statement during the nancial period in which they are incurred.
No depreciation is provided on freehold land.
Depreciation of other property plant and equipment is calculated to write o their cost less residual value over their expected useful lives.
The rates of depreciation used for the other assets are as follows Biological assets Bearer plants 20 to 50 years Freehold and long leasehold buildings nil to 50 years Other short leasehold land and buildings unexpired term of the lease Plant machinery xtures ttings and equipment 3 to 25 years No depreciation is provided on bearer plants until maturity when commercial levels of production have been reached.
Assets held under nance leases are depreciated over their expected useful lives on the same basis as owned assets or where shorter over the term of the relevant lease.
Camellia RandA pp43pp53 Page 45 The assets residual values and useful lives are reviewed and adjusted if appropriate at each balance sheet date.
The gain or loss arising on the disposal or retirement of an asset is determined as the dierence between the sales proceeds and the carrying amount of the asset and is included in the income statement.
Assets held under nance leases are depreciated over their expected useful lives on the same basis as owned assets or where shorter over the term of the relevant lease.
The assets residual values and useful lives are reviewed and adjusted if appropriate at each balance sheet date.
The gain or loss arising on the disposal or retirement of an asset is determined as the dierence between the sales proceeds and the carrying amount of the asset and is included in the Income Statement.
Investment properties Properties held to earn rental income rather than for the purpose of the Groups principal activities are classied as Investment properties.
Investment properties are recorded at cost less accumulated depreciation and any recognised impairment loss.
The depreciation policy is consistent with those described for other Group properties.
Income from Investment properties is disclosed in other operating income.
The related operating costs are immaterial and are included within administrative expenses.
Biological assets noncurrent Biological assets are measured at each balance sheet date at fair value and are generally valued at each year end by independent professional valuers.
Any changes in fair value are recognised in the Income Statement in the year in which they arise.
Costs of new areas planted are included as new planting additions in the biological assets note.
As timber is harvested the value accumulated to the date of harvest is treated as decrease due to harvesting and charged to cost of sales in the Income Statement.
Biological assets current Produce is valued on the basis of net present values of expected future cash ows and include certain assumptions about yields selling prices costs and discount rates.
As the crop is harvested it is transferred to inventory at fair value.
Financial assets The Group classies its nancial assets in the following categories loans and receivables availablefor sale and heldtomaturity.
The classication depends on the purpose for which the nancial assets were acquired.
Management determines the classication of its nancial assets at initial recognition.
Loans and receivables are nonderivative nancial assets with xed or determinable payments that are not quoted in an active market.
They are included in current assets except for maturities greater than 12 months after the end of the reporting period.
These are classied as noncurrent assets.
The Groups loans and receivables comprise trade and other receivables and cash and cash equivalents in the Balance Sheet.
Availableforsale nancial assets are nonderivatives that are either designated in this category or not classied in any of the other categories.
They are included in noncurrent assets unless the investment matures or management intends to dispose of it within 12 months of the end of the reporting period.
Heldtomaturity investments are nonderivative nancial assets with xed or determinable payments and xed maturities that the Groups management has the positive intention and ability to hold to maturity.
Were the Group to sell other than an insignicant amount of heldtomaturity assets the entire category would be tainted and reclassied as availableforsale.
Regular purchases and sales of nancial assets are recognised on the tradedate the date on which the Group commits to purchase or sell the asset.
Investments are initially recognised at fair value plus transaction costs for all nancial assets.
Financial assets are derecognised when the rights to receive cash ows from the investments have expired or have been transferred and the Group has transferred substantially all risks and rewards of ownership.
CAMELLIA PLC ACCOUNTING POLICIES Camellia RandA pp43pp53 Page 46 ACCOUNTING POLICIES CAMELLIA PLC Availableforsale nancial assets are subsequently carried at fair value.
Availableforsale nancial assets include shares of listed and unlisted companies.
The fair values of listed shares are based on current bid values.
Shares in unlisted companies are measured at cost as fair value cannot be reliably measured.
Changes in the fair value of monetary and nonmonetary securities classied as availableforsale are recognised in other comprehensive income.
When securities classied as availableforsale are sold or impaired the accumulated fair value adjustments recognised in equity are included in the Income Statement as protloss on disposal of availableforsale investments.
Dividends on availableforsale equity instruments are recognised in the Income Statement as part of investment income when the groups right to receive payments is established.
Loans and receivables and held to maturity investments are subsequently carried at amortised cost using the eective interest method.
Financial assets and liabilities are oset and the net amount reported in the Balance Sheet when there is a legally enforceable right to oset the recognised amounts and there is an intention to settle on a net basis or realise the asset and settle the liability simultaneously.
Availableforsale nancial assets are subsequently carried at fair value.
Availableforsale nancial assets include shares of listed and unlisted companies.
The fair values of listed shares are based on current bid values.
Shares in unlisted companies are measured at cost as fair value cannot be reliably measured.
Changes in the fair value of monetary and nonmonetary securities classied as availableforsale are recognised in Other comprehensive income.
When securities classied as availableforsale are sold or impaired the accumulated fair value adjustments recognised in equity are included in the Income Statement as Protloss on disposal of availableforsale investments.
Dividends on availableforsale equity instruments are recognised in the Income Statement as part of investment income when the Groups right to receive payments is established.
Loans and receivables and held to maturity investments are subsequently carried at amortised cost using the eective interest method.
Financial assets and liabilities are oset and the net amount reported in the Balance Sheet when there is a legally enforceable right to oset the recognised amounts and there is an intention to settle on a net basis or realise the asset and settle the liability simultaneously.
Other investments  heritage assets Other investments comprise ne art documents manuscripts and philately which are measured at cost as fair value cannot be reliably measured.
Investments in subsidiary companies Investments in subsidiary companies are included at cost plus incidental expenses less any provision for impairment.
Impairment reviews are performed by the Directors when there has been an indication of potential impairment.
Impairment of nancial assets i Assets carried at amortised cost The Group assesses at the end of each reporting period whether there is objective evidence that a nancial asset or group of nancial assets is impaired.
A nancial asset or a group of nancial assets is impaired and impairment losses are incurred only if there is objective evidence of impairment as a result of one or more events that occurred after the initial recognition of the asset a loss event and that loss event or events has an impact on the estimated future cash ows of the nancial asset or group of nancial assets that can be reliably estimated.
For the loans and receivables category the amount of the loss is measured as the dierence between the assets carrying amount and the present value of estimated future cash ows excluding future credit losses that have not been incurred discounted at the nancial assets original eective interest rate.
The carrying amount of the asset is reduced and the amount of the loss is recognised in the consolidated Income Statement.
Camellia RandA pp43pp53 Page 47 If in a subsequent period the amount of the impairment loss decreases and the decrease can be related objectively to an event occurring after the impairment was recognised such as an improvement in the debtors credit rating the reversal of the previously recognised impairment loss is recognised in the Consolidated Income Statement.
In the case of equity investments classied as availableforsale a signicant or prolonged decline in the fair value of the security below its cost is also evidence that the assets are impaired.
If any such evidence exists for availableforsale nancial assets the cumulative loss measured as the dierence between the acquisition cost and the current fair value less any impairment loss on that nancial asset previously recognised in prot or loss is removed from equity and recognised in prot or loss.
Impairment losses recognised in the consolidated income statement on equity instruments are not reversed through the consolidated income statement.
If in a subsequent period the fair value of a debt instrument classied as availableforsale increases and the increase can be objectively related to an event occurring after the impairment loss was recognised in prot or loss the impairment loss is reversed through the consolidated Income Statement.
Impairment of nonnancial assets Assets that have an indenite useful life are not subject to amortisation and are tested annually for impairment and whenever events or changes in circumstance indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable.
Assets that are subject to amortisation are tested for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable.
An impairment loss is recognised for the amount by which the assets carrying amount exceeds its recoverable amount.
The recoverable amount is the higher of an assets fair value less costs to sell and value in use.
For the purposes of assessing impairment assets are grouped at the lowest levels for which there are separately identiable cash ows cashgenerating units.
Leases
Leases of property plant and equipment where the Group has substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership are classied as nance leases.
Finance leases are capitalised at the inception of the lease at the lower of fair value and the estimated present value of the underlying lease payments.
Each lease payment is allocated between the liability and nance charges so as to achieve a constant rate of interest on the nance balance outstanding.
The corresponding rental obligations net of nance charges are included in liabilities.
The interest element of the nance cost is charged to the Income Statement over the lease period.
Property plant and equipment acquired under nance leases is depreciated over the shorter of the assets useful life and the lease term.
Leases where a signicant portion of the risks and rewards of ownership are retained by the lessor are classied as operating leases.
Payments made under operating leases are charged to the Income Statement on a straightline basis over the period of the lease.
Inventories
Agricultural produce included within inventory largely comprises stock of black tea.
In accordance with IAS 41 on initial recognition agricultural produce is required to be measured at fair value less estimated point of sale costs.
Other inventories are stated at the lower of cost and net realisable value.
Cost comprises direct materials and where applicable direct labour costs and those overheads that have been incurred in bringing the inventories to their present location and condition.
Cost is calculated using the weighted average method.
Net realisable value represents the estimated selling price less all estimated costs of completion and selling expenses.
Trade and other receivables Trade receivables are carried at original invoice amount less provision made for impairment of these receivables.
A provision for impairment of trade receivables is established when there is objective evidence that the Group will not be able to collect all amounts due according to the original terms.
The amount of the provision is recognised in the Income Statement.
CAMELLIA PLC ACCOUNTING POLICIES Camellia RandA pp43pp53 Page 48 ACCOUNTING POLICIES CAMELLIA PLC Amounts due from customers of banking subsidiaries consist of loans and receivables which are non derivative nancial assets with xed or determinable payments that are not quoted in an active market.
They arise when the bank provides money goods or services directly to a customer with no intention of trading the receivable and are carried at amortised cost using the eective interest method.
Cash and cash equivalents Cash and cash equivalents include cash in hand deposits held at call with banks other shortterm highly liquid investments with original maturities of three months or less and bank overdrafts.
Bank overdrafts are shown within borrowings in current liabilities on the balance sheet.
Discontinued operations and noncurrent assets held for sale A discontinued operation is a separate major line of business or geographic area of operation that has either been disposed of abandoned or is part of a plan to dispose of a major line of business or geographic area.
An operation is classied as a discontinued operation in the year that the above criteria are met.
In the consolidated Income Statement protloss from discontinued operations is reported separately from the results from continuing operations.
Prior periods Income Statement and cash ow are presented on a comparable basis.
Noncurrent assets classied as held for sale are measured at the lower of the carrying amount and fair value less costs to sell.
Noncurrent assets are classied as held for sale if their carrying amount will be recovered through a sale transaction rather than through continuing use.
This condition is regarded as met only when the sale is highly probable and the asset is available for immediate sale in its present condition.
Management must be committed to the sale which should be expected to qualify for recognition as a completed sale within one year from the date of classication.
Trade payables Trade payables are obligations to pay for goods or services that have been acquired in the ordinary course of business from suppliers.
Accounts payable are classied as current liabilities if payment is due within one year or less.
If not they are presented as noncurrent liabilities.
Trade payables are recognised initially at fair value and subsequently measured at amortised cost using the eective interest method.
Borrowings
Interestbearing bank loans and overdrafts are initially recorded at the proceeds received net of direct issue costs.
Finance charges including premiums payable on settlement or redemption and direct issue costs are accounted for on an accrual basis to the Income Statement using the eective interest method and are added to the carrying amount of the instrument to the extent that they are not settled in the period in which they arise.
Taxation
The tax expense represents the sum of the tax currently payable and deferred tax.
The tax currently payable is based on taxable prot for the year.
Taxable prot diers from net prot as reported in the income statement because it excludes items of income or expense that are taxable or deductible in other years and it further excludes items that are never taxable or deductible.
The Group liability for current tax is calculated using tax rates that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the balance sheet date.
Deferred tax is the tax expected to be payable or recoverable on dierences between the carrying amount of assets and liabilities in the nancial statements and the corresponding tax bases used in the computation of taxable prot and is accounted for using the liability method.
Deferred tax is not accounted for if it arises from initial recognition of an asset or liability in a transaction other than in a business combination that at the time of the transaction aects neither accounting nor taxable prot or loss.
Deferred tax is determined using tax rates and laws that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the balance sheet date and are expected to apply when the related tax asset is realised or the tax liability is settled.
Camellia RandA pp43pp53 Page 49 Deferred tax assets are recognised to the extent that it is probable that future taxable prot will be available against which the temporary dierences can be utilised.
Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are oset when there is a legally enforceable right to oset current tax assets against current tax liabilities and when the deferred income taxes assets and liabilities relate to income taxes levied by the same taxation authority on either the same taxable entity or dierent taxable entities where there is an intention to settle the balances on a net basis.
Deferred tax is provided on temporary dierences arising on investments in subsidiaries and associates except where the timing of the reversal of the temporary dierence is controlled by the Group and it is probable that the temporary dierence will not reverse in the foreseeable future.
Employee benets i Pension obligations Group companies operate various pension schemes.
The schemes are funded through payments to insurance companies or trusteeadministered funds.
The Group has both dened benet and dened contribution plans.
A dened contribution plan is a pension plan under which the Group pays xed contributions into a separate fund.
The Group has no legal or constructive obligations to pay further contributions to the fund.
Contributions are recognised as an expense in the Income Statement when they are due.
A dened benet plan is a pension plan that denes an amount of pension benet that an employee will receive on retirement usually dependent on one or more factors such as age years of service and compensation.
The pension cost for dened benet schemes is assessed in accordance with the advice of qualied independent actuaries using the projected unit funding method.
The liability recognised in the Balance Sheet in respect of dened benet pension plans is the present value of the dened benet obligation at the balance sheet date less the fair value of plan assets.
Independent actuaries calculate the obligation annually using the projected unit funding method.
Actuarial gains and losses arising from experience adjustments and changes in actuarial adjustments are recognised in full in the period in which they occur they are not recognised in the Income Statement and are presented in the Statement of Comprehensive Income.
Past service costs are recognised directly in the Income Statement.
Some Group companies have unfunded obligations to pay terminal gratuities to employees.
Provisions are made for the estimated liability for gratuities as a result of services rendered by employees up to the balance sheet date and any movement in the provision is recognised in the Income Statement.
The estimated monetary liability for employees accrued annual leave entitlement at the balance sheet date is recognised as an accrual.
Provisions
Provisions are recognised when the Group has a present obligation legal or constructive as a result of a past event it is probable that an outow of resources will be required to settle the obligation and the amount has been reliably estimated.
Share capital Ordinary shares are classied as equity.
Incremental costs directly attributable to the issue of new shares or options are shown in equity as a deduction net of tax from the proceeds.
CAMELLIA PLC ACCOUNTING POLICIES Camellia RandA pp43pp53 Page 50 ACCOUNTING POLICIES CAMELLIA PLC Where any Group company purchases the Companys equity share capital treasury shares the consideration paid including any directly attributable incremental costs net of income taxes is deducted from equity attributable to the Companys equity holders until the shares are cancelled or reissued.
Where such shares are subsequently reissued any consideration received net of any directly attributable incremental transaction costs and the related income tax eects is included in equity attributable to the Companys equity holders.
Dividend distribution Dividend distribution to the Companys shareholders is recognised as a liability in the Groups nancial statements in the period in which the dividends are approved by the Companys shareholders.
Interim
Sources of estimation uncertainty Estimates and judgements are continually evaluated and are based on historical experience and other factors including expectations of future events that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances.
The Group makes estimates and assumptions concerning the future.
The resulting accounting will by denition seldom equal the actual results.
The estimates and assumptions that have a risk of causing a material adjustment to the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities within the next nancial year are set out below.
The Group has signicant investments in intangible assets property plant and equipment biological assets associated companies and other investments.
These assets are tested for impairment when circumstances indicate there may be a potential impairment.
Factors considered which could trigger an impairment review include the signicant fall in market values signicant underperformance relative to historical or projected future operating results a major change in market conditions or negative cash ows.
Biological assets are carried at fair value less estimated pointofsale costs.
Where meaningful market determined prices do not exist to assess the fair value of biological assets the fair value has been determined based on the net present value of expected future cash ows from those assets discounted at appropriate pretax rates.
In determining the fair value of biological assets where the discounting of expected future cash ows has been used the Directors have made certain assumptions about expected lifespan of the plantings yields selling prices costs and discount rates.
Details of assumptions made and sensitivity analysis are given in note 19.
Pension accounting requires certain assumptions to be made in order to value obligations and to determine the impact on the Income Statement.
These gures are particularly sensitive to assumptions for discount rates mortality ination rates and expected longterm rates of return on assets.
Details of assumptions made and sensitivity analysis are given in note 33.
Tax provisions are based on managements interpretation of country specic tax law and the likelihood of settlement.
This involves a signicant amount of judgement as tax legislation can be complex and open to dierent interpretation.
Management uses professional rms and previous experience when assessing tax risks.
Where actual tax liabilities dier from the provisions adjustments are made which can have a material impact on the Groups prots for the year.
Camellia RandA pp43pp53 Page 51 Changes in accounting policy and disclosures i New and amended standards adopted by the Group The Group has adopted the following new and amended IFRSs as of 1 January 2017 IAS 7 amendments Statement of cashows  eective from 1 January 2017 The Group has adopted the amendments to IAS 7 for the rst time in the current year.
IAS 12 amendment Recognition of deferred tax  eective from 1 January 2017 Amendments made to IAS 12 in January 2016 clarify the accounting for deferred tax where an asset is measured at fair value and that fair value is below the assets tax base.
Specically the amendments conrm that A temporary dierence exists whenever the carrying amount of an asset is less than its tax base at the end of the reporting period.
An entity can assume that it will recover an amount higher than the carrying amount of an asset to estimate its future taxable prot.
Where the tax law restricts the source of taxable prots against which particular types of deferred tax assets can be recovered the recoverability of the deferred tax assets can only be assessed in combination with other deferred tax assets of the same type.
Tax deductions resulting from the reversal of deferred tax assets are excluded from the estimated future taxable prot that is used to evaluate the recoverability of those assets.
The amendments to IAS 7 and IAS 12 have not had a material impact on the nancial statements of the Group.
A number of new standards and amendments to standards and interpretations are eective for annual periods beginning on or after 1 January 2018 and have not been applied in preparing these consolidated nancial statements.
None of these is expected to have a signicant eect on the consolidated nancial statements of the Group except the following set out below IFRS 9 Financial Instruments  eective from 1 January 2018 The standard covers the classication measurement and derecognition of nancial instruments and applies an approach where the business model of an entity and the cash ows associated with each nancial asset denes the classication of the nancial instrument.
IFRS 9 applies a forwardlooking impairment model that will replace the currently applicable incurred loss model.
Classication and measurement Under IFRS 9 the classication of nancial assets is based both on the business model within which the asset is held and the contractual cash ow characteristics of the asset.
There are three principal classication categories for nancial assets that are debt instruments i amortised cost ii fair value through other comprehensive income FVTOCI and iii fair value through prot or loss FVTPL.
Equity investments in scope of IFRS 9 are measured at fair value with gains and losses recognised in prot or loss unless an irrevocable election is made to recognise gains or losses in Other comprehensive income.
At the date of initial application of IFRS 9 the Group has elected to apply the FVTOCI option for all of its noncontrolling equity interests that were classied as Available for sale nancial assets AFS under IAS This election results in all gains and losses being presented in Other comprehensive income except dividend income which is recognised in prot or loss.
This diers from the current treatment of AFS instruments under IAS 39 where gains and losses recognised in Other comprehensive income are reclassied to prot and loss on derecognition or impairment.
There will be no other changes in the classication and measurement for any of the Groups other nancial assets or liabilities.
ACCOUNTING POLICIES CAMELLIA PLC Camellia RandA pp43pp53 Page 52 The Group has elected not to restate comparatives on initial application of IFRS 9.
The full impact of adopting IFRS 9 on the Groups consolidated nancial statements will depend on the nancial instruments that the Group holds during 2018 as well as on economic conditions and judgements will be made at the year end.
The Group has performed a preliminary assessment of the potential impact of adopting IFRS 9 based on the nancial instruments as at the date of initial application of IFRS 9.
Based on the Groups preliminary assessment the adoption of IFRS 9 will not have a material impact on the nancial statements.
Impairment
The impairment model under IFRS 9 reects expected credit losses as opposed to incurred credit losses under IAS 39.
Under the impairment approach in IFRS 9 it is not necessary for a credit event to have occurred before credit losses are recognised.
The amount of expected credit losses should be assessed on initial recognition of the related asset and updated at each reporting date.
The Group expects to apply the simplied approach to recognise lifetime expected credit losses for its trade receivables as required or permitted by IFRS.
IFRS 15 Revenue from contracts with customers  eective from 1 January 2018 The IASB has issued a new standard for the recognition of revenue.
This will replace IAS 18 which covers contracts for goods and services and IAS 11 which covers construction contracts.
The new standard is based on the principle that revenue is recognised when control of a good or service transfers to a customer  so the notion of control replaces the existing notion of risks and rewards.
A new vestep process must be applied before revenue can be recognised Identify contracts with customers Identify the separate performance obligation Determine the transaction price of the contract Allocate the transaction price to each of the separate performance obligations Recognise the revenue The adoption of IFRS 15 is not expected to have a material nancial impact on the nancial statements of the Group as the Groups revenue recognition practises are in line with IFRS 15 in all material respects.
IFRS 16 Leases  eective from 1 January 2019 IFRS 16 will aect primarily the accounting by lessees and will result in the recognition of almost all leases on Balance Sheet.
The standard removes the current distinction between operating and nancing leases and requires recognition of an asset the right to use the leased item and a nancial liability to pay rentals for virtually all lease contracts.
An optional exemption exists for shortterm and lowvalue leases.
The Income Statement will also be aected because the total expense is typically higher in the earlier years of a lease and lower in later years.
Additionally operating expense will be replaced with interest and depreciation.
Operating cash ows will be higher as cash payments for the principal portion of the lease liability are classied within nancing activities.
Only the part of the payments that reects interest can continue to be presented as operating cash ows.
ACCOUNTING POLICIES CAMELLIA PLC Camellia RandA pp43pp53 Page 53 CAMELLIA PLC NOTES TO THE ACCOUNTS 1 Business and geographical segments The principal activities of the Group are as follows
Engineering
Food Service For management reporting purposes these activities form the basis on which the Group reports its primary divisions.
Segment information about these businesses is presented below Agriculture Engineering Food Service Other operations Consolidatedtelteltel 2016 m m m m m m m m m m
Trading prot Segment protloss 35.6 29.9 2.6 2.6 1.8 0.8  0.1 34.8 28.2 Unallocated corporate expenses 8.4 9.2 Trading prot 26.4 19.0 Share of associates results 2.0 5.1 Impairment of property plant and equipment and provisions 1.8 Prot on disposal of availableforsale investments 0.7 1.5 Investment income 0.6 0.6 Net nance costincome 0.3 0.3 Prot before tax from continuing operations 27.6 26.5 Taxation 13.8 12.4 Prot after tax from continuing operations 13.8 14.1 Other information Investments in associates 55.4 61.0 Discontinued operation  266.9 Unallocated assets 112.6 69.6 Consolidated total assets 576.5 813.9 Segment liabilities 56.6 55.4 7.9 4.6 6.5 5.4   71.0 65.4 Discontinued operation  244.2 Unallocated liabilities 87.6 124.7 Consolidated total liabilities 158.6 434.3 Capital expenditure 17.2 13.0 0.3 0.4 2.3 0.6 1.0 0.7 20.8 14.7 Amortisation 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 Impairments 0.9 0.2 0.1 1.1 0.1 Segment assets consist primarily of intangible assets property plant and equipment investment properties biological assets prepaid operating leases inventories trade and other receivables and cash and cash equivalents.
Receivables for tax have been excluded.
Investments in associates valued using the equity method have been shown separately in the segment information.
Segment liabilities are primarily those relating to the operating activities and generally exclude liabilities for taxes shortterm loans nance leases and noncurrent liabilities.
Camellia RandA pp54pp69 Page 54 NOTES TO THE ACCOUNTS CAMELLIA PLC 1 Business and geographical segments continued Geographical segments The Groups operations are based in nine main geographical areas.
The United Kingdom is the home country of the parent.
The principal geographical areas in which the Group operates are as follows United Kingdom Continental Europe
India
Kenya
Malawi
North America and Bermuda South Africa South America The following table provides an analysis of the Groups revenue by geographical market irrespective of the origin of the goodsservices 2017 2016 m m United Kingdom 53.9 41.4 Continental Europe 34.1 35.6 Bangladesh 28.1 24.2 India 85.6 67.2 Kenya 42.3 35.6 Malawi 11.0 8.6 North America and Bermuda 9.9 10.1 South Africa 2.9 1.5 South America 6.5 5.3 Other 24.0 28.4 The following is an analysis of the carrying amount of segment assets and additions to property plant and equipment and investment properties analysed by the geographical area in which the assets are located Carrying amount of Additions to property Additions to segment assets plant and equipment investment propertiesteltel m m m m m m United Kingdom 58.0 60.4 3.2 1.1 0.2 0.5 Continental Europe 6.3 6.1 0.1 0.1 Bangladesh 63.1 69.6 2.5 1.1 North America and Bermuda 12.2 12.5 0.2 0.2 South Africa 13.4 13.0 2.0 1.2 South America 10.9 12.7 0.5 0.4 Camellia RandA pp54pp69 Page 55 CAMELLIA PLC NOTES TO THE ACCOUNTS 2 Revenue An analysis of the Groups revenue is as follows 2017 2016 m m Sale of goods 238.8 206.5 Distribution and warehousing revenue 37.8 31.6 Engineering services revenue 20.5 18.8 Agency commission revenue 0.6 0.6 Property rental revenue 0.6 0.4 Total Group revenue 298.3 257.9 Other operating income 2.4 2.3 Investment income 0.6 0.6 Interest income 3.0 2.7 Total Group income 304.3 263.5 Camellia RandA pp54pp69 Page 56 NOTES TO THE ACCOUNTS CAMELLIA PLC 3 Trading prot 2017 2016 m m The following items have been included in arriving at trading prot Employment costs note 14 101.5 92.0
Cost of inventories recognised as an expense included in cost of sales 162.8 137.6 Cost of inventories provision recognised as an expense included in cost of sales 0.1 0.3 Fair value gain included in Made Tea 1.2 0.8 Depreciation of property plant and equipment Owned assets 15.0 14.6 Under nance leases 0.1 Amortisation of intangibles included in administrative expenses 0.3 0.3 Gain from change in fair value of noncurrent biological assets 1.1 1.1 Impairment of availableforsale nancial assets included in administrative expenses 0.2 0.1 Prot on disposal of property plant and equipment 0.1 0.2 Operating leases  lease payments Plant and machinery 0.3 0.4 Property 0.6 0.6 Repairs and maintenance expenditure on property plant and equipment 5.5 4.6 Currency exchange gainslosses creditedcharged to income include Revenue  0.3 Cost of sales  0.1 Distribution costs  0.1 Administrative expenses 0.2 0.2 Finance income 0.1 0.4 During the year the Group including its overseas subsidiaries obtained the following services from the Companys auditor and its associates Audit services Statutory audit Parent company and consolidated nancial statements 0.2 0.2 Subsidiary companies 0.5 0.8 Audit  related regulatory reporting 0.1 0.1 Other services not covered above 0.2 Camellia RandA pp54pp69 Page 57 CAMELLIA PLC NOTES TO THE ACCOUNTS 4 Share of associates results The Groups share of the results of associates is analysed below 2017 2016 m m Prot before tax 2.0 6.0 Taxation  0.9 Prot after tax 2.0 5.1 5 Impairment of property plant and equipment and provisions Following a decision to sell both British Metal Treatments Limited and GU Cutting and Grinding Services Limited to their respective management teams the assets and liabilities associated with the two companies have been fair valued and reclassied as held for sale note 9.
Impairments and provisions totalling 1.8 million have been charged to the income statement.
6 Prot on disposal of availableforsale investments In 2016 the prot of 1.5 million included a prot of 1.1 million relating to the disposal of the Groups investment in Ascendant Group a Bermudian power company.
7 Finance income and costs 2017 2016 m m Interest payable on loans and bank overdrafts 0.5 0.6 Finance costs 0.5 0.6 Finance income  interest income on shortterm bank deposits 3.0 2.7 Net exchange lossgain on foreign cash balances 0.1 0.4 Employee benet expense note 33 2.7 2.2 Net nance costincome 0.3 0.3 Camellia RandA pp54pp69 Page 58 NOTES TO THE ACCOUNTS CAMELLIA PLC 8 Taxation Analysis of charge in the year 2017 2016 m m m Current tax UK corporation tax UK corporation tax at 19.25 per cent.
2016 20.00 per cent.
Double tax relief 1.8 1.4 Foreign tax Corporation tax 14.0 11.6 Adjustment in respect of prior years 0.3 0.1 Total current tax 14.3 11.7 Deferred tax Origination and reversal of timing dierences Overseas 0.5 0.7 Tax on prot on ordinary activities 13.8 12.4 Factors aecting tax charge for the year Prot on ordinary activities before tax 42.4 6.5 Share of associated undertakings prot 2.0 5.1 Group prot on ordinary activities before tax 40.4 1.4 Tax on ordinary activities at the standard rate of corporation tax in the UK of 19.25 per cent.
2016 20.00 per cent.
Eects of Adjustment to tax in respect of prior years 0.3 0.1 Expenses not deductible for tax purposes 2.6 6.6 Adjustment in respect of foreign tax rates 4.6 3.7 Additional tax arising on dividends from overseas companies 1.1 1.0 Other income not charged to tax 2.2 1.5 Prot on disposal of discontinued operation not charged to tax 3.9 Increase in tax losses carried forward 1.9 1.6 Movement in other timing dierences 1.6 0.6 Total tax charge for the year 13.8 12.4 The Prot on disposal of discontinued operation not charged to tax arises from the disposal of Duncan Lawrie Asset Management the gain from which is not expected to be chargeable to tax.
Expenses not deductible for tax purposes in 2016 included 4.0 million arising from the discontinued operation and consists of losses not recoverable and expenses not allowable for tax purposes.
Camellia RandA pp54pp69 Page 59 CAMELLIA PLC NOTES TO THE ACCOUNTS 9 Assets classied as held for sale Following a decision to sell both British Metal Treatments Limited and GU Cutting and Grinding Services Limited the assets and liabilities associated with the two companies have been fair valued and reclassied as held for sale.
The disposal of these companies which form part of the Engineering segment is expected to complete during 2018.
The following assets and liabilities were reclassied as held for sale in relation to British Metal Treatments Limited and GU Cutting and Grinding Services Limited 2017 2016 m m Assets classied as held for sale Property plant and equipment 2.7 Inventories 0.9 Trade and other receivables 1.2 Cash and cash equivalents 0.3 Impairments 0.9 Assets classied as held for sale 4.2 Liabilities directly associated with assets classied as held for sale Trade and other payables 0.9 Provisions 0.9 In addition the property previously occupied by Loddon Engineering was sold in March 2018.
0.7 million has been reclassied from investment property to assets held for sale.
Camellia RandA pp54pp69 Page 60 NOTES TO THE ACCOUNTS CAMELLIA PLC 10 Discontinued operation On 19 December 2016 the Group announced its intention to exit the banking and nancial services businesses operated by Duncan Lawrie.
The assets and liabilities associated with Duncan Lawrie were consequently presented as held for sale in the 2016 nancial statements.
The UK loan book was sold to Arbuthnot Latham in December 2016.
The sale of the Duncan Lawrie Asset Management to Brewin Dolphin was also agreed in 2016 and completed in 2017 generating a gain on sale of 19.2 million which is reected in these results.
The nancial performance for the year end 31 December 2017 and 31 December 2016 is as follows 2017 2016 m m Revenue 2.8 12.1 Other operating income  0.1 Operating expenses 8.3 19.7 Costs associated with closure Sta termination  5.0 Contract settlement  2.6 Advisors fees  2.7 Prot on sale of Duncan Lawrie Asset Management 19.2 Prot on sale of other operations 1.1 Impairment of noncurrent assets and loans and advances to customers  1.2 Prot on sale of availableforsaleinvestments  1.2 Prot on sale of heldtomaturity nancial assets  0.6 Loss on sale of UK loan book and provision for loss on sale of Isle of Man loan book  2.8 Protloss from discontinued operation 14.8 20.0 Cash ows are as follows 2017 2016 m m Protloss from discontinued operation 14.8 20.0 Depreciation and amortisation  0.5 Prot on sale of operations 20.3 Impairment of assets  0.6 Prot on sale of nancial assets  1.8 Increase in working capital 17.3 1.3 Net decrease in banking funds  9.0 Cash ow from discontinued operation 11.8 10.4 Proceeds from sale of operations 26.4 Purchase of property plant and equipment  0.1 Net cash inowoutow from discontinued operation 38.2 10.5 Camellia RandA pp54pp69 Page 61 CAMELLIA PLC NOTES TO THE ACCOUNTS 10 Discontinued operation continued The following assets and liabilities were reclassied as held for sale in relation to Duncan Lawrie 2017 2016 m m Assets classied as held for sale Intangible assets  6.3 Availableforsale nancial assets  1.0 Heldtomaturity nancial assets  30.0 Trade and other receivables  28.0 Cash and cash equivalents  201.6 Total assets of Duncan Lawrie held for sale  266.9 Liabilities directly associated with assets classied as held for sale Trade and other payables  244.0 Current income tax liabilities  0.2 11 Prot for the year 2017 2016 m m The prot of the Company was 3.9 4.0 The Company has taken advantage of the exemption under Section 408 of the Companies Act 2006 not to disclose its income statement.
12 Equity dividends 2017 2016 m m Amounts recognised as distributions to equity holders in the period Final dividend for the year ended 31 December 2016 of 95p 2015 95p per share 2.6 2.6 Interim dividend for the year ended 31 December 2017 of 37p 2016 35p per share 1.0 1.0 Dividends amounting to 0.1 million 2016 0.1 million have not been included as group companies hold 62500 issued shares in the Company.
These are classied as treasury shares.
Proposed nal dividend for the year ended 31 December 2017 of 98p 2016 95p per share 2.8 2.7 The proposed nal dividend is subject to approval by the shareholders at the AGM and has not been included as a liability in these nancial statements.
Camellia RandA pp54pp69 Page 62 NOTES TO THE ACCOUNTS CAMELLIA PLC 13 Earningsloss per share EPS 2017 2016 Weighted Weighted average average number of Loss number of Earnings shares EPS earnings shares EPS m Number Pence m Number Pence Attributable to ordinary shareholders 22.2 2762000 803.8 10.7 2762000 387.4 Attributable to ordinary shareholders  continuing operations 7.4 2762000 268.0 9.3 2762000 336.7 Attributable to ordinary shareholders  discontinued operation 14.8 2762000 535.8 20.0 2762000 724.1 Basic and diluted earnings per share are calculated by dividing the earnings attributable to ordinary shareholders by the weighted average number of ordinary shares in issue during the period excluding those held by the Group as treasury shares note 34.
14 Employees 2017 2016 Number Number Average number of employees by activity Agriculture 79665 79075 Engineering 250 251 Food Service 334 294 Central Management 26 24 80275 79644 2017 2016 m m Employment costs Wages and salaries 91.3 82.8 Social security costs 2.5 2.4 Employee benet obligations see note 33  UK 1.4 4.6 Overseas 6.3 2.2 Total remuneration paid to key employees who are members of the Executive Committees excluding Directors of Camellia Plc amounted to 2.1 million 2016 1.4 million.
Camellia RandA pp54pp69 Page 63 CAMELLIA PLC NOTES TO THE ACCOUNTS 15 Emoluments of the Directors 2017 2016 m m Aggregate emoluments excluding pension contributions 1.9 1.8 Emoluments of the highest paid Director excluding pension contributions were 0.6 million 2016 0.6 million.
Further details of Directors emoluments are set out on pages 34 to 35.
16 Intangible assets Customer Computer Goodwill relationships Brands software Total Group m m m m m
At 1 January 2016 4.0 4.8  6.4 15.2 Additions    0.2 0.2 Disposals    1.9 1.9 Reclassication to assets held for sale 4.0 4.8  2.3 11.1 At 1 January 2017    2.4 2.4 Exchange dierences   0.1  0.1 Additions   2.4 0.1 2.5 Disposals    0.1 0.1 At 31 December 2017   2.3 2.4 4.7
At 1 January 2016  2.3  4.9 7.2 Exchange dierences    0.1 0.1 Charge for the year  0.2  0.3 0.5 Disposals    1.9 1.9 Impairment provision    0.2 0.2 Reclassication to assets held for sale  2.5  2.3 4.8 At 1 January 2017    1.3 1.3 Charge for the year    0.3 0.3 Disposals    0.1 0.1 At 31 December 2017    1.5 1.5 Net book value at 31 December 2017   2.3 0.9 3.2 Net book value at 31 December 2016    1.1 1.1 Camellia RandA pp54pp69 Page 64 NOTES TO THE ACCOUNTS CAMELLIA PLC 17 Property plant and equipment
Bearer Land and Plant and ttings and plants buildings machinery equipment Total Group m m m m m Deemed cost At 1 January 2016 117.5 84.4 104.6 18.9 325.4 Exchange dierences 19.8 8.9 11.7 1.3 41.7 Additions 4.5 3.2 5.6 0.9 14.2 Disposals  0.1 2.2 0.3 2.6 Reclassication to investment properties  0.7   0.7 Reclassication to assets held for sale    3.7 3.7 At 1 January 2017 141.8 95.7 119.7 17.1 374.3 Exchange dierences 12.7 4.0 4.9 0.7 22.3 Additions 5.8 5.3 8.5 1.0 20.6 Disposals 1.3 0.2 2.5 0.3 4.3 Transfer between categories  10.7 10.7 Reclassication to investment properties  2.3   2.3 Reclassication to assets held for sale  3.1 3.9  7.0 At 31 December 2017 133.6 102.1 106.2 17.1 359.0
At 1 January 2016 5.3 37.7 67.0 10.3 120.3 Exchange dierences 1.4 3.6 6.9 0.8 12.7 Charge for the year 5.7 2.4 6.0 0.8 14.9 Disposals  0.1 2.1 0.3 2.5 Impairment provision    0.4 0.4 Reclassication to assets held for sale    3.7 3.7 At 1 January 2017 12.4 43.6 77.8 8.3 142.1 Exchange dierences 1.3 1.4 2.7 0.6 6.0 Charge for the year 6.0 1.5 6.6 1.0 15.1 Disposals 0.3 0.1 2.4 0.3 3.1 Transfer between categories  9.2 9.2  0.0 Impairment provision  0.1 0.2  0.3 Reclassication to investment properties  1.1   1.1 Reclassication to assets held for sale  0.9 3.7  4.6 At 31 December 2017 16.8 50.9 66.6 8.4 142.7 Net book value at 31 December 2017 116.8 51.2 39.6 8.7 216.3 Net book value at 31 December 2016 129.4 52.1 41.9 8.8 232.2 Land and buildings at net book value comprise 2017 2016 m m Freehold 26.6 26.0 Long leasehold 24.3 25.6 Short leasehold 0.3 0.5 The amount of expenditure for property plant and equipment in the course of construction amounted to 3.3 million 2016 1.5 million.
Camellia RandA pp54pp69 Page 65 CAMELLIA PLC NOTES TO THE ACCOUNTS 18 Investment properties
Cost
At 1 January 2016 16.4 Exchange dierences 0.1 Additions 0.5 Transfers from property plant and equipment 0.7 At 1 January 2017 17.7 Additions 0.2 Transfers from property plant and equipment 2.3 Reclassication to assets held for sale 0.7 At 31 December 2017 19.5
At 1 January 2016 0.6 Exchange dierences 0.1 At 1 January 2017 0.7 Transfers from property plant and equipment 1.1 Charge for the year 0.1 At 31 December 2016 1.9 Net book value at 31 December 2017 17.6 Net book value at 31 December 2016 17.0 Included in revenue is 0.6 million 2016 0.4 million of rental income generated from investment properties.
Direct operating expenses arising on the investment property the majority of which generated rental income in the period amounted to 0.2 million 2016 0.2 million.
At the end of the year the fair value of the investment properties was 23.4 million 2016 22.8 million.
Investment properties were valued by the Directors fair value hierarchy Level 2.
Camellia RandA pp54pp69 Page 66 NOTES TO THE ACCOUNTS CAMELLIA PLC 19 Biological assets Noncurrent Forestry Livestock Total m m m
At 1 January 2016 10.2 0.9 11.1 Exchange dierences 2.3 0.2 2.5 New planting additions 0.3  0.3 Gains arising from changes in fair value less estimated pointofsale costs 0.9 0.2 1.1 Decreases due to harvesting 0.8 0.3 1.1 At 1 January 2017 12.9 1.0 13.9 Exchange dierences 1.2 0.1 1.3 New planting additions 0.2  0.2 Gains arising from changes in fair value less estimated pointofsale costs 0.8 0.3 1.1 Decreases due to harvesting 0.8 0.3 1.1 At 31 December 2017 11.9 0.9 12.8 Current 2017 2016 m m
Tea 0.2 0.3 Edible nuts 1.9 1.3 Citrus 1.0 1.3 Soya 2.3 3.1 Avocado 1.1 0.9 Other 0.1 0.3 Biological assets are carried at fair value.
Where meaningful marketdetermined prices do not exist to assess the fair value of biological assets the fair value has been determined based on the net present value of expected future cash ows from those assets discounted at appropriate pretax rates.
At
31 December 2017 professional valuations were obtained on a signicant proportion of assets.
In determining the fair value of biological assets where the discounting of expected future cash ows has been used the Directors have made certain assumptions about the expected lifespan of the plantings yields selling prices and costs.
There are no individually signicant unobservable inputs.
The fair value of livestock is based on market prices of livestock of similar age and sex.
New planting additions represent new areas planted to the particular crop at cost.
As at 31 December 2017 the area planted to Forestry amounted to 5866 Hectares 2016 5946 from which 196121 cubic metres 2016 169089 were harvested during the year.
Livestock numbers were 4502 head 2016 4704 at 31 December 2017.
Fair value measurement All of the biological assets fall under level 3 of the hierarchy dened in IFRS 13.
The basis upon which the valuations are determined is set out in accounting policies on page 46.
Camellia RandA pp54pp69 Page 67 CAMELLIA PLC NOTES TO THE ACCOUNTS 19 Biological assets continued Valuations by external professional valuers and those derived from discounted cash ows both make assumptions based on unobservable inputs of yields an increase in which will raise the value costs an increase in which will decrease the value market prices an increase in which will raise the value life span of the plantings an increase in which will raise the value discount rates an increase in which will decrease the value.
These assumptions vary signicantly across dierent countries crops and varieties.
In preparing these valuations a long term view is taken on the yields and prices achieved.
The fair value of biological assets is sensitive to these assumptions the more signicant of which are as follows
Forestry  a 10% movement in the market price for trees or volume of trees assumed would result in a 1.2 million 2016 1.3 million increasedecrease in the fair value of forestry.
Current
Macadamia  a 10% increasedecrease in the volumes assumed would result in a 0.2 million 2016 0.1 million increasedecrease in the fair value of macadamia growing crop.
A 10% increasedecrease in selling price assumed for macadamia would result in a 1.0 million 2016 0.9 million increasedecrease in the fair value.
Avocados  a 10% increasedecrease in the volume or the price assumed would result in a 0.1 million 2016 0.1 million increasedecrease in the fair value of Hass avocados growing crop.
Soya  a 10% increasedecrease in the volume or the price assumed would result in a 0.2 million 2016 0.4 million increasedecrease in the fair value of soya growing crop.
Financial risk management strategies The Group is exposed to nancial risks arising from changes in the prices of the agricultural products it produces.
The Group does not anticipate that these prices will decline signicantly in the foreseeable future.
There are no futures markets available for the majority of crops grown by the
The Groups exposure to this risk is mitigated by the geographical spread of its operations selective forward selling in certain instances when considered appropriate and regular reviews of available market data on sales and production.
The Group monitors closely the returns it achieves from its crops and considers replacing its biological assets when yields decline with age or markets change.
Further nancial risk arises from changes in market prices of key cost components.
Such costs are closely monitored.
Camellia RandA pp54pp69 Page 68 20 Prepaid operating leases
Cost
At 1 January 2016 0.8 Exchange dierences 0.2 At 1 January 2017 1.0 Exchange dierences 0.1 At 31 December 2017 0.9 Net book value at 31 December 2017 0.9 Net book value at 31 December 2016 1.0 21 Investments in subsidiaries 2017 2016 m m
Cost
At 1 January and 31 December 73.5 73.5 Details of the Companys subsidiaries are shown in note 40.
NOTES TO THE ACCOUNTS CAMELLIA PLC Camellia RandA pp54pp69 Page 69 CAMELLIA PLC NOTES TO THE ACCOUNTS 22 Investments in associates 2017 2016 m m
At 1 January 89.8 73.0 Exchange dierences 8.4 14.4 Share of prot note 4 2.0 5.1 Dividends 2.8 2.3 Additions 1.0 Other equity movements 0.1 0.4 At 31 December 81.7 89.8 Provision for diminution in value At 1 January 28.8 24.1 Exchange dierences 2.5 4.7 At 31 December 26.3 28.8 Net book value at 31 December 55.4 61.0 Details of the Groups associates are shown in note 40.
The Groups share of the results of its principal associates and its share of the assets including goodwill and liabilities are as follows Country of Interest Market incorporation Assets Liabilities Revenues Prot held value m m m m % m
BFandM Bermuda 702.4 632.4 69.9 0.9 36.3 40.9 United Finance Limited Bangladesh 81.0 71.5 7.4 0.9 38.4 13.8 United Insurance Company Limited Bangladesh 3.0 0.8 0.3 0.2 37.0 4.1
BFandM Bermuda 522.9 446.2 71.7 3.8 35.8 52.2 United Finance Limited Bangladesh 80.9 70.2 7.0 1.1 38.4 12.4 United Insurance Company Limited Bangladesh 3.1 0.7 0.3 0.2 37.0 3.7 Camellia RandA pp70pp74 Page 70 NOTES TO THE ACCOUNTS CAMELLIA PLC 23 Availableforsale nancial assets Group Companytel 2016 m m m m Cost or fair value At 1 January 39.6 35.7 0.2 0.2 Exchange dierences 3.7 6.4 Fair value adjustment 10.9 3.5 Additions 4.0 3.4 Disposals 1.1 7.2 Fair value adjustment for disposal 0.3 1.2 Reclassication to assets held for resale  1.0 At 31 December 49.4 39.6 0.2 0.2 Provision for diminution in value At 1 January 2.4 5.1 Exchange dierences 0.2 0.6 Provided during year 0.2 0.1 0.2 Disposals  3.4 At 31 December 2.4 2.4 0.2 Net book value at 31 December 47.0 37.2  0.2 Availableforsale nancial assets include the following Group Companytel 2016 m m m m Listed securities Equity securities  Bermuda 5.2 5.1 Equity securities  Japan 20.3 15.7 Equity securities  Switzerland 9.5 8.5 Equity securities  US 4.1 2.8 Equity securities  India 3.8 3.5 Equity securities  Europe 0.5 0.5 Equity securities  Other 0.3 0.4 Treasury infrastructure bonds  12.0% to 12.2% interest payable twice yearly and redeemable in November 2022  Kenya 1.5 Treasury infrastructure bonds  12.0% to 12.2% interest payable twice yearly and redeemable in November 2024  Kenya 1.5 Debentures with xed interest of 12.5% and repayable twice yearly until 31 October 2019  Kenya 0.3 0.5 Unlisted investments  0.2  0.2 Camellia RandA pp70pp74 Page 71 CAMELLIA PLC NOTES TO THE ACCOUNTS 23 Availableforsale nancial assets continued Availableforsale nancial assets are denominated in the following currencies Group Companytel 2016 m m m m Sterling  0.2  0.2 US Dollar 4.1 2.8 Euro 0.5 0.5 Swiss Franc 9.5 8.5 Indian Rupee 3.8 3.5 Bermudian Dollar 5.2 5.1 Japanese Yen 20.3 15.7 Kenyan Shilling 3.3 0.5 Other 0.3 0.4 24 Heldtomaturity nancial assets
2017 2016 m m Cost or fair value At 1 January  29.5 Additions  30.0 Disposals  29.5 Reclassication to assets held for resale  30.0 At 31 December 25 Other investments  heritage assets Group Companytel 2016 m m m m
At 1 January 9.2 9.0 10.4 10.2 Additions 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 At 31 December 9.4 9.2 10.6 10.4 Heritage assets comprise the Groups and Companys investment in ne art philately documents and manuscripts.
The market value of these collections is expected to be in excess of book value.
Camellia RandA pp70pp74 Page 72 NOTES TO THE ACCOUNTS CAMELLIA PLC 26 Inventories 2017 2016 m m
Made Tea 31.3 34.8 Other agricultural produce 1.9 1.6 Work in progress 0.2 0.4 Trading stocks 2.5 2.2 Raw materials and consumables 11.5 11.6 Made Tea inventories include the fair value of green leaf which includes a fair value uplift of 1.2 million 2016 0.8 million.
27 Trade and other receivables
2017 2016 m m
Current
Trade receivables 30.3 27.8 Amounts owed by associated undertakings 0.1 Other receivables 7.4 7.6 Prepayments and accrued income 5.9 5.2
Other receivables 1.9 1.8 Camellia RandA pp70pp74 Page 73 CAMELLIA PLC NOTES TO THE ACCOUNTS 27 Trade and other receivables continued The carrying amounts of the Groups trade and other receivables are denominated in the following currencies 2017 2016 m m
Sterling 11.7 9.6 US Dollar 3.5 3.8 Euro 1.3 1.4 Kenyan Shilling 2.5 2.1 Indian Rupee 19.5 19.2 Malawian Kwacha 0.9 0.4 Bangladesh Taka 2.3 1.9 South African Rand 0.2 0.4 Brazilian Real 0.9 1.2 Other 0.9 0.6
US Dollar  0.3 Kenyan Shilling 0.5 0.5 Indian Rupee 1.1 0.6 Bangladesh Taka 0.3 0.4 Included within trade receivables is a provision for doubtful debts of 0.3 million 2016 0.3 million and all other trade receivables are with normal trading partners and there is no history of defaults.
Trade receivables include receivables of 6.0 million 2016 4.4 million which are past due at the reporting date against which the Group has not provided as there has not been a signicant change in credit quality and the amounts are still considered recoverable.
Ageing of past due but not provided for receivables is as follows 2017 2016 m m Up to 30 days 4.0 3.1 3060 days 0.8 0.5 6090 days 0.3 0.2 Over 90 days 0.9 0.6 Camellia RandA pp70pp74 Page 74 NOTES TO THE ACCOUNTS CAMELLIA PLC 28 Cash and cash equivalents Group Companytel 2016 m m m m Cash at bank and in hand 42.8 31.0 0.1 Shortterm bank deposits 61.1 37.8 Shortterm liquid investments 4.1 4.1 Cash cash equivalents and bank overdrafts include the following for the purposes of the cash ow statementtel 2016 m m m m Cash and cash equivalents 108.0 72.9 0.1 Bank overdrafts note 30 1.2 1.1 tel 2016 Eective interest rate Shortterm deposits 0.57  12.00% 2.50  12.50% Shortterm liquid investments 5.08  9.75% 6.45  6.49% Average maturity period Shortterm deposits 58 days 88 days Shortterm liquid investments 64 days 46 days 29 Trade and other payables Group Companytel 2016 m m m m
Trade payables 28.3 30.3 Other taxation and social security 1.6 2.6 Other payables 18.4 19.4 0.2 0.1 Accruals 8.2 6.4 Camellia RandA pp75end Page 75 CAMELLIA PLC NOTES TO THE ACCOUNTS 30 Financial liabilities  borrowings 2017 2016 m m
Current
Bank overdrafts 1.2 1.1 Bank loans 0.6 0.6 Current borrowings include the following amounts secured on property plant and equipment and investment properties Bank overdrafts 0.8 0.2 Bank loans 0.6 0.6
Bank loans 3.9 4.5 Finance leases 0.1 Noncurrent borrowings include the following amounts secured on plant and equipment and investment properties Bank loans 3.9 4.5 Finance leases 0.1 The repayment of bank loans and overdrafts fall due as follows Within one year or on demand included in current liabilities 1.8 1.7 Between 1  2 years 0.6 0.6 Between 2  5 years 3.3 3.9 Minimum nance lease payments fall due as follows Between 2  5 years 0.1 Future nance charges on nance leases Present value of nance lease liabilities 0.1 Camellia RandA pp75end Page 76 NOTES TO THE ACCOUNTS CAMELLIA PLC 30 Financial liabilities  borrowings continued The rates of interest payable by the group ranged between 2017 2016 % % Bank overdrafts 2.25  21.50 2.00  33.00 Bank loans 3.03 3.03 Finance leases 6.80  9.50 31 Provisions Wages and salaries Claims Total m m m
At 1 January 2016 4.0 0.8 4.8 Exchange dierences 1.0  1.0 Utilised in the period 2.0 0.1 2.1 Provided in the period 4.7 0.2 4.9 At 1 January 2017 7.7 0.9 8.6 Exchange dierences 1.0  1.0 Utilised in the period 0.4  0.4 Provided in the period 7.7 0.7 8.4 Unused amounts reversed in period  0.4 0.4 At 31 December 2017 14.0 1.2 15.2
At 31 December 2017 14.0 1.2 15.2 At 31 December 2016 7.7 0.9 8.6 The wages and salaries provisions are in respect of unresolved wage negotiations in Kenya for the Collective Bargaining Agreement years of 201415 and 201617 and ongoing wage negotiations in India and Bangladesh.
32 Deferred tax The net movement on the deferred tax account is set out below Group Companytel 2016 m m m m At 1 January 43.1 37.2 0.2 0.2 Exchange dierences 3.7 6.4 Creditedcharged to the income statement 0.5 0.7 Credited to equity 1.1 1.2 At 31 December 40.0 43.1 0.2 0.2 Camellia RandA pp75end Page 77 CAMELLIA PLC NOTES TO THE ACCOUNTS 32 Deferred tax continued The movement in deferred tax assets and liabilities is set out below Deferred tax liabilities
At 1 January 2016 43.2 0.1 43.3 Exchange dierences 7.7 0.2 7.9 Creditedcharged to the income statement 1.9 2.8 0.9 At 1 January 2017 49.0 3.1 52.1 Exchange dierences 4.4 0.2 4.6 Chargedcredited to the income statement 3.5 2.0 1.5 At 31 December 2017 48.1 0.9 49.0 Deferred tax assets oset 8.8 Net deferred tax liability after oset 40.2 Deferred tax assets
Tax losses asset Other Total m m m m At 1 January 2016 0.5 1.1 4.5 6.1 Exchange dierences 0.1 0.1 1.3 1.5 Credited to the income statement 0.3 1.3 1.8 0.2 Credited to equity  0.9 0.3 1.2 At 1 January 2017 0.3 0.8 7.9 9.0 Exchange dierences  0.5 0.4 0.9 Credited to the income statement 0.4 0.1 1.5 2.0 Charged to equity  1.0 0.1 1.1 Recategorisation  3.8 3.8 At 31 December 2017 0.7 3.2 5.1 9.0 Oset against deferred tax liabilities 8.8 Net deferred tax asset after oset 0.2 Deferred tax liabilities of 23.8 million 2016 24.3 million have not been recognised for the withholding tax and other taxes that would be payable on the unremitted earnings of certain subsidiaries.
Such amounts are permanently reinvested.
Deferred tax assets are recognised for tax losses carried forward only to the extent that the realisation of the related tax benet through future taxable prots is probable.
The Group has not recognised deferred tax assets of 10.9 million 2016 9.5 million in respect of losses that can be carried forward against future taxable income.
Camellia RandA pp75end Page 78 NOTES TO THE ACCOUNTS CAMELLIA PLC 33 Employee benet obligations i Pensions Certain Group subsidiaries operate dened contribution and funded dened benet pension schemes.
The most signicant is the UK funded nal salary dened benet scheme.
The assets of this scheme are administered by trustees and are kept separate from those of the Group.
The performance of the assets is monitored on a regular basis by the trustees and their investment advisors.
A full actuarial valuation was undertaken as at 1 July 2017 and updated to 31 December 2017 by a qualied independent actuary.
The UK nal salary dened benet pension scheme is closed to new entrants and with eect from 1 November 2016 the scheme was closed to future accruals.
Since that date members have participated in a dened contribution scheme.
The overseas schemes are operated in Group subsidiaries located in Bangladesh India and The
Actuarial valuations have been updated to 31 December 2017 by qualied actuaries for these schemes.
Assumptions
The major assumptions used in the valuation to determine the present value of the schemes dened benet obligations were as follows 2017 2016 % per annum % per annum UK schemes Rate of increase in salaries Na 2.00 Rate of increase to LPI Limited Price Indexation pensions in payment 2.20  5.00 2.40  5.00 Discount rate applied to scheme liabilities 2.45 2.65 Ination assumption CPIRPI 2.203.20 2.403.40 Assumptions regarding future mortality experience are based on advice received from independent actuaries.
The current mortality tables used are SAPS 2 males 105% and females 104% on a year of birth basis with CMI2016 future improvement factors and subject to a long term annual rate of future improvement of 1.25% per annum.
This results in males and females aged 65 having life expectancies of 21.7 years 2016 22.5 years and 23 years respectively 2016 24.4 years.
Overseas schemes Rate of increase in salaries 1.50  7.00 1.50  7.00 Rate of increase to LPI Limited Price Indexation pensions in payment 0.00  3.00 0.00  5.00 Discount rate applied to scheme liabilities 2.00  7.50 1.80  9.00 Ination assumption 0.00  7.00 0.00  7.00 ii Postemployment benets Certain Group subsidiaries located in Kenya India and Bangladesh have an obligation to pay terminal gratuities based on years of service.
These obligations are estimated annually using the projected unit method by qualied independent actuaries.
Schemes operated in India are funded but the schemes operated in Kenya and Bangladesh are unfunded.
Operations in India and Bangladesh also have an obligation to pay medical benets upon retirement.
These schemes are unfunded.
Camellia RandA pp75end Page 79 CAMELLIA PLC NOTES TO THE ACCOUNTS 33 Employee benet obligations continued
The major assumptions used in the valuation to determine the present value of the postemployment benet obligations were as follows 2017 2016 % per annum % per annum Rate of increase in salaries 6.00  10.00 6.00  10.00 Discount rate applied to scheme liabilities 7.00  13.50 6.75  14.50 Ination assumptions 0.00  10.00 0.00  10.00 iii Leave obligations Certain Group subsidiaries located in India have an obligation to pay leave benet based on years of service.
These obligations are estimated annually using the projected unit method by qualied independent actuaries.
These schemes are unfunded.
Sensitivity analysis The sensitivity of the UK dened benet obligation to changes in the weighted principal assumptions is
Change benet in assumption obligation Discount rate 0.5% higher 7.2% decrease Discount rate 0.5% lower 8.1% increase Rate of RPI ination 0.25% higher 1.8% increase Rate of RPI ination 0.25% lower 1.7% decrease Life expectancy 1 year 4.5% increase Life expectancy 1 year 4.5% decrease The above changes in assumptions may have an impact on the value of the schemes investment holdings.
For example the scheme holds a proportion of its assets in corporate bonds.
A fall in the discount rate as a result of lower UK corporate bond yields would lead to an increase in the value of these assets thus mitigating the increase in the dened benet obligation to some extent.
The sensitivities have been calculated by changing the key assumption only and leaving all others xed.
Duration of the scheme liabilities The weighted average duration of the UK schemes liabilities is 15 years.
Analysis of scheme liabilities The liabilities of the UK scheme are split as follows % Deferred pensioners 41 Current pensioners 59 Total membership 100 Camellia RandA pp75end Page 80 NOTES TO THE ACCOUNTS CAMELLIA PLC 33 Employee benet obligations continued iv Actuarial valuations 2017 2016 UK Overseas Total UK Overseas Total m m m m m m Equities and property 108.6 0.7 109.3 96.5 0.7 97.2 Diversied growth 16.9  16.9 Total fair value of plan assets 174.3 32.3 206.6 164.1 30.0 194.1 Present value of dened benet Total decit in the schemes 14.3 16.6 30.9 44.6 22.1 66.7 Amount recognised as asset in the balance sheet  0.3 0.3  0.1 0.1 Amount recognised as current liability in the balance sheet  0.7 0.7  0.9 0.9 Amount recognised as noncurrent liability in the balance sheet 14.3 16.2 30.5 44.6 21.3 65.9 Related deferred tax asset note 32  3.2 3.2  0.8 0.8 Movements in the fair value of scheme assets were as follows 2017 2016 UK Overseas Total UK Overseas Total m m m m m m Transfer from other creditors     0.6 0.6 Expected return on plan assets 4.1 1.8 5.9 5.6 1.8 7.4 Employer contributions 0.9 3.8 4.7 1.4 2.8 4.2 Benet payments 9.6 2.1 11.7 7.6 2.1 9.7 Actuarial gains 14.8 0.1 14.9 15.1 0.4 15.5 Exchange dierences  1.3 1.3  4.1 4.1 Camellia RandA pp75end Page 81 CAMELLIA PLC NOTES TO THE ACCOUNTS 33 Employee benet obligations continued Movements in the present value of dened benet obligations were as follows 2017 2016 UK Overseas Total UK Overseas Total m m m m m m Transfer from other creditors     1.1 1.1 Current service cost  2.5 2.5 0.4 1.8 2.2 Interest cost 5.3 3.3 8.6 6.5 3.1 9.6 Benet payments 9.6 2.1 11.7 7.6 2.1 9.7 Actuarial gainslosses 15.8 3.6 19.4 35.3 4.5 39.8 Exchange dierences  3.3 3.3  7.2 7.2 In 2015 the total fair value of plan assets was 172.0 million present value of dened benet obligations was 210.6 million and the decit was 38.6 million.
In 2014 the total fair value of plan assets was 169.6 million present value of dened benet obligations was 211.2 million and the decit was 41.6 million and in 2013 the total fair value of plan assets was 164.0 million present value of dened benet obligations was 185.4 million and the decit was 21.4 million.
Income Statement The amounts recognised in the Income Statement are as follows 2017 2016 UK Overseas Total UK Overseas Total m m m m m m Amounts charged to operating prot Current service cost  2.5 2.5 0.4 1.8 2.2 Total operating charge  2.5 2.5 0.4 1.8 2.2 Amounts charged to other nance costs Interest expense 1.2 1.5 2.7 0.9 1.3 2.2 Total charged to income statement 1.2 4.0 5.2 1.3 3.1 4.4 Employer contributions to dened contribution schemes are charged to prot when payable and the costs charged were 5.2 million 2016 4.6 million.
Camellia RandA pp75end Page 82 NOTES TO THE ACCOUNTS CAMELLIA PLC 33 Employee benet obligations continued Actuarial gains and losses recognised in the Statement of Comprehensive Income The amounts included in the Statement of Comprehensive Income 2017 2016 UK Overseas Total UK Overseas Total m m m m m m
Return on plan assets excluding amount included in interest 14.8 0.1 14.9 15.1 0.4 15.5 Gain from changes in demographic assumptions 14.7  14.7 Lossgain from changes in nancial assumptions 4.8 4.8  37.1 5.3 42.4 Experience gainslosses 5.9 1.2 4.7 1.8 0.8 2.6 Actuarial gainloss 30.6 3.7 34.3 20.2 4.1 24.3 Cumulative actuarial losses recognised in the Statement of Comprehensive Income are 25.0 million 2016 59.3 million.
As the UK dened benet pension scheme was closed to future accrual and active members were transferred to a dened contribution scheme no employer contributions will be paid for the year commencing 1 January 2018 however contributions totalling 0.2 million will be paid in accordance with the previous schedule of contributions.
No contributions will be made after 1 April 2018 as the latest actuarial valuation shows a funding surplus of 7.1 million.
34 Share capital 2017 2016 m m Authorised 2842000 2016 2842000 ordinary shares of 10p each 0.3 0.3 Allotted called up and fully paid ordinary shares of 10p each At 1 January and 31 December  2824500 2016 2824500 shares 0.3 0.3 Group companies hold 62500 issued shares in the Company.
These are classied as treasury shares.
Camellia RandA pp75end Page 83 CAMELLIA PLC NOTES TO THE ACCOUNTS 35 Reconciliation of prot from continuing operations to cash ow 2017 2016 m m
Prot from continuing operations 27.3 25.6 Share of associates results 2.0 5.1 Depreciation and amortisation 15.4 14.9 Impairment of assets and provisions 1.8 0.1 Prot on disposal of noncurrent assets 0.1 0.2 Prot on disposal of investments 0.7 1.5 Increase in working capital 1.2 3.0 Pensions and similar provisions less payments 2.2 1.5 Cash generated from continuing operations 40.7 35.3 36 Reconciliation of net cash ow to movement in net cash 2017 2016 m m
Increasedecrease in cash and cash equivalents in the year 40.2 4.1 Net cash outow from decrease in debt 0.5 0.6 Increasedecrease in net cash resulting from cash ows 40.7 3.5 Exchange rate movements 5.2 10.3 Increase in net cash in the year 35.5 6.8 Net cash at beginning of year 66.7 59.9 Net cash at end of year 102.2 66.7 Camellia RandA pp75end Page 84 NOTES TO THE ACCOUNTS CAMELLIA PLC 37 Commitments Capital commitments Capital expenditure contracted for at the balance sheet date but not yet incurred is as follows 2017 2016 m m
Property plant and equipment 2.5 1.9 Operating leasing commitments  minimum lease payments The Group leases land and buildings plant and machinery under noncancellable operating lease arrangements which have various terms and renewal rights.
The future aggregate minimum lease payments under noncancellable operating leases are as follows 2017 2016 m m
Land and buildings Within 1 year 1.0 2.0 Between 1  5 years 3.0 2.8 After 5 years 17.1 18.3 Plant and machinery Within 1 year 0.2 0.3 Between 1  5 years 0.2 0.2 The Groups most signicant operating lease commitments are long term property leases with renewal terms in excess of 60 years.
38 Contingencies In India assessments have been received for excise duties of 3.8 million and of 1.3 million for income tax matters.
These are being contested on the basis that they are without technical merit.
In India a long running dispute between our local subsidiaries and the Government of West Bengal over the payment of a land transfer tax locally called Salami remains unresolved.
Lawyers acting for the Group have advised that payment of Salami does not apply.
The sum in dispute excluding nes and penalties amounts to 1.4 million.
Since the year end and pending resolution of the dispute which if resolved in our favour will result in the sums being returned the Group has agreed to deposit the tax in seven equal annual instalments in order to allow the normal functioning of the estates.
The Group operates in certain countries where its operations are potentially subject to a number of legal claims.
When required appropriate provisions are made for the expected cost of such claims.
Camellia RandA pp75end Page 85 CAMELLIA PLC NOTES TO THE ACCOUNTS 39 Financial instruments Capital risk management The Group manages its capital to ensure that it will be able to continue as a going concern while maximising the return to stakeholders through the optimisation of its debt and equity balance.
The capital structure of the Group consists of debt which includes the borrowings disclosed in note 30 cash and cash equivalents and equity attributable to equity holders of the parent comprising issued capital reserves and retained earnings.
The Board reviews the capital structure with an objective to ensure that gross borrowings as a percentage of tangible net assets does not exceed 50 per cent.
The ratio at the year end is as follows 2017 2016 m m Borrowings 5.8 6.2 Tangible net assets 365.2 329.7 Ratio 1.59% 1.88% Borrowings are dened as current and noncurrent borrowings as detailed in note 30.
Tangible net assets includes all capital and reserves of the Group attributable to equity holders of the parent less intangible assets.
Financial instruments by category At 31 December 2017 Loans and Available for receivables sale Total m m m
Assets as per Balance Sheet Availableforsale nancial assets  47.0 47.0 Trade and other receivables excluding prepayments 39.7  39.7 Cash and cash equivalents 108.0  108.0 Camellia RandA pp75end Page 86 NOTES TO THE ACCOUNTS CAMELLIA PLC 39 Financial instruments continued Other nancial liabilities at amortised cost Total m m
Liabilities as per Balance Sheet Borrowings 5.8 5.8 Trade and other payables 69.7 69.7
Trade and other payables 0.1 0.1 At 31 December 2016 Loans and Available for receivables sale Total m m m
Assets as per Balance Sheet Availableforsale nancial assets  37.2 37.2 Trade and other receivables excluding prepayments 37.2  37.2 Cash and cash equivalents excluding bank subsidiaries 72.9  72.9
Availableforsale nancial assets  0.2 0.2 Other nancial liabilities at amortised cost Total m m
Liabilities as per Balance Sheet Borrowings 6.2 6.2 Trade and other payables 64.3 64.3
Trade and other payables 0.1 0.1 Camellia RandA pp75end Page 87 CAMELLIA PLC NOTES TO THE ACCOUNTS 39 Financial instruments continued Fair value estimation The table below analyses nancial instruments carried at fair value by valuation method.
The dierent levels have been dened as follows Quoted prices unadjusted in active markets for identical assets or liabilities Level 1.
Inputs other than quoted prices included within Level 1 that are observable for the asset or liability either directly that is as prices or indirectly that is derived from prices Level 2.
Inputs for the asset or liability that are not based on observable market data that is unobservable inputs Level 3.
The following table presents the Groups nancial assets and liabilities that are measured at fair value.
See note 19 for disclosures of biological assets that are measured at fair value.
At 31 December 2017 Level 1 Level 3 Total m m m
Availablefor sale nancial assets Equity securities 43.7  43.7 Debt investments Debentures 3.3  3.3 At 31 December 2016 Level 1 Level 3 Total m m m
Availablefor sale nancial assets Equity securities 36.5 0.2 36.7 Debt investments Debentures 0.5  0.5 Financial risk management objectives The Group nances its operations by a mixture of retained prots bank borrowings longterm loans and leases.
The objective is to maintain a balance between continuity of funding and exibility through the use of borrowings with a range of maturities.
To achieve this the maturity prole of borrowings and facilities are regularly reviewed.
The Group also seeks to maintain sucient undrawn committed borrowing facilities to provide exibility in the management of the Groups liquidity.
Given the nature and diversity of the Groups operations the board does not believe a highly complex use of nancial instruments would be of signicant benet to the Group.
However where appropriate the Board does authorise the use of certain nancial instruments to mitigate nancial risks that face the Group where it is eective to do so.
Various nancial instruments arise directly from the Groups operations for example cash and cash equivalents trade receivables and trade payables.
In addition the Group uses nancial instruments for two main reasons namely To nance its operations to mitigate liquidity risk To manage currency risks arising from its operations and arising from its sources of nance to mitigate foreign exchange risk.
Camellia RandA pp75end Page 88 NOTES TO THE ACCOUNTS CAMELLIA PLC 39 Financial instruments continued The Group including Duncan Lawrie the Groups discontinued banking subsidiary did not in accordance with Group policy trade in nancial instruments throughout the period under review.
A Market risk i Foreign exchange risk The Group has no material exposure to foreign currency exchange risk on currencies other than the functional currencies of the operating entities with the exception of signicant Japanese availableforsale nancial assets.
A movement by 5 per cent.
Japanese Yen with Sterling the Groups equity balance would increasedecrease by 1.0 million 2016 0.8 million.
Currency risks are primarily managed through the use of natural hedging and regularly reviewing when cash should be exchanged into either sterling or another functional currency.
The Group is exposed to equity securities price risk because of investments held by the Group and classied on the consolidated balance sheet as availableforsale.
To manage its price risk arising from investments in equity securities the Group diversies its portfolio.
The majority of the Groups equity investments are publicly traded and are quoted on stock exchanges located in Bermuda Japan Switzerland UK and US.
Should these equity indexes increase or decrease by 5 per cent.
2.2 million 2016 1.8 million.
The Groups exposure to commodity price risk is not signicant.
The Groups interest rate risk arises from interestbearing assets and short and longterm borrowings.
Borrowings issued at variable rates expose the Group to cash ow interest rate risk.
The Groups UK borrowings of 4.6 million are at xed rates.
At 31 December 2017 if interest rates on nonsterling denominated interestbearing assets and borrowings had been 50 basis points higherlower with all other variables held constant posttax prot for the year would have been 0.3 million 2016 0.3 million higherlower.
The interest rate exposure of the Groups interest bearing assets and liabilities by currency at 31 December was Assets Liabilitiestel 2016 m m m m Sterling 40.9 7.5 4.6 5.1 US Dollar 13.1 17.3 Euro 0.9 0.9 0.1 Swiss Franc 0.6 0.8 Kenyan Shilling 26.8 19.2 Indian Rupee 9.4 12.5 0.6 0.1 Malawian Kwacha 0.1 0.1 0.3 0.9 Bangladesh Taka 10.9 9.7 0.1 0.1 South African Rand 0.6 1.5 0.1 Brazilian Real 2.7 2.7 Bermudian Dollar 2.0 0.7 Camellia RandA pp75end Page 89 CAMELLIA PLC NOTES TO THE ACCOUNTS 39 Financial instruments continued B Credit risk The Group has policies in place to limit its exposure to credit risk.
Credit risk arises from cash and cash equivalents deposits with banks and nancial institutions as well as credit exposures to customers including outstanding receivables and committed transactions.
If customers are independently rated these ratings are used.
Otherwise if there is no independent rating management assesses the credit quality of the customer taking into account its nancial position past experience and other factors and if appropriate holding liens over stock and receiving payments in advance of services or goods as required.
Management monitors the utilisation of credit limits regularly.
The Group has a large number of trade receivables the largest ve receivables at the year end comprise 27 per cent.
2016 27 per cent. of total trade receivables.
C Liquidity risk Ultimate responsibility for liquidity risk management rests with the board of Directors.
The Group manages liquidity risk by maintaining adequate reserves and banking facilities by continuously monitoring forecast and actual cash ows and managing the maturity proles of nancial assets and liabilities.
At 31 December 2017 the Group had undrawn committed facilities of 25.8 million 2016 28.5 million all of which are due to be reviewed within one year.
The table below analyses the Groups nancial assets and liabilities which will be settled on a net basis into relevant maturity groupings based on the remaining period at the balance sheet date to the contractual maturity date.
The amounts disclosed are the contractual undiscounted cash ows.
Less than 1 Between 1 Between 2 Over 5 year and 2 years and 5 years years Undated Total m m m m m m At 31 December 2017
Availableforsale nancial assets 0.1 0.2 1.5 1.5 43.7 47.0 Trade and other receivables 37.8 1.9    39.7 Cash and cash equivalents 108.0     108.0
Borrowings 1.8 0.6 3.4   5.8 Trade and other payables 54.9     54.9 At 31 December 2016
Availableforsale nancial assets 0.1 0.1 0.3  36.7 37.2 Trade and other receivables 35.4 1.8    37.2 Cash and cash equivalents 72.9     72.9
Borrowings 1.7 0.6 3.9   6.2 Trade and other payables 56.1     56.1 Included in borrowings due in less than 1 year is 1.2 million 2016 1.1 million repayable on demand.
Camellia RandA pp75end Page 90 NOTES TO THE ACCOUNTS CAMELLIA PLC 40 Subsidiary and associated undertakings Subsidiary undertakings The subsidiary undertakings of the Group at 31 December 2017 which are wholly owned and incorporated in Great Britain unless otherwise stated were
Agriculture
Amgoorie India Limited Incorporated in India  99.8 per cent.
Amo Tea Company Limited Bangladesh i
Lawrie Comrcio e Participaces Ltda.
Incorporated in Brazil Brazil vi Chittagong Warehouse Limited Incorporated in Bangladesh  93.3% holding Bangladesh vii Duncan Brothers Limited Incorporated in Bangladesh Bangladesh vii Eastern Produce Cape Pty Limited Incorporated in South Africa South Africa viii Eastern Produce Estates South Africa Pty Limited Incorporated in South Africa  held by Eastern Produce South Africa Pty Limited South Africa ix Eastern Produce Kenya Limited Incorporated in Kenya  70.0 per cent.
Eastern Produce Malawi Limited Incorporated in Malawi 73.2 per cent.
Eastern Produce South Africa Pty Limited Incorporated in South Africa 73.2 per cent.
Eastland Camellia Limited Incorporated in Bangladesh  93.8% holding Bangladesh vii Goodricke Group Limited Incorporated in India  76.5 per cent.
Goodricke Tech Limited Incorporated in India  99.8 per cent.
Horizon Farms An United States of America general partnership  80 per cent.
Kakuzi Limited Incorporated in Kenya  50.7 per cent.
Koomber Tea Company Limited Incorporated in India India iv Octavius Steel and Company of Bangladesh Limited Incorporated in Bangladesh Bangladesh vii Robertson Bois Dickson Anderson Limited UK i Stewart Holl India Limited Incorporated in India  92.0 per cent.
Surmah Valley Tea Company Limited Bangladesh i The Allynugger Tea Company Limited Bangladesh i The Chandpore Tea Company Limited Bangladesh i The Lungla Sylhet Tea Company Limited Bangladesh i The Mazdehee Tea Company Limited Bangladesh i Victoria Investments Limited Incorporated in Malawi  73.2 per cent.
Zetmac Pty Limited Incorporated in South Africa  55.8 per cent.
Eastern Produce Estates South Africa Pty Limited South Africa ix
Abbey Metal Finishing Company Limited UK i AJT Engineering Limited UK xiv AKD Engineering Limited UK xv Atn GmbH Incorporated in Germany  51.0 per cent.
British Metal Treatments Limited UK i GU Cutting and Grinding Services Limited UK i Unochrome Investments Limited formerly Loddon Engineering Limited UK i XiMo AG Incorporated in Switzerland  51.0 per cent.
Food Service Ash BV Incorporated in Holland The Netherlands xviii Associated Cold Stores and Transport Limited UK i Duncan Products Limited Incorporated in Bangladesh Bangladesh vii Wylax International BV Incorporated in Holland The Netherlands xviii Camellia RandA pp75end Page 91 CAMELLIA PLC NOTES TO THE ACCOUNTS 40 Subsidiary and associated undertakings continued Subsidiary undertakings continued
Banking and Financial Services Duncan Lawrie Limited UK i Duncan Lawrie Holdings Limited UK i Duncan Lawrie International Holdings Limited Incorporated in Isle of Man Isle of Man xix Duncan Lawrie IOM Limited Incorporated in Isle of Man Isle of Man xix Duncan Lawrie Oshore Services Limited Incorporated in Isle of Man Isle of Man xix Dunman Nominees Limited Incorporated in Isle of Man Isle of Man xix Havelock Nominees Limited Incorporated in Isle of Man Isle of Man xix Hobart Place Nominees Limited UK i Mount Havelock Directors Limited Incorporated in Isle of Man Isle of Man xix Mount Havelock Investments Limited Incorporated in Isle of Man Isle of Man xix Mount Havelock Secretaries Limited Incorporated in Isle of Man Isle of Man xix Investment Holding Ash Limited UK i Assam Dooars Investments Limited UK i Associated Fisheries Limited UK i Borbam Limited Incorporated in India  99.8 per cent.
Bordure Limited UK i Duncan Properties Limited Incorporated in Bangladesh Bangladesh vii Eastern Produce Investments Limited UK i Elgin Investments Limited Incorporated in India  99.8 per cent.
Endogram Limited India iii EP USA Inc.
Incorporated in the United States of America USA xiii EP California Inc.
Incorporated in the United States of America USA xiii John Ingham and Sons Limited UK i Koomber Properties Limited Incorporated in India  94.0 per cent.
Lawrie Bermuda Limited Incorporated in Bermuda Bermuda xx Lawrie Group Plc Owned directly by the company UK i Lawrie International Limited Incorporated in Bermuda Bermuda xx Lebong Investments Limited Incorporated in India  94.0 per cent.
Linton Park Plc Owned directly by the company UK i Lintak Investments Limited Incorporated in Kenya Kenya x Longbourne Holdings Limited Bangladesh i Plantation House Investments Limited Malawi xii Incorporated in Malawi  50.2 per cent.
Shula Limited Incorporated in Isle of Man Isle of Man xix Unochrome Industries Limited UK i Western Dooars Investments Limited UK i
Linton Park Services Limited UK i Camellia RandA pp75end Page 92 NOTES TO THE ACCOUNTS CAMELLIA PLC 40 Subsidiary and associated undertakings continued Subsidiary undertakings continued
Dormant companies ACSandT Gloucester Limited UK i ACSandT Grimsby Limited UK i ACSandT Humberside Limited UK i ACSandT Seamer Limited UK i ACSandT Tewkesbury Limited UK i ACSandT Wolverhampton Limited UK i Alex Lawrie and Company Limited UK i Amgoorie Investments Limited UK i AssamDooars Holdings Limited UK i Associated Fisheries Scotland Limited UK xiv Banbury Tea Warehouses Limited UK i Blantyre and East Africa Limited UK xiv Blantyre Insurance and General Agencies Limited Incorporated in Malawi Eastern Produce Malawi Limited Malawi xii Bonathaba Farms Pty Limited Incorporated in South Africa South Africa viii British African Tea Estates Holdings Limited UK i British African Tea Estates Limited UK i British Heat Treatments Limited UK i British Indian Tea Company Limited UK i British United Trawlers Limited UK i BTS Chemicals Limited UK i BUT Engineers Fleetwood Limited UK i BUT Engineers Grimsby Limited UK i Camellia Investments Limited UK i Chisambo Holdings Limited UK i Chisambo Tea Estate Limited UK i Cholo Holdings Limited UK i Craighead Investments Limited UK i David Field Limited UK i East African Tea Plantations Limited Incorporated in Kenya  held by Eastern Produce Kenya Limited Kenya x Eastern Produce Africa Limited UK i Eastern Produce Kakuzi Services Limited Incorporated in Kenya  held by Kakuzi Limited Kenya x EP RBDA Limited Incorporated in Malawi  Eastern Produce Malawi Limited Malawi xii Estate Services Limited Incorporated in Kenya  held by Kakuzi Limited Kenya xi Feltham 1 Limited UK i Feltham 2 Limited UK i Fescol Limited UK i
F.
Sleight and Sons Limited UK i Goodricke Lawrie Consultants Limited UK i Gotha Tea Estates Limited UK i Granton Transport Limited UK xiv Hamstead Village Investments Limited UK i Hellyer Brothers Limited UK i Horace Hickling and Company Limited UK i Hudson Brothers Trawlers Limited UK i Camellia RandA pp75end Page 93 CAMELLIA PLC NOTES TO THE ACCOUNTS 40 Subsidiary and associated undertakings continued Subsidiary undertakings continued
Dormant companies continued Humber Commercials Limited UK i Humber St.
Andrews Engineering Company Limited UK i Isa Bheel Tea Company Limited UK i Jatel Plc UK i Jetinga Holdings Limited UK i Jetinga Valley Tea Company Limited UK i Kaguru EPZ Limited Incorporated in Kenya  held by Kakuzi Limited Kenya xi Kapsumbeiwa Factory Company Limited UK i Kip Koimet Limited Incorporated in Kenya  held by Eastern Produce Kenya Limited Kenya x Kumadzi Tea Estates Limited UK i Lankapara Tea Company Limited UK i Lawrie Bhutan Limited UK i Lawrie Plantation Services Limited UK i Leasing Investments Limited UK i Nasonia Tea Company Limited Incorporated in Malawi Malawi xii North West Proles Limited UK i Octavius Steel and Company London Limited UK i Robert Hudson Holdings Limited UK i Rosehaugh Africa Limited UK i Ruo Estates Limited UK i Ruo Estates Holdings Limited UK i Sandbach Export Limited UK i Sapekoe Pusela Pty Limited Incorporated in South Africa  held by Eastern Produce South Africa Pty Limited South Africa ix SilverthorneGillott Limited UK i SIS Securities Limited UK i Sterling Industrial Securities Limited UK i Stewart Holl Investments Limited UK i The Amgoorie Tea Estates Limited UK i The Bagracote Tea Company Limited UK i The Ceylon Upcountry Tea Estates Limited UK i The Dejoo Tea Company Limited UK i The Dhoolie Tea Company Limited UK i The Doolahat Tea Company Limited UK i The Eastern Produce and Estates Company Limited UK i The Endogram Tea Company Limited UK i The Jhanzie Tea Association Ltd UK i The Harmutty Tea Company Limited UK i The Kapsumbeiwa Tea Company Limited UK i The Longai Valley Tea Company Limited UK i The Tyspane Tea Company Limited UK i Thyolo Highlands Tea Estates Limited UK i Vaghamon Travancore Tea Company Limited UK i Walter Duncan and Goodricke Limited UK i WDG Properties Limited UK i Western Dooars Tea Holdings Limited UK i Camellia RandA pp75end Page 94 NOTES TO THE ACCOUNTS CAMELLIA PLC 40 Subsidiary and associated undertakings continued Subsidiary undertakings continued Summarised nancial information on subsidiaries with material noncontrolling interests Summarised balance sheet Eastern Produce Eastern Produce Kenya Limited Malawi Limited as at 31 December as at 31 Decembertel 2016 m m m m
Liabilities 25.1 20.0 9.5 11.4 Total current net assetsliabilities 3.9 3.6 2.4 0.4
Liabilities 4.1 5.7 12.0 12.4 Total noncurrent net assets 22.4 21.8 27.3 30.0 Net assets 26.3 25.4 29.7 30.4 Eastern Produce Goodricke Group South Africa Limited Limited as at 31 December as at 31 Decembertel 2016 m m m m
Liabilities 1.2 1.1 22.0 19.8 Total current net assets 2.7 4.7 14.9 18.1
Liabilities 1.1 1.5 10.3 10.5 Total noncurrent net assets 5.1 3.8 24.5 20.0 Net assets 7.8 8.5 39.4 38.1 Camellia RandA pp75end Page 95 CAMELLIA PLC NOTES TO THE ACCOUNTS 40 Subsidiary and associated undertakings continued Subsidiary undertakings continued Horizon Farms Kakuzi Limited as at 31 December as at 31 Decembertel 2016 m m m m
Liabilities 0.5 0.2 4.4 3.4 Total current net assets 3.8 3.4 12.7 12.6
Liabilities 0.7 0.8 5.8 6.3 Total noncurrent net assets 7.2 8.1 18.2 17.7 Net assets 11.0 11.5 30.9 30.3 Summarised income statement Eastern Produce Eastern Produce Kenya Limited for year Malawi Limited for ended 31 December year ended 31 Decembertel 2016 m m m m Prot before tax 9.0 4.7 5.2 3.9 Taxation 3.0 1.2 1.8 1.2 Other comprehensive income 2.1 0.2 2.7 Total comprehensive income 3.9 3.7 0.7 2.7 Total comprehensive income allocated to noncontrolling interests 1.2 1.1 0.2 0.7 Dividends paid to noncontrolling interests 0.8 1.9 0.5 0.5 Camellia RandA pp75end Page 96 NOTES TO THE ACCOUNTS CAMELLIA PLC 40 Subsidiary and associated undertakings continued Subsidiary undertakings continued Eastern Produce Goodricke Group South Africa Limited for year Limited for year ended 31 December ended 31 Decembertel 2016 m m m m Revenue 3.7 4.5 84.0 72.7 Lossprot before tax 1.3 0.6 5.4 6.6 Taxation 0.4 0.2 2.1 3.0 Other comprehensive expense   0.7 1.0 Total comprehensive expenseincome 0.9 0.4 2.6 2.6 Total comprehensive expenseincome allocated to noncontrolling interests 0.2 0.1 0.8 0.5 Dividends paid to noncontrolling interests   0.3 0.2 Kakuzi Limited for Horizon Farms for year year ended ended 31 December 31 Decembertel 2016 m m m m Revenue 6.6 4.4 19.2 17.2 Prot before tax 3.8 0.8 6.3 5.5 Taxation 1.4 0.3 1.9 1.4 Other comprehensive income 0.8  2.9 0.1 Total comprehensive income 1.6 0.5 1.5 4.2 Total comprehensive income allocated to noncontrolling interests 0.3 0.1 0.7 2.1 Dividends paid to noncontrolling interests 0.4 0.3 0.4 0.4 Camellia RandA pp75end Page 97 CAMELLIA PLC NOTES TO THE ACCOUNTS 40 Subsidiary and associated undertakings continued Subsidiary undertakings continued Summarised cash ows Eastern Produce Eastern Produce Malawi Limited for Kenya Limited for year year ended ended 31 December 31 Decembertel 2016 m m m m Cash ows from operating activities Cash generated from operations 17.3 7.8 6.0 5.6 Net interest receivedpaid 1.1 0.9 0.1 0.1 Income tax paid 3.4 5.9 1.0 1.4 Net cash generated from operating activities 15.0 2.8 5.1 4.1 Net cash used in investing activities 3.4 0.9 2.9 1.9 Net cash used in nancing activities 2.8 6.2 1.2 1.7 Net increasedecrease in cash and cash equivalents and bank overdrafts 8.8 4.3 1.0 0.5 Cash cash equivalents and bank overdrafts at beginning of year 13.0 14.9 0.4 0.9 Exchange lossesgains on cash and cash equivalents 1.4 2.4 0.1 Cash cash equivalents and bank overdrafts at end of year 20.4 13.0 0.5 0.4 Eastern Produce Goodricke Group South Africa Limited for Limited for year year ended 31 December ended 31 Decembertel 2016 m m m m Cash ows from operating activities Cash generated from operations 0.1 2.0 8.2 6.7 Net interest received 0.1 0.1 Income tax paid   1.6 0.8 Net cash generated from operating activities 0.2 2.1 6.6 5.9 Net cash used in investing activities 1.5 0.5 6.3 3.0 Net cash generated fromused in nancing activities 0.1  1.4 1.1 Net decreaseincrease in cash and cash equivalents and bank overdrafts 1.2 1.6 1.1 1.8 Cash cash equivalents and bank overdrafts at beginning of year 3.9 1.7 2.5 0.6 Exchange lossesgains on cash and cash equivalents 0.2 0.6 0.2 0.1 Cash cash equivalents and bank overdrafts at end of year 2.5 3.9 1.6 2.5 Camellia RandA pp75end Page 98 NOTES TO THE ACCOUNTS CAMELLIA PLC 40 Subsidiary and associated undertakings continued Subsidiary undertakings continued Kakuzi Limited for Horizon Farms for year year ended ended 31 December 31 Decembertel 2016 m m m m Cash ows from operating activities Cash generated from operations 5.0 0.7 9.8 8.5 Net interest received   0.7 0.6 Income tax paid 1.0 1.1 0.9 1.7 Net cash generated fromused in operating activities 4.0 0.4 9.6 7.4 Net cash used in investing activities 0.2  6.2 4.8 Net cash used in nancing activities 1.9 1.5 0.9 0.7 Net increasedecrease in cash and cash equivalents and bank overdrafts 1.9 1.9 2.5 1.9 Cash cash equivalents and bank overdrafts at beginning of year 0.7 2.3 11.3 7.8 Exchange lossesgains on cash and cash equivalents 0.1 0.3 1.2 1.6 Cash cash equivalents and bank overdrafts at end of year 2.5 0.7 12.6 11.3 Associated undertakings The principal associated undertakings of the Group at 31 December 2017 were
Principal Accounting in equity country of Registered date capital operation Oce 2017 % Insurance and banking BFandM Limited Incorporated in Bermuda common stock Bermuda xx 31 December 36.3 United Insurance Company Limited Incorporated in Bangladesh ordinary shares Bangladesh vii 31 December 37.0 United Finance Limited Incorporated in Bangladesh  ordinary shares Bangladesh vii 31 December 38.4 Camellia RandA pp75end Page 99 CAMELLIA PLC NOTES TO THE ACCOUNTS 40 Subsidiary and associated undertakings continued Registered Oces i Linton Park
Maidstone
Kent
ME17 4AB
PO Amguri Haloating  785 681 Dist Sibsagar
India
14 Gurusaday Road
West Bengal
PO Kumbhir Cachar  788 108
India
PO Dibrugarh Dist Dibrugarh
India
Bairro Maruque
So Paulo
22 Kazi Nazrul Islam
Dhaka 1000
Slangrivier Plaas
South Africa ix 7 Windsor Street
Limpopo Province South Africa x New Rehema House Rhapta Road
P O Box 45560 GPO 00100
Kenya xi Main Oce Punda Milia Road
P O Box 24 01000 Thika
Mulanje
Malawi xiii 2520 West Shaw Lane Suite 101
California
USA xiv Craigshaw Crescent West Tullos
AB12 3TB
St Katharines Way
E1W 1DD
D82380
Peissenberg
Germany xvii Altsagenstrasse 3 CH6048 Horw
Switzerland xviii Burg.
4285 BL
Netherlands xix First Names House Victoria Road
Isle of Man IM2 4DF xx 112 Pitts Bay Road
Bermuda
HM08
Camellia RandA pp75end Page 100 NOTES TO THE ACCOUNTS CAMELLIA PLC 41 Control of Camellia Plc Camellia Holding AG continues to hold 1427000 ordinary shares of Camellia Plc representing 51.67 per cent. of the total voting rights.
Camellia Holding AG is owned by The Camellia Private Trust Company Limited a private trust company incorporated under the laws of Bermuda as trustee of The Camellia Foundation the Foundation.
The Foundation is a Bermudian trust the income of which is utilised for charitable educational and humanitarian causes at the discretion of the trustees.
The activities of Camellia Plc and its group the Camellia Group are conducted independently of the Foundation and none of the directors of Camellia Plc are connected with The Camellia Private Trust Company Limited or the Foundation.
While The Camellia Private Trust Company Limited as a Trustee of the Foundation maintains its rights as a shareholder it has not participated in and has conrmed to the board of Camellia Plc that it has no intention of participating in the day to day running of the business of the Camellia Group.
The Camellia Private Trust Company Limited has also conrmed its agreement that where any director of Camellia Plc is for the time being connected with the Foundation he should not exercise any voting rights as a director of Camellia Plc in relation to any matter concerning the Camellia Groups interest in any assets in which the Foundation also has a material interest otherwise than through Camellia Plc.
Gordon Fox is listed as a person of signicant inuence on the Companys register a copy of which has been led at the UK Registrar of Companies.
Camellia RandA pp75end Page 101 CAMELLIA PLC REPORT OF THE INDEPENDENT AUDITORS INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT TO THE MEMBERS OF CAMELLIA PLC Report on the audit of the nancial statements
In our opinion The nancial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the Groups and of the parent companys aairs as at 31 December 2017 and of the Groups prot for the year then ended The Group nancial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union The parent company nancial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and as applied in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006 and The nancial statements have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006.
We have audited the nancial statements of Camellia Plc the parent company and its subsidiaries the Group which comprise The consolidated income statement The consolidated statement of comprehensive income The consolidated and parent company balance sheets The consolidated and parent company statements of changes in equity The consolidated and parent company cash ow statements and The related notes 1 to 41.
The nancial reporting framework that has been applied in their preparation is applicable law and IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and as regards the parent company nancial statements as applied in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006.
Basis for opinion We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing UK ISAs UK and applicable law.
Our responsibilities under those standards are further described in the auditors responsibilities for the audit of the nancial statements section of our report.
We are independent of the Group and the parent company in accordance with the ethical requirements that are relevant to our audit of the nancial statements in the UK including the FRCs Ethical Standard as applied to listed entities and we have fullled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with these requirements.
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sucient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion.
Summary of our audit approach Key audit matters The key audit matters that we identied in the current year were Revenue recognition Fair value of biological assets under IAS 41 Agriculture Impairment of factories and bearer plants Prot on disposal of Duncan Lawrie businesses Materiality The materiality that we used for the Group nancial statements was 1.4m which was determined on the basis of 5% of prot before tax from continuing operations.
Scoping Our scoping provides full scope audit coverage of 98% of the Groups revenue 91% of the Groups prot before tax and 78% of the Groups net assets.
Camellia RandA pp75end Page 102 103 CAMELLIA PLC REPORT OF THE INDEPENDENT AUDITORS Conclusions relating to going concern We are required by ISAs UK to report in respect of the following matters where Key audit matters Key audit matters are those matters that in our professional judgement were of most signicance in our audit of the nancial statements of the current period and include the most signicant assessed risks of material misstatement whether or not due to fraud that we identied.
These matters included those which had the greatest eect on the overall audit strategy the allocation of resources in the audit and directing the eorts of the engagement team.
These matters were addressed in the context of our audit of the nancial statements as a whole and in forming our opinion thereon and we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters.
Revenue recognition The directors use of the going concern basis of accounting in preparation of the nancial statements is not appropriate or The directors have not disclosed in the nancial statements any identied material uncertainties that may cast signicant doubt about the Groups or the parent companys ability to continue to adopt the going concern basis of accounting for a period of at least twelve months from the date when the nancial statements are authorised for issue.
We have nothing to report in respect of these matters.
Key audit matter description The Groups agricultural operations involve a wide range of customer delivery models including auction and retail sales.
Per IAS 18 revenue is recognised when the signicant risks and rewards of ownership have been transferred to the buyer.
Given the complexity of the Groups operations and the terms of business with buyers there is a risk of inappropriate cuto of revenue recognition around the balance sheet date.
The Groups agricultural revenue is included within Sale of Goods of 238.8m disclosed in note 2 to the nancial statements.
Further information regarding the agricultural revenue recognition policy is in the principal accounting policies disclosed in the nancial statements.
How our scope of work responded to the key audit matter We have performed the following procedures in order to address the risk We gained an understanding of the key processes used to record revenue transactions and assessed the design and implementation of controls.
We performed detailed cuto testing of revenue transactions during the period either side of the balance sheet date with reference to the relevant terms of business dispatch or delivery documentation as appropriate.
We examined material journal entries that were posted to revenue accounts and obtained supporting evidence to test the appropriateness of revenue recognition.
We have concluded that revenue is appropriately recognised in the correct accounting period in accordance with IAS18 Revenue.
Key observations Camellia RandA pp75end Page 103 CAMELLIA PLC REPORT OF THE INDEPENDENT AUDITORS Fair value of biological assets under IAS 41 Agriculture Impairment of factories and bearer plants Key audit matter description The group holds 6.6 million 2016 7.2 million of biological assets as current assets.
As required by IAS 41 Agriculture management estimates the fair value of these assets through the use of valuation models and recent transaction prices.
Signicant judgement is required for key assumptions for each model including the lifespan of the plantings yields selling prices costs and discount rates.
The valuation is sensitive to some of the underlying assumptions.
Biological assets are disclosed in note 19 to the nancial statements the valuation is discussed as a key source of estimation uncertainty and the valuation policy is disclosed in the principal accounting policies.
How our scope of work responded to the key audit matter We have performed the following procedures in order to address the risk We gained an understanding of key controls around the valuation of biological assets and assessed the design and implementation of controls.
For a sample of fair value models We assessed the inputs by assessing the historical accuracy of managements forecasts and utilising thirdparty and market data We tested the mechanical integrity of the model.
Key observations From the work performed we are satised that the key assumptions applied in respect of the valuation of biological assets are appropriate.
Key audit matter description The Group holds 216.3 million 2016 232.2 million of property plant and equipment PPandE which includes factories and bearer plants.
Management identied gardens as cash generating units CGUs and performed an annual review for indicators of impairment.
This considered indicators such as underutilisation adverse weather conditions and land use rights.
There is therefore a risk that an impairment is required but not recognised.
PPandE is disclosed in note 17 to the nancial statements the valuation is discussed as source of estimation uncertainty and the valuation policy is disclosed in the principal accounting policies.
How our scope of work responded to the key audit matter We gained an understanding of key controls around the valuation of biological assets and assessed the design and implementation of controls.
We challenged managements assessment as to whether indicators of impairment exist for factories and bearer plants with reference to disease or crop damage sustained generation of operating losses long term commodity price reductions underutilised plant or warehousing loss of key customers long term failure of water or power supply variation in rights to land use signicant changes in tax or foreign exchange rates.
We also challenged managements allocation of assets to individual cash generating units.
We concur with management that no impairment of factories and bearer plants is required.
Key observations Camellia RandA pp75end Page 104 Prot on disposal of Duncan Lawrie businesses Key audit matter description On 19 December 2016 the Group announced that due to lower interest rates and other factors changing the outlook for private banking it would sell most of the Duncan Lawrie business and wind down the remainder.
This process began in December 2016 and each company in the Duncan Lawrie Group prepared their accounts on a basis other than going concern.
The Group completed the disposals during the year and recognised a prot on disposal of 20.3 million as disclosed in note 10 of the nancial statements.
Due to its materiality to the Group and the complexity of accounting and taxation arrangements we have identied the calculation of the gain on the disposal of Duncan Lawrie Asset Management of 19.2 million as representing a key audit matter.
How our scope of work responded to the key audit matter We have performed the following procedures in order to address the risk We gained an understanding of key controls around the accounting for the gain on disposal and assessed the design and implementation of the controls We agreed transactions and amounts to appropriate evidences including legal agreements cash received board minutes and ledger entries We recalculated the gain on disposal and checked the accounting for each aspect of the transaction We involved taxation specialists to assist us in auditing the taxation position resulting from the disposal of the Duncan Lawrie Asset Management business.
In particular we assessed the reasonableness of managements assumption that the intangible assets sold can be treated under the capital gains regime and the resultant conclusion that there is no degrouping charge or required additional disclosure.
Key observations From our work performed we are satised that the asset disposals for the Duncan Lawrie Group have been accounted for and disclosed appropriately in the nancial statements.
REPORT OF THE INDEPENDENT AUDITORS CAMELLIA PLC Camellia RandA pp75end Page 105 Our application of materiality We dene materiality as the magnitude of misstatement in the nancial statements that makes it probable that the economic decisions of a reasonably knowledgeable person would be changed or inuenced.
We use materiality both in planning the scope of our audit work and in evaluating the results of our work.
Based on our professional judgement we determined materiality for the nancial statements as a whole as follows We agreed with the Audit Committee that we would report to the Committee all audit dierences in excess of 0.07 million for the Group and 0.03 million for the parent company as well as dierences below that threshold that in our view warranted reporting on qualitative grounds.
We also report to the Audit Committee on disclosure matters that we identied when assessing the overall presentation of the nancial statements.
An overview of the scope of our audit The Group holds agricultural operations in countries across Africa North and South America and Asia with its principal crops grown in Bangladesh India Kenya and Malawi.
The Groups engineering food service and discontinued banking operations are located in Europe principally in the UK.
Our Group audit was scoped by obtaining an understanding of the Group and its environment including Groupwide controls and assessing the risks of material misstatement at the Group level.
Of the groups 80 principal components 35 were subject to a full audit and 3 were subject to specied audit procedures where the extent of our testing was based on our assessment of the risks of material misstatement and of the materiality of the Groups operations at those locations.
These 38 components represent the principal business units and account for 98% of the Groups revenue and 91% of the Groups prot before tax and 78% of the Groups net assets.
The group engagement team worked from the groups London oce directing and supervising the work of component auditors.
Senior members of the group audit team visited the Bangladesh India Kenya and Malawi components during the current year to discuss the component auditors risk assessment and review documentation of the ndings from their work.
Scope Revenue % Prot before tax % Net assets % Full scope 88 87 68 Specied audit procedures 10 4 10 Review at group level 2 9 22 Rationale for the benchmark applied We have used a prot based measure given the Group is listed and therefore shareholders focus on protability.
The prot is adjusted for the discontinued operations to avoid distortion that could otherwise arise due to nonrecurring items.
We have used net assets measure given that entity is a holding company generating no revenue.
Group nancial statements Parent company nancial statements 1.4 million 0.6 million Materiality Basis for determining materiality 5% of prot before tax from continuing operations.
2% of net assets capped at 50% of Group materiality CAMELLIA PLC REPORT OF THE INDEPENDENT AUDITORS Camellia RandA pp75end Page 106 Other information Responsibilities of directors As explained more fully in the directors responsibilities statement the directors are responsible for the preparation of the nancial statements and for being satised that they give a true and fair view and for such internal control as the directors determine is necessary to enable the preparation of nancial statements that are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error.
In preparing the nancial statements the directors are responsible for assessing the Groups and the parent companys ability to continue as a going concern disclosing as applicable matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless the directors either intend to liquidate the group or the parent company or to cease operations or have no realistic alternative but to do so.
Auditors responsibilities for the audit of the nancial statements Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the nancial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error and to issue an auditors report that includes our opinion.
Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with ISAs UK will always detect a material misstatement when it exists.
Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if individually or in the aggregate they could reasonably be expected to inuence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these nancial statements.
A further description of our responsibilities for the audit of the nancial statements is located on the Financial Reporting Councils website at www. rc. iteauditorsresponsibilities.
This description forms part of our auditors report.
The directors are responsible for the other information.
The other information comprises the information included in the annual report other than the nancial statements and our auditors report thereon.
Our opinion on the nancial statements does not cover the other information and except to the extent otherwise explicitly stated in our report we do not express any form of assurance conclusion thereon.
In connection with our audit of the nancial statements our responsibility is to read the other information and in doing so consider whether the other information is materially inconsistent with the nancial statements or our knowledge obtained in the audit or otherwise appears to be materially misstated.
If we identify such material inconsistencies or apparent material misstatements we are required to determine whether there is a material misstatement in the nancial statements or a material misstatement of the other information.
If based on the work we have performed we conclude that there is a material misstatement of this other information we are required to report that fact.
We have nothing to report in respect of these matters.
REPORT OF THE INDEPENDENT AUDITORS CAMELLIA PLC Camellia RandA pp75end Page 107 Use of our report This report is made solely to the companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006.
Our audit work has been undertaken so that we might state to the companys members those matters we are required to state to them in an auditors report and for no other purpose.
To the fullest extent permitted by law we do not accept or assume responsibility to anyone other than the company and the companys members as a body for our audit work for this report or for the opinions we have formed.
Report on other legal and regulatory requirements Opinions on other matters prescribed by the Companies Act 2006 In our opinion based on the work undertaken in the course of the audit The information given in the strategic report and the directors report for the nancial year for which the nancial statements are prepared is consistent with the nancial statements and The strategic report and the directors report have been prepared in accordance with applicable legal requirements.
In the light of the knowledge and understanding of the Group and or the parent company and their environment obtained in the course of the audit we have not identied any material misstatements in the strategic report or the directors report.
Matters on which we are required to report by exception Adequacy of explanations received and accounting records Directors remuneration Michael Williams FCA Senior statutory auditor For and on behalf of Deloitte LLP Statutory Auditor London United Kingdom 18 April 2018 Under the Companies Act 2006 we are required to report to you if in our opinion We have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit or Adequate accounting records have not been kept by the parent company or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or The parent company nancial statements are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns.
We have nothing to report in respect of these matters.
Under the Companies Act 2006 we are also required to report if in our opinion certain disclosures of directors remuneration have not been made.
We have nothing to report in respect of this matter.
CAMELLIA PLC REPORT OF THE INDEPENDENT AUDITORS Camellia RandA pp75end Page 108 109 CAMELLIA PLC FIVE YEAR RECORDtel 2014 2013 m m m m m
Revenue  continuing operations 298.3 257.9 244.7 238.9 251.3 Prot before tax 27.6 26.5 24.0 22.0 59.6 Prot from continuing operations 13.8 14.1 10.8 8.3 37.5 Protloss attributable to owners of the parent 22.2 10.7 1.4 2.8 28.3 Equity dividends paid 3.6 3.6 3.5 3.5 3.4
