Parity Group plc Report and Accounts Year Ended 31 December 2017 Parity Group plc Dawson House 5 Jewry Street London EC3N 2EX tel www. arity.
Stock code PTY Perivan Financial Printtel60 Parity Group Cover Spread 5mm Spine.
Page 1 Contents Overview 1 Highlights and Headlines 2 Strategic report Chairmans statement 4 About Parity 5 CEO statement 6 Operational and nancial review 8
Board of Directors 14 Directors report 15 Social environmental and ethical policies 18 Corporate governance report 21 Remuneration report 26 Independent Auditors report to 30 the members of Parity Group plc Consolidated income statement 35 Consolidated statement of comprehensive income 36 Statements of changes in equity 37 Statements of nancial position 39 Statements of cash ows 40 Notes to the accounts 41 Corporate Information 76 Parity Group Cover Spread 5mm Spine.
Page 2 1 Driving Change People Led Technology Enabled Parity is a leading partner in driving digital transformation through consultancy technology and people solutions.
Parity helps customers implement technology solutions to transform their business through distinctive integrated and complementary services.
Parity Consultancy Services Focussed on dynamic high growth services with large longterm contracts at higher margins particularly Data Solutions  enabling more eective decision making.
Parity Professionals Targeted recruitment of temporary and permanent professionals with high demand skills to support IT and business change programmes.
The combination of these services ensures Parity remains innovative exible and scalable.
Parity Grouppp01pp13.
Page 1 2 Parity Group plc www. arity.
Report and Accounts 2017 stock code PTY Financial Headlines Strong momentum in Consultancy Services drove double digit prot growth Group revenues of 83.82m 2016 91.76m Signicant growth in Parity Consultancy Services Consultancy Services revenues reecting strategic priorities to build higher value business Consultancy Services revenue up by 78.7% to 9.54m 2016 5.34m reected increased momentum during the year o 110% increase to 5.62m in H2 2017 H2 2016 2.68m o 48% increase to 3.93m in H1 2017 H1 2016 2.66m Parity Professionals Professionals revenue down by 7.9% to 80.04m 2016 86.90m Operating prot before nonrecurring costs up 16.4% to 2.06m 2016 1.77m Improved operating margin to 2.5% 2016 1.9% with increased Consultancy Services revenues and continuing cost and operational controls Consultancy Services contribution up by 26% to 1.15m 2016 0.91m representing 33% of Group contribution 2016 25% Professionals contribution reduced by 13.2% to 2.31m 2016 2.66m with revenue reduction due to increased contractor churn following UK taxation reforms Prot before tax increased by 73% to 1.66m 2016 0.96m reecting improved business mix and no nonrecurring costs in 2017 Basic earnings per share 2.15p 2016 0.87p Improved Balance Sheet with further reduction in net debt Further signicant reduction in net debt to 1.6m 2016 4.4m Cash inow from operations at 3.0m 2016 3.4m with further positive working capital swing On a continuing basis Including intersegment revenues Nonrecurring costs were nil 2016 0.36m Before Group costs depreciation and amortisation and share based charges After tax credit of 0.53m 2016 0.08 tax charge Group costs include Board Directors salaries and costs relating to Group activities and are not allocated to reporting segments Highlights and Headlines Parity Grouppp01pp13.
Page 2 Highlights and Headlines continued Strategic Report Governance Accounts notes and other information Operational Headlines Delivering against growth strategy Successfully rebalancing the Group towards higher margin Consultancy Services which now represents 33% of contribution 2016 25% Improving client base with longerterm revenue visibility Driving improvement in operating margin Clear focus and positioned to grow in attractive markets Strengthening sales and marketing with senior hires to drive focus on data technology solutions to deliver business intelligence and cost modelling applications Increased collaboration across the Group enabling a shift towards managed service projects whilst both divisions maintain expertise in their service lines Continued momentum with further development of Consultancy Services Operational restructure to enable next stage of growth in both Data and Outcome Managed Services Postperiod end awarded signicant contract extensions with ESFA BAT and MCOCS with a total opportunity of Progress in Professionals Strong sales activity illustrated by improvement in KPIs including number of placements and new clients billed in the year Further growth in permanent recruitment of 24% improving branding in high growth Digital Transformation markets Key framework wins with signicant revenue potential managed service for IT recruitment with Primark major brand in the Private Sector Public Sector framework wins with Ordnance survey Scottish Government Dynamic Purchasing System for Digital Services amongst others Key extensions on the Scottish Government Interim frameworks Scottish Water framework and an extension for the service wrap of the Cabinet Oce FastStream graduate recruitment scheme Consultancy Services revenue up by 78.7% to 9.54m Over the past year I have worked closely with Parity on a number of projects.
Each and every time the quality of service and the response times have been excellent.
Service Manager Top 10 UK University Parity Grouppp01pp13.
Page 3 Chairmans Statement
Parity Group plc www. arity.
Report and Accounts 2017 stock code PTY
2017 was an important year for Parity one in which good operational management created continuing improvement despite the risk and headwinds of the IR35 regulatory changes to the taxation of intermediaries which oered a signicant challenge to our industry.
STRATEGY
Importantly the management team has begun further activity to leverage the consulting services side of the business to drive operating margin improvement.
The
Board will seek to accelerate growth in the consulting business whilst sustaining investment in the traditional professional services side of the business.
Strategically Parity believes it has established a clear point of dierentiation from competitors due to the synergy between its consulting and professional services divisions.
We are now highly focussed on exploiting this advantage and we are investing in key hires to optimise the opportunities which we believe exist.
We also believe that a focus on Data Management which we rst identied as an opportunity 18 months ago now has the potential to become a leading oering for the Group in 2018.
RESULTS
It has been particularly pleasing in 2017 to see strong customer relationship management lead to a 73% increase in prot before tax to 1.66m 2016 0.96m.
This was further leveraged by strong working capital management with Group debtor days at a record low of 20 days 2016 29 days.
As a result of strong cash generation we were able to reduce net debt substantially to 1.6m at 31 December 2017 2016 4.4m whilst also investing for future growth.
Key relationships held by the business for many years such as the Education and Skills Funding Agency British American Tobacco and the Ministry of Defence continued to widen and deepen and we were able to announce post close extensions on these contracts.
New clients have been developed such as Primark the high street retailer and this together with the combination of good relationship management and increasing traction from new relationships underpin the outlook for 2018.
DISCONTINUED OPERATIONS The nal legacy from the previous strategy is the Groups bespoke 3D development arm Inition which has for some time been a noncore asset.
It has been held for sale and accounted for as a discontinued operation in these accounts.
Despite having good skills and some specic successes the business had a disappointing year in 2017 due to its lack of scale and lack of synergy with the rest of the Group.
Following a diligent process the Board remains optimistic of a sale of the business to a home where a greater synergy can be achieved and will keep this plan under review.
DIVIDEND
The Board will not declare a dividend at this time but looks forward to restoring a dividend in the medium term.
PEOPLE
We would like to thank the wider team across Parity for all their hard work and commitment in helping the management team drive the business forward.
It is a testament to this hard work that we have been able to make such strong progress with our strategy and achieve such a robust performance despite considerable change.
BOARD
As rst announced on 23 March 2017 I joined the Board as Group NonExecutive Chairman on 27 April 2017 replacing Lord Freeman.
CURRENT TRADING AND OUTLOOK Trading in the current nancial year remains in line with expectations and the Board remains condent in the outlook and continues to target investment to support strategic progress.
We believe our continued drive to rebalance revenues towards the higher margin consulting arm of the business positions us well to deliver both growth and further improvements in protability in 2018 and beyond.
John Conoley NonEx ecutiv e C hairman 9 April telParity Grouppp01pp13.
Page 4 About Parity Strategic Report Governance Accounts notes and other information Parity Group enables people led technology driven change Parity drives digital transformation through consultancy technology and people solutions.
It helps customers transform the way they deliver their services to improve speed eciency and eectiveness.
Its distinctive integrated oering combines The consulting business which has secured large ongoing contracts at higher margins which we have now focussed on dynamic high growth services The recruitment business which provides access to highcalibre and hardtond expertise direct to clients and for Parity managed projects Parity Consultancy Services Helping clients to make the best use of technology to inform better decision making This division is focused on successful project delivery driven by senior industryexperienced consultants.
They guide development of data strategy and deliver data solutions which generate competitive advantage by closing the gap between information and insight enabling more eective decision making.
Parity Professionals Helping clients to recruit the best people to deliver real benet to your business This division provides targeted recruitment of temporary and permanent professionals to support IT and business change programmes.
They ensure clients have both the capacity and capability to transform organisational performance in high growth and rapidly evolving markets.
Group
By aligning both divisions Parity provides an attractive combination of trusted consultancy advice with access to the best delivery expertise.
When necessary we supplement our industry and technology specialists with access to the broader contractor market through Parity
As a clientcentric organisation this enables us to full their needs through a broad range of services ensuring Parity remains innovative exible and very scalable.
The model is now proven and we look forward to accelerating it during 2018 and 2019. www. arity.
Parity Grouppp01pp13.
Page 5 CEO Statement Parity Group plc www. arity.
Report and Accounts 2017 stock code PTY Alan Rommel  Chief Executive Ocer
I am delighted by the continuing improvement in the Groups performance as shown by ve consecutive halves of improving comparative metrics all achieved through selffunded growth.
I would like to thank all my colleagues at Parity for their continued support in delivering this positive run of results.
We have plenty still to do to build on our strategic improvement of the business and we would like to thank our shareholders who have been both patient and supportive during our journey to this point.
Our focus in 2018 is on demonstrating that the consulting arm working in tandem with the recruitment division can deliver sustained growth and protability improvements to the benet of our shareholders.
We aim to grow Group revenues with further focus on the development of the consultancy business driving margins and to manage that growth with continued strong cost management.
Our lead oering in support of our consulting proposition is Data Management  the provision of datadriven insight with which we have already demonstrated success with BAT MoD and in the Education and Utilities sectors.
We believe this is an attractive area to focus on due to strong market growth rates and the impact of an increase in demand for relatively scarce IT and digital specialist skills across the broader market.
The benets of having an aligned recruitment business in Parity Professionals specialising in the sourcing of these niche skills has been demonstrated by the signicant increase in collaboration and intercompany trading.
The Sector Parity as a Group is addressing the needs of a large high demand and growing market.
In early 2018 Mavenlink published a report in conjunction with Research Now detailing the results of a survey of 576 executives Director and above from servicecentric companies in North America Europe and AsiaPacic.
65% of these executives stated that they had had to turn down work in the last 12 months 82% said they did not have enough resources 18% said they did not have the right skill set and 50% said contractorsfreelancerssubcontractors were very important to delivery and a further 31% said they were critical to delivery.
With regards to the market for Consultancy Services data oering more specically research by Gartner in 2017 forecast that the global Business Intelligence BI and Analytics market would grow from 18bn to 23bn by 2020.
Gartner estimated that the global Master Data Management MDM market was worth between 35bn in 2016.
Furthermore the MDM market is expected to experience signicant growth with MarketsandMarkets forecasting a compound annual growth rate of 23.3% to 2020.
In addition market reports indicate that there continues to be a shortage of people with the necessary digital skills to meet the demands of the market.
Clients are increasingly reliant upon agencies and third party suppliers to provide access to the necessary skills or outsource the projects in part or in whole.
We are very well positioned as a Group to exploit this opportunity.
We have a strong reputation with long standing relationships in both divisions established over 45 years of delivering successful projects.
Our clients benet through our deliberate strategy of aligning our services to provide exible access to a substantial resource pool.
Digitalisation of services is a global trend that is creating new business possibilities and new business models for our customers.
Our services are part of the platform that enables this disruption driving their businesses forwards with Gold Partnerships with Oracle and Microsoft positioning us at the forefront of technology developments.
Paritys Competitive Advantage Parity has a proactive and wellreceived integrated model and this underpins our consultancy business with the very best expertise available in the market while maximising our exposure to opportunities.
This enables exibility speed to scale up for new opportunities and cost eective delivery.
Parity can apply delivery models to suit its clients specic needs at every stage of their development lifecycle for example it can provide full delivery of data projects manage project teams to deliver outcomesbased managed services and supply contract or permanent IT skills to supplement internal sta.
This distinctive integrated approach is a key point of dierentiation that we plan to exploit further.
Parity Grouppp01pp13.
Page 6 CEO Statement continued Strategic Report Governance Accounts notes and other information 2017 Performance Our emerging strategy has already driven growth in the more protable Consultancy Services where we also benet from greater visibility of future revenues.
The
Group has continued to make progress in line with expectations simplifying the structure and improving focus on protable activities which are symbiotic beneting both operating divisions.
The management team is pleased to have achieved strategic progress including prot growth supported by signicant revenue growth in Consultancy Services with the benet of greater collaboration with the Professionals Division the exit from noncore loss making Talent Management Services improved new sales KPIs in Parity Professionals against a headwind of disruption caused by changes to the application of taxation to Public Sector o payroll workers IR35 and to lesser extent uncertainty surrounding the impact of Brexit in the UK and strong nancial controls which resulted in strong cash generation and a signicant further reduction in net debt.
2018 Outlook Our recent strong run of securing new clients major frameworks and contract extensions in combination with additional investment in key sales and marketing functions in the rst half leaves us well positioned to benet in future periods.
We have continued to trade in line with expectations in the rst two months of the current year and we remain condent in the improving pipeline of opportunities for both divisions which we expect to benet the second half and beyond.
Alan Rommel Chief Executive Ocer 9 April 2018 I dont know how to truly express our gratitude and appreciation to the Parity team for the extremely high quality eciency and speed of service every time it was beyond exceptional.
Many many thanks Project Manager Manufacturing Client Parity Grouppp01pp13.
Page 7 Operational and Financial Review Parity Group plc www. arity.
Report and Accounts 2017 stock code PTY Alan Rommel  Chief Executive Ocer Roger Antony  Group Finance Director Continuing Operations 2017 2016 Incr.
Decr.
000s 000s % Key Financials Revenue 83815 91764 8.7% Operating profit before nonrecurring items 2056 1766 16.4% Net debt 1632 4386 62.8%
Operating margin % 2.5% 1.9% Net debt  EBITDA ratio 0.7 2.0 The Groups nancial performance demonstrates the encouraging progress in rebalancing the business by growing revenues in the Consultancy Services division which generates greater yields.
Consultancy Services now delivers 33.2% of Group contribution from 11.4% of external revenues.
The 9% decline in Group revenue for the year from 91.8m to 83.8m is predominately a result of the eect of the IR35 reforms on the Professionals division.
A signicant increase in Consultancy Services revenues helped to partially oset the impact.
The improved revenue mix gave rise to a 16% increase in Group operating prot before nonrecurring items non recurring items were nil in 2017 with the Group operating margin improving from 1.9% to 2.5%.
We achieved a second successive year of cash conversion in excess of 100% of EBITDA in 2017 enabling us to reduce net debt from 7.4m at the end of 2015 to 1.6m at the end of 2017 with the net debtEBITDA ratio at the end of year improved to 0.7x 2016 2.0x.
Divisional performance 2017 2016 Incr.
Decr.
000s 000s %
Parity Professionals 80036 86900 7.9% Parity Consultancy Services 9543 5345 78.5% Less intersegment revenue 5764 481 Group revenue 83815 91764 8.7% Divisional contribution Parity Professionals 2307 2660 13.3% Parity Consultancy Services 1148 910 26.2% Total divisional contribution 3455 3570 3.2% Reconciliation of divisional contribution to operating prot from continuing operations 2017 2016 Divisional contribution 3455 3570 Group costs 1045 1383 Depreciation and amortisation 286 365 Sharebased payment charges 68 56 Operating profit before nonrecurring items 2056 1766 Nonrecurring items continuing operations  355 Operating profit from continuing operations 2056 1411 Parity Grouppp01pp13.
Page 8 Operational and Financial Review continued Strategic Report Governance Accounts notes and other information Divisional performance continued The Consultancy Services business has grown in line with our strategic intent with a signicant improvement in revenue of 78.5% to 9.5m 2016 5.3m.
This growth has clearly demonstrated the opportunities in aligning delivery within the business to support rapid scaling in higher value services with inter segment revenues of 5.76m 2016 This revenue growth supported a strong 26.2% increase in divisional contribution to 1.15m 2016 0.91m whilst we also continued to invest for growth.
As anticipated Professionals revenues reduced by 7.9% to 80.0m 2016 86.9m as contractor volumes were impacted by IR35 with a corresponding reduction in divisional contribution of 13.3% to 2.31m 2016 Parity Consultancy Services The consultancy business has undergone a service driven structural reorganisation to improve focus and align sales and delivery functions around core propositions.
This provides clarity and ownership to our client facing activities centred on the provision of data solutions and on delivery of IT projects for our clients.
Datadriven insight is critical to optimising operations and developing informed business strategies for our clients.
Consultancy Services has created a suite of tools and capabilities to support the development of the Data Strategy through to the delivery of Data Analytics.
We help clients understand the key data that they need to gain real insight with a Data Maturity Diagnostic which benchmarks the organisation to dene the start point.
Our
In addition Consultancy Services is still able to use its project management and technical delivery expertise supported by contract stang from Parity Professionals and our internal permanent sta to provide Outcome Managed Services.
We work alongside clients on key projects where they dont have the internal capability or bandwidth oering access to skilled resource sharing delivery risk and saving money in comparison to a full project outsource by managing the exible resource levels to suit project demands.
Growth in the business is creating a much better balance with strong higher margin and higher value sales linked with greater project scale and duration.
Improving visibility of recurring revenues provides a strong foundation from which to build.
We are pleased to report that all key contracts for the business have been extended.
In the past two years the client base has signicantly increased in size to 21 clients and revenues have more than doubled.
We are equally proud to have retained longterm relationships with the MoD and BA T alongside newer signicant wins including the Education and Skills Funding Agency.
The business has successfully tendered for the Dynamic Procurement System for the Scottish Government adding to the award of GCloud and the Digital Outcomes and Specialists frameworks which provide access to our specialist services to Public Sector clients in England Wales and Northern Ireland.
Consultancy Services ended the year with an improving pipeline and stronger visibility on orders with H1 2018 contracted revenues over 33% above H1 2017 contracted revenues 2.8m vs 2.1m measured at the end of
We saw approximately a 10% increase in internal sta days delivered in the year compared to 2016 though by far the greatest increase in delivered days was from contract sta supplied by Professionals.
Whilst this underwrites the benet of the businesses being aligned it has held back operating margin.
The divisions overheads also included talent investment as we continue to develop the divisions proposition in line with the Groups strategy.
Continuing to broaden the client base whilst delivering projects with similar core skills will enable further permanent recruitment activity to support project delivery which will help to improve operating margin.
Parity Grouppp01pp13.
Page 9 Operational and Financial Review continued Parity Group plc www. arity.
Report and Accounts 2017 stock code PTY Parity Professionals Professionals provides targeted recruitment of temporary and permanent professionals with the sta to deliver business change programmes.
We supply a broad range of skills from project management through to the niche skills in Digital Data and Information Security required to ensure our clients can deliver their projects.
Professionals has a strong reputation and a well established client base in the Public Sector .
As highlighted in the interim nancial results contractor volumes were impacted due to the implementation of IR35 reforms applied to Public Sector workers in April 2017.
The average number of contractors on billing in the Professionals division during the year was 6.6% lower at 942 2016 1009 resulting from an initial post IR35 implementation drop in overall contractor numbers of approximately 15% in April.
The remainder of the year has seen volumes recover towards preimplementation levels.
Investment
Underwriting these decisions we are pleased to report an improvement in the key sales activities at the front end which mitigated the increased churn in our contractor base.
Sales activity generated an increase in new candidate placements of 7.7% and the margin generated from these new placements increased by 9.2% in comparison to 2016 driving the growth trend in contractor volumes from April.
We are continuing to invest in training and to build both contract and permanent sales capacity.
Permanent placements help to develop our market knowledge and brand awareness in niche sectors with both the client and the candidate community.
Whilst contract placements provide more predictable longerterm revenue the improvement in our permanent capability has supported our new client acquisition strategy.
We improved revenues on permanent placements by 24% to 657000 2016 530000 targeting niche skills verticals with strong growth in digital skills to the SME sector .
The longstanding contract covering the servicewrap for the Public Sector FastStream Graduate intake was extended for a further 12 months to November 2018.
We extended key Public Sector framework contracts with the Scottish Government GCloud and NonMedical Non Clinical NMNC and continued to build our client base with 120 new clients in the year 80 of which were in the Private Sector.
As with permanent placements we are seeing increased penetration into the SMEs assisting with digital skills which provides a positive balance to maintaining supply to the larger volume clients that provide longerterm visibility.
Professionals improved operational protability with higher conversion of opportunity to placement and performed strongly against our peers.
This is evidenced by our improved ranking in the Recruiter Hot 100 which assesses protability per head across the agency sector .
Our position improved from 59 th place to 43 rd Group Costs Group costs reduced to 1.05m 2016 1.38m as a result of lower headcount and cost savings for example reduced insurance costs through actions taken by management.
The absence of nonrecurring items in 2017 provides greater clarity to the Groups protability.
Taxation
The tax credit on continuing prot before tax was 0.53m 2016 tax charge of 0.07m mainly representing a deferred tax credit in respect of Consultancy Services.
The division previously carried forward an unrecognised deferred tax asset in respect of deductible timing dierences that had not been recognised due to historic nancial performance.
Given the recent turnaround of the division it is considered more likely than not that there will be sucient taxable prots for the timing dierences to be deducted and the corresponding asset was recognised in accordance with IAS We have taken a prudent view on the divisions carried forward tax losses which remain unrecognised but will keep this under review.
The Group did not provide for corporation tax payable in 2017 due to the utilisation of Group relief and the availability of carried forward deductible timing dierences and tax losses.
Discontinued operations Inition was held for sale during 2017 and accordingly its results are presented as discontinued.
During 2017 Inition incurred an operating loss after tax of 0.9m 2016 0.1m.
In addition a noncash charge of 1.1m 2016 nil was incurred in respect of the impairment of the remaining goodwill relating to Inition.
Other discontinued costs include professional advisor fees incurred in connection with actions taken to divest of Inition.
Earnings per share and dividend The basic earnings per share from continuing operations were 2.15 pence 2016 0.87 pence.
The increase is driven by prot before tax growth and the deferred tax credit.
The Board does not propose a dividend for 2017 2016 nil but will continue to review this policy and will seek to restore a dividend in the medium term.
Parity Grouppp01pp13.
Page 10 Operational and Financial Review continued Strategic Report Governance Accounts notes and other information Statement of Financial Position Trade and other receivables Trade and other receivables decreased by 2.4m to 12.0m 2016 14.4m.
The decrease is principally attributable to an improvement in debtor collections in the Professionals division.
Group debtor days calculated on billings on a countback basis decreased to a record low of 20 days 2016 29 days.
Trade and other payables Trade and other payables decreased slightly during the year to 8.3m 2016 9.1m.
At the year end creditor days were 28 days 2016 26 days.
Loans and borrowings Loans and borrowings represent the Groups debt under the assetbased lending facility.
This is a working capital facility and is consequently linked to the same cycle as the trade receivables.
The assetbased lending facility with PNC Business Credit PNC a leading secured nance lender allows for borrowing of up to 15m depending on the availability of appropriate assets as security.
The current facility which has been in place since 2010 was renewed on 1 September 2016 and runs until the end of 2018 at which point PNC have indicated a willingness to renew the facility.
The interest rate applied to borrowings was 2.35% over the prevailing base rate.
Cash ow and net debt The Group generated positive net cash ows from operating activities of 3.0m 2016 3.4m driven by EBITDA and a positive working capital swing with a reduction in debtor days to 20 2016 29 days.
The 3.0m cash generated was after an outflow of 0.7m in respect of discontinued operations and despite the reversal of 0.6m fees in advance carried forward from 2016.
As a result of the positive cash ow net debt reduced to 1.6m 2016 4.4m.
Dened Benet Pension Decit During the year the Group agreed to the trustees proposal to implement liability driven investment LDI.
LDI seeks to reduce volatility of the scheme decit by hedging against liability risks which was considered to be appropriate given the maturity of the scheme 88% of members are pensioners.
At the year end the decit had decreased to 1.06m 2016 1.85m primarily due to a good return on the scheme assets.
Share Capital In May 2017 we cancelled the legacy deferred shares in issue.
The deferred shares were not listed and eectively carried no rights.
As a result share capital reduced to 2.0m 2016 16.3m and a capital redemption reserve of 14.3m was created 2016 nil.
Principal risks and uncertainties The Board maintains a close watch on issues that aect our business markets and the wider economy.
Whilst the markets that we operate in can be cyclical in their nature we take necessary action to mitigate the risk and potential impact prole.
We have provided a sample below Macroeconomic uncertainty Client project decisions can stall and recruitment activity are aected by condence.
We operate a largely elastic cost base with exible resourcing and costs both stang and commissions related to activity levels and managed oces on shorterterm contracts with options to exit.
The expected increase in interest rates has been mitigated with signicantly reduced debt with our debtor days below market norms 20 days.
Brexit
The Group operates predominately in the UK and notwithstanding delays due to the wider macro economic uncertainty is not expected to suer a direct longterm negative impact due to Brexit as it is supported by the strong underlying UK economy.
Demand for the Groups services could reduce as an indirect result of impact of Brexit on the UK economy although Brexit has also driven additional opportunity to the Group with established Public Sector clients creating additional infrastructure in preparation.
Legislation  e.
IR35 GDPR IR35 has increased the churn rate of contractors in the Public Sector as they leave to work in roles which are not assessed to be within IR35 elsewhere in the Public Sector or leave for roles in the Private Sector which are assessed dierently.
Our exposure was greater than most with a high concentration of Public Sector contractors.
Positive net cash ow Reduced net debt to 1.6m 2016 4.4m Parity Grouppp01pp13.
Page 11 Operational and Financial Review continued Parity Group plc www. arity.
Report and Accounts 2017 stock code PTY Principal risks and uncertainties continued Legislation  e.
IR35 GDPR continued Parity tracks changes directly and as an active founding member of the Association of Professional Stang Companies APSCo which lobbies and advises on changes.
An internal working group changed our processes and ensured all stakeholders client candidate and sta were informed through the transition.
The processes are now business as usual sales activities have increased and our broader managed services in the consulting business have expanded to support clients who are also impacted by increased churn.
If the same rules are applied to the Private Sector as rumoured we will be very well prepared.
We are following the same principles with a working group in place focused on GDPR.
Strategy fails to deliver anticipated growth The Groups anticipated growth may not be achievable if the Group is unable to implement its strategy eectively.
The Board seeks to mitigate this through a robust assessment of its opportunities the feedback from its clients and potential clients clear priorities and focus on delivering key objectives and incentivising its team to deliver against those objectives.
Loss of key client accounts A portion of the Groups revenues are dependent on the award of framework agreements as an approved supplier.
It is possible that the Group will lose this status.
We seek to mitigate this through closely monitoring our service level agreements and ensuring the quality of our delivery.
The Group also has a deliberate focus on winning new client framework agreements to continue to diversify its revenue streams.
Staff
The risk is that sta do not have the development or the tools to perform at their best and without a clear career path we experience increased sta turnover.
Parity has invested in additional direct training and training resource for sta.
We support sta to achieve expectations in their roles and there is clarity on the development required.
We support sta by reviewing and acquiring new tools to help them perform at their best and provide competitive remuneration and incentives to support retention.
Our sta engagement survey for 2017 demonstrated improvement in all primary metrics and we score as good as or better than the industry norm in each of these metrics.
In addition the Group has various share plans at its disposal to provide sta with the opportunity to benet from the success of the Group with minimal nancial risk.
Financial
The Group actively monitors its liquidity position to ensure it has sucient available funds and working capital in order to operate and meet its planned commitments and has a credit risk policy that requires appropriate status checks and or references as necessary.
Technology
As an IT services provider the Group relies on its IT telecommunications and infrastructure systems to perform and manage the services we provide to clients.
The Group reviews its own disaster recovery systems regularly in order to minimise the risk of prolonged disruption to systems.
Alan Rommel Chief Executive Ocer 9 April 2018 Roger Antony Group Finance Director 9 April 2018 In all the years I have worked with Parity I have found the level of knowledge and professionalism to be outstanding.
A real pleasure to work with people who always go above and beyond what is expected.
Technical Consultant IT Services Client Parity Grouppp01pp13.
Page 12 13 Parity are responsible for the delivery of costmodelling to determine builtup through life costs for all military capability under the control of the MoD.
Paritys hybrid team of employed and contract consultants have developed the SDS application to validate and manage the core master data.
Our Data Architect is responsible for the Master Data Management of the costing data providing the denition and documentation of the processes governance and standards which are applied to the data.
The programme has been running since 2015 generating 5m in revenues for Parity and identifying in excess of 15m in savings for MoD.
Programme start date 5m In revenues for Parity In savings for MoD CASE STUDY Data Solutions Ministry of Defence MCOCS Parity Grouppp01pp13.
Page 13 Board of Directors Parity Group plc www. arity.
Report and Accounts 2017 stock code PTY John Conoley NonExecutive Chairman John Conoley 57 joined the Board as Group non executive Chairman on 27 April 2017 and is Chairman of the Nominations Committee.
John Conoley brings over 30 years IT industry knowledge and signicant executive and nonexecutive Board level experience of AIM listed technology software and services businesses.
Johns current roles include eServGlobal the innovative mobile nancial services plc where he has served as both NonExecutive Director and is currently Executive
He previously served as CEO of London listed Psion PLC and as a NonExecutive Director of NetDimensions the talent management technology platform.
David Firth NonExecutive Director David Firth 57 was appointed to the Board as a NonExecutive Director on the 14 September 2016 and is Chairman of the Remuneration and Audit Committees.
David was previously the Finance Director of Penna Consulting plc for over 16 years and has a wealth of experience in the people management and consultancy markets.
Prior to that David has held senior nance positions in public companies across a number of sectors including nancial markets recruitment IT services motor retailing and advertising.
He was a member of the nance team at Parity for the period 1993 to 1999 and served as its Group Finance Director from 1995.
David is currently also a NonExecutive Director at Best of the Best plc the online competitions organiser.
Alan Rommel Chief Executive Ocer Alan Rommel 46 is the Chief Executive Ocer of Parity and was appointed to the Board in August 2015.
Alan joined Parity following completion of his degree in Economics and Business Studies from the University of
Alan is a specialist in the sector with over 20 years recruitment experience and a solid understanding of the industry.
He spent 5 years as MD of Parity Resources before promotion in 2013 to CEO of Parity Professionals which was created by combining the recruitment and talent management services.
In addition to holding a number of senior posts within the Parity Group Alan was elected to the APSCo The Association of Professional Stang Companies Executive Committee for 3 terms covering the period 2010  2014.
Roger Antony Group Finance Director Roger Antony 50 is the Group Financial Director and was appointed to the Board on 22 April 2016.
Roger had been with Parity for over 18 years prior to his appointment holding the position of Group Financial Controller since 2006 and prior to that the role of Financial Controller for the International Resources Division.
Roger joined the Group after qualifying as an accountant in 1997 and previously held managerial roles within a variety of listed entity nance departments.
He has a thorough understanding and experience of the IT Services sector.
1 Member of the nominations committee 2 Member of the remuneration committee 3 Member of the audit committee Parity Grouppp14pp34.
Page 14 Directors Report Strategic Report Governance Accounts notes and other information The Directors present their report and the audited accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017.
Principal activities The Group delivers a range of recruitment and business and technology solutions to clients across the public and private sectors.
During the period under review the Group operated through two divisions Parity Professionals and Parity Consultancy Services.
The principal activity of the Parity Professionals division is to provide recruitment predominately interim recruitment and graduate placement services to a diverse range of clients.
In 2017 its clients market sectors included central and local government within the public sector and Utilities FMCG Insurance Oil and Transport in the private sector.
The principal activities of the Parity Consultancy Services division comprise business intelligence solutions technology solutions and business consultancy services.
Parity Consultancy Services delivered its services during the year to central government departments in the public sector and to FMCG and legal clients in the private sector .
Review of business and future developments A review of the business and its outlook including commentary on the key performance indicators of turnover gross margin contribution debtor days and net debt and the principal risks and uncertainties facing the Group is included in the Chairmans Statement CEO Statement and the Operational and Financial Review on pages 4 to 12.
The Groups social environmental and ethical policies are set out on pages 18 and 19. principle is set out below.
Details of nancial instruments are set out in note 20 to the nancial statements.
Each of the above is incorporated in this report by reference.
Group results The Group prot from continuing operations before taxation for the year was 1.66m 2016 0.96m.
After a tax credit of 0.53m 2016 tax charge of 0.08m and a loss after tax from discontinued operations of 2.18m 2016 0.08m the retained prot of 0.01m 2016 0.81m has been transferred to reserves.
The results for the year are set out in the consolidated income statement on page 35.
Dividends
The Directors do not recommend a nal dividend 2016 nil pence per ordinary share.
The total dividends for the year were nil pence per ordinary share 2016 nil pence per ordinary share.
Pension
The Group operates a dened contribution pension scheme.
There is also a dened benet scheme which is closed both to new members and to future service accrual.
Details of the dened benet pension scheme are given in note 22.
Purchase of own shares At the end of the year the Company had authority under the shareholders resolution of 25 May 2017 to purchase in the market 10212402 of the Companys ordinary shares at prices ranging between two pence and an amount equal to 105% of the average of the middle market prices quoted in the ve business days immediately preceding the day of purchase.
No purchases were made during the year.
The Directors intend to seek renewal of this authority at the forthcoming Annual General Meeting.
Board of Directors Biographical information on each of the Directors as at 9 April 2018 is set out on page 14 together with details of membership of the Board committees.
The Companys Articles of Association also require that each Director retire from oce and seek reappointment at the third annual general meeting after the general meeting at which he was last appointed or reappointed.
None of the Directors are due for reelection at the next AGM.
Directors interests The Directors benecial interests in the ordinary share capital of the Company are set out within the remuneration report on page 29.
Parity Grouppp14pp34.
Page 15 Directors Report continued Parity Group plc www. arity.
Report and Accounts 2017 stock code PTY Principal shareholders At the close of business on 6 April 2018 being the latest practical date prior to the signing of the Directors Report the Company had received notication of the following substantial interests representing over 3% of the issued share capital Number of Percentage Ordinary 2p shares Held Philip Swinstead 12043751 11.79 Hargreave Hale Limited 9200000 9.01 Timothy Watts 8700000 8.52 David Courtley 6566031 6.43 Barclays Wealth 5966996 5.84 Citrine Investments 5558766 5.44 Killik Asset Management 5470020 5.36 Interactive Investor 5256734 5.15 Dominion Holdings 4400000 4.31 Hargreaves Landsdown Asset Management 4028543 3.94 Brewin Dolphin 3640084 3.56 Redmayne Bentley Stockbrokers 3558082 3.48 Equiniti Financial Services 3219543 3.15 Capital structure The Company has one class of share in issue ordinary shares of 2p.
The shares are listed on the London Stock Exchange and shareholders are entitled to vote at Company meetings to receive dividends and to the return of their capital in the event of liquidation with the exception of ordinary shares held by the Parity Group plc Employee Share Ownership Trust which are not entitled to receive dividends.
The Directors are not aware of any restrictions on transfers of shares in the Company or on voting rights or of any agreements between holders of the Companys shares which may result in such restrictions.
Going concern The Directors have reviewed the Groups cash ow forecasts for the period to 31 December 2019 taking account of reasonably possible changes in trading performance.
The nancing facility provided by PNC is due for renewal on 31 December 2018 and PNC have formally indicated a willingness in principle to renew at this point.
After making appropriate enquiries the Directors have a reasonable expectation that the Company and the Group have adequate resources to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future.
Accordingly they continue to adopt the going concern basis in preparing the Annual Report and Accounts.
The Company is not party to any signicant agreements that take eect alter or terminate upon a change of control of the Company following a takeover bid except for the nance facility agreement with PNC.
There are no agreements between the Company and its Directors or employees providing for compensation for loss of oce or employment that occurs because of a takeover bid.
Payments to suppliers The Group seeks to abide by the payment terms agreed with suppliers when it is satised that the supplier has provided the goods or services in accordance with the agreed terms and conditions.
In the United Kingdom and Ireland the Group agrees payment terms with its suppliers when it enters into binding purchase contracts.
Corporate social responsibility The Group recognises its corporate social responsibilities and reports on these in a separate statement of social environmental and ethical policies on pages 18 and 19.
This statement covers the Groups Employment Policies Environmental Policy and Health and Safety Policy.
Parity Grouppp14pp34.
Page 16 Directors Report continued Strategic Report Governance Accounts notes and other information Directors and ocers liability insurance and indemnity The Company has purchased insurance to cover its Directors and ocers against their costs in defending themselves in any legal proceedings taken against them in that capacity and in respect of damages resulting from the unsuccessful defence of any proceedings.
Political donations There were no political donations made by the Group during the year 2016 none.
Corporate Governance The Corporate Governance Report on pages 21 to 25 forms part of the Directors Report.
Auditor
Resolutions will be proposed at the Annual General Meeting to reappoint KPMG LLP as auditor to the Company and to authorise the Directors to determine their remuneration.
Annual General Meeting The resolutions to be proposed at the Annual General Meeting together with the explanatory notes will appear in the Notice of the Annual General Meeting which will be circulated with the annual report when sent to all
By order of the Board Roger Antony
9 April 2018 Parity have always exceeded expectations in any management development or service activity.
Data Analytics Lead Manufacturing Client Research and Development Parity Grouppp14pp34.
Page 17 Social Environmental and Ethical Policies Parity Group plc www. arity.
Report and Accounts 2017 stock code PTY Employment policies As a professional services business Paritys strength derives from the commitment capability and cultural diversity of its employees.
The Group aims to adopt a policy of diversity at all levels including selection role assignment teamwork and individual career development.
The Group encourages the participation of all employees in the operation and development of the business by oering open access to senior management including the Executive Directors and adopting a policy of regular communications through road shows and the intranet.
An
Employee Voice forum was introduced during 2017 in order to create more opportunities for upward communication and generation of ideas from all employees.
The forum comprises volunteer sta members from dierent oce locations.
The Group also encourages all employees to participate in an annual employee survey.
The survey is administered by an independent organisation and responses are anonymous.
Results are communicated to sta with proposed actions to address any identied issues.
The results from the 2017 survey reected above average sta engagement and satisfaction and an overall improvement on the 2016 results.
The Group incentivises employees through sharebased incentives and the payment of bonuses and commissions linked to performance objectives.
Where appropriate these objectives are linked to protability.
The Group also has a structured approach to performance appraisal and career development and ensures that every employee has an annual performance review and has clear objectives and performance standards.
Health and Safety The Health and Safety of Paritys employees is paramount.
Group policy is to provide and maintain safe and healthy working conditions equipment and systems of work for all employees and to provide such information training and supervision as is needed for this purpose.
Appropriate written health and safety information outlining the Groups policy in each area is issued to all new employees.
This includes First aid  Each oce has a person qualied in rst aid.
First aid boxes are readily accessible and records kept of all accidents and injuries.
Fire safety  Each oce has an evacuation marshal who will liaise with building management or local emergency authorities as appropriate.
Evacuation assembly points are agreed for every location and a full evacuation carried out every six months.
Fire alarms are tested regularly.
Employees health  Any employee who believes heshe is suering from an illness or condition related to their working environment is encouraged to report this to hisher manager for investigation.
Annual Health and Safety audits are carried out at every Parity oce to ensure high standards are maintained.
As part of its benets package Parity oers a number of benets to support the health and well being of its sta as well as an Employee Assistance helpline.
Social responsibilities It is Group policy to be a good corporate citizen wherever it operates.
As part of the Groups social responsibility employees are encouraged to support national charities and also become involved in their local communities and fund raising events.
The Group encourages employees who undertake volunteer work and rmly believes that the experience gained contributes to the individuals personal development.
Where possible the Group provides exibility with working hours to accommodate such commitments outside of work.
Environmental policy While Parity Groups operations by their very nature have minimal environmental impact the Group recognises its responsibilities to protect and sustain the environment and its resources.
The Groups policy is to meet or exceed the statutory requirements in this area and it has adopted a code of good environmental practice particularly in its main areas of environmental impact namely energy eciency use and recycling of resources and transport.
Transport
Public transport is used whenever possible.
Interestfree
Teleconference facilities are extended to main oce locations to minimise business travel and increase eciency.
PCs portable or desktop are made available to sta where needed to facilitate home working and minimise the need to travel to oces where this is appropriate for their role.
Parity Grouppp14pp34.
Page 18 Social Environmental and Ethical Policies continued Strategic Report Governance Accounts notes and other information Environmental policy continued
Only energyecient computers and peripherals are acquired and they are turned o at the end of each day.
As a normal part of its operations the Group seeks to occupy oces which have ecient building management systems and ideally low energy lighting.
Oce lighting is turned o at the end of each day.
Whenever economically justiable the paper and other consumables used are made from environmentally friendly or recycled material or from renewable resources.
Recycling
The Group makes every eort to recycle oce paper and envelopes.
Appropriate containers are provided at all oces and all paper collected is sent to recycling plants.
The Group also recycles as much other material such as toner cartridges as is economically viable.
When replaced computers and peripherals are oered to employees at market value local schools or charities or sent to recycling plants.
Paper usage The Group constantly strives to implement papersaving practices to reduce wastage.
Examples include electronic timesheets Einvoicing Epayslips and electronic expense claims.
Ethics
Parity Group is committed to maintaining the highest standards of ethics professionalism and business conduct as well as ensuring that we act in accordance with the law at all times.
The Group supports and promotes the principles of equal opportunities in employment and promotes a culture where every employee is treated fairly.
A culture of teamwork openness integrity and professionalism forms a key element of our company principles and values which sets out the standards of behaviour we expect from all our employees.
AntiBribery Act Paritys AntiBribery and Corruption policy is written to follow the UK regulatory requirements in relation to the AntiBribery Act.
The policy has Executive Director ownership and is available on the Groups intranet.
Client and supplier arrangements are regularly reviewed and guidance forms part of each employees induction.
Modern Slavery Policy Parity Group has a zerotolerance approach to modern slavery and is committed to acting ethically and with integrity in all its business dealings and relationships and to implement and enforce eective systems and controls to ensure modern slavery is not taking place anywhere in its own business or its supply chain.
The following actions have been taken during 2017.
Supply Chain Review  we continue to take positive steps to improve supply chain transparency.
As our supplier chain is mainly made up of UK based suppliers of professional services computer software and equipment oce supplies and our contractor and associate workers we believe that we operate a supply chain with a very low inherent risk of slavery and human tracking potential.
Nevertheless we have amended our contractual clauses with suppliers to ensure their suitability and ongoing compliance to the Modern Slavery Act 2015.
We will continue to assess and manage the risk in our supply chain as part of an annual review of our policy.
Sta Training  we have provided training to all our employees on the Modern Slavery Act 2015 in order to provide general awareness across the company and ensure all employees are aware of their responsibilities.
This training has now been built into our sta induction processes to ensure it is provided to all new recruits coming on board.
Id say the best vendor I ever have the pleasure of working with.
Technical Consultant IT Services Client Parity Grouppp14pp34.
Page 19 20 Parity Group plc www. arity.
Report and Accounts 2017 stock code PTY
Candidate
Server Engineer I have been working with Parity for several months.
They are very ecient and provide an exceptional service.
I have dealt with several sta from Parity all of which were friendly approachable helpful and understanding.
Demonstrated professionalism and passion and dependable.
I appreciate their quick response eciency and prompt followup to my requests.
Parity Grouppp14pp34.
Page 20 Corporate Governance Report Strategic Report Governance Accounts notes and other information
As the Company is AIM listed it is not required to follow the provisions of The UK Corporate Governance Code published by the Financial Reporting Council the Code.
However  the Board is committed to maintaining high standards of corporate governance and seeks to follow the Code as far as is practicable and appropriate having regard to the size and resources of the Company and to the Quoted Companies Alliance Corporate Governance Code for Small and MidSize Quoted Companies.
Accordingly this report sets out how the Company applies elements of the Code that are deemed appropriate.
Going concern The Board conrms that after making enquiries the Directors have a reasonable expectation that the Company and the Group have adequate resources to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future.
For this reason they continue to adopt the going concern basis in preparing the accounts.
Further details are outlined in the Directors Report on pages 15 to 17.
The workings of the Board and its Committees The Board At the date of this report the Board comprises the Non Executive Chairman John Conoley NonExecutive Director David Firth Group Chief Executive Alan Rommel and Group Finance Director Roger Antony.
During the year John Conoley was appointed NonExecutive Chairman on 27 April 2017 with Lord Freeman stepping down from this role on the same date.
The table on page 28 sets out the dates of tenure of the current Directors on the Board.
The
Directors biographies which are set out on page 14 illustrate the range of business backgrounds skills independence and experience contributed by each Board member.
NonExecutive Chairman The NonExecutive Chairman John Conoley is responsible for the leadership of the Board ensuring its eectiveness on all aspects of its role.
This includes ensuring that Board meetings are held in an open manner that the Directors receive accurate timely and clear information and allowing sucient time for agenda items to be discussed.
Annual appraisals are held of each Director providing feedback and reviewing any training or development needs.
The Chairman is also responsible for eective communications with shareholders and relaying any shareholder concerns to the Directors.
During the year the NonExecutive Chairman met with the other Non Executive Director without the Executive Directors being present.
Senior Independent Director David Firth acted as the de facto Senior Independent Director during 2017.
He was an additional contact point for shareholders if they had reason for concern when contact through the normal channels of the Executive Directors and Chairman had failed to resolve their concerns or where such contact was inappropriate.
Reelection of Directors Directors appointed since the last annual General Meeting and those retiring by rotation will submit themselves for election or reelection at the next Annual General Meeting as set out in the Directors report on page 15 and in the separate Notice of Annual General Meeting sent to all Shareholders.
The NonExecutive Chairman conrms that the performance of each Director continues to be eective and the individuals continue to demonstrate commitment to their role.
Company Secretary All Directors have access to the advice and services of the Company Secretary who is responsible for ensuring that Board procedures applicable rules and regulations are observed.
There is an agreed procedure for Directors to obtain independent professional advice if necessary at the Companys expense.
New Directors receive a comprehensive formal and tailored induction to the Groups operations including corporate governance the legislative framework and visits to Group premises.
Board meetings The Board has meetings scheduled regularly throughout the year to review and approve the Groups strategy and to monitor progress against set objectives.
Additional meetings are also held as business dictates.
A table showing the number of meetings of the Board and its Committees held during the year and attendance at those meetings by each Board member is set out on page 22.
The Board maintains close dialogue by email telephone and conference calls between scheduled meetings.
The
Board has a formal schedule of matters reserved for its specic approval which was reviewed during the year and includes a review of Group strategic operational and nancial matters such as proposed acquisitions and divestments.
It approves the annual accounts and interim report the annual budget signicant transactions major capital expenditure and reviews the eectiveness of the system of internal control and the risks faced by the
It covers all controls including nancial operational compliance and risk management.
During
2017 the Board continued to regularly track potential risks associated with Brexit.
Parity Grouppp14pp34.
Page 21 Corporate Governance Report continued Parity Group plc www. arity.
Report and Accounts 2017 stock code PTY Board meetings continued The Board delegates specic responsibilities to three Committees The Audit Committee The Remuneration Committee and the Nomination Committee.
Authority is delegated to management through Group authorisation limits on a structured basis ensuring that proper management oversight exists at the appropriate level.
The
Group authorisation levels were reviewed by the Board in December 2017.
All members of the Board are normally supplied in advance of meetings with the agenda and supporting papers covering the matters which are to be considered.
If unable to attend a meeting the Director is able to provide feedback to the Chairman the Chair of the Committee or the Company Secretary and their comments are then communicated at the meeting.
A procedure exists for the Directors in the furtherance of their duties to take independent professional advice if required.
If a Director has any concerns about a particular issue such concerns are recorded in the minutes of the relevant Board meeting.
In the event that a Director resigned over a matter that was of concern to him such concerns would be communicated to the other Directors.
All Directors have the opportunity to undertake relevant training.
The continuing operational businesses are divided into two separate divisions Parity Professionals and Parity Consultancy Services.
Inition is a noncore separate business oering acquired under the previous strategy and was held for sale during 2017.
Each division or business oering has a Managing Director .
The operational board comprises the Chief Executive Ocer the Group Finance Director and the divisional Managing Directors.
The operational board meetings are held monthly and are attended by other senior management as appropriate.
Regular updates are provided by the heads of Shared Service functions such as Marketing HR and IT.
Any key issues arising from these meetings are reported to the main Board.
NonExecutive Directors are invited to visit the Groups premises and are encouraged to have an informal dialogue with the divisions.
Performance evaluation The Board undertook an annual evaluation of its own performance and that of its Committees and individual Directors for the year.
The performance of the Non Executive Chairman was reviewed by the other NonExecutive Director .
The outcome of the evaluation of the Board is reviewed by the Board as a whole and the results are used to assist the Board in developing its approach going forward.
Board balance and independence The Board has a balance of Executive and NonExecutive Directors such that no individual or small group of individuals can dominate the Boards decision making.
The
Board has a range of backgrounds and skills.
The Non Executive Directors ensure that independent judgement is brought to Board discussions and decisions.
The Board are aware of the importance of attaining greater diversity amongst its members.
The Board considers that there are no relationships or circumstances which are likely to aect the independent judgement of the NonExecutive Directors.
Attendance at board and committee meetings During the year 11 scheduled Board meetings and 5 ad hoc Board meetings were convened as necessary to deal with various matters.
Details of attendance at Board meetings is summarised below.
Committee attendance is shown for Committee members only.
Board Audit Nomination Remuneration Number held Number attended John Conoley 1111 22  11 David Firth 1316 33 11 33 Alan Rommel 1616 Roger Antony 1616 Lord Freeman 1 All Directors who were members of the Board at the time attended the Groups Annual General Meeting on 25 May 2017 2 Appointed to the Board 27 April 2017 3 Stepped down from the Board 27 April telParity Grouppp14pp34.
Page 22 Corporate Governance Report continued Strategic Report Governance Accounts notes and other information
The Audit Remuneration and Nomination Committees of the Board each have formal written terms of reference.
These terms of reference are made available on request to the Company Secretary can be inspected at the Companys head oce and are also available in the Corporate Governance section of the Groups website.
Audit Committee David Firth was appointed Chair of the Audit Committee on 6 October 2016.
Details of Davidss recent and relevant nancial experience are set out in his biography on page 14.
John Conoley was appointed as the other member of the Audit Committee after Lord Freeman stepped down on 27 April 2017.
The Audit Committee meets three times a year.
Audit committee meetings are attended by the external auditors and all of the Executive Directors at the invitation of the Committee.
The external auditors meet separately with the Audit Committee on request without the presence of the Executive Directors to ensure open communication.
The Audit Committee reviews and as appropriate actively engages in the processes for nancial reporting internal control risk assessment audit compliance assurance and considers the independence of the Groups external auditor as well as the eectiveness of the Groups system of accounting its internal nancial controls external audit process and risk management.
The Audit Committees principal terms of reference include the oversight responsibilities described in the foregoing paragraph reviewing compliance with laws regulations and the Groups code of conduct and policies monitoring the integrity of the Groups nancial statements and announcements relating to the Groups nancial performance and reviewing signicant nancial reporting judgements changes in accounting policies and practices signicant adjustments resulting from the audit and the application of the going concern assumption reviewing the ndings of the external audit with the external auditor making recommendations to the Board for it to put to the shareholders for their approval regarding the appointment reappointment and removal of the external auditor and approving the remuneration and terms of engagement of the external auditor monitoring and reviewing the external auditors independence and the eectiveness of the audit process developing and implementing policy on the engagement of the external auditors to supply non audit services reviewing the risk management framework and risk assessments reviewing the Groups arrangements for its employees to raise concerns in condence about possible wrong doing in nancial reporting or other matters and reviewing and monitoring the adequacy and eectiveness of the Companys internal nancial controls internal control and risk management systems.
In order to ensure an appropriate balance between cost eectiveness objectivity and independence the Audit Committee reviews the nature of all services including nonaudit work provided by the external auditor each year.
The Group normally expects to retain the external auditor to provide nonaudit related services including work in relation to shareholder circulars and similar services.
The external auditor provided nonaudit related services during 2017 details of which are set out in note 3 to the accounts.
Remuneration Committee The Remuneration Committee comprises both Non Executive Directors and is chaired by David Firth.
John
Conoley became a member after Lord Freeman stepped down on 27 April 2017.
Details of the responsibilities of the Remuneration Committee are set out in the remuneration report on pages 26 to 29.
Where necessary specialist external consultants are used to assist the
Nomination Committee The Nomination Committee comprises both NonExecutive Directors and is chaired by John Conoley.
John Conoley was appointed Chairman after Lord Freeman stepped down on 27 April 2017.
David Firth is the other member of the Nomination committee.
The Committee is responsible for proposing candidates for appointment to the Board having due regard to the balance and structure of the Board as well as succession planning.
During the year the Committee considered the size composition skills experience and independence of the Board having regard to the requirements of the business.
The process for new Board appointments includes an initial search preliminary interviews and discussions.
Following this process recommendations are then made by the Committee to the Board on merit against objective criteria.
Where necessary external recruitment consultants are used to assist the process.
Parity Grouppp14pp34.
Page 23 Corporate Governance Report continued Parity Group plc www. arity.
Report and Accounts 2017 stock code PTY Investor relations The Company engages where possible in regular dialogue with its major Shareholders through presentations and meetings after the announcement of the Groups full year and interim results.
Private and institutional shareholders are given an opportunity to communicate directly with the Board at the Annual General Meeting.
Shareholders queries received via the Company Secretarys email address at email.
Groups head oce are responded to in person by the Company Secretary or by another appropriate employee.
All members of the Board usually attend the Annual General Meeting.
The chairmen of the Audit Remuneration and Nomination Committees will normally be available to answer Shareholders questions at that meeting.
Notice of the Meeting is posted to Shareholders with the report and accounts no fewer than 21 clear days prior to the date of the Annual General Meeting.
The information sent to Shareholders includes a summary of the business to be covered at the Annual General Meeting where a separate resolution is proposed for each substantive matter.
The Groups annual report and accounts interim report and other stock exchange announcements are published on the Groups website at www. arity.
Annual Report The Annual Report is designed to present a fair balanced and understandable view of the Groups activities and prospects.
The Operating and Financial Review provides an assessment of the Groups aairs and position.
The Annual Report is sent to all Shareholders on the Register.
Statement of Directors responsibilities in respect of the Annual Report and the nancial statements The Directors are responsible for preparing the Annual Report and the Group and parent Company nancial statements in accordance with applicable law and regulations.
Company law requires the Directors to prepare Group and parent Company nancial statements for each nancial year.
As required by the AIM Rules of the London Stock Exchange they are required to prepare the Group nancial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as adopted by the EU IFRSs as adopted by the EU and applicable law and have elected to prepare the parent Company nancial statements on the same basis.
Under company law the Directors must not approve the nancial statements unless they are satised that they give a true and fair view of the state of aairs of the Group and parent Company and of their prot or loss for that period.
In preparing each of the Group and parent Company nancial statements the Directors are required to select suitable accounting policies and then apply them consistently make judgements and estimates that are reasonable relevant and reliable state whether they have been prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the EU assess the Group and parent Companys ability to continue as a going concern disclosing as applicable matters related to going concern and use the going concern basis of accounting unless they either intend to liquidate the Group or the parent Company or to cease operations or have no realistic alternative but to do so.
The Directors are responsible for keeping adequate accounting records that are sucient to show and explain the parent Companys transactions and disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the nancial position of the parent Company and enable them to ensure that its nancial statements comply with the Companies Act 2006.
They are responsible for such internal control as they determine is necessary to enable the preparation of nancial statements that are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error and have general responsibility for taking such steps as are reasonably open to them to safeguard the assets of the Group and to prevent and detect fraud and other irregularities.
Under applicable law and regulations the Directors are also responsible for preparing a Strategic Report and a Directors Report that complies with that law and those regulations.
Website publication The Directors are responsible for ensuring the annual report and the nancial statements are made available on the Parity Group website.
Financial statements are published on the Companys website in accordance with AIM company requirements governing the preparation and dissemination of nancial statements.
The maintenance and integrity of the Companys website is the responsibility of the Directors.
The Directors responsibility also extends to the ongoing integrity of the nancial statements contained therein.
Parity Grouppp14pp34.
Page 24 Corporate Governance Report continued Strategic Report Governance Accounts notes and other information Internal control The Board is ultimately responsible for the Groups system of internal control and for reviewing its eectiveness and is assisted in this respect by the Audit Committee.
Such a system is designed to manage rather than eliminate the risk of failure to achieve business objectives and can only provide reasonable and not absolute assurance against material misstatement or loss.
The Groups system of internal control which materially complies with the Financial Reporting Councils Risk Management Internal Control and Related Financial and Business Reporting September 2014 guidance has been in place throughout the year and up to the date of this report.
The Directors conrm that they have reviewed the eectiveness of the Groups system of internal controls during the year.
The Group did not consider it necessary to have a separate internal audit function but will continue to keep the need under review.
Risk management
The Group is exposed through its operations to the following nancial risks Interest rate risk Foreign currency risk Liquidity risk and Credit risk.
The policies for managing these risks are set by the Board following recommendations from the Group Finance
Certain risks are managed centrally while others are managed locally following guidelines communicated from the centre.
The policies for each of the above risks and the nature and extent of those risks are described in detail in note 20 to the nancial statements.
Other risks and uncertainties are discussed in the Operational and Financial Review on pages 11 and 12.
Each of the persons who is a Director as at the date of approval of this annual report conrms that so far as the Director is aware there is no relevant audit information of which the Companys auditors are unaware and the Director has taken all the steps that he ought to have taken as a Director in order to make himself aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that the Companys auditors are aware of that information.
This conrmation is given and should be interpreted in accordance with the provisions of s418 of the Companies Act 2006.
Roger Antony Company Secretary 9 April telParity Grouppp14pp34.
Page 25 Remuneration Report
Parity Group plc www. arity.
Report and Accounts 2017 stock code PTY Remuneration Committee The Remuneration Committee comprises David Firth as Chairman and John Conoley who joined on 27 April 2017.
Lord
Freeman was Chairman in the year until 27 April 2017 when he stepped down.
Directors are excluded from discussions about their personal remuneration.
The committee is responsible for reviewing the Groups remuneration policy the emoluments of the Executive Directors and other senior management and the Groups pension arrangements and for making recommendations thereon to the Board.
The committee also makes recommendations to the Board in respect of awards of options under the Senior Executive Share Option Plan Executive Share Option Plan and Sharesave Schemes and in respect of employees who should be invited to participate in the Coinvestment Scheme.
It also reviews the terms of service contracts with senior employees and Executive Directors and any compensation arrangements resulting from the termination by the Company of such contracts.
The committee has access to external advisors to assist it with ensuring that salary and benet packages are competitive and appropriate.
In addition committee members keep themselves fully informed of all relevant developments and best practice by reading the circulars on remuneration and related matters that the Company receives from its advisers and if appropriate by attending seminars.
Pension advice is provided by Cartwright Group Limited in relation to the dened benet scheme and advice is taken on an ad hoc basis in relation to the dened contribution scheme.
Advice on share options and Coinvestment Plans is provided by Pinsent Masons who also provide other legal services to the Group.
The Board determines the remuneration of all NonExecutive Directors within the limits set out in the Companys Articles of Association.
Nonexecutive Directors are not involved in any decisions about their own remuneration.
Details of Directors remuneration for the year ended 31 December 2017 are set out in the table on page 28.
Remuneration policy Parity aims to recruit motivate and retain high calibre executives capable of achieving the objectives of the Group and to encourage and reward appropriately superior performance in a manner which enhances shareholder value.
Accordingly the Group operates a remuneration policy which ensures that there is a clear link to business strategy and a close alignment with shareholder interests and current best practice and aims to ensure that senior executives are rewarded fairly for their respective individual contributions to the Groups performance.
The four key elements of the remuneration package of senior executives including Executive Directors in the Group in 2017 were basic annual salary and benets in kind performance bonuses long term incentives including share options and pension arrangements.
Salaries and benets are reviewed annually.
In order to assess the competitiveness of the pay and benets packages oered by the Group comparisons are made to those oered by similar companies.
These are chosen with regard to the size of the company turnover prots and employee numbers the diversity and complexity of their businesses the geographical spread of their businesses and their growth expansion and change prole.
Performance bonus The terms of an incentive bonus for Executive Directors are agreed annually.
For 2017 performance targets were set but were not met and no performance bonuses were earned by or paid to Executive Directors in 2017.
Share option schemes During 2017 the Group operated two types of share option scheme An Executive Share Option Plan and a Savings Related Share Option Scheme Sharesave Scheme.
Executive share option plans The Group operates both an HMRC Approved Share Option Plan and an Unapproved Share Option Plan for options awarded to UK employees in excess of the HMRC limit of 30000.
Share options are granted to Executive Directors and other senior employees over a period of time and according to performance.
The rules of the Executive Share Option Plans allow for annual grants to be awarded equivalent to a value of up to one times salary or up to two times salary in exceptional circumstances.
A limit of 15% of the issued share capital of the Company in a ten year period on a rolling basis is applicable to the headroom available to award options over the life of the Schemes.
Rules of the current Plans expire in May 2019.
The terms and conditions of existing share options have not been varied in the year.
Parity Grouppp14pp34.
Page 26 Remuneration Report continued Strategic Report Governance Accounts notes and other information Executive share option plans continued Executive Share Options granted after 2004 are exercisable in normal circumstances between three and ten years after the date of grant.
The exercise of the options is conditional upon the share price either outperforming the average Total Shareholder Return performance of a comparator group comprising a basket of companies in the IT services sector or outperforming a target price.
The exercise of share options is satised either through shares issued by the Company or through purchases in the market via the Employee Benet Trust.
In the event that an employee resigns the options that they hold will lapse.
Options are granted at nil cost.
The option exercise price is set at the closing midmarket share price on date of grant without any discount.
Share options awarded to the Executive Directors are disclosed in the table under the section Directors Remuneration within the Remuneration Report on page 29.
All of the options awarded to the Executive Directors have vested or lapsed with the exception of the following grant On 19 September 2016 1500000 share options were awarded under this scheme to Alan Rommel and 800000 share options were awarded to Roger Antony.
The exercise price of the options is 8.62 pence and the share options granted have been divided into thirds with each third being subject to the following performance condition To exercise the rst third 13 in total of the share options awarded the share price must be greater than or equal to 10.74 pence for 5 consecutive days.
To exercise the second third 23 in total of the share options awarded the share price must be greater than or equal to 12.93 pence for 5 consecutive days.
To exercise the nal third 100% in total of the share options awarded the share price must be greater than or equal to 15.08 pence for 5 consecutive days.
All of the share options awarded to the Executive Directors vest in 3 years from the grant date and lapse in 10 years from the grant date if not exercised.
Sharesave schemes All UK employees including the Executive Directors are eligible to participate in the Groups savings related option scheme Sharesave Scheme which enables them to subscribe for ordinary shares in the Company.
Options granted under the Sharesave Scheme do not have performance related conditions attached to them.
There were no grants made under the Sharesave scheme in 2017.
Share price The Parity Group plc midmarket share price on 31 December 2017 was 9.375 pence.
During the period 1 January to 31 December 2017 shares traded at market prices between 7.625 pence and 12.875 pence.
Directors pension information Alan Rommel and Roger Antony are entitled to a contributory company pension contribution of 5% of basic salary.
NonExecutive Directors remuneration The Board determines the remuneration of the NonExecutive Directors with the benet of independent advice when required.
The fees are set at a level which will attract individuals with the necessary experience and ability to make a signicant contribution to the Group and are benchmarked against those fees paid by other UK listed companies.
The NonExecutive Directors do not receive bonuses or pension contributions and are not eligible for grants under any of the Groups share incentive schemes.
They are entitled to be reimbursed for reasonable expenses incurred by them in carrying out their duties as Directors of the Company.
Service contracts and letters of appointment The Groups policy is that no Director has a service contract with a notice period of greater than one year or has provision for predetermined compensation on termination which exceeds one years salary bonus and benets in kind.
NonExecutive
Directors have letters of appointment which set out the terms of their appointments.
All Board appointments are subject to the Companys articles of association.
Parity Grouppp14pp34.
Page 27 Remuneration Report continued Parity Group plc www. arity.
Report and Accounts 2017 stock code PTY Service contracts and letters of appointment continued Contractual arrangements for current Directors are summarised below
Director Contract date Notice period payment John Conoley 27 April 2017 3 months 3 months rolling David Firth 31 May 2016 na na Alan Rommel 12 August 2015 12 months 12 months rolling Roger Antony 22 April 2016 6 months 6 months rolling 1 Unless otherwise specied the appointment of NonExecutive Directors is terminable at the will of the parties.
Other NonExecutive posts Subject to the approval of the Board the Executive Directors may hold external NonExecutive appointments.
The Group believes that such appointments provide a valuable opportunity in terms of personal and professional development.
Fees derived from such appointments may be retained by the Executive Director concerned.
Directors remuneration The remuneration of the Directors who served during the year is set out below.
Compensation Company Share Salary for loss Total pension Based Fees Benefits of office emoluments contributions
Executive Directors A Rommel R Antony NonExecutive Directors John Conoley Lord Freeman D Firth Total emoluments Compensation Company Share Salary for loss Total pension Based Fees Benets of oce emoluments contributions
Executive Directors R Antony M Aspinall NonExecutive Directors Lord Freeman 40   40 D Firth N Ransome Total emoluments Notes J Conoley was appointed as a Board Director on 27 April 2017 Lord Freeman resigned as a Board Director on 27 April 2017 R Antony was appointed as a Board Director on 22 April 2016 M Aspinall resigned as a Board Director on 22 April 2016 D Firth was appointed as a Board Director on 14 September 2016 N Ransome resigned as a Board Director on 6 October 2016 Company pension contributions disclosed in the table above represent the contractual pension entitlements due to the Directors of the company.
Parity Grouppp14pp34.
Page 28 Remuneration Report continued Strategic Report Governance Accounts notes and other information Executive Directors share options Lapsed Exercise As at Surrendered Exercised Awarded As at price 1 January in the in the in the 31 December Exercise per year year year 2017 period share Alan Rommel Executive share option plan 150000 150000 20122019 0.0900 150000 150000 20132020 0.0875 100000 100000 20132020 0.0750 160000 160000 20162023 0.2650 600000 600000    na 0.2112 1500000 1500000 20192026 0.0862
2660000 600000   2060000 Roger Antony Executive share option plan 100000 100000 20132020 0.0875 20000 20000 20162023 0.2650 160000 160000    na 0.2112 800000   800000 20192026 0.0862
1080000 160000   920000
3740000 760000   2980000 Directors interests in shares The benecial interests of the Directors who served during the year and their families in the ordinary share capital of the Company are shown below.
At 31 December Shareholding as at 2016 or date of 31 December 2017 appointment % issued or date of % issued if later share capital resignation share capital John Conoley Lord Freeman 6250 0.01 6250 0.01 David Firth 100000 0.10 100000 0.10 Alan Rommel 210632 0.21 410632 0.40 Roger Antony 100000 0.10 100000 0.10 For and on behalf of the Board David Firth Chairman of The Remuneration Committee 9 April telParity Grouppp14pp34.
Page 29 30 Parity Group plc www. arity.
Report and Accounts 2017 stock code PTY Our opinion is unmodified We have audited the financial statements of Parity Group Plc the Company for the year ended 31 December 2017 which comprise the Consolidated Income Statement Statement of Comprehensive Income Statements of Changes in Equity Statements of Financial Position Statements of Cash Flows and the related notes including the accounting policies in note 1.
In our opinion the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the Groups and of the parent Companys affairs as at 31 December 2017 and of the Groups profit for the year then ended the group financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as adopted by the European Union IFRSs as adopted by the EU the parent Company financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the EU and as applied in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006 and the financial statements have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006.
Basis for opinion We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing UK ISAs UK and applicable law.
Our responsibilities are described below.
We have fulfilled our ethical responsibilities under and are independent of the Group in accordance with UK ethical requirements including the FRC Ethical Standard as applied to listed entities.
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is a sufficient and appropriate basis for our opinion.
Independent
auditors report
Materiality group financial statements as a whole 0.84m 20160.85m 1.00% 2016 0.92% of total group revenues Coverage 100% 2016100% of group profit before tax Risks of material misstatement vs 2016 Recurring risks Revenue recognition Recoverability of parent companys investment in subsidiaries Parity Grouppp14pp34.
Page 30 Independent Auditors Report continued Strategic Report Governance Accounts notes and other information Key audit matters our assessment of risks of material misstatement Key audit matters are those matters that in our professional judgment were of most significance in the audit of the financial statements and include the most significant assessed risks of material misstatement whether or not due to fraud identified by us including those which had the greatest effect on the overall audit strategy the allocation of resources in the audit and directing the efforts of the engagement team.
These matters were addressed in the context of our audit of the financial statements as a whole and in forming our opinion thereon and we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters.
In arriving at our audit opinion above the key audit matters in decreasing order of audit significance were as follows The risk Our response Revenue recognition 84m 2016 92m Refer to page 8 Audit Committee Report on Audit Strategy page 7 Audit Committee report on Audit Findings and page 50 financial disclosures Although we do not consider revenue to be an area with a high risk of significant misstatement or requiring a significant level of judgement it is considered to be one of the key drivers of results and as such had the greatest effect on our audit and allocation of resources in the planning and completing our audit.
The majority of the Groups revenue is derived from the supply of professional services at pre determined rates.
This revenue is recognised as and when the work is performed based on timesheets submitted by contractors.
At year end the Group estimates adjustments for revenue from any work carried out during the year where timesheets were not submitted before year end.
Revenue from consultancy service contracts also contributes towards the Groups revenue.
Contracts can either be fixed price or time and materials based.
Fixed price contract revenue is recognised based on the percentage of completion method.
Time and materials contract revenue is recognised as the services are rendered.
Our procedures included Control operation assessing the operating effectiveness of IT systems and manual data entry controls used in the timesheet and hourly rate input processes to assess the accuracy of contractor billing data.
Control operation assessing the operating effectiveness of controls over the timesheet approval and sales invoice authorisation processes to obtain comfort over the hours worked.
Test of details Using Data and Analytics procedures to identify customers contractors or individual projects with unusually high or low gross margins during the year.
We investigated any outliers by agreeing to supporting documentation.
Test of details Selecting a sample of invoices and other revenue adjustments processed at the yearend and challenging whether revenue had been accurately recorded in the correct period by comparing to supporting documentation.
Reperformance Recalculating the revenue recognised in respect of a sample of revenue contracts recognised on a percentage of completion basis.
This included comparing the contract terms days currently worked on the project according to timesheets and estimated days to complete to assess if revenue had been correctly calculated.
To assess the reasonableness of the estimated days to complete we considered the historical accuracy of forecasting and corroborated judgements involved in estimates through discussions with project level staff.
Parity Grouppp14pp34.
Page 31 Independent Auditors Report continued Parity Group plc www. arity.
Report and Accounts 2017 stock code PTY Key audit matters our assessment of risks of material misstatement continued Key audit matters are those matters that in our professional judgment were of most significance in the audit of the financial statements and include the most significant assessed risks of material misstatement whether or not due to fraud identified by us including those which had the greatest effect on the overall audit strategy the allocation of resources in the audit and directing the efforts of the engagement team.
These matters were addressed in the context of our audit of the financial statements as a whole and in forming our opinion thereon and we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters.
In arriving at our audit opinion above the key audit matters in decreasing order of audit significance were as follows The risk Our response Recoverability of parent companys investment in subsidiaries 21m 2016 21m Refer to page 75 financial disclosures.
Low risk high value The carrying amount of the parent companys investments in subsidiaries represents 14% 2016 14% of the companys total assets.
Their recoverability is not at a high risk of significant misstatement or subject to significant judgement.
However due to their materiality in the context of the parent company financial statements this is considered to be the area that had the greatest effect on our overall parent company audit.
Our procedures included Tests of detail Comparing the carrying amount of 100% of investments with the relevant subsidiaries financial statements to identify whether their net assets being an approximation of their minimum recoverable amount were in excess of their carrying amount and assessing whether those subsidiaries have historically been profit making.
For the investments where the carrying amount exceeded the net asset value comparing the carrying amount of the investment with the expected value of the business based on discounted forecasted cash flows.
Assessing subsidiary audits Assessing the work performed as part of our audit of subsidiaries and considering the results of that work on those subsidiaries profits and net assets.
Parity Grouppp14pp34.
Page 32 Independent Auditors Report continued Strategic Report Governance Accounts notes and other information Our application of materiality and an overview of the scope of our audit Materiality for the group financial statements as a whole was set at 0.84m determined with reference to a benchmark of group revenue of which it represents 1.00% 2016 0.92%.
We consider total revenue to be the most appropriate benchmark as it provides a more stable measure year on year than group profit before tax.
Materiality for the parent company financial statements as a whole was set at 0.835m 2016 0.85m determined with reference to a benchmark of company total assets of which it represents 0.55% 2016 0.58%.
We agreed to report to the Audit Committee any corrected or uncorrected identified misstatements exceeding 0.04m in addition to other identified misstatements that warranted reporting on qualitative grounds.
Of the groups 12 2016 27 components we subjected the 9 active subsidiaries 2016 12 to full scope audits for group purposes.
The Group team approved the component materialities which ranged from 0.05m to 0.835m having regard to the mix of size and risk profile of the Group across the components.
All work was carried out by the group engagement team at the groups London head office only.
The components within the scope of our work accounted for the percentages illustrated opposite.
Whole financial statements materiality 2016 0.85m Range of materiality at 9 components Misstatements reported to the audit committee 2016 Total revenue 84m 2016 92m Group Materiality 0.84m 2016 0.85m Total Revenue Group materiality Group revenue Group profit before tax Group total assets % 2016 100% 100% 2016 100%
Full scope for group audit purposes 2017 Full scope for group audit purposes 100% 2016 100% Parity Grouppp14pp34.
Page 33 Independent Auditors Report continued Parity Group plc www. arity.
Report and Accounts 2017 stock code PTY We have nothing to report on going concern We are required to report to you if we have concluded that the use of the going concern basis of accounting is inappropriate or there is an undisclosed material uncertainty that may cast significant doubt over the use of that basis for a period of at least twelve months from the date of approval of the financial statements.
We have nothing to report in these respects.
We have nothing to report on the other information in the Annual Report The directors are responsible for the other information presented in the Annual Report together with the financial statements.
Our opinion on the financial statements does not cover the other information and accordingly we do not express an audit opinion or except as explicitly stated below any form of assurance conclusion thereon.
Our responsibility is to read the other information and in doing so consider whether based on our financial statements audit work the information therein is materially misstated or inconsistent with the financial statements or our audit knowledge.
Based solely on that work we have not identified material misstatements in the other information.
Strategic report and directors report Based solely on our work on the other information we have not identified material misstatements in the strategic report and the directors report in our opinion the information given in those reports for the financial year is consistent with the financial statements and in our opinion those reports have been prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 2006.
We have nothing to report on the other matters on which we are required to report by exception Under the Companies Act 2006 we are required to report to you if in our opinion adequate accounting records have not been kept by the parent Company or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or the parent Company financial statements are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns or certain disclosures of directors remuneration specified by law are not made or we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit.
We have nothing to report in these respects Respective responsibilities Directors responsibilities As explained more fully in their statement set out on page 24 the directors are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements including being satisfied that they give a true and fair view such internal control as they determine is necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error assessing the Group and parent Companys ability to continue as a going concern disclosing as applicable matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless they either intend to liquidate the Group or the parent Company or to cease operations or have no realistic alternative but to do so.
Auditors responsibilities Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error and to issue our opinion in an auditors report.
Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance but does not guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with ISAs UK will always detect a material misstatement when it exists.
Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if individually or in aggregate they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of the financial statements.
A fuller description of our responsibilities is provided on the FRCs website at www. rc. iteauditorsresponsibilities.
This report is made solely to the Companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006.
Our audit work has been undertaken so that we might state to the Companys members those matters we are required to state to them in an auditors report and for no other purpose.
To the fullest extent permitted by law we do not accept or assume responsibility to anyone other than the Company and the Companys members as a body for our audit work for this report or for the opinions we have formed.
Kelly Dunn Senior Statutory Auditor for and on behalf of KPMG LLP Statutory Auditor Chartered Accountants 15 Canada Square
E14 5GL 9 April telParity Grouppp14pp34.
Page 34 Consolidated income statement for the year ended 31 December 2017 Strategic Report Governance Accounts notes and other information
Before non recurring recurring Items Total items note 4 Totaltel 2016 Continuing operations Revenue 2 83815 91764  91764 Employee benefit costs 3 5939 6245 260 6505 Depreciation amortisation and impairment 3 286 365 115 480 All other operating expenses 3 75534 83388 20 83368 Total operating expenses 81759 89998 355 90353 Operating profitloss 2056 1766 355 1411 Finance costs 6 394 452  452 Profitloss before tax 1662 1314 355 959 Tax creditcharge 9 534 154 79 75 Profitloss for the year from continuing operations 2196 1160 276 884 Discontinued operations Loss from discontinued operations net of tax 7 2182 78  78 Profitloss for the year attributable to owners of the parent 14 1082 276 806 Earnings per share  Continuing operations Basic earnings per share 10 2.15p 0.87p Diluted earnings per share 10 2.08p 0.83p Earnings per share  Continuing and discontinued operations Basic earnings per share 10 0.01p 0.79p Diluted earnings per share 10 0.01p 0.76p The notes on pages 41 to 75 form part of the financial statements.
Parity Grouppp35pp40.
Page 35 Consolidated statement of comprehensive income for the year ended 31 December 2017 Parity Group plc www. arity.
Report and Accounts 2017 stock code PTY 2017 2016 Notes 000 000 Profit for the year 14 806 Other comprehensive income Items that may be reclassified to profit or loss Exchange differences on translation of foreign operations 39 13 Items that will never be reclassified to profit or loss Remeasurement of defined benefit pension scheme 22 800 413 Deferred taxation on remeasurement of defined pension scheme 14 136 Other comprehensive income for the year net of tax 625 426 Total comprehensive income for the year attributable to equity holders of the parent 639 380 The notes on pages 41 to 75 form part of the financial statements.
Parity Grouppp35pp40.
Page 36 Statements of changes in equity for the year ended 31 December 2017 Strategic Report Governance Accounts notes and other information Share Capital Share Deferred premium redemption Other Retained capital shares reserve reserve reserves earnings Total At 1 January 2017 2037 14319 33195  44160 87251 6460 Profit for the year  1414 Exchange differences on translation of foreign operations  39 39 Remeasurement of defined benefit pension scheme  800 800 Deferred taxation on remeasurement of defined pension scheme taken directly to equity  136 136 Issue of new ordinary shares 6 16 22 Share options  value of employee services  6868 Cancellation of deferred shares  14319  14319 At 31 December 2017 2043  33211 14319 44160 86544 7189 Share Capital Share Deferred premium redemption Other Retained capital shares reserve reserve reserves earnings Total At 1 January 2016 2037 14319 33195  44160 87689 6022 Profit for the year  806 806 Exchange differences on translation of foreign operations  13 13 Remeasurement of defined benefit pension scheme  413 413 Share options  value of employee services  58 58 At 31 December 2016 2037 14319 33195  44160 87251 6460 Parity Grouppp35pp40.
Page 37 Statements of changes in equity continued for the year ended 31 December 2017 Parity Group plc www. arity.
Report and Accounts 2017 stock code PTY Share Capital Share Deferred premium redemption Other Retained capital shares reserve reserve reserves earnings Total At 1 January 2017 2037 14319 33195  22729 57709 14571 Loss for the year  2149 2149 Issue of new ordinary shares 6 16 22 Share options  value of employee services  4646 Cancellation of deferred shares  14319  14319 At 31 December 2017 2043  33211 14319 22729 59812 12490 Share Capital Share Deferred premium redemption Other Retained capital shares reserve reserve reserves earnings Total At 1 January 2016 2037 14319 33195  22729 53177 19103 Loss for the year  4531 4531 Share options  value of employee services      1 1 At 31 December 2016 2037 14319 33195  22729 57709 14571 The notes on pages 41 to 75 form part of the financial statements.
Parity Grouppp35pp40.
Page 38 Statements of nancial position As at 31 December 2017 Strategic Report Governance Accounts notes and other information Company number  Consolidated Companytel 2016
Noncurrent assets Intangible assets and goodwill 1112 4821 5055 Property plant and equipment 13 78 72  1 Trade and other receivables 15   122170 122736 Investment in subsidiaries 28   20527 20527 Deferred tax assets 14 919 409 Total noncurrent assets 5818 5536 142697 143264 Current assets Trade and other receivables 15 12033 14373 2202 3370 Cash and cash equivalents 4968 4272 116 111 Assets classified as held for sale 16 791 2389 Total current assets 17792 21034 2318 3481 Total assets 23610 26570 145015 146745
Current liabilities Loans and borrowings 17 6592 8636 Trade and other payables 18 8349 9104 11141 10919 Liabilities classified as held for sale 16 395 483 Total current liabilities 15336 18223 11141 10919 Noncurrent liabilities Loans and borrowings 17 8 22 Trade and other payables 18   121384 121255 Provisions 19 18 17 Retirement benefit liability 22 1059 1848 Total noncurrent liabilities 1085 1887 121384 121255 Total liabilities 16421 20110 132525 132174 Net assets 7189 6460 12490 14571 Shareholders equity Called up share capital 23 2043 16356 2043 16356 Share premium reserve 21 33211 33195 33211 33195 Capital redemption reserve 21 14319  14319 Other reserves 21 44160 44160 22729 22729 Retained earnings 21 86544 87251 59812 57709 Total shareholders equity 7189 6460 12490 14571 Approved by the Directors and authorised for issue on 9 April 2018.
The notes on pages 41 to 75 form part of the financial statements.
Alan Rommel Roger Antony
Chief Executive Officer Finance Director
Parity Grouppp35pp40.
Page 39 Statements of cash ows for the year ended 31 December 2017 Parity Group plc www. arity.
Report and Accounts 2017 stock code PTY Consolidated Companytel 2016 Cash flows from operating activities Profitloss for year 14 806 2149 4531 Adjustments for Net finance expense 6 394 452 1457 3665 Sharebased payment expensecredit 1 Income tax creditexpense 79 619 44 244 362 Intercompany loans written off 27   327 Amortisation of intangible assets 11 341 652 Depreciation of property plant and equipment Impairment of goodwill 1112 1165 Loss on write down of intangible assets 11 3 115 1472 2274 562 1228 Working capital movements Decrease in work in progress 3 44 Decreaseincrease in trade and other receivables 2619 330 2 1185 Decreaseincrease in trade and other payables 910 962 21 1848 Increase in provisions 1 33 Payments to retirement benefit plan 22 184 231 Net cash flows from operating activities 3001 3412 581 565 Investing activities Purchase of intangible assets 12 5 22 Purchase of property plant and equipment 13 91 129 Net cash used in investing activities 96 151 Financing activities Issue of ordinary shares 22  22 Repayment of finance facility 2032 1360 Net movements on intercompany funding   759 931 Interest paid 6 199 277 195 273 Net cash from financing activities 2209 1637 586 658 Net increase in cash and cash equivalents 696 1624 5 93 Cash and cash equivalents at the beginning of the year 4272 2648 111 18 Cash and cash equivalents at the end of the year 4968 4272 116 111 The notes on pages 41 to 75 form part of the financial statements.
Parity Grouppp35pp40.
Page 40 Notes to the accounts Strategic Report Governance Accounts notes and other information 1 Accounting policies Basis of preparation Parity Group plc the Company is a company incorporated and domiciled in the UK.
Both the parent company nancial statements and the Group nancial statements have been prepared and approved by the Directors in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as adopted by the EU Adopted IFRSs.
On publishing the parent company nancial statements here together with the Group nancial statements the Company is taking advantage of the exemption in s408 of the Companies Act 2006 not to present its individual income statement and related notes that form a part of these approved nancial statements.
The principal accounting policies adopted in the preparation of the nancial statements are set out below.
The policies have been consistently applied to all the years presented unless otherwise stated.
The nancial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis.
The Groups business activities together with the factors likely to aect its future development performance and position are set out in the Directors Report Review of business and future developments.
The nancial position of the Group its cash ows liquidity position and borrowing facilities are described in the Operational and Financial Review on pages 8 to 12 and in note 20 to the nancial statements.
Note 20 also includes the Groups objectives for managing capital.
As outlined in note 20 the Group meets its day to day working capital requirements through an assetbased nance facility.
The facility contains certain nancial covenants which have been met throughout the period.
The facility was renewed during 2016 on favourable terms and is currently subject to a minimum period up to 31 December 2018 at which point the facility becomes evergreen rolling over on the same terms with six months notice from either party.
However  the bank who provide the facility PNC has formally indicated a willingness in principle to renew the facility when the minimum term expires.
The Groups forecasts and projections taking account of reasonably possible changes in trading performance show that the Group will be able to operate within the level of its current facility for the foreseeable future.
After making enquiries the Directors have a reasonable expectation that the Company and the Group have adequate resources to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future.
Accordingly they continue to adopt the going concern basis in preparing the Annual Report and Accounts.
Basis of consolidation The consolidated nancial statements comprise the nancial statements of the Company and its subsidiaries as at 31 December 2017.
Subsidiaries are entities controlled by the Group.
Control exists when the Group has existing rights that give it the ability to direct the relevant activities that signicantly aect the subsidiarys returns and exposure or rights to variable returns from its involvement with the subsidiary and the ability to use its power over the subsidiary to aect the amount of the Groups returns.
The acquisition date is the date on which control is transferred to the acquirer.
The nancial statements of subsidiaries are included in the consolidated nancial statements from the date that control commences until the date that control ceases.
Losses applicable to the noncontrolling interests in a subsidiary are allocated to the noncontrolling interests even if doing so causes the noncontrolling interests to have a decit balance.
The nancial statements of the subsidiaries are prepared for the same reporting period as the parent company using consistent accounting policies.
All intragroup balances transactions unrealised gains and losses resulting from intragroup transactions and dividends are eliminated in full.
In accordance with Section 408 of the Companies Act 2006 the Company has not presented its own Income Statement or Statement of Comprehensive Income.
The loss for the year dealt with in the accounts of the Company was 2149000 2016 4531000.
Business Combinations The acquisition of subsidiaries is accounted for using the purchase method.
The related costs of acquisition other than those associated with the issue of debt or equity securities are recognised in the prot and loss as incurred.
The acquirees identiable assets and liabilities and contingent liabilities that meet the conditions for recognition under IFRS3 Business combinations are recognised at their fair value at the acquisition date.
Parity Grouppp41pp54.
Page 41 Notes to the accounts continued Parity Group plc www. arity.
Report and Accounts 2017 stock code PTY 1 Accounting policies continued Changes in accounting policies new standards interpretations and amendments eective in 2017 adopted by the Group and published standards not yet eective No new standards amendments to published standards or interpretations of existing standards eective in 2017 had a material impact on the Groups 2017 nancial statements.
The following new standards and interpretations to existing standards have been published that are mandatory for the Groups future accounting which the Group does not expect to have signicant impact on its accounting policies or disclosures IFRS 2 Classication and Measurement of Sharebased Payment Transactions eective 1 January 2018  amendment IFRS 4 Applying IFRS 9 Financial Instruments with IFRS 4 Insurance Contracts eective 1 January 2018  amendment IFRS 9 Financial Instruments eective 1 January 2018 IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with customers eective 1 January 2018 IFRS 16 Leases eective 1 January 2019 IAS 7 Disclosure Initiative eective 1 January 2018 IAS 12 Recognition of Deferred Tax Assets for Unrealised Losses eective 1 January 2018  amendment An assessment of the impact of IFRS 15 has been completed following a comprehensive review of the contracts that exist across the Groups revenue streams.
The review has concluded that revenue recognition under IFRS 15 is expected to be consistent with current practice for the Groups revenue and had IFRS 15 been applied in the current reporting period it would not have had a material impact on the nancial statements.
Under IFRS 16 the Groups operating leases will be accounted for as right of use assets which will be largely oset by equivalent lease liabilities.
The assets will be recognised as property plant and equipment and the lease liability will increase net debt.
The impact to prot before tax is not expected to be material.
It is not anticipated that there will be a material impact in respect of IFRS 9 as the Group has minimal nancial assets except for trade debtors.
Measurement convention The nancial statements are prepared on the historical cost basis except that the following assets and liabilities are stated at their fair value derivative nancial instruments and nancial instruments classied as fair value through the prot or loss or as availableforsale.
Noncurrent assets are stated at the lower of previous carrying amount and fair value less costs to sell.
Revenue recognition The Group generates revenue principally through the provision of recruitment and consultancy services.
The Group recognises revenue when certain criteria are met there is clear evidence that a contract exists the amount of revenue can be measured reliably it is probable that future economic benets will ow to the Group and the stage of completion can be measured reliably where services are delivered.
Revenue is measured at the fair value of the consideration received or receivable net of discounts volume rebates and value added tax.
Revenue on contracts for the supply of professional services at predetermined rates is recognised as and when the work is performed irrespective of the duration of the contract.
Permanent placement stang revenue is recognised when candidates commence employment.
Rebates may be applicable on a sliding scale where the candidates employment is terminated within nine weeks.
Rebate provisions are created based on the experience of claims.
The Group presents interim recruitment revenues and the related direct costs of services in accordance with IFRS 15s guidance  Principal versus Agency Considerations.
The Group acts as principal in all of its interim recruiting transactions in that it carries the risks and rewards of ownership e. nonpayment due to insolvency or poor performance and also the risk of pricing reductions.
Accordingly in respect of interim recruitment the Group reports gross revenues and gross direct costs.
Revenue is recognised on xed price contracts while the contract is in progress using the percentage of completion method having regard to the proportion of the total contract costs which have been incurred at the reporting date.
Provision is made for all foreseeable future losses.
Revenue from systems integration and consulting services under time and material arrangements is recognised as the services are rendered.
Parity Grouppp41pp54.
Page 42 Notes to the accounts continued Strategic Report Governance Accounts notes and other information 1 Accounting policies continued Nonrecurring items Items which are both material and nonrecurring are presented as nonrecurring items within the relevant Income Statement category.
The separate reporting of nonrecurring items helps provide a better indication of the Groups underlying business performance.
Events which may give rise to the classication of items as nonrecurring if of a signicantly material value include gains or losses on the disposal of a business restructuring of a business transaction costs litigation and similar settlements asset impairments onerous contracts and gains on bargain purchases.
Finance lease payments Minimum lease payments are apportioned between the nance charge and the reduction of the outstanding liability.
The nance charge is allocated to each period during the lease term so as to produce a constant periodic rate of interest on the remaining balance of the liability.
Financing income and expenses Financing expenses comprise interest payable and nance leases recognised in prot or loss using the eective interest method unwinding of the discount on the retirement benet scheme liabilities and net foreign exchange losses that are recognised in the income statement see foreign currency accounting policy.
Financing income comprises the expected return on the retirement benet scheme assets interest receivable on funds invested dividend income and net foreign exchange gains.
Interest income and interest payable is recognised in prot or loss as it accrues using the eective interest method.
Dividend income is recognised in the income statement on the date the entitys right to receive payments is established.
Foreign currency gains and losses are reported on a net basis.
Dividends
Final dividends proposed by the Board of Directors and unpaid at the year end are not recognised in the nancial statements until they have been approved by the shareholders at the Annual General Meeting.
Interim dividends which do not require shareholder approval are recognised when paid.
Taxation
Tax on the prot or loss for the year comprises current and deferred tax.
Tax is recognised in the income statement except to the extent that it relates to items recognised directly in equity in which case it is recognised in equity or in other comprehensive income.
Current tax is the expected tax payable or receivable on the taxable income or loss for the year using tax rates enacted or substantively enacted at the balance sheet date and any adjustment to tax payable in respect of previous years.
Deferred tax is provided on temporary dierences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities for nancial reporting purposes and the amounts used for taxation purposes.
The following temporary dierences are not provided for the initial recognition of goodwill the initial recognition of assets or liabilities that aect neither accounting nor taxable prot other than in a business combination and dierences relating to investments in subsidiaries to the extent that they will probably not reverse in the foreseeable future.
The amount of deferred tax provided is based on the expected manner of realisation or settlement of the carrying amount of assets and liabilities using tax rates enacted or substantively enacted at the balance sheet date.
A deferred tax asset for deductible temporary dierences is not recognised unless it probable that there will be taxable prots in the foreseeable future against which the deferred tax asset can be utilised.
A deferred tax asset for unused tax losses carried forward is recognised on the same basis as for deductible temporary dierences.
However the existence of the unused tax losses is strong evidence that future taxable prot may not be available.
Therefore when an entity has a history of recent losses the entity recognises a deferred tax asset arising from unused tax losses only to the extent that there is convincing evidence that sucient taxable prot will be available against which the unused tax losses can be utilised.
Parity Grouppp41pp54.
Page 43 Notes to the accounts continued Parity Group plc www. arity.
Report and Accounts 2017 stock code PTY 1 Accounting policies continued Foreign currencies
Transactions in foreign currencies are recorded at the rate ruling at the date of the transaction.
Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are retranslated at the rate of exchange ruling at the balance sheet date.
All dierences are taken to the Income Statement.
Nonmonetary assets and liabilities that are measured in terms of historical cost in a foreign currency are translated using the exchange rate at the date of the transaction.
Nonmonetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies that are stated at fair value are retranslated to the functional currency at foreign exchange rates ruling at the dates the fair value was determined.
Group
On consolidation the results of overseas operations are translated into sterling at rates approximating to those ruling when the transactions took place.
All assets and liabilities of overseas operations are translated at the rate ruling at the reporting date.
Exchange dierences arising on translating the opening net assets at opening rate and the results of overseas operations at actual rate are recognised in Other Comprehensive Income.
On disposal of a foreign operation the cumulative exchange dierences recognised in Other Comprehensive Income relating to that operation up to the date of disposal are transferred to the consolidated Income Statement as part of the prot or loss on disposal.
Discontinued operations A discontinued operation is a component of the Groups business that represents a separate major line of business or geographical area of operations or its subsidiary acquired exclusively with a view to resale that has been disposed of has been abandoned or that meets the criteria to be classied as held for sale.
Discontinued operations are presented in the Income Statement including in the comparative period as a single line which comprises the posttax prot or loss of the discontinued operation and the posttax gain or loss recognised on the re measurement to fair value less costs to sell or on disposal of the assets or disposal groups constituting discontinued operations.
Segmental reporting Operating segments are reported in a manner consistent with the internal reporting provided to the Chief Operating Decision
The Chief Operating Decision Maker is the Group Board.
Intangible assets
Goodwill represents the excess of the cost of acquisition of a business combination over the Groups share of the fair value of identiable net assets of the business acquired.
After initial recognition goodwill is stated at cost less any accumulated impairment losses.
Goodwill is allocated to cash generating units and is not amortised but is tested annually for impairment.
In respect of equity accounted investees the carrying amount of goodwill is included in the carrying amount of the investment in the investee.
Gains and losses on disposal of a business include the carrying amount of goodwill relating to the business sold in determining the gain or loss on disposal except for goodwill arising on business combinations on or before 31 December 1997 which has been deducted from Shareholders equity and remains indenitely in Shareholders equity.
Software
The carrying amount of software is its cost less any accumulated amortisation and any provision for impairment.
Software is amortised on a straight line basis over its expected useful economic life of three to seven years.
Intellectual property Intellectual property represents the expenditure incurred on developing new innovative productsservices that are expected to generate future economic benets.
The carrying amount of intellectual property is its cost less any accumulated amortisation and any provision for impairment.
Intellectual property is amortised on a straight line basis over two years with amortisation commencing from the date that the productsservices are available for sale.
Parity Grouppp41pp54.
Page 44 Notes to the accounts continued Strategic Report Governance Accounts notes and other information 1 Accounting policies continued Property plant and equipment Property plant and equipment are stated at cost net of depreciation and any provision for impairment.
Depreciation is provided on all property plant and equipment at rates calculated to write o the cost less estimated residual value of each asset on a straight line basis over its expected useful economic life as follows Leasehold improvements The lesser of the asset life and the remaining length of the lease Oce equipment Between 3 and 5 years The carrying value of property plant and equipment is reviewed for impairment if events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value may not be recoverable.
Impairment of nonnancial assets excluding deferred tax assets An impairment loss is recognised for the amount by which the assets carrying amount exceeds its recoverable amount the latter being the higher of the fair value less costs to sell associated with the CGU and its value in use.
Value in use calculations are performed using cash ow projections for the CGU to which the goodwill relates discounted at a pretax rate which reects the asset specic risks and the time value of money.
Impairment losses are recognised in prot or loss.
Impairment losses recognised in respect of CGUs are allocated rst to reduce the carrying amount of any goodwill allocated to the units and then to reduce the carrying amounts of the other assets in the unit group of units on a pro rata basis.
Goodwill is tested for impairment at each reporting date.
The carrying value of other intangible assets and property plant and equipment is reviewed for impairment if events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value may not be recoverable.
For the purpose of impairment testing assets that cannot be tested individually are grouped together into the smallest group of assets that generates cash inows from continuing use that are largely independent of the cash inows of other assets or groups of assets the cashgenerating unit.
The goodwill acquired in a business combination for the purpose of impairment testing is allocated to cashgenerating units or CGU.
Subject to an operating segment ceiling test for the purposes of goodwill impairment testing CGUs to which goodwill has been allocated are aggregated so that the level at which impairment is tested reects the lowest level at which goodwill is monitored for internal reporting purposes.
Goodwill acquired in a business combination is allocated to groups of CGUs that are expected to benet from the synergies of the combination.
An impairment loss in respect of goodwill is not reversed.
In respect of other assets impairment losses recognised in prior periods are assessed at each reporting date for any indications that the loss has decreased or no longer exists.
An impairment loss is reversed if there has been a change in the estimates used to determine the recoverable amount.
An impairment loss is reversed only to the extent that the assets carrying amount does not exceed the carrying amount that would have been determined net of depreciation or amortisation if no impairment loss had been recognised.
Financial assets The Groups nancial assets fall into the categories discussed below with the allocation depending to an extent on the purpose for which the asset was acquired.
Unless otherwise indicated the carrying amounts of the Groups nancial assets are a reasonable approximation of their fair values.
Subsequent to initial recognition they are measured at amortised cost using the eective interest method less any impairment losses.
Loans and receivables these assets are nonderivative nancial assets with xed or determinable payments that are not quoted in an active market.
They arise principally through the provision of goods and services to customers e. receivables.
They are initially recognised at fair value plus transaction costs that are directly attributable to the acquisition or issue less provision for impairment.
The eect of discounting on these nancial instruments is not considered to be material.
Parity Grouppp41pp54.
Page 45 Notes to the accounts continued Parity Group plc www. arity.
Report and Accounts 2017 stock code PTY 1 Accounting policies continued Financial assets continued Impairment provisions are recognised when there is objective evidence such as signicant nancial diculties on the part of the counterparty or default or signicant delay in payment that the Group will be unable to collect all of the amounts due under the terms receivable the amount of such a provision being the dierence between the net carrying amount and the present value of the future expected cash ows associated with the impaired receivable.
For trade receivables such provisions are recorded in a separate allowance account with the loss being recognised within other operating expenses in the Income Statement.
On conrmation that the trade receivable will not be collectable the gross carrying value of the asset is written o against the associated provision.
Investments investments in subsidiary undertakings are recorded at cost.
The carrying values of investments are reviewed for impairment if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable.
Cash and cash equivalents cash and cash equivalents in the Statement of Financial Position comprise cash at bank and in hand short term deposits and other shortterm liquid investments.
In the Cash Flow Statement cash and cash equivalents comprise cash and cash equivalents as dened above net of bank overdrafts.
Assets held for sale Noncurrent assets or disposal groups comprising assets and liabilities are classied as heldforsale if it is highly probable that they will be recovered primarily through sale rather than through continuing use.
Such assets or disposal groups are generally measured at the lower of their carrying amount and fair value less costs to sell.
Any impairment loss on a disposal group is allocated rst to goodwill and then to the remaining assets and liabilities on a pro rata basis except that no loss is allocated to work in progress nancial assets deferred tax assets or employee benet assets which continue to be measured in accordance with the Groups other accounting policies.
Impairment losses on initial classication as heldforsale and subsequent gains and losses on remeasurement are recognised in prot or loss.
Stocks and work in progress Stocks are stated at the lower of cost and net realisable value.
Cost comprises equipment for resale.
Net realisable value represents the estimated selling price less all estimated costs of completion and costs to be incurred in marketing selling and distribution.
Costs recoverable on contracts which are expected to benet performance and be recoverable over the life of the contracts are recognised in the Statement of Financial Position as work in progress and charged to the Income Statement over the life of the contract so as to match costs with revenues.
Work in progress is stated at the lower of cost and net realisable amount and represents that element of startup costs which at the reporting date has not been charged to the Income Statement.
Cost includes materials direct labour and an attributable portion of overheads based on normal levels of activity.
Net realisable amount is based on estimated selling price less further costs expected to be incurred to completion and disposal including provision for contingencies and anticipated future losses.
Accrued income Accrued income primarily arises where temporary workers have provided their services but approved timesheets are outstanding.
As such the amount incurred and margin earned thereon has yet to be invoiced onto the client.
Amounts recoverable on contracts and payments in advance Amounts recoverable on contracts are stated at the net sales value of work done less amounts received as progress payments on account.
Where progress payments exceed the sales value of work done they are included in payables as payments in advance.
Parity Grouppp41pp54.
Page 46 Notes to the accounts continued Strategic Report Governance Accounts notes and other information 1 Accounting policies continued Financial liabilities All of the Groups nancial liabilities are classied as nancial liabilities carried at amortised cost.
The Group does not use derivative nancial instruments or hedge account for any transactions.
Unless otherwise indicated the carrying amounts of the Groups nancial liabilities are a reasonable approximation of their fair values.
Financial liabilities include the following items Trade payables and other shortterm monetary liabilities which are initially recognised at fair value and subsequently carried at amortised cost using the eective interest method.
Finance leases which are initially measured at fair value and subsequently carried at amortised cost using the eective interest method.
Bank borrowings which are initially recognised at fair value net of any transaction costs directly attributable to the issue of the instrument.
Such interest bearing liabilities are subsequently measured at amortised cost using the eective interest rate method which ensures that any interest expense over the period to repayment is at a constant rate on the balance of the liability carried in the consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
Interest expense in this context includes initial transaction costs and premiums payable on redemption as well as any interest or coupon payable while the liability is outstanding.
Operating leases Rentals paid under operating leases are charged to income on a straight line basis over the term of the lease.
Lease incentives received are recognised in the income statement as an integral part of the total lease expense.
Provisions
A provision is recognised in the Balance Sheet when the Group has a present legal or constructive obligation as a result of a past event that can be reliably measured and it is probable that an outflow of economic benets will be required to settle the obligation.
Provisions are determined by discounting the expected future cash ows at a pretax rate that reects risks specic to the liability.
From time to time the Group faces the potential of legal action in respect of employment or other contracts.
In such situations where it is probable that a payment will be required to settle the action provision is made for the Groups best estimate of the outcome.
Where leasehold properties are surplus to requirements provisions are made for the best estimates of the unavoidable net future costs.
Provisions for dilapidation charges that will crystallise at the end of the period of occupancy are provided for in full on non serviced properties.
Pensions
The Group operates a small number of retirement benet schemes.
With the exception of the Parity Retirement Benet Plan all of the schemes are dened contribution plans and the assets are held in separate independently administered funds.
The Groups contributions to dened contribution plans are charged to the Income Statement in the period to which the services are rendered by the employees and the Group has no further obligation to pay further amounts.
The Parity Retirement Benet Plan is a dened benet pension fund with assets held separately from the Group.
This fund has been closed to new members since 1995 and with eect from 1 January 2005 was also closed to future service accrual.
A dened benet plan is a postemployment benet plan other than a dened contribution plan.
The Groups net obligation in respect of dened benet pension plans is calculated by estimating the amount of future benet that employees have earned in return for their service in the current and prior periods that benet is discounted to determine its present value and the fair value of any plan assets at bid price and any unrecognised past service costs are deducted.
The liability discount rate is the yield at the balance sheet date on AA credit rated bonds denominated in the currency of and having maturity dates approximating to the terms of the Groups obligations.
The calculation is performed by a qualied actuary using the projected unit credit method.
When the calculation results in a benet to the Group the recognised asset is limited to the present value of benets available in the form of any future refunds from the plan reductions in future contributions to the plan or on settlement of the plan and takes into account the adverse eect of any minimum funding requirements.
Parity Grouppp41pp54.
Page 47 Notes to the accounts continued Parity Group plc www. arity.
Report and Accounts 2017 stock code PTY 1 Accounting policies continued Share capital Following the adoption of IAS 32 nancial instruments issued by the Group are treated as equity only to the extent that they meet the following two conditions a they include no contractual obligations upon the company or Group as the case may be to deliver cash or other nancial assets or to exchange nancial assets or nancial liabilities with another party under conditions that are potentially unfavourable to the company or Group and b where the instrument will or may be settled in the companys own equity instruments it is either a nonderivative that includes no obligation to deliver a variable number of the companys own equity instruments or is a derivative that will be settled by the companys exchanging a xed amount of cash or other nancial assets for a xed number of its own equity instruments.
To the extent that this denition is not met the proceeds of issue are classied as a nancial liability.
Where the instrument so classied takes the legal form of the companys own shares the amounts presented in these nancial statements for called up share capital and share premium account exclude amounts in relation to those shares.
For the purposes of the disclosures given in note 20 the Group considers its capital to comprise its cash and cash equivalents its assetbased bank borrowings and its equity attributable to equity holders comprising issued capital reserves and retained earnings as disclosed in the statement of changes in equity.
Financial guarantee contracts Where Group companies enter into nancial guarantee contracts and guarantee the indebtedness of other companies within the Group the company considers these to be insurance arrangements and accounts for them as such.
In this respect the company treats the guarantee contract as a contingent liability until such time that it becomes probable that any Group company will be required to make a payment under the guarantee.
Employee Share Ownership Plan ESOP As the Company is deemed to have control of its ESOP trust it is treated as an agent and consolidated for the purposes of the consolidated nancial statements.
The ESOPs assets other than investments in the Companys shares liabilities income and expenses are included on a linebyline basis in the consolidated nancial statements.
The ESOPs investment in the Companys shares is deducted from shareholders equity in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position as if they were treasury shares.
Sharebased payment transactions Sharebased payment arrangements in which the Group and Company receives goods or services as consideration for its own equity instruments are accounted for as equitysettled sharebased payment transactions regardless of how the equity instruments are obtained by the Group and Company.
The grant date fair value of sharebased payment awards granted to employees is recognised as an employee expense with a corresponding increase in equity over the period that the employees become unconditionally entitled to the awards.
The fair value of the options granted is measured using an option valuation model taking into account the terms and conditions upon which the options were granted.
The amount recognised as an expense is adjusted to reect the actual number of awards for which the related service and nonmarket vesting conditions are expected to be met such that the amount ultimately recognised as an expense is based on the number of awards that do meet the related service and nonmarket performance conditions at the vesting date.
For sharebased payment awards with nonvesting conditions the grant date fair value of the sharebased payment is measured to reect such conditions and there is no trueup for dierences between expected and actual outcomes.
Where the terms and conditions of options are modied before they vest the increase in the fair value of the options measured immediately before and after the modication is also charged to the Income Statement over the remaining vesting period.
Signicant accounting estimates and judgements The preparation of nancial statements under IFRS requires the Group to make estimates and assumptions regarding the future.
Estimates and judgements are continually evaluated and are based on historical experience and other factors including expectations of future events that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances.
Actual results may dier from these estimates.
The estimates and assumptions which have a signicant risk of causing a material adjustment to the carrying amount of assets and liabilities within the next nancial year are discussed below.
Parity Grouppp41pp54.
Page 48 Notes to the accounts continued Strategic Report Governance Accounts notes and other information 1 Accounting policies continued Signicant accounting estimates and judgements continued Retirement benet liability The costs assets and liabilities of the dened benet scheme operated by the Group are determined using methods relying on actuarial estimates and assumptions.
Details of the key assumptions are set out in note 22.
The Group takes advice from independent actuaries relating to the appropriateness of the assumptions.
Changes in the assumptions used may have a signicant eect on the Income Statement and the Statement of Financial Position.
Recoverability of deferred tax assets The deferred tax assets are reviewed for recoverability and recognised to the extent that it is probable that taxable prots will be available against which deductible temporary dierences can be utilised and there is convincing evidence that sucient taxable prots will be available against which unused tax losses can be utilised.
This is determined based on management estimates and assumptions as to the future protability of the related business units.
The forecasts for the business used in this review were the same as those used in the review of impairment of goodwill see note 12.
Investments in subsidiaries The Company reviews its investment in subsidiaries to test whether any impairment has been suered.
The recoverable amounts are determined using discounted future cash ows.
Intercompany receivables The Company reviews receivables due from subsidiary undertakings to test whether they are recoverable.
Provision is made for where there is uncertainty as to full recovery.
2 Segmental information Factors that management used to identify the Groups reporting segments In accordance with IFRS 8 Operating Segments the Groups management structure and the reporting of nancial information to the Chief Operating Decision Maker the Group Board have been used as the basis to dene reporting segments.
The Group has two continuing dened cash generating units see note 12 which form the basis of each operating segment.
The components of each segment are described below.
The internal nancial information prepared for the Group Board includes contribution at a segmental level and the Group Board allocates resources on the basis of this information.
Segmental contribution dened as divisional revenues less attributable overheads prot before tax and assets and liabilities are internally reported at a Group level.
Description of the types of services from which each reportable segment derives its revenues The Group has two segments Parity Professionals  provides targeted recruitment of temporary and permanent professionals to support IT and business change programmes.
Parity Professionals provides 89% 2016 94% of the continuing Groups revenues.
Parity Consultancy Services  provides business and IT consultancy services focusing on the provision of data solutions and delivery of IT projects.
Parity Consultancy Services provides 11% 2016 6% of the continuing Groups revenues.
Group costs include Directors salaries and costs relating to Group activities and are not allocated to reporting segments for internal reporting purposes.
Measurement of operating segment contribution The accounting policies of the operating segments are the same as those described in the summary of signicant accounting policies.
The Group evaluates performance on the basis of contribution from operations before tax not including nonrecurring items such as restructuring costs.
Intersegment sales are priced on the same basis as sales to external customers with a discount applied to encourage the use of Group resources at a rate acceptable to the tax authorities.
Parity Grouppp41pp54.
Page 49 Notes to the accounts continued Parity Group plc www. arity.
Report and Accounts 2017 stock code PTY 2 Segmental information continued Parity Before Parity Consultancy nonrecurring Nonrecurring Professionals Services Items Items Totaltel 2017 2017 Revenue from external customers 74272 9543 83815  83815 Intersegment revenue 5764  5764  5764 Segment revenue 80036 9543 89579  89579 Attributable costs 77729 8395 86124  86124 Segmental contribution 2307 1148 3455  3455 Group costs 1045  1045 Depreciation and amortisation 286  286 Share based payment 68  68 Operating profit 2056  2056 Finance costs 394  394 Profit before tax continuing activities 1662  1662 Parity Before Parity Consultancy nonrecurring Nonrecurring Professionals Services Items Items Totaltel 2016 2016 Revenue from external customers 86419 5345 91764  91764 Intersegment revenue 481  481  481 Segment revenue 86900 5345 92245  92245 Attributable costs 84240 4435 88675  88675 Segmental contribution 2660 910 3570  3570 Group costs 1383  1383 Depreciation and amortisation 365 115 480 Share based payment 56  56 Other nonrecurring items  240 240 Operating profit 1766 355 1411 Finance costs 452  452 Profitloss before tax continuing activities 1314 355 959 The continuing Group operates exclusively in the UK.
All revenues are generated and all segment assets are located in the
Intersegment revenue in the year is a result of Parity Professionals selling IT recruitment services to Parity Consultancy
68% 2016 61% or 50.4m 2016 52.7m of the Parity Professionals revenue from external customers was generated in the public sector .
82% 2016 57% or 7.8m 2016 3.0m of the Parity Consultancy Services revenue was generated in the Public Sector.
The largest single customer in Parity Professionals contributed revenue of 8.8m or 11% and was in the public sector 2016 10.8m or 12% and in the public sector.
The largest single customer in Parity Consultancy Services contributed revenue of 4.4m or 46% and was in the Public Sector 2016 2.9m or 54% and in the Public Sector.
Parity Grouppp41pp54.
Page 50 Notes to the accounts continued Strategic Report Governance Accounts notes and other information 3 Operating costs
2017 2016 Continuing operations 000 000 Employee benefit costs wages and salaries 5138 5688 social security costs 609 639 other pension costs 192 178 5939 6505 Depreciation and amortisation Amortisation of intangible assets  software 239 294 Depreciation of leased property plant and equipment 9 35 Depreciation of owned property plant and equipment 38 36 Write down of intangible assets  115 All other operating expenses Contractor costs 73088 80409 Subcontracted direct costs 228 350 Operating lease rentals plant and machinery 17 27 land and buildings 659 775 Other occupancy costs 98 147 IT costs 278 348 Equity settled share based payment charge 66 56 Other operating costs 1100 1256 75534 83368 Total operating expenses 81759 90353 Disclosures relating to the remuneration of Directors are set out on page 28.
During the year the Group obtained the following services from the Groups auditor KPMG LLP
2017 2016 Audit of the Parent Company and consolidated financial statements 12 11 Other services Audit of the Companys subsidiaries 65 65 Interim review 6 6 Tax compliance 27 27 Other 26 1tel126 All other services have been performed in the United Kingdom.
Other refers to services provided in relation to advice relating to the Retirement Benet Plan transaction costs and assistance provided with research and development tax credit applications.
Parity Grouppp41pp54.
Page 51 Notes to the accounts continued Parity Group plc www. arity.
Report and Accounts 2017 stock code PTY 4 Nonrecurring items 2017 2016 Continuing operations Write down of GPSeer Write down of intangible assets  115 Other operating costs  152 Total write down of GPSeer  267
Employee benefit costs  260 Other operating costs  36 Transaction costs 52 Property provisions 46 Insolvency dividend  306 There were no nonrecurring charges within continuing operations during 2017.
The continuing operations nonrecurring charge for 2016 included The write down of assets in the GPSeer joint venture.
GPSeer was an initiative under the previous digital strategy to develop a cuttingedge internet search engine.
Since the change in strategy no further development work has been performed by the Group.
Restructuring costs including compensation payments incurred to downsize the Talent Management service oering in Northern Ireland the cost of Board changes aligned to the Groups strategy and residual expenses incurred to close the Golden Square service oering.
Transaction costs relating to professional services incurred to implement the Boards strategy to focus on core business.
Property provisions represent empty property costs incurred as a result of centralising the London oce.
The insolvency dividend relates to a oneo payment received in 2016 from the administrators of a legacy overseas subsidiary.
5 Average sta numbers 2017 2016 Number Number Continuing operations Professionals  United Kingdom Consultancy Services  United Kingdom including corporate office Discontinued operations Consultancy Services 22 22 1 Includes 22 2016 22 employees providing shared services across the Group.
2 Includes 4 2016 7 employees of the Company.
At 31 December 2017 the Group had 105 continuing employees 2016 112.
6 Finance costs 2017 2016 Finance costs Interest expense on financial liabilities 199 277 Net finance costs in respect of postretirement benefits 19telThe interest expense on nancial liabilities represents interest paid on the Groups assetbased nancing facilities.
A 1% increase in the base rate would increase annual borrowing costs by approximately 53000.
Parity Grouppp41pp54.
Page 52 Notes to the accounts continued Strategic Report Governance Accounts notes and other information 7 Discontinued operations In December 2016 the Group Board committed to a plan to sell the Inition cash generating unit following the strategic decision made in May 2015 to place greater focus on the Groups core business.
As such Initions operating result for the current and comparative year as well as impairment of goodwill associated with the Inition cash generating unit is presented as discontinued.
The results of discontinued operations also include expenses incurred that are associated with the planned disposal of
The posttax result of discontinued operations was determined as follows Note 2017 2016 Revenue 2324 3263 Expenses 3426 3372 Impairment of goodwill 1165 Pretax loss 2267 109 Taxation credit 85 31 Loss for the year 2182 78 Basic loss per share 10 2.14p 0.08p Diluted loss per share 10 2.07p 0.07p The loss from the discontinued operation of 2182000 2016 78000 is attributable entirely to the owners of the
Cash ows used infrom discontinued operations 2017 2016 Net cash used infrom operating activities 674 45 Net cash used in investing activities 38 88 Net cash flows for the year 712 43 8 Share based payments The Group operates several share based reward schemes for employees A United Kingdom tax authority approved scheme for Executive Directors and senior sta an unapproved scheme for Executive Directors and senior sta and a Save As You Earn Scheme for all employees.
Under the approved and unapproved schemes options vest if the share price averages a target price for 5 consecutive days over a three year period from the date of grant.
Options lapse if the individual leaves the Group except under certain circumstances such as leaving by reason of redundancy when the options lapse 12 months after the leaving date.
Save As You Earn options lapse if not exercised within six months after the vesting date.
They are also subject to continued employment within the Group.
All employee options have a maximum term of ten years from the date of grant.
The total sharebased remuneration recognised in the Income Statement was 68000 2016 58000.
Sharebased remuneration relating to key management personnel is disclosed in note 26.
Parity Grouppp41pp54.
Page 53 Notes to the accounts continued Parity Group plc www. arity.
Report and Accounts 2017 stock code PTY 8 Share based payments continued 2017 2016 Weighted Weighted average average exercise 2017 exercise 2016 price p Number price p Number Outstanding at beginning of the year 15 8420851 19 8452583 Granted during the year  9 3100000 Exercised during the year 8 300000 Lapsed during the year 22 3565851 19 3131732 Outstanding at the end of the year 11 4555000 15 8420851 The exercise price of options outstanding at the end of the year and their weighted average contractual life fell within the following ranges 2017 2016 Weighted Weighted average average contractual Exercise contractual Exercise price p life years Number price p life years Number 1728 5 655000 1728 7 4220851 4555000 8420851 Of the total number of options outstanding at the end of the year 1455000 2016 2030000 had vested and were exercisable at the end of the year.
The weighted average exercise price of those options was 17 pence 2016 17 pence.
300000 options were exercised during the year 2016 nil at an average exercise price of 8 pence 2016 nil.
There were no options granted during the year 2016 3100000 options granted at a weighted average fair value of 9 pence.
The following information is relevant in determining the fair value of options granted during the year under equitysettled sharebased remuneration schemes operated by the Group.
There are no cashsettled schemes.
2017 2016 Stochastic Stochastic Option pricing model Weighted average share price at grant date p  9 Weighted average exercise price p  9 Weighted average contractual life years  10 Weighted average expected life years  5 Expected volatility  43  50% Weighted average risk free rate  0.27% Expected dividend growth rate  0% The volatility assumption is calculated as the historic volatility of the share price over a 3 and 5 year period prior to grant date.
Share options issued to dened benet pension scheme In December 2010 the Group issued 1000000 share options in Parity Group plc to the pension scheme at an exercise price of 9 pence per share.
These options may be exercised at the discretion of the Trustees they vested on grant and have no expiry date.
Any gain on exercise is to be used to reduce the scheme decit.
These options were valued using the stochastic method.
The share price on the grant date was 15.75 pence.
Whilst the options do not have an expiry date for valuation purposes it is assumed that the expected life of the options is 8 years.
The expected volatility is 64.2% and the average risk free rate assumed was 3.4%.
Parity Grouppp41pp54.
Page 54 Notes to the accounts continued Strategic Report Governance Accounts notes and other information 9 Taxation 2017 2016 Current tax expense Current tax on profit for the year 112 5 Total current tax expense 112 5 Deferred tax creditexpense Accelerated capital allowances 68 39 Origination and reversal of other temporary differences  3 Recognition of deferred tax previously unprovided 675 Change in corporation tax rate  20 Adjustments in respect of prior periods 39 8 Total deferred tax creditexpense 646 70 Tax creditexpense on continuing operations 534 75 The tax creditexpense on continuing operations excludes the tax credit from discontinued operations of 85000 2016 31000.
This has been included in protloss from discontinued operations net of tax see note 7.
The tax credit from discontinued operations of 85000 comprises a current tax credit of 112000 and a deferred tax expense of 27000.
As such there is no current tax payable by the Group for 2017.
The standard rate of corporation tax in the UK changed from 20% to 19% with eect from 1 April 2017.
Accordingly the Groups prots for this accounting period are subject to tax at a rate of 19.25% 2016 20%.
A further reduction to 17% eective 1 April 2020 was substantively enacted on 15 September 2016.
As such the tax rate of 17% has been applied in calculating the UK deferred tax position of the Group at 31 December 2017.
The reasons for the dierence between the actual tax creditcharge for the year and the standard rate of corporation tax in the United Kingdom applied to losses for the year are as follows 2017 2016 Profit before tax from continuing operations 1662 959 Expected tax charge based on the standard rate of United Kingdom corporation tax of 19.25% 2016 20% 320 192 Expenses not allowable for tax purposes 10 5 Adjustments in respect of prior periods 39 8 Decrease in deferred tax asset due to change in enacted rate  20 Accelerated capital allowances 9 Utilisation of unprovided tax losses carried forward 141 150 Recognition of deferred tax asset previously unprovided 675 Tax creditexpense on continuing operations 534 75 Tax on each component of other comprehensive income is as follows 2017 2016 Before tax Tax After tax Before tax Tax After tax Exchange differences on translation of foreign operations 39  39 13  13 Actuarial gainloss on defined benefit pension scheme 800 136 664 413  413 Parity Grouppp55pp63.
Page 55 Notes to the accounts continued Parity Group plc www. arity.
Report and Accounts 2017 stock code PTY 10 Earnings per ordinary share Basic earnings per share is calculated by dividing the basic earnings for the year by the weighted average number of fully paid ordinary shares in issue during the year.
Diluted earnings per share is calculated on the same basis as the basic earnings per share with a further adjustment to the weighted average number of fully paid ordinary shares to reect the eect of all dilutive potential ordinary shares.
Weighted Weighted average average number of Earnings number of Earnings Earnings shares per share Earnings shares per shareteltel 000 000 Pence 000 000 Pence Continuing operations Basic earnings per share 2196 102087 2.15 884 101824 0.87 Effect of dilutive options  3263   4691 Diluted earnings per share 2196 105350 2.08 884 106515 0.83 As at 31 December 2017 the number of ordinary shares in issue was 102124020 2016 101824020.
Basic loss per share from discontinued operations was 2.14p 2016 0.08p.
Diluted loss per share from discontinued operations was 2.07p 2016 0.07p.
Basic loss per share from continuing and discontinued operations was 0.01p 2016 0.79p.
Diluted loss per share from continuing and discontinued operations was 0.01p 2016 0.76p.
11 Intangible assets
Software
Property
Goodwill
Totalteltel 2017 2016
At 1 January 1083 1285 109 852 4594 5759 5786 7896 Additions 5 22     5 22 Disposals  51      51 Impairment    115    115 Transferred to assets held for sale  173  628  1165  1966 At 31 December 1088 1083 109 109 4594 4594 5791 5786 Accumulated amortisation At 1 January   731 783 Charge for the year   239 652 Disposals  51      51 Transferred to assets held for sale  94  559    653 At 31 December   970 731 Net book amount 227 446  15 4594 4594 4821 5055 At 31 December 2016 the intangible assets held in the Inition business unit were reclassied as held for sale.
The Company does not hold any intangible assets.
Neither the Group nor the Company had any additional capital commitments for the purchase of intangible assets as at the Balance Sheet date.
Parity Grouppp55pp63.
Page 56 Notes to the accounts continued 12 Goodwill The carrying amount of goodwill is allocated to the Groups two separate continuing cash generating units CGUs being Parity Professionals and Parity Consultancy Services.
At 31 December 2016 the goodwill associated with the Inition CGU was reclassied as held for sale.
Carrying amounts are as follows
Parity Consultancy Professionals Services Inition Total Carrying value Balance at 1 January 2017 2642 1952  4594 Balance at 31 December 2017 2642 1952  4594 Balance at 1 January 2016 2642 1952 1165 5759 Transferred to assets held for sale   1165 1165 Balance at 31 December 2016 2642 1952  4594 Goodwill was tested for impairment in accordance with IAS 36 at the year end and no impairment charge was recognised.
The recoverable amounts of the CGUs are based on value in use calculations using the pretax cash ows based on budgets approved by management for 2018.
Years from 2019 to 2021 are based on the budget for 2018 projected forward at expected growth rates.
Years from 2022 onward assume no further growth.
This approach is considered prudent based on current expectations of the 2018 longterm growth rate.
Major assumptions are as follows
Parity
Consultancy
Professionals
Services % % Discount rate Forecast revenue growth Operating margin 2018 Operating margin 2019 onward Discount rate Forecast revenue growth Operating margin 2017 Operating margin 2018 onward Discount rates are based on the Groups weighted average cost of capital adjusted for the specic risks of each cash generating unit.
In 2017 the Directors considered it appropriate to increase the WACC in light of industry and sector comparables.
Forecast revenue growth is expressed as the compound growth rate over the next 4 years from 2018 to 2021.
For all CGUs the rates are based on past experience of growth in revenues and future expectations of economic conditions.
Operating
A 10% change in any of the underlying assumptions used in the discounted cash ow forecasts would not lead to the carrying value of goodwill being in excess of their recoverable amount.
Strategic Report Governance Accounts notes and other information Parity Grouppp55pp63.
Page 57 Notes to the accounts continued Parity Group plc www. arity.
Report and Accounts 2017 stock code PTY 13 Property plant and equipment Leasehold Office improvements equipment Total
At cost Balance at 1 January 2016 16 3503 3519 Additions  129 129 Transferred to assets held for sale  193 193 Disposals  375 375 Balance at 31 December 2016 and 1 January 2017 16 3064 3080 Additions  53 53 Disposals  1976 1976 Balance at 31 December 2017 16 1141 1157 Accumulated depreciation Balance at 1 January 2016 16 3323 3339 Depreciation charge for the year  147 147 Transferred to assets held for sale 103 103 Disposals  375 375 Balance at 31 December 2016 and 1 January 2017 16 2992 3008 Depreciation charge for the year  47 47 Disposals  1976 1976 Balance at 31 December 2017 16 1063 1079 Net book value At 1 January 2016  180 180 At 31 December 2016  72 72 At 31 December 2017  78 78 Leasehold Office improvements equipment Total
At Cost Balance at 1 January 2016 134 Balance at 31 December 2016 and 1 January 2017 134 Balance at 31 December 2017 134 Accumulated depreciation Balance at 1 January 2016 112 Depreciation charge for the year 11 Balance at 31 December 2016 and 1 January 2017 123 Depreciation charge for the year 11 Balance at 31 December 2017 134 Net book value At 1 January 2016 22 At 31 December 2016 11 At 31 December 2017 During 2017 a review of the Groups xed asset registers was undertaken.
The review identied fully depreciated items with a cost value of 1976000 that was no longer used by the Group.
As such the Group recognised a 1976000 disposal for oce equipment at cost and the associated accumulated depreciation.
Parity Grouppp55pp63.
Page 58 Notes to the accounts continued 13 Property plant and equipment continued At 31 December 2016 the property plant and equipment held in the Inition business unit were reclassied as held for sale.
As at 31 December 2017 neither the Group nor the Company had any capital commitments contracted for but not provided for the purchase of tangible assets 2016 nil.
Leased plant and equipment At 31 December 2017 the total net carrying value of the leased equipment was 18000 2016 27000.
14 Deferred tax
2017 2016 At 1 January 409 507 Recognised in other comprehensive income Remeasurement of defined benefit pension scheme 136 Recognised in the income statement Change in enacted tax rate  24 Adjustments in relation to prior periods 39 6 Capital allowances in excess of depreciation 68 23 Other shortterm timing differences  3 Recognition of deferred tax previously unprovided 675 Transferred to assets held for sale  54 At 31 December 919 409 The deferred tax asset of 919000 2016 409000 comprises
2017 2016 Depreciation in excess of capital allowances 685 355 Short term and other timing differences 54 54 Retirement benefit liability 180 A deferred tax asset for deductible temporary dierences is not recognised unless it is more likely than not that there will be taxable prots in the foreseeable future against which the deferred tax asset can be utilised.
At the Balance Sheet date the Directors assessed the probability of future taxable prots being available against which Parity Consultancy Services could recognise a deferred tax asset for previously unrecognised deductible temporary dierences.
The review concluded that it is probable that future taxable prots will be available.
As such the Directors have recognised a deferred tax asset for all deductible temporary dierences available to Parity Consultancy Services.
A deferred tax asset for unused tax losses carried forward is recognised on the same basis as for deductible temporary dierences.
However the existence of the unused tax losses is itself strong evidence that future taxable prot may not be available.
Therefore when an entity has a history of recent losses the entity recognises a deferred tax asset arising from unused tax losses only to the extent that there is convincing evidence that sucient taxable prot will be available against which the unused tax losses can be utilised.
At the balance sheet date the Directors considered recognising a deferred tax asset for previously unrecognised unused tax losses carried forward by Parity Consultancy Services.
The review concluded that given the divisions history of relatively recent tax losses and the additional requirement of providing convincing evidence that sucient taxable prot will be available a prudent approach would be taken and deferred tax would remain unrecognised for tax losses carried forward by the division.
Strategic Report Governance Accounts notes and other information Parity Grouppp55pp63.
Page 59 Notes to the accounts continued Parity Group plc www. arity.
Report and Accounts 2017 stock code PTY 14 Deferred tax continued The Directors believe that the deferred tax asset recognised is recoverable based on the future earning potential of the Group and the individual cash generating divisions.
The forecasts for Parity Professionals comfortably support the unwinding of the deferred tax asset held by this division of 380000 2016 409000 and the forecasts for Parity Consultancy Services comfortably support the unwinding of the deferred tax asset held by this division of 539000 2016 nil.
The deferred tax asset at 31 December 2017 has been calculated on the rate of 17% substantively enacted at the Balance Sheet date.
The movements in deferred tax assets during the period are shown below
Credited to to other Transferred to income comprehensive assets held Asset statement income for saletel 2017 Depreciation in excess of capital allowances 685 330 Other shortterm timing differences 54 Retirement benefit liability 180 316 136 Charged Charged credited to to other Transferred to income comprehensive assets held Asset statement income for saletel 2016 Depreciation in excess of capital allowances 355 59  33 Other shortterm timing differences 54 6 Trading losses  21  21 The Group has unrecognised carried forward tax losses of 29485138 2016 30078882.
The Company has unrecognised carried forward tax losses of 24537730 2016 24301882.
The Group has unrecognised capital losses carried forward of 281936691 2016 281875386.
These losses may be carried forward indenitely.
Parity Grouppp55pp63.
Page 60 Notes to the accounts continued 15 Trade and other receivables Consolidated Companytel 2016 Amounts falling due within one year Trade receivables 5812 7577 Accrued income 3250 2588 Amounts recoverable on contracts 2541 3771 Amounts owed by subsidiary undertakings   2200 3367 Other receivables 136 84 Prepayments 033 14373 2202 3370 Amounts falling due after one year Amounts owed by subsidiary undertakings   122170 122736 Total 12033 14373 124372 126106 The fair values of trade and other receivables are not considered to dier from the values set out above.
5812000 2016 7430000 of the Groups trade receivables and 4941000 2016 5748000 of the total of the Groups accrued income and amounts recoverable on contracts are pledged as collateral for the assetbased borrowings.
These borrowings uctuate daily and at the yearend totalled 6581000 2016 8613000.
The Group records impairment losses on its trade receivables separately from gross receivables.
Factors considered in making provisions for receivables include the ability of the customer to settle the debt the age of the debt and any other circumstance particular to the transaction that may impact recoverability.
The movements on the allowance account during the year are included within operating costs in the consolidated income statement and are summarised below
2017 2016 Opening balance 7 Increases in provisions 4 Written off against provisions  2 Recovered amounts reversed  9 Closing balance The balance of impaired losses for the continuing Group at 31 December 2017 was nil 2016 nil.
All debts at 31 December 2017 are considered to be recoverable.
As at 31 December 2017 trade receivables of 737000 2016 1335000 were past due but not impaired.
These relate to customers where there is no evidence of unwillingness or of an inability to settle the debt.
The ageing of Group trade receivables is as follows 2017 2016 Gross Impaired Total Gross Impaired Total Not past due 5074  5074 6242  6242 3160 days and past due 588  588 957  957 6190 days 112  112 250  250 Total 5811  5811 7577  7577 Strategic Report Governance Accounts notes and other information Parity Grouppp55pp63.
Page 61 Notes to the accounts continued Parity Group plc www. arity.
Report and Accounts 2017 stock code PTY 15 Trade and other receivables continued The Company had no provisions for trade receivables as it has no trade receivables.
Other receivables in the Group and the Company were not past due and not impaired.
The Companys receivables due from subsidiary undertakings were reviewed for impairment at the year end based on the performance of 2017 and on subsequent years forecast projections.
A discounted future cash ow method was employed for the review.
As a result of this review no provision was deemed necessary.
The assessment was performed on a value in use basis using discount rates of between 11.5% and 13.0% 2016 between 3.1% and 5.5% and the other parameters used in the goodwill impairment review as outlined in note 12.
16 Assets and liabilities classied as held for sale and included in disposal groups The major classes of assets and liabilities comprising the operations classied as held for sale are set out below.
Consolidated
2017 2016 Goodwill  1165 Intangible assets  software 44 79 Intangible assets  intellectual property  69 Property plant and equipment  office equipment 69 90 Trade and other receivables 637 915 Work in progress 14 17 Deferred tax asset 27 54 Total assets classified as held for sale 791 2389 Trade and other payables 365 453 Provisions 30 30 Total liabilities associated with assets classified as held for sale 395 483 Net assets of disposal group 396 1906 Goodwill was assessed for impairment at the Balance Sheet date and written down to nil 2016 1165000 based on the expected sale price for the Inition cash generating unit.
Trade and other receivables of 637000 2016 915000 is net of a provision for doubtful debts of 134000 2016 nil.
Parity Grouppp55pp63.
Page 62 Notes to the accounts continued 17 Loans and borrowings
2017 2016
Finance lease liabilities Current Bank and other borrowings due within one year or on demand Assetbased financing facility 6581 8613 Current portion of finance lease liabilities 11 23 6592 8636 Finance lease liabilities Present Present Future value of Future value of minimum minimum minimum minimum lease lease lease lease payments Interest Payments payments Interest paymentsteltel Less than one year 11  Between one and two years 8 8 22  22 19  Changes in liabilities from nancing activities Loans and Finance lease borrowings liabilities Balance at 1 January 2017 8613 45 Repayment of borrowings 2032 Payment of finance lease liabilities  26 Balance at 31 December 2017 6581 19 Further details of the Groups banking facilities are given in note 20.
18 Trade and other payables Consolidated Companytel 2016 Amounts falling due within one year Payments in advance 16 594 Trade payables 5318 6018 14 Amounts due to subsidiary undertakings   10967 10724 Other tax and social security payables 1450 1126 21 21 Other payables and accruals 1565 1366 139 174 8349 9104 11141 10919 Amounts falling due after one year Amounts due to subsidiary undertakings   121384 121255 Total 8349 9104 132525 132174 Strategic Report Governance Accounts notes and other information Parity Grouppp55pp63.
Page 63 Notes to the accounts continued Parity Group plc www. arity.
Report and Accounts 2017 stock code PTY
Leasehold dilapidations Total Consolidated 000 000 At 1 January 2017 17 17 Created in year 1 1 At 31 December 2017 18 18 Due after more than one year 18 18 Total 18 18 At the Balance Sheet date the Company had no provisions 2016 No provisions.
Leasehold dilapidations Leasehold dilapidations relate to the estimated cost of returning a leasehold property to its original state at the end of the lease in accordance with the lease terms.
Dilapidation charges that will crystallise at the end of the period of occupancy are provided for in full on all nonserviced properties.
Based on current lease expiry dates it is estimated these provisions will be settled over a period of two to three years.
The main uncertainty relates to the estimation of the costs that will be incurred at the end of the lease.
20 Financial instruments  risk management The Group is exposed to risks that arise from its use of nancial instruments.
This note describes the Groups objectives policies and processes for managing those risks and the methods used to measure them.
Further quantitative information in respect of these risks is presented throughout these nancial statements.
There have been no substantive changes in the Groups exposure to nancial instrument risks and the methods used to measure them from previous periods unless otherwise stated in this note.
Principal nancial instruments The principal nancial instruments used by the Group from which nancial instrument risk arises are trade receivables cash and cash equivalents trade and other payables and bank borrowings.
A summary by category of the nancial instruments held by the Group is provided below Amortised Loans and cost receivables Total Consolidated 000 000 000 As at 31 December 2017 Financial assets Net cash and cash equivalents  4968 4968 Trade and other short term receivables  11739 11739 16707 16707 Financial liabilities Assetbased financing facility 6581 6581 Finance lease liabilities 19  19 Trade and other short term payables 8333  8333 14933  14933 As at 31 December 2016 Financial assets Net cash and cash equivalents  4272 4272 Trade and other short term receivables  14020 14020 18292 18292 Financial liabilities Assetbased financing facility 8613  8613 Finance lease liabilities 45  45 Trade and other short term payables 8510  8510 17168  17168 Parity Grouppp64pp76.
Page 64 Notes to the accounts continued 20 Financial instruments  risk management continued A summary by category of the nancial instruments held by the Company is provided below Amortised Loans and cost receivables Total Company 000 000 000 As at 31 December 2017 Financial assets Noncurrent trade and other receivables  122170 122170 Net cash and cash equivalents  116 116 Trade and other short term receivables  2200 2200 124486 124486 Financial liabilities Trade and other short term payables 11141  11141 Noncurrent trade and other payables 121384  121384 132525  132525 As at 31 December 2016 Financial assets Noncurrent trade and other receivables  122736 122736 Net cash and cash equivalents  111 111 Trade and other short term receivables  3367 3367 126214 126214 Financial liabilities Trade and other short term payables 10919  10919 Noncurrent trade and other payables 121255  121255 132174  132174 Noncurrent amounts due to subsidiary undertakings have no specic repayment terms but are subject to notice periods of at least one year.
Fair values of nancial instruments The fair values of all of the Groups and of the Companys nancial instruments are the same as their carrying values.
General objectives policies and processes  risk management The Group is exposed through its operations to the following nancial instrument risks credit risk liquidity risk interest rate risk and foreign currency risk.
The policy for managing these risks is set by the Board following recommendations from the Finance Director.
Certain risks are managed centrally while others are managed locally following guidelines communicated from the centre.
The overall objective of the Board is to set policies that seek to reduce risk as far as possible without unduly aecting the Groups competitiveness and exibility.
The policy for each of the above risks is described in more detail below.
Credit risk Credit risk arises from the Groups trade and other receivables.
It is the risk that the counterparty fails to discharge their obligation in respect of the instrument.
The Group is mainly exposed to credit risk from credit sales.
It is Group policy to assess the credit risk of new customers before entering contracts.
Such credit ratings are then factored into the credit assessment process to determine the appropriate credit limit for each customer.
The Group does not collect collateral to mitigate credit risk.
The Group operates exclusively in the UK.
Approximately 69% 2016 61% of the Groups turnover is derived from the Public
The largest customer balance represents 29% 2016 19% of the trade receivable balance.
Quantitative disclosures of the credit risk exposure in relation to nancial assets are set out below.
Further disclosures regarding trade and other receivables which are neither past due nor impaired are provided in note 15.
Strategic Report Governance Accounts notes and other information Parity Grouppp64pp76.
Page 65 Notes to the accounts continued Parity Group plc www. arity.
Report and Accounts 2017 stock code PTY 20 Financial instruments  risk management continued Credit risk continued 2017 2016 Carrying Maximum Carrying Maximum value exposure value exposure Financial assets Cash and cash equivalents 4968 4968 4272 4272 Trade and other receivables 11739 11739 14020 14020 Total financial assets 16707 16707 18292 18292 Interest rate risk Interest rate risk is the risk that the fair value or future cash ows of a nancial instrument will uctuate because of changes in interest rates.
It is Group policy that all external Group borrowings are drawn down on the assetbased nancing facilities arranged with our bankers which bear a oating rate of interest based on the PNC base rate.
Borrowings against the assetbased nancing facilities are typically drawn or repaid on a daily basis in order to minimise borrowings and interest costs and transaction charges.
Although the Board accepts that this policy neither protects the Group entirely from the risk of paying rates in excess of current market rates nor eliminates the cash ow risk associated with interest payments it considers that it achieves an appropriate balance of these risks.
Throughout 2017 and 2016 the Groups variable rate borrowings were denominated in Sterling.
Interest costs on borrowings from the assetbased nancing facility with PNC was charged at 2.35% above base rate throughout 2017 2016 2.5% until 1 September 2016 and 2.35% subsequently.
Amounts under this facility are repayable upon demand.
If interest rates on borrowings had been 1% higherlower throughout the year with all other variables held constant the loss after tax for the year would have been approximately 53000 higherlower and net assets 53000 higherlower.
The Directors consider a 1% change in base rates is the maximum likely change over the next year being the period to the next point at which these disclosures are expected to be made.
The Company holds interest bearing loan agreements with some of its subsidiary undertakings.
Interest on all loans is charged at 2.0% above the prevailing Bank of England base rate except for one loan with Parity International B. at 2.0% above the prevailing European Central Bank base rate.
As at 31 December 2017 the loan balance due by the Company to Parity International BV translated into Sterling was 27463000 2016 26696000 payable.
Foreign exchange risk Foreign currency risk is the risk that the fair value or future cash ows of a nancial instrument will uctuate because of changes in foreign exchange rates.
The Group no longer has any active overseas operations but does retain certain overseas subsidiaries that are not trading and are in the process of being closed down.
The Groups net assets arising from overseas operations are exposed to currency risk resulting in gains or losses on retranslation into sterling.
The asset exposure is mainly in respect of intercompany balances.
The Group does not hedge its net investment in overseas operations as it does not consider that the potential nancial impact of such hedging techniques warrants the reduction in volatility in consolidated net assets.
The continuing business has few transactions in foreign currency.
The hedging of individual contracts is considered on a case by case basis.
Owing to the small value and volume of such contracts no hedging transactions were entered in 2017 or 2016.
During 2014 the underlying denomination of a large intercompany balance between the Company and one of the Groups inactive overseas subsidiaries was revised.
As at 31 December 2013 the Company held a loan balance due to the relevant subsidiary of 24471000 which was denominated in Sterling.
The base currency of the Company is Sterling and the overseas subsidiarys base currency is Euros.
In 2014 the denomination of the loan was revised to Euros and thus subject to exchange rate uctuations in the books of the Company.
As a result in 2017 the Company recorded a translation loss of 1092000 2016 loss of 3212000.
As at the 31 December 2017 the loan balance due by the Company translated into Sterling was 27463000 2016 26696000.
Parity Grouppp64pp76.
Page 66 Notes to the accounts continued 20 Financial instruments  risk management continued Foreign exchange risk continued The currency prole of the Groups net nancial assets was as follows Functional currency of individual entity Sterling Euro US Dollar Total Net foreign currencyteltel 2017 2016 financial assets
2236 219  966 2236 1185
27455 26694 US Dollar 1350   5 1354 Total net exposure 2236 1569  966 29686 24155 The prole of the Companys net nancial assets was as follows Functional currency Sterling 2017 2016 Net foreign currency financial assets 000 000
Euro 27455 26694 US Dollar 5 4 Total net exposure 27450 26690 Sensitivity analysis  Group and Company If the exchange rate between Sterling and the Euro had been 10% higherlower at the balance sheet date with all other variables held constant the eect on equity for the year would have been approximately 2746300 higherlower.
A 10% uctuation in any other currency exchange rate would not have a signicant impact on prot and loss nor equity.
Liquidity risk Liquidity risk arises from the Groups management of working capital and the nance charges on its borrowings under its assetbased nancing arrangements.
It is the risk that the Group will encounter diculty in meeting its nancial obligations as they fall due.
The liquidity of each Group entity is managed centrally with daily transfers to operating entities to maintain a predetermined cash balance.
Normal supplier terms range from 2 weeks to 30 days.
The level of the Group facility is approved periodically by the Board and negotiated with the Groups current bankers.
At the reporting date cash ow projections were considered by the Board and the Group is forecast to have sucient funds and available funding facilities to meet its obligations as they fall due.
The following table sets out the contractual maturities representing undiscounted contractual cash ows of nancial liabilities
Up to Over 1 month 1 month Total At 31 December 2017 000 000 000 Trade and other payables 8333  8333 Borrowings 6581 19 6600 Total 14914 19 14933 Up to Over 1 month 1 month Total At 31 December 2016 000 000 000 Trade and other payables 8510  8510 Borrowings 8613 45 8658 Total 17123 45 17168 Strategic Report Governance Accounts notes and other information Parity Grouppp64pp76.
Page 67 Notes to the accounts continued Parity Group plc www. arity.
Report and Accounts 2017 stock code PTY 20 Financial instruments  risk management continued Liquidity risk continued
Between
Up to 1 and 12 Over 1 month months 1 year Total At 31 December 2017 000 000 000 000 Trade and other payables 11141  121384 132525 Total 11141  121384 132525
Up to 1 and 12 Over 1 month months 1 year Total At 31 December 2016 000 000 000 000 Trade and other payables 10919  121255 132174 Total 10919  121255 132174 More detail on trade and other payables is given in note 18.
Capital disclosures The capital structure of the Group consists of cash and cash equivalents equity attributable to equity holders and asset based nance.
There is no longterm external debt except for a small number of nance leases.
The leases represent a liability of 19000 2016 45000 and are repayable within two years.
The Company is funded through equity and intercompany loans.
The Group uses an assetbased nance facility with PNC Business Credit a member of The PNC Financial Services Group
The facility which enables the Group to borrow against both trade debt and accrued income and provides for borrowing of up to 15.0m depending on the availability of appropriate assets as security.
The Groups and Companys objectives when maintaining capital are to safeguard the entitys ability to continue as a going concern so that it can continue to provide returns for shareholders and benets for other stakeholders and to provide an adequate return to shareholders by pricing products and services commensurately with the level of risk.
2017 2016 Cash and cash equivalents 4968 4272 Assetbased borrowings 6581 8613 Finance lease liabilities 19 45 Net debt 1632 4386 The Board regularly reviews the adequacy of resources available and considers the options available to increase them.
The assetbased borrowing facility contains certain externally imposed nancial covenants which have been met throughout the period.
The Company does not currently have distributable reserves available for dividend payments.
A capital reconstruction will be necessary to create reserves available for distribution.
The Board plan to review possible capital reconstruction options in the near future.
Parity Grouppp64pp76.
Page 68 Notes to the accounts continued 21 Reserves The Board is not proposing a dividend for the year 2016 nil pence per share.
The following describes the nature and purpose of each reserve within owners equity Share capital Share capital consists of ordinary share capital and previously consisted of deferred share capital.
Ordinary share capital Share capital is the amount subscribed for ordinary share capital at nominal value.
During 2017 300000 share options were exercised increasing the Groups ordinary share capital from 2036480 to 2042480 2016 no change to ordinary share capital.
Deferred share capital Deferred share capital is the nominal value assigned to the deferred share capital.
In May 2017 the Directors resolved to compulsorily reacquire and cancel the deferred shares of Parity Group plc.
As such the deferred share capital at year end was nil 2016 14319108.
Share premium reserve Share premium is the amount subscribed for share capital in excess of nominal value.
Following the exercise of share options in 2017 the share premium reserve increased from 33195689 to 33212189 2016 There was no change to the share premium reserve.
Capital redemption reserve A capital redemption reserve of 14319108 was created during 2017 when the Directors resolved to cancel the deferred shares of Parity Group plc 2016 nil.
Other reserves Other reserves of the Group of 44160000 relate principally to a reserve created following a change of the Groups ultimate parent and a corresponding Scheme of Arrangement in July 1999.
Other reserves of the Company of 22729000 relate principally to a reserve created following the reorganisation of the Groups capital structure in 2002 which resulted in the Company increasing its investment in subsidiary undertakings.
Retained earnings Retained earnings represent the cumulative net gains and losses recognised in the Income Statement.
Consolidated retained earnings are stated after adjustment for the ESOPs investment in the Companys shares of 351000 2016 351000.
Strategic Report Governance Accounts notes and other information Parity Grouppp64pp76.
Page 69 Notes to the accounts continued Parity Group plc www. arity.
Report and Accounts 2017 stock code PTY 22 Pension commitments The Group operates a small number of pension schemes.
With the exception of the Parity Group Retirement Benets Plan all of the schemes are dened contribution plans and the assets are held in separately administered funds.
Contributions to dened contribution schemes from continuing operations during the year were 192000 2016 178000.
Dened benet plan In March 1995 the Group established the Parity Retirement Benets Plan renamed as the Parity Group Retirement Benets Plan following a Scheme of Arrangement in 1999 in order to facilitate the continuance of pension entitlements for sta transferring from other schemes following acquisitions in 1994.
The Plan is governed by the Trustees of the plan and is administered by Cartwright Group Limited in accordance with the Trust Deed and Rules solely for the benet of its members and other beneciaries.
The Trustees comprise an independent Chairman one member representative and one employer representative.
It is a funded dened benet scheme and has been closed to new members since 1995.
With eect from 1 January 2005 this scheme was also closed to future service accrual and future contributions paid into money purchase arrangements.
The weighted average liability duration is approximately 14 years and can be attributed to the scheme members as follows Weighted average
Pensioner members 60 14 Deferred members 8 20 Total 68 14 During the year one deferred member elected to transfer out of the Plan.
The Plan is funded by the Group based on a separate actuarial valuation for funding purposes.
The actuarial valuation is subject to more prudent assumptions than the valuation under IFRS 19.
The next triennial actuarial valuation is due as at April 2018.
Funding requirements are formally set out in the Statement of Funding Principles Schedule of Contributions and Recovery Plan agreed between the Trustees and the Group.
During March 2015 the Trustees agreed to a temporary suspension of contributions and subsequently extended this agreement until July 2016.
In February 2016 a lump sum contribution of 100000 was made by the Group.
In March 2016 agreement was reached with the Trustees to reduce decit reduction contributions linking amounts payable to company performance and aordability on a sliding scale as part of the 2015 triennial valuation review.
As a result monthly contributions of 15000 resumed from May 2016 until March 2035 with conditional annual bonus payments predicated on the Groups nancial performance and the divestment of noncore assets.
The contributions increase each year in line with RPI from the 1st January with the rst increase applied on 1st January 2017.
The balance of the decit is expected to be met by asset outperformance.
The core contributions in 2018 are expected to be 16700 per month to allow for increased scheme expenses in addition to the inationary increase.
In 2012 an issue was made to the Plan of 1000000 share options in Parity Group plc at an exercise price of 9 pence per share to be exercised at the discretion of the Trustees and any gain to be used for the benet of the Plan.
These options vested on grant and have no expiry date.
In 2017 the Trustees changed the investment strategy and fund choices in order to reduce the volatility of the decit whilst increasing the longer term expected investment return.
This was achieved by using liability driven investment which provides leveraged exposure to bondlike assets.
The leverage was used to reduce decit volatility and has allowed a greater share of the assets to be invested in growth assets as set out in the Composition of Plan Assets table on page 71.
The liability driven investments signicantly reduced both interest rate and ination risk so that using a stochastic value at risk model the overall investment risk reduced by approximately one third.
The main funding risks are as follows Investment return risk  if the assets underperform the assumed returns in setting the funding targets then additional contributions may be required Longevity risk  if the future improvements in mortality exceed the assumptions then additional contributions may be required Foreign currency exchange rate risk  the diversied growth funds have the option to use foreign currency as an asset class.
The diversied growth funds are actively managed and consequently any foreign currency exposure is constantly monitored and addressed where the riskreward balance is not appropriate.
Parity Grouppp64pp76.
Page 70 Notes to the accounts continued 22 Pension commitments continued The valuation for IAS 19 has been provided by Cartwright Group Limited a company that specialises in providing actuarial services as at 31 December 2017.
Principal actuarial assumptions 2017 2016 Rate of increase of pensions in payment 3.7%  3.9% 3.7%  4.0% Discount rate 2.45% 2.6% Retail price inflation 3.3% 3.4% Consumer price inflation 2.3% 2.4% In accordance with the revised IAS19 the assumption for future investment returns is the same discount rate 2.45% used in calculating the pension liabilities.
The underlying mortality assumption used is in accordance with the standard table known as S1PAH S1PA or S1PAL mortality dependent on the size of each members pension using the CMI2015 projection based on year of birth with a long term rate of improvement of 1.25% p.
2016 1.25% p.
This results in the following life expectancies Male aged 65 at 31.12.17 has a life expectancy of 87 years 2016 87 years Female aged 65 at 31.12.17 has a life expectancy of 89 years 2016 89 years Reconciliation to consolidated statement of nancial position 2017 2016 Fair value of plan assets 21880 22465 Present value of funded obligations 22939 24313 At the end of the year 1059 1848 Reconciliation of plan assets 2017 2016 At the beginning of the year 22465 19703 Expected return 559 728 Contribution by Group 184 231 Benefits paid 1792 1006 Expenses met by scheme 145 117 Actuarial gain 609 2926 At the end of the year 21880 22465 Benets paid during 2017 included a lump sum payment to one member who opted to transfer out of the Plan.
Composition of plan assets 2017 2016 Diversified growth funds  Quoted 12881 Liability driven investment funds  Quoted 8829 Equities  Quoted  7993 Gilts  7114 Bonds  7087 Options in Parity Group plc 96 96 Cash 74 175 Total 21880 22465 Strategic Report Governance Accounts notes and other information Parity Grouppp64pp76.
Page 71 Notes to the accounts continued Parity Group plc www. arity.
Report and Accounts 2017 stock code PTY 22 Pension commitments continued Reconciliation of plan liabilities 2017 2016 At the beginning of the year 24313 21194 Interest cost 609 786 Benefits paid 1792 1006 Actuarial gainloss 191 3339 At the end of the year 22939 24313 Amounts recognised in the consolidated income statement 2017 2016 Included in Finance Costs Expected return on plan assets 414 611 Unwinding of discount on plan liabilities interest cost 609 786 Net finance costs in respect of postretirement benefits 195 175 Amounts recognised in the consolidated statement of comprehensive income 2017 2016 Remeasurement of defined benefit pension scheme Actuarial gain on plan assets 609 2926 Actuarial gainloss on plan liabilities 191 3339 Remeasurement of defined benefit pension scheme 800 413 Dened benet obligation trendstel 2014 2013 Plan assets 21880 22465 19703 20356 17421 Plan liabilities 22939 24313 21194 22457 19591 Deficit 1059 1848 1491 2101 2170 Experience adjustments on assets 609 2926 401 2251 34 2.9% 15.0% 2.0% 12.4% 0.2% Experience adjustments on liabilities 191 3339 1249 2900 255 0.8% 15.9% 5.6% 14.8% 1.3% Sensitivity Analysis
Decrease
Liabilities Assets Deficit in deficit Effect of change in assumptions 000s 000s 000s 000s No change 22939 21880 1059 0.25% rise in discount rate 22175 21880 295 764 0.25% fall in discount rate 23744 21880 1864 805 0.25% rise in inflation 23058 21880 1178 119 0.25% fall in inflation 22823 21880 943 116 Parity Grouppp64pp76.
Page 72 Notes to the accounts continued 23 Share capital Authorised share capital Ordinary shares Deferred shares of 2p each 0.04p each Totaltel 2017 2017 number 000 number 000 000 Authorised at 1 January 409044603 8181 35797769808 14319 22500 Cancelation of deferred shares   35797769808 14319 14319 Authorised at 31 December 409044603 8181   8181 Issued share capital Ordinary shares Deferred shares of 2p each 0.04p each Totaltel 2017 2017 number 000 number 000 000 Issued and fully paid at 1 January 101824020 2037 35797769808 14319 16356 Issue of new ordinary shares 300000 6   6 Cancelation of deferred shares   35797769808 14319 14319 Issued and fully paid at 31 December 102124020 2043   2043 In May 2017 the Directors resolved to cancel the deferred shares of Parity Group plc.
Upon cancellation the value of the deferred shares transferred to a capital redemption reserve within owners equity.
The deferred shares were not listed on the London Stock Exchange had no voting rights no rights to dividends and the right only to a very limited return on capital in the event of liquidation.
Shares held by ESOPTreasury Shares 2017 2016 Number Number Ordinary shares held by the ESOP 43143 43143 The shares held by the ESOP are expected to be issued under share option contracts.
24 Operating lease commitments Operating leases  lessee The total future minimum rents payable under noncancellable operating leases are as follows Land and Plant and Land and Plant and buildings machinery buildings machinerytel 2016 Continuing operations Amounts payable Within one year Between two and five years Over five years 34 1The increase in land and buildings operating lease commitments is due to a veyear lease extension for the Groups Manchester oce that was agreed during 2017.
Strategic Report Governance Accounts notes and other information Parity Grouppp64pp76.
Page 73 Notes to the accounts continued Parity Group plc www. arity.
Report and Accounts 2017 stock code PTY 25 Contingencies In the normal course of business the Group is exposed to the risk of claims in respect of contracts where the customer or supplier is dissatised with the performance pricing andor completion of the contracted service or product.
Such claims are normally resolved by a combination of negotiation further work by Parity or the supplier andor monetary settlement without formal legal process being necessary.
Occasionally such claims progress into legal action.
At the present time Group management believes the resolution of any known claims or legal proceedings will not have a material further impact on the nancial position of the Group.
26 Key management remuneration Key management comprises the Groups Board of Directors and the Managing Directors of Parity Professionals and Parity Consultancy Services.
The total remuneration received by key management for 2017 was 803000 2016 909000.
This comprises emoluments received pension contributions and share based payment charges 2016 included compensation for loss of oce.
Remuneration of the Board of Directors including that of the highest paid Director A Rommel is disclosed in detail within the remuneration report on page 28.
2017 2016 Short term employee benefits 741 740 Post employment benefits 28 28 Compensation for loss of office  87 Sharebased payments note 8  Related party transactions
There were no related party transactions during the year 2016 none.
Company
Details of the Companys holding in Group undertakings are given in note 28.
The Company entered into transactions with other Group undertakings as shown in the table below.
Subsidiary
Operating
Finance Finance loans Operating Finance Finance expenses income expense written off expenses income expenseteltel 2016 Expenses incurred from Group subsidiaries 1609 1341 528  1451 Income generated from Group subsidiaries 1441  1668  1272 At 31 December the Company had the following amounts payable torecoverable from Group undertakings.
2017 2016 Amounts owed by subsidiary undertakings Falling due within one year note 15 2200 3367 Falling due after one year note 15 122170 122736 Amounts due to subsidiary undertakings Falling due within one year note 18 10967 10724 Falling due after one year note 18 121384 121255 Parity Grouppp64pp76.
Page 74 Notes to the accounts continued 28 Subsidiaries The principal subsidiaries of Parity Group plc which have been included in these consolidated nancial statements are Parity Professionals Limited Parity Consultancy Services Limited and Inition Limited.
Parity Professionals Limited and Parity Consultancy Services Limited are wholly owned by Parity Holdings Limited and incorporated in the United Kingdom.
Inition
Limited has been included in these Consolidated nancial statements as a discontinued operation and as assets and associated liabilities held for sale.
Inition Limited is wholly owned by Parity Solutions Limited and is incorporated in the United Kingdom.
Parity Solutions Limited is a direct subsidiary of Parity Holdings Limited and is incorporated in the United Kingdom.
Parity
Holdings Limited is a direct subsidiary of Parity Group plc and is incorporated in the United Kingdom.
Parity Professionals Limited is a specialist IT recruitment services company.
Parity Consultancy Services Limited provides business and IT consultancy services focusing on the provision of data solutions and delivery of IT projects.
Inition Limited specialises in virtual reality augmented reality and 3D solutions.
The Companys investment in continuing subsidiaries was reviewed for impairment at the year end based on the performance of 2017 and on subsequent years forecast projections.
A discounted future cash ow method was employed for the review.
As a result of this review no provision was deemed necessary leaving a carrying value of 20527000 2016 20527000.
The assessment was performed on a value in use basis using discount rates of between 11.5% and 13.0% 2016 between 3.1% and 5.5% and the other parameters used in the goodwill impairment review as outlined in note 12.
The remaining Group subsidiaries are either discontinued or dormant are wholly owned by the Group ultimate parent Parity Group plc and are registered in the UK at Dawson House 5 Jewry Street London EC3N 2EX unless stated otherwise in the list below Parity Eurosoft Ltd Parity International BV registered at Keizersgracht 6264 1015 CS Amsterdam Netherlands Parity Ltd Parity Resources Ltd Parity Solutions Dublin 1999 Ltd registered at Molyneux House Bride Street Dublin 8 Ireland Parity Solutions Ireland Ltd registered at Northern Ireland Science Park Queens Road Belfast BT3 9DT Personnel Solutions Inc.
Teltech International Corp.
During 2017 a Group simplication project was undertaken which resulted in 35 previously discontinued or dormant Group subsidiaries being dissolved.
Strategic Report Governance Accounts notes and other information Parity Grouppp64pp76.
Page 75 Corporate information Parity Group plc www. arity.
Report and Accounts 2017 stock code PTY Registered oce Dawson House 5 Jewry Street London EC3N 2EX tel Registered in England and Wales No.
Registrars
Equiniti Limited Aspect House Spencer Road Lancing West Sussex BN99 6DA tel Equiniti oer a range of information online.
You can access information on your shareholding indicative share prices and dividend details and nd practical help on transferring shares or updating your details at site Enquiries concerning shareholdings in Parity Group plc should be directed in the rst instance to the Registrars Equiniti as above.
Investor relations MHP Communications 6 Agar Street
WC2N 4HN tel Further information for shareholders including copies of the Annual and Interim Reports can be obtained from the company secretarys oce at the registered oce address below or from the Parity Group website at www. arity.
The Company Secretary Parity Group plc Dawson House 5 Jewry Street London EC3N 2EX Or by email to email.
Advisors
Auditor
KPMG LLP 15 Canada Square
E14 5GL
RBS Group PNC Business Credit 9th Floor 814 The Broadway 280 Bishopsgate Haywards Heath London West Sussex EC2M 4RB RH16 3AP Nominated advisors and brokers WH Ireland 24 Martin Lane
EC4R 0DR
Pinsent Masons 30 Crown Place
EC2A 4ES Parity Grouppp64pp76.
Page 76 Parity Group plc Report and Accounts Year Ended 31 December 2017 Parity Group plc Dawson House 5 Jewry Street London EC3N 2EX tel www. arity.
Stock code PTY Perivan Financial Printtel60 Parity Group Cover Spread 5mm Spine.
