Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 FOCUSED ON DELIVERING GROWTH 17.4m Clinical Research Services 17.4 million growth of 9% on PY Drug Safety and Medical Information 22.2 million growth of 68% on PY For further information visit site We have established a portfolio of codevelopment partnerships with pharmaceutical and biotech companies using a shared risk model and we wholly own a pipeline of proprietary development products for the treatment of surgical bleeding.
Our offer includes clinical development trial management and pharmacovigilance services to over 200 clients ranging from top 10 pharmaceutical and generics companies to small and midsized drug development companies.
INTRODUCTION
ERGOMED PROVIDES SPECIALISED SERVICES TO THE PHARMACEUTICAL INDUSTRY .
Strategic report 1 Highlights 2 At a glance 4 Company overview 10 Chairmans statement
12 Chief Executive Officers review
14 Strategy 16 Strategy in action 18 Financial review 20 Principal risks
22 Board of directors 24 Corporate governance statement 26 Directors remuneration report unaudited 29 Directors report Financial statements 31 Independent auditors report 38 Consolidated income statement 39 Consolidated statement of comprehensive income 40 Consolidated balance sheet 41 Consolidated statement of changes in equity 42 Consolidated cash flow statement 43 Company balance sheet 44 Company statement of changes in equity 45 Company cash flow statement 46 Notes to the financial statements Net Service Revenue 1 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Governance Strategic report 45tel 2017 million Net Service Revenue Reimbursement Revenue Licence Revenue 80tel 2017 million Contracted Order Backlog 26%
21%
FINANCIAL HIGHLIGHTS
BUSINESS HIGHLIGHTS
Acquisition of PSR Group BV PSR a leading contract research organisation based in The Netherlands and focused on orphan drug development for a total consideration of up to 5.7 million 5.1 million October 2017 Institutional placing raising gross proceeds of 2.9 million to partially fund the initial consideration for PSR September 2017 PrimeVigilance demonstrated its successful pilot project in robotic automation at an intelligent automation seminar for the International Society of Pharmacovigilance ISOP December 2017 Board and management appointments including Peter George former CEO of Clinigen Group plc and NonExecutive Director of Ergomed to Chairman Dr Miroslav Reljanovic founder and former CEO to Executive ViceChairman Stephen Stamp to CEO and Jan Petracek to COO An agreement with Allergy Therapeutics plc for a multistudy codevelopment partnership to support three of Allergy Therapeutics OralVac products December 2017 First commercialisation deal for Haemostatix products with Boryung for South Korea September Positive Phase II data from PeproStat our whollyowned product and the first to come from the Haemostatix pipeline October 2017 Services Clinical Research Services Drug Safety and Medical Information Phases I  III Phase IV Drug Safety Medical
Project management Patient recruitment Medical writing Data management  statistics Regulatory affairs Quality assurance Adverse event case processing Medical safety review  reports Consulting  audit Medical information QPPV  Qualified person 2 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 WHAT WE DO Ergomed offers a comprehensive suite of specialised services to the pharmaceutical industry.
In our Clinical Research Services division we undertake on behalf of our clients all facets of clinical trial management from Phase I to IV.
In our Drug Safety and Medical Information division we provide a range of services related to the collection aggregation and reporting of safety issues related to drugs on the market sometimes called pharmacovigilance.
See pages 4 and 5 for more information Clinical Research Services Over 20 years Ergomed has built particular expertise in oncology neurology immunology and the development of orphan drugs.
Our
Site Management model and Study Physician teams resulting in a closer and more productive relationship between Ergomed and investigational sites involved in clinical trials.
Ergomed Clinical Research Services operates out of 16 offices across the Northern Hemisphere from San Antonio US to T aipei T aiwan and is conducting clinical trials in 55 countries.
Comprehensive range of services AT A GLANCE See pages 6 and 7 for more information Drug Safety and Medical Information Through our subsidiary PrimeVigilance we offer the full range of drug safety and medical information services including adverse event case processing aggregate reporting risk management plans signal detection and audit.
PrimeVigilance including the recently rebranded PharmInvent is a medically led organisation with a passion for quality.
This is reflected in our exceptional client retention and organic growth.
PrimeVigilance operates out of six offices from Boston US to Belgrade Serbia and is monitoring drugs in over 100 countries for more than 100 clients.
SPECIALISED SERVICES PROVIDER 3 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Governance Strategic report Net Service
Clinical Research Services OUR PERFORMANCE OUR GEOGRAPHICAL REACH New contracts won in 2017 Order backlog at yearend Drug Safety and Medical Information
Active clients Patients studied Clinical trials in countries Studies completed Adverse event cases processed p.
Our growth 9% 3% organic Global industry growth 7.5% Our growth 68% 35% organic Global industry growth 18% Ergomed Offices 4 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 EU Qualified Person
Risk Management Planning RMP
Compliant PV System with consistent adverse event data capture Validated ARISg safety database Robust Quality Management Expedited reporting preparation of PSURs literature screening signal detection and evaluation benefitrisk assessment Compliance auditing support during crisis and various ad hoc assignments Integrated international Medical Information service using AG Inquirer database COMPANY OVERVIEW DRUG SAFETY AND MEDICAL INFORMATION Through PrimeVigilance we provide integrated drug safety and medical information services.
PrimeVigilance operates from bases in Guildford UK Zagreb Croatia Belgrade Serbia Prague Czech Republic Boston USA and this year has opened up a sixth location in Frankfurt
PrimeVigilance is currently providing services across more than 100 countries to a range of international pharma generic and biotech clients.
The services offered by PrimeVigilance cover all the regulatory and scientific elements of pharmacovigilance required to obtain and maintain a product licence within Europe and the US.
Employees
Net Service Revenue
Services marketed in countries OUR KEY DIFFERENTIATORS 5 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Governance Strategic report Data collection Signal detection Risk assessment Communication Regulatory action Decision making No action The Global Leader in pharmacovigilance.
In order to move from a major independent pharmacovigilance provider to the worlds 1 pharmacovigilance provider we plan to take the following strategic steps Increase investment in people attracting the best talent worldwide and fostering talentpersonal growth within our organisation.
Incr ease investment in technology becoming a leader in process automation and the use of artificial intelligence in our services.
Increase growth both organically and through acquisitions resulting in a larger presence in major markets and achieving further benefits from economies of scale.
People
PrimeVigilances reputation is built on the quality of its people.
The senior leadership team includes leading pharmacovigilance experts and former senior regulators with over 300 years of combined industry experience.
Fundamental to its medicled approach PrimeVigilance employs 44 physicians and over 300 pharmacists and other life sciences professionals.
Its
Pharmacovigilance QPPV is the most extensive in Europe and includes 16 inhouse and over 100 outsourced professionals covering 60 countries.
The CEO of PrimeVigilance Dr Jan Petracek is the former Head of Risk Management at the European Medicines Agency and has and continues to contribute to many national and international guidelines.
Technology automation PrimeVigilance has long had a technology driven approach to pharmacovigilance with speed consistency and accuracy being the goal.
Adverse event case processing can be executed either in an inhouse validated database or in the clients own database as required.
PrimeVigilance is able to offer case processing in either of the two leading global databases.
More recently PrimeVigilance has been identified as an industry leader in the deployment of robotic process automation RPA software in routine pharmacovigilance processes.
In pilots PrimeVigilance has been able to demonstrate very significant improvements in efficiency through time savings and in accuracy.
PrimeVigilances strategy is to continue to invest in technology to drive efficiency enhance quality and as a result competitiveness.
VISION 2020 ESSENTIAL PHARMACOVIGILANCE PROCESSES ALL COVERED BY PRIMEVIGILANCE PreApproval
PostApproval
Service cycle 6 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 31% 12% 11% 9% 37% Acquisition of PSR for up to Reinforcing our position in orphan drug development services.
ACQUISITION UPDATE Oncology  Haematology
Cardiovascular
Allergy  Respiratory
COMPANY OVERVIEW
RESEARCH SERVICES ERGOMEDs approach is focused on effective patient recruitment to reduce time and cost of clinical trials.
Ergomed has 20 years experience working across the world in many therapeutic areas with a particular expertise in oncology neurology and immunology and the development of orphan drugs.
Solutions are tailored to meet the requirements of individual clients and specific projects with an uncompromising commitment to quality standards.
As a midsized fullservice CRO Ergomed differentiates through 25% of staff with PhD MD Site management program specifically built to increase study performance Focus on orphan drug development Presence in MENA region Therapeutic specialisations Oncology Respiratory Neurology CLOSING THE DEVELOPMENT CIRCLE THERAPEUTIC AREA EXPERTISE NO.
OF TRIALS 7 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Governance Strategic report
Investigator
NursesSite Staff Clinical trials in countries Studies completed Net Service Revenue Study Physician Team Peertopeer support Develops best practice across treatment centres Provides expertise for particular study designs Site Management
Enhanced recruitment Increased retention More evaluable patients Focusing on patient recruitment with efficient management and control of complex trial protocols Ergomed believes its approach to clinical trials is differentiated from other providers by its innovative Study Site Management model and the use of Study Physician Teams resulting in a closer relationship between Ergomed and the physicians involved in clinical trials.
As well as providing high quality clinical development services Ergomed is building a portfolio of codevelopment partnerships with pharma and biotech companies which share the risks and rewards of drug development.
Ergomed leverages its expertise and services in return for carried interest in the drugs under development.
OUR KEY DIFFERENTIATORS 8 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Haemostatix has developed a new class of peptide based coagulant or haemostat for the control of bleeding in surgery.
The Company has pioneered a new approach to haemostasis that is based on a peptide that binds to the protein fibrinogen inducing the rapid and targeted formation of clots.
This innovative technology platform is being used to develop a pipeline of topical products to treat surgical bleeding with further applications in tissue repair and regenerative medicine.
Surgical bleeding and its markets The haemostat market is worth 2.5Bn and is expanding globally at 6 to 8% per annum.
Growth in several market segments and emerging economies has exceeded 10% per annum.
The market leader is blood derived thrombin a relatively fragile molecule requiring storage in a dry or frozen form.
Haemostatixs peptidebased coagulants are bloodfree have greater stability enabling the formulation of readytouse liquids and gels and have a mode of action that is faster than thrombinmediated clotting.
HAEMOSTATIX
COMPANY OVERVIEW Peak sales potential
Reduced time to haemostasis by 1.6 minutes versus standard of care.
PRODUCT PIPELINE PeproStat Liquid A topical liquid haemostat that is applied to wounds to control bleeding during surgery.
PeproStat has a novel mode of action that is fast and effective.
The peptide based coagulant is manufactured from bloodfree components and is formulated as a readytouse solution to be used with commercially available resorbable sponges.
Current products are typically bloodderived and often require reconstitution or thawing prior to use.
Positive PeproStat Phase II results In October 2017 we announced positive Phase II results of PeproStat in surgical bleeding.
The trial met its primary endpoint and was completed approximately six months ahead of schedule.
PeproStat showed a reduction in time to haemostasis by 1.6 minutes compared with standard of care time to haemostasis of 5.8 minutes.
It also met key secondary endpoints and was highly rated by investigators.
No treatment related serious adverse events or rebleeding were observed.
These results reinforce PeproStats potential as a safe bloodfree readytouse and costeffective method of controlling bleeding during surgery.
HXP12 ReadyFlow A flowable gelbased haemostat that is applied with a syringe and nozzle enabling less accessible wounds to be treated as well as wounds with uneven surfaces.
HXP12
ReadyFlow is composed of a heatstable peptide active substance mixed with a transparent particulate gel and prefilled in a readytouse syringe.
Current products in this rapidly expanding market segment require eight preparation steps prior to use are blood derived and opaque obscuring the wound site.
HXP12 ReadyFlow won first prize in the pan European Emerging Technology Competition run by the Royal Society of Chemistry.
Patented fibrinogenbinding peptide technology 1 Internal estimate 9 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Governance Strategic report Reduction in fees 3050 % Ergomed investment Allows Ergomed to focus on Clinical Partner focuses on CMC PreClinical
Share of revenue 515 % Equity share of company
PARTNERSHIPS
Ergomed has developed an innovative model for sustainable drug development and is a source of potential upside.
Ergomed has established a portfolio of codevelopment partnerships with pharmaceutical and biotech companies.
By reducing service fees Ergomed has secured either a share in future revenues derived from the product or in the case of single product companies an equity stake in the partner company.
The Ergomed team screen up to 100 codevelopment candidates in any given year and may carry out detailed due diligence on a dozen or less with a view to concluding one or two deals per annum.
Expansion of the codevelopment pipeline will not be a strategic priority for the Company going forward.
Our diversified product pipeline CODEVELOPMENT MODEL Compound Partner Preclinical Phase I Phase II Phase III
Multikine CelSci Lorediplon Ferrer Sevuparin Modus Therapeutics Sepranolone Asarina Pharma OralVac Allergy Therapeutics Head and Neck Cancer
SickleCell Disease Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder HDM Grass Trees or 10 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
CHAIRMANS STATEMENT
FOCUSED
ON STRATEGY 2017 saw continued very strong performance for Ergomed in the services business and particularly in the Drug Safety and Medical Information business.
The Board sees this area and specialist CRO services such as orphan drug development as significant opportunities where Ergomed can take global leadership positions and continue to grow.
The appointment of Stephen Stamp as CEO and Dr Jan Petracek as COO was a catalyst for the realigned Board to review Ergomeds growth opportunities and set strategic priorities which will see greater focus on the services business and a targeting of the Companys resources at those areas.
The codevelopment pipeline continues to represent a differentiator for the CRO business and is a source of potential upside but with increased focus on the services business expansion of the pipeline will not be a strategic priority.
Having delivered strong Phase II clinical trial results for PeproStat the Company intends to pursue further development of the Haemostatix assets through partnerships and collaborations.
The integration of pharmacovigilance services under the PrimeVigilance brand which commenced during 2017 was successfully completed in 2018 and the acquisition of PSR a specialist orphan CRO contribute to a firm foundation for the Companys strategic priorities.
I look forward to further progress this year and in the future.
Peter George
Peter George Chairman 11 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Governance Strategic report Ergomeds services businesses provide differentiated offerings in growth markets with drug development upside potential.
FAVOURABLE
MARKET DRIVERS The trend to outsource continues to drive growth in pharmaceutical services.
The contract research market is expected to reach 59Bn by 2020 and the pharmacovigilance market at around 3Bn is growing at 18% pa The Contract Research services market overall is growing at 7.5% pa HIGH GROWTH In 2017 our net service revenues grew at 36% pa driven by growth of 68% in our Drug Safety and Medical Information segment.
Organic growth in DSandMI was 35%.
With Contract Research services our focus will be on orphan drug development.
The market for orphan drugs is expected to reach 200Bn by 2022 MARKET LEADERSHIP PrimeVigilance is a leading provider of drug safety and medical information services in Europe.
Our
Within Contract Research services we aim to be the leading provider in orphan drug development building on the acquisition of PSR Group in October 2017.
ACQUISITION
OPPORTUNITIES
We have acquired and successfully integrated five services acquisitions since IPO in mid2014 all of which have been earnings enhancing.
Strategic acquisitions which add specialist skills andor geographic coverage to our services offering remain key to our growth strategy.
PRODUCT
DEVELOPMENT UPSIDE We have economic interests in five drug development programmes through codevelopment partnerships together with two lead products from our whollyowned Haemostatix subsidiary.
A milestone event from any one of these interests could have a material positive impact on Ergomed.
DEBT FREE NET CASH POSITION Ergomeds cash at hand at 31 December 2017 was 3.2 million with zero debt.
We retain the flexibility to access the capital markets andor leverage our balance sheet for strategic acquisitions as appropriate.
INVESTMENT CASE Source Zion Research 2014 Source Global Market Insights 2016 Source Global Data 2016 Source Evaluate Pharma Orphan Drug Report 2017 12 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICERS REVIEW
DELIVERING ON GROWTH I am pleased to report on another year of strong growth in our service businesses and one which has also seen clinical success.
We see significant opportunities to build on the foundations we have established in high growth areas within the pharmaceutical services market and specifically to take leadership positions in pharmacovigilance and orphan drug development services.
We believe this will deliver further growth and shareholder value in the future.
Services
Overall it was a strong year within the services businesses.
New business won in 2017 of 54 million up 29% on 2016 helped drive net service revenue growth of 36% to 39.6 million.
Total service revenue including reimbursement revenue increased 21% to 47.6 million.
EBITDA adjusted for the year was 2.8 million compared with 2.8 million in 2016.
RandD expense related to the development of the Haemostatix products was 2.7 million in 2017 and 1.2 million in 2016.
The EBITDA adjusted of our services businesses excluding RandD was 5.5 million in 2017 compared with 4.0 million in 2016.
Drug Safety and Medical Information DSandMI The DSandMI business which comprises the PrimeVigilance and PharmInvent companies performed exceptionally strongly.
Net service revenue from the DSandMI segment increased 68% to 22.2 million in 2017 from 13.3 million in 2016.
Excluding the PharmInvent acquisition completed in November 2016 organic growth of the DSandMI segment was 35%.
PharmInvent was acquired in November 2016 and immediately successfully collaborated with PrimeVigilance to provide a comprehensive pharmacovigilance service offering to existing and new clients of both companies.
The integration was completed early in 2018 with both companies now operating under the PrimeVigilance brand led by Dr Jan
PrimeVigilance now employs over 450 employees with hubs in Guildford UK Belgrade Serbia Prague Czech Republic Boston USA and Zagreb Croatia.
PrimeVigilance which is already a significant investor in information technology has initiated the implementation of robotic process automation for certain routine pharmacovigilance processes resulting in significant improvements in efficiency and accuracy.
PrimeVigilances strategy of investing in people and technology is designed to drive further growth with the aim of becoming the global leader in pharmacovigilance by 2020.
The global pharmacovigilance market is forecast to grow to more than 8Bn by 2024 from around 3Bn in 2015 with contract outsourcing forecast to expand from around 30% of the market in 2015 to approximately 50% in 2024.
Source Global Market Insights 2016.
Contract Research Services CRS Net service revenue from the CRS segment increased 9% to 17.4 million in 2017 from 15.9 million in 2016.
Excluding the PSR acquisition October 2017 organic growth was 3%.
Consistent with our acquisition strategy of adding specialist skills andor geographic coverage PSR was acquired in October 2017 for a total consideration of up to 5.7 million 5.1 million.
PSR is a specialist contract research organisation based in The Netherlands that specialises in the development of orphan drugs for rare diseases.
Orphan drug development is a growing area with up to 30 million people worldwide estimated to suffer from rare diseases Source Evaluate Pharma Orphan Drug Report 2017.
The logistical regulatory and operational complexities associated with orphan drug trials require specialised approaches.
PSR combined with Ergomeds site management organisation and study physician groups is ideally suited for efficient management of these types of trials.
The Companys goal is to become the leading global contract research organisation for orphan drug development and overall to continue to outpace the market for clinical research services.
Stephen Stamp Chief Executive Officer 13 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Governance Strategic report New Business
29% Contracted Order
26% Net Service
36% Services EBITDA adjusted Global demand for quality outsourced drug safety services and drug development remains strong and Ergomed continues to benefit from these trends.
Ergomed ended 2017 with a total backlog of contracted work with a value to be invoiced in future years of approximately 88 million 2016 70 million.
Product development
A new codevelopment deal with Allergy Therapeutics plc LSE AGY was announced in December 2017. and could include studies of three OraiVac products.
The Company also announced the following updates during the year Ferrer In February 2017 Ferrer announced data from the successful Phase II study of lorediplon in insomnia.
Aeterna Zentaris NASDAQ AEZS TSX AEZ In May 2017 Aeterna Zentaris announced termination of their programme after Zoptrex showed no treatment benefit over doxorubicin control.
CELSCI NYSE CVM The FDA lifted the clinical hold for Multikine in August 2017 and the Phase III study in head and neck cancer is continuing as initially planned.
We believe our codevelopment pipeline continues to offer potential upside as programmes progress and move towards commercialisation.
However as we increase our focus on the opportunities within our service businesses to take leadership positions in highgrowth markets the Board has concluded that expanding the codevelopment pipeline is no longer a strategic priority for the Company.
We do not anticipate announcing new codevelopment deals unless material but will continue to benefit from our experience and ability to engage in codevelopment selectively as a differentiator for our CRO offering.
Haemostatix
In October the Company announced positive Phase II results of PeproStat in surgical bleeding the first product to come from the Haemostatix portfolio.
The trial met its primary endpoint and was completed approximately six months ahead of schedule.
PeproStat showed time to haemostasis of 4.2 minutes a reduction of 1.6 minutes compared with standard of care time to haemostasis of 5.8 minutes.
It also met key secondary endpoints and was highly rated by investigators.
No treatment related serious adverse events or rebleeding were observed.
These results reinforce PeproStats potential as a safe bloodfree readytouse and costeffective method of controlling bleeding during surgery.
The second product HXP12 ReadyFlow a flowable gel is proceeding with preclinical development and is expected to be ready for Phase I in 2018.
A license for rights to PeproStat and HXP12 ReadyFlow in South Korea was signed in October 2017.
The Companys strategy is to pursue further development of the Haemostatix assets through partnerships and collaborations.
We anticipate further modest investment in RandD related to Haemostatix during 2018 in line with current market expectations.
Outlook
A contracted backlog of 88 million underpins Ergomeds ability to deliver its targets for 2018.
Drug safety and medical information services make up an increasing proportion of our overall revenues and owing to their greater predictability and exceptional growth we benefit from greater visibility than with clinical research services which although capable of attractive margins are lumpy by nature and highly competitive.
More generally during the coming period we expect to continue to deliver on our strategy of focusing on the growth and profitability of our services businesses supplemented by acquisitions that expand the services offering or geographical coverage or both.
Stephen Stamp Chief Executive Officer 14 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
ACCELERATED
GROWTH
Building a profitable services business targeting global leadership in pharmacovigilance services and orphan drug development by 2020.
OUR MISSION The Board continually looks for opportunities to capitalise on Ergomeds expertise with the following key components Augment the organic growth of its services business with selective acquisitions to add complementary services andor geographical coverage to the Companys current offering.
The Board is committed to pursuing both components of the growth strategy in parallel and maintaining a balance between services income and development costs.
Strategic priorities
ACQUISITIONS
STRATEGIC AND SELECTIVE PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT PARTNERSHIPS 15 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Governance Strategic report Acquired in October 2017 Optimise value Growth must be the foundation of any healthy company and is the primary focus of the Board.
We constantly measure ourselves against prior period performance and against our peers and competitors.
The market for outsourced clinical research is relatively mature and is dominated by mainly large USbased companies.
To compete effectively we must play to our strengths including our innovative Study Site Management model and utilise our Study Physician Group to competitive advantage.
The market for outsourced pharmacovigilance and medical information while smaller is less competitive.
PrimeVigilance is a leading independent pharmacovigilance and medical information provider in Europe.
Services acquisitions are a key component of Ergomeds growth strategy with an emphasis on Services and skills which complement our existing services.
We can offer a broader onestopshop suite of services to customers reducing reliance on partners and expanding margins.
Geographical expansion.
Although we have preferred subcontract providers in some markets having our own presence in certain key markets ensures quality control scalability and again enhanced margins.
The codevelopment pipeline continues to represent a differentiator for the CRO business and is a source of potential upside but with increased focus on the services business expansion of the pipeline will not be a strategic priority.
The Companys strategy is to optimise the value of the Haemostatix assets by pursuing their further development through partnerships and collaborations.
Strategy Progress Clinical Research Services 9% 7.5% Ergomed Industry 3% organic Source Zion Research 2014 Drug Safety and Medical Information 68% 18 % Ergomed Industry 35% organic Source Global Market Insights 2016 Strategic priorities 16 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Acquisition accelerates Ergomeds leadership in orphan drug development services PSRs specialist orphan drug development brand complements Ergomeds existing strong expertise in this area PSR will expand Ergomeds services portfolio and geographical coverage Acquisition expected to be immediately accretive to earnings STRATEGY IN ACTION Acquisition of PSR Group BV a specialist orphan drug CRO.
Overview
The acquisition is consistent with Ergomeds strategy to grow its existing profitable services business both organically and through bolt on acquisitions.
PSRs extensive expertise in orphan drug development complements Ergomeds services and will further strengthen Ergomeds orphan drug development capability in addition to expanding its current services portfolio.
The acquisition PSR was acquired in October 2017 for up to 5.7 million including initial consideration of 3.2 million.
Ergomeds strategy is to continue to grow PSRs global orphan drug development business under the PSR brand and will remain focused on its two divisions 1 PSR Orphan Experts which is a leading expert in supporting biotech and pharma companies with their regulatory and clinical development of orphan drugs and 2 PSR Pharma Resource which complements PSR Orphan Experts as a niche staffing provider focused on orphan drug specialised staff.
Background
PSR established in 1998 and based in The Netherlands is a specialist orphan drug CRO and recognised as a leading expert in rare diseases.
PSR specialises in running complex orphan drug development programs requiring innovative regulatory and clinical approaches as well as pricing and reimbursement strategies.
Besides outsourced project solutions PSR provides insourced staffing solutions orphan drug teams temporary and permanent staffing interim management solutions as well as trainingcoaching career programs.
PSRs dedication to the rare disease landscape is exemplified by an extensive track record of orphan drug projects in a wide range of therapeutic areas its continued efforts to achieve true patient centricity and its societal commitments by participation in fundraising activities and publicprivate partnerships.
For further information visit site ORPHAN SPECIALIST
OUR KEY DIFFERENTIATORS Winner Best CRO ROAR Awards multiple times Orphan Drug Designation EMA FDA Protocol Assistance  Scientific Advice  pre IND  NDA Clinical Development Plan Paediatric Investigation Plan Clinical Study 17 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Governance Strategic report
Oncology
Central Nervous System and Neurology Cardiovascular and Haematology Metabolic Disorders
Immunology and Infectious Disease
Opthalmology
Dermatology
Gastroenterology
Endocrinology
Orphan diseases are severe debilitating or even lifethreatening conditions which affect fewer than 1 in 2000 people EU definition or fewer than 200000 people in the US US definition.
Although patient numbers in individual indications are limited there are a total of 30 million people worldwide suffering from rare diseases.
Orphan drugs represent approximately 21% of all prescription drugs with the market growing at 11% pa and expected to reach 200Bn by 2022 driven in part by the trend towards personalised medicine.
The nature of orphan drug trials requires highly specialised providers due to the regulatory logistical and operational complexities of conducting clinical trials in these indications.
Studies typically are complex and run in small patient cohorts and Ergomeds Site Management model and Study Physician group can be key success factors in recruiting and managing orphan drug trials.
Our orphan experience distributed across our various services and further split into therapeutic areas DISCOVER OUR ORPHAN ADVANTAGE Partnered with a small biotech on 7 individual retrospective and prospective studies Studies totalled 3 Phase I studies 1 Phase III 1 Phase III 1 Compassionate use study Patients 759 Sites 27 Countries 9 Austria Denmark France Germany Israel Italy Japan Spain UK Services included across the program Project Management Monitoring Site Management Regulatory Safety Data Management Biostatistics Medical Writing QA Ergomed is working with the Sponsor to continue the study in North America Projects where we provided regulatory consultancy 49 18 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
FINANCIAL REVIEW
SOLID RESUL TS UNDERPINNED BY DSandMI Key Performance Indicators The Directors consider the principal financial performance indicators of the Group to be m 2017 2016 Net service revenue 39.6 29.2 Gross profit 14.6 12.0 Research and development expenditure 2.7 1.2 EBITDA adjusted note 38 2.8 2.8 Cash and cash equivalents 3.2 4.4 The Directors have substituted total revenue with net service revenue as a key financial performance indicator.
In line with industry practice net service revenue excludes reimbursement revenue and also excludes licence revenue providing a clearer picture of underlying services growth.
The Directors consider the principal nonfinancial performance indicators of the Group to be The delivery of high quality services that continue to meet the highest industry standards as evidenced by internal and external quality audits.
The development or acquisition of new andor the expansion of existing service offerings.
Nonfinancial performance indicators are routinely reviewed by the Directors at Board meetings.
During 2017 the Group was audited multiple times by customers and regulators with no critical findings.
In addition during 2017 the Group expanded its specialist orphan drug development capabilities through the acquisition of PSR.
Consolidated income statement Net service revenue for the year ended 31 December 2017 was 39.6 million 2016 29.2 million an increase of 36% driven by 68% growth in Drug Safety and Medical Information complemented by 9% growth from Clinical Research Services.
Excluding the impact of acquisitions net service revenue grew at 18%.
Total revenue including reimbursement revenue and licensing income for the year ended 31 December 2017 was 47.6 million 2016 39.2 million an increase of 21%.
Reimbursement revenues are explained in note 1.
Gross profit from service revenue was 14.3 million and gross margin was 36% 2016 gross profit 12.0 million and gross margin 41%.
T o support future growth the Company made substantial investments in its Clinical Research Services business particularly in the US.
Compared to a traditional clinical research organisation CRO service provider Ergomeds gross margin can fluctuate because of its codevelopment activities where Ergomed undertakes clinical studies at reduced fees in return for carried interests in the partnered product.
In addition the Companys Drug Safety and Medical Information business made significant investments in headcount particularly in Serbia to support impending new contracts.
Administration expenses were 16.0 million 2016 restated 10.8 million an increase of 5.2 million.
Included in administrative expenses are increases in amortisation of acquired fair valued intangible assets of 0.4 million sharebased payment charge of 0.1 million deferred consideration for acquisitions relating to post acquisition remuneration of 0.2 million revaluation of deferred consideration of 2.9 million offset by a reduction in acquisition costs and exceptional items of 0.3 million.
0.1 million additional recruitment costs 0.2 million increase in investor relations and public relations activities 0.2 million increase in depreciation and foreign exchange losses of 0.5 million compared to foreign exchange gains of 0.3 million in 2016 offset by a 0.8 million reduction in provision for doubtful debts.
Research and development costs expensed in the year were 2.7 million 2016 restated 1.2 million relating to Haemostatix and included chemistry manufacturing and controls CMC costs for clinical trial material the costs of the Phase II clinical trial of PeproStat and preclinical formulation development costs for ReadyFlow.
Other operating income includes 0.1 million in respect of an RandD tax credit.
In 2016 an RandD credit of 0.2 million was included in the tax charge.
Cash settled deferred consideration for achieving 2017 financial targets of 0.8 million 2016 0.6 million in respect of Pharmlnvent has been charged to profit and loss in the year as it is tied to the continued employment of the vendors.
Equity settled deferred consideration is included within the sharebased payment charge for the year.
The Company incurred acquisition costs totalling 0.3 million 2016 0.6 million in the year primarily in respect of the PSR acquisition.
In addition 0.1 million in respect of severance costs in relation to the former CEO were recognised as an exceptional item.
Included in finance charges is 0.5 million 2016 0.3 million relating to the unwinding of the discount applied to contingent consideration for Haemostatix and 0.1 million 2016 nil relating to the unwinding of the discount applied to contingent consideration for PSR.
Consolidated balance sheet As at 31 December 2017 total assets less total liabilities amounted to 34.8 million 2016 restated 34.4 million see note 14 including cash and cash equivalents of 3.2 million 2016 4.4 million.
The principal movements in the Consolidated balance sheet during the year were Acquisition of PSR in October 2017 and the associated goodwill of 2.5 million and intangible assets of 0.7 million.
Increase in trade and other receivables by 4.8 million reflecting higher trading levels a reduction in bad debt provision of 0.8 million and a 0.3 million increase in other current assets.
19 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Governance Strategic report An increase in trade and other payables of 3.6 million reflecting higher trading levels.
An increase in deferred consideration current and noncurrent of 0.6 million in respect of PSR and 3.4 million in respect of Haemostatix comprising 0.5 million for the unwinding of the discount applied and an additional 2.9 million revaluation increase.
An increase in share premium arising from the institutional placing in October 2017 net of costs.
An increase in merger reserve arising from the acquisition of PSR and contingent share issues in settlement of deferred consideration in relation to the acquisitions of Pharmlnvent and PSR.
Consolidated cash flow statement At present the Group does not have any borrowings or long term debt apart from a few immaterial fixed asset finance leases.
Cash Inflows from operating activities before changes in working capital in the year were 1.3 million 2016 restated 2.5 million.
Changes in working capital included a 3.5 million increase in trade and other receivables a 0.3 million increase in other current assets and a 2.8 million increase in trade and other payables.
Cash outflows from investing activities were 3.9 million 2016 5.8 million including 2.0 million related to the acquisition of PSR and 0.5 million related to a Pharmlnvent earnout payment 0.7 million for the acquisition of tangible assets and 0.7 million for the acquisition of intangible assets.
Cash inflows from financing activities included proceeds of a placing of 1.9 million net of expenses to fund the acquisition of PSR.
The Group also paid taxation of 0.4 million in 2017 2016 0.9 million.
Going concern As at 31 December 2017 the Group had 3.2 million in cash and cash equivalents and a strong backlog of signed contracts.
The Directors therefore expect Ergomeds services business to be cash generative.
Revenue
2016 39.2m Net Service Revenue 2016 29.2m
2016 1.1m EBITDA adjusted 2016 2.8m 20 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 PRINCIPAL RISKS There are number of risks and uncertainties associated with the Groups activities.
The Board believes the following are the principal risks along with the mitigation actions being pursued.
Strategic priorities Movement Mitigation of risk
Ergomeds competitors and potential competitors include companies which may have substantially greater resources.
Generally the ability of Ergomed to win new business or repeat business from existing customers is a key risk and if the business development function fails to deliver new profitable contracts then Ergomeds profits and cash flows will suffer.
Ergomed employs an experienced team of business development executives to generate leads and close contracts for new business.
Ergomed aims to provide high quality services at competitive rates drawing upon its differentiators in the marketplace as appropriate.
Cancellation or delay of clinical trials or projects by customers The customers of Ergomed may cancel or delay proposed clinical trials or pharmacovigilance projects without notice or upon short notice.
The cancellation or delay of a clinical trial may result in a risk of Ergomed having to reduce its staff overheads which could in turn have a negative impact on the Groups profitability.
The terms of Ergomeds contracts seek to mitigate the impact of cancellation or delay by structuring standard study close down procedures with the customer.
In addition pharmacovigilance contracts contain provisions for transition of services.
Foreign currency risk A significant proportion of Ergomeds business is carried out outside the UK and in the relevant local currency.
To the extent that there are fluctuations in exchange rates this may have a material impact on Ergomeds financial position or results of operations.
Ergomed seeks advice from specialist foreign currency brokers regularly reviewing the geographical mix of its operational costs and also its currency revenue streams and by the inclusion of exchange rate reviews in its major commercial contracts.
Dependency on pharmaceutical industry Ergomeds current revenue results from expenditure by pharmaceutical and biotech businesses on research and development and regulatory compliance.
If customers or potential customers in this sector were to reduce such expenditure in particular by reducing the numbers of drugs put into clinical trials seek to retain work inhouse rather than outsourcing it andor consolidate through the vertical integration of their businesses and choose not to engage Ergomed then Ergomeds business could be negatively impacted.
Ergomed seeks to maintain diversification in all aspects of its customer base including Large pharmaceutical vs biotech vs generics customers US vs European based customers Preproduct approval clinical trials vs postapproval trials and pharmacovigilance services and actively engages with its customers to protect its existing relationships and build new ones.
Financial statements Governance Strategic report Strategic priorities Movement Mitigation of risk Legislation and regulation of the pharmaceutical and biotechnology industries An element of Ergomeds competitive advantage stems from its ability to navigate the regulated medicinal products approval processes and pharmacovigilance regulations which are expensive and complex.
If there were to be substantial relaxation of such processes cross jurisdictional harmonisation or simplification of the legislative or regulatory framework this could reduce the barriers to entry which prospective competitors face thereby eroding the Groups competitive advantage.
Ergomed is a strong advocate of rigorous Good Clinical Practice GCP guidelines and pharmacovigilance regulation.
Our management team includes former senior regulators in the European Medicines Agency and through industry associations remain active promoters of regulation.
Licences approvals and compliance Ergomed is dependent on certain licences and regulatory approvals.
Noncompliance with those licences could in extreme cases be restricted or revoked which could adversely affect Ergomeds business and future prospects.
More generally Ergomed operates in an environment which is subject to detailed and complex regulation.
Ergomed maintains a highly professional Quality Assurance team and selfaudit programme which checks on all aspects of compliance on a structured basis.
In addition customers audit Ergomeds compliance on a weekly basis.
Customers pricing and payment terms Some of Ergomeds customers may have substantial purchasing power and negotiating leverage.
While Ergomed has historically been able to secure good contractual terms there can be no assurance that it will continue to be able to do so in the future.
In certain cases Ergomed may accept payment terms which impact adversely upon the revenue received by the margins achieved by and the cash flow of Ergomed in any given period.
Ergomed has experienced proposal development and budgeting personnel within each of its clinical research and pharmacovigilance teams tasked with preparing bids for new work with target margins.
In addition Project Managers are tasked with ensuring that relevant costs are passed through to customers and all billable tasks are recorded and appropriately billed.
Dependence on a limited number of key clients A significant proportion of the Groups revenue is derived from a relatively small number of clients.
The percentage of the Groups total revenue generated by the top five clients in the year ended 31 December 2017 was 40% 2016 51%.
The loss of any client who represent a significant proportion of Ergomeds revenue could have a negative impact on operating results and cash flows.
A significant part of the business development teams focus is generation of leads and requests for proposals from new clients to diversify the Companys customer base.
The Companys organic growth combined with acquisitions is naturally diluting reliance on relatively few large clients.
Approved by the Board of Directors and signed on behalf of the Board.
Stephen Stamp Director 22 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Dr Miroslav Reljanovic Founder and Executive Vice Chairman Dr Miroslav Reljanovic is a medical doctor and a boardcertified neurologist.
Whilst practicing as a physician in a large WHO Collaborating Centre in Zagreb he was the clinical investigator in numerous Phase II and III studies in the field of neurology and a consultant to various pharmaceutical companies.
In 1997 Miro founded Ergomed and he introduced the novel Study Site Coordination model as an intrinsic part of the conduct of clinical studies.
Together with co founder Elliot Brown MB MRCGP FFPM a wellknown international expert in drug safety Miro started PrimeVigilance in 2008 which soon became a leading specialist vendor of contracted pharmacovigilance services to the pharmaceutical industry.
Stephen Stamp
Chief Executive Officer
Chief Financial Officer Stephen Stamp joined Ergomed as Chief Financial Officer in January 2016 and was appointed Chief Executive Officer in December 2017.
Prior to joining Ergomed Stephen worked in the US as Chief Financial Officer of AssureRx Health Inc.
Prior to that he was CFO of EZCORP Inc and Chief Operating Officer and CFO at Xanodyne Pharmaceuticals Inc.
Before leaving for the US Stephen was Group Finance Director of Shire plc and Regus Plc.
Earlier in his career Stephen was an investment banker with Lazard in London advising mainly public companies on crossborder MandA and corporate finance.
Prior to Lazard he worked for KPMG in London where he qualified as a Chartered
Stephen holds a BA Econ from The University of Manchester.
BOARD OF DIRECTORS Peter George NonExecutive Chairman Peter George joined Ergomed as a NonExecutive Director in May 2014 and was elected NonExecutive Chairman in April 2017.
Peter has over 20 years experience in the pharmaceutical services industry most recently as Chief Executive Officer of Clinigen Group plc AIM CLIN the global speciality pharmaceuticals and pharmaceutical services business.
Peter stepped down as CEO of Clinigen in November 2016 and as a nonexecutive director in November 2017.
Prior to Clinigen he was CEO at Penn Pharma having led a 67 million management company buyout in 2007.
Before this Peter was executive Vice President for Wolters Kluwer Health with responsibility for Europe and Asia Pacific regions.
Peter has also held roles as the Chief Operating Officer of Unilabs Clinical Trials International Limited Head of Clinical Pathology in the Oxford region of the NHS and as Director of PharmaPatents Global.
23 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Strategic report Governance Christopher Collins NonExecutive Director Christopher was the CEO and a founding partner of Code Securities a healthcarefocused advisory and broking firm which was formed in 2003 acquired by Nomura in 2005 and continued as Nomura Code Securities until late 2013.
Chris was previously head of the Life Sciences Group at WestLBPanmure having founded that firms activities in the sector in 1993.
He has advised companies at all stages of development on transactions including private financings IPOs secondary offerings and mergers and acquisitions.
Prior to WestLBPanmure Chris was Managing Director of Corporate Finance at Panmure Gordon after eight years as a Director of Corporate Finance at Hoare Govett and nine years in corporate finance at Charterhouse Japhet.
He has an MBA and read Biology at Sussex University.
Andrew Mackie Chief Business Officer Andrew Mackie joined Ergomed as Chief Business Officer in 2015 having worked with the Company as a consultant since 2004.
He has been instrumental in developing the co development business and negotiating the partnerships signed to date.
Prior to joining Ergomed Andrew worked in the Business Development group at Eli Lilly having previously been Head of Life Sciences at IP Group and Head of Alliance Management at
Prior to that Andrew held a variety of RandD positions at Novartis Sanofi and MDS.
Andrew holds a BSc in biochemistry from Queens University Canada an LLB from the University of London and an MBA from the London Business School.
Dr Jan Petracek Chief Operating Officer Dr Jan Petracek was appointed to the Board as Chief Operating Officer in December 2017.
Jan has been Chief Executive Officer of PrimeVigilance since April 2017 having joined the Ergomed group in November 2016 following the acquisition of European PharmInvent Services s. was founder and CEO.
Dr Petracek is the former Head of Risk Management at the European Medicines Agency and the former Head of Pharmacovigilance Strategy and Development at the State Institute for Drug Control in the Czech
He studied Quality and Safety in Healthcare MSc at Imperial College London and trained as a physician at Charles University in Prague MD.
24 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STATEMENT
Corporate governance The Company is listed on the Alternative Investment Market AIM and is not required to comply with the provisions of the UK Corporate Governance Code 2010 2010 Code as set out in the Financial Services Authority Listing Rules.
However the Directors recognise the importance of sound corporate governance and intend to comply with the Corporate Governance Guidelines to the extent appropriate for a company of its nature and size.
The Corporate Governance Guidelines were devised by the Quoted Company Alliance QCA in consultation with a number of significant institutional small company investors as an alternative corporate governance code applicable to AIM companies.
An alternative code was proposed because the QCA considers the 2010 Code to be inappropriate to many AIM companies.
The Corporate Governance Guidelines state that The purpose of good corporate governance is to ensure that the company is managed in an efficient effective and entrepreneurial manner for the benefit of all shareholders over the longer term.
The Board comprises two NonExecutive Directors including the Chairman and four Executive Directors.
The Board meets regularly to consider strategy performance and the framework of internal controls.
To enable the Board to discharge its duties the Directors receive appropriate and timely information.
Briefing papers are distributed to the Directors in advance of Board meetings.
The Directors have access to the advice and services of the Company Secretary and the Chief Financial Officer who are responsible for ensuring that the Board procedures are followed and that applicable rules and regulations are complied with.
In addition procedures are in place to enable the Directors to obtain independent professional advice in the furtherance of their duties if necessary at the Companys expense.
The Board considers Peter George and Christopher Collins to be independent Directors.
Board committees The Company has Audit and Risk Nomination AIM Compliance and Remuneration Committees.
The Audit and Risk Committee has Christopher Collins as Chairman and has primary responsibility for monitoring the quality of internal controls ensuring that the financial performance of the Company is properly measured and reported on and reviewing reports from the Companys auditors relating to the Companys accounting and internal controls in all cases having due regard to the interests of shareholders.
The Audit and Risk Committee meets at least twice a year.
Peter George is the other member of the Audit and Risk Committee.
The Nomination Committee identifies and nominates for the approval of the Board candidates to fill Board vacancies as and when they arise.
The Nomination Committee meets at least twice a year.
Rolf Stahel was Chairman of the Nomination Committee until 31 March 2017 and was succeeded as Chairman by Peter George.
Miroslav Reljanovic Christopher Collins and until 16 April 2017 Neil Clark are the other members of the Nomination Committee.
The Remuneration Committee has Christopher Collins as Chairman and reviews the performance of the Executive Directors and determine their terms and conditions of service including their remuneration and the grant of options having due regard to the interests of shareholders.
The Remuneration Committee meets at least twice a year.
Peter George Stephen Stamp and until 31 March 2017 Rolf Stahel are the other members of the Remuneration Committee.
The Company has established an AIM Compliance Committee to ensure that the Company is complying with the AIM Rules.
In addition the Committee assesses the Companys Corporate Governance obligations every year.
The AIM Compliance Committee is chaired by Christopher Collins and its other member is Peter George.
The Directors understand the importance of complying with the AIM Rules relating to Directors dealings and have established a share dealing code which is appropriate for an AIM listed company.
25 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Strategic report Governance Internal control and risk management The Board acknowledges its responsibility for safeguarding the shareholders investments and the Groups assets.
In applying this principle the Board recognises that it has overall responsibility for ensuring that the Group maintains a system of internal control that provides it with reasonable assurance regarding effective and efficient operations internal financial control and compliance with laws and regulations.
The system of internal control is designed to manage rather than eliminate the risk of failure to achieve business objectives and can only provide reasonable and not absolute assurance against material misstatement or loss.
Through the Audit and Risk Committee the Directors have reviewed the effectiveness of the internal controls.
Since admission to AIM in July 2014 management is continuing to invest significant time in further developing the Groups internal control environment.
The key features of the internal control system are described below control procedures and environment  the Group has an organisational structure with clearly drawn lines of accountability and authority.
Employees are required to follow welldefined internal procedures and policies appropriate to the business and their position within the business and management promotes the highest levels of professionalism and ethical standards identification and evaluation of risks  the Group employs Executive Directors and senior management with the appropriate knowledge and experience required for a medical and scientific research group.
Identification and evaluation of risk is a continuous process running in parallel with the significant organic growth of the Group risk register  senior management works with the Audit and Risk Committee to identify key risks facing the Group any mitigating controls and persons responsible for reviewing and managing such risks.
The risk register is reviewed periodically and updated and reviewed by the Board no less than annually financial information  the Group prepares detailed budgets and working capital forecasts annually.
These are based upon the strategy of the Group and are approved by the Board.
Detailed management accounts and working capital reforecasts are reviewed at least quarterly for each Board meeting with any variances from budget investigated thoroughly and a summary provided to the Board.
Annual Reports Preliminary Statements and Halfyear Reports prepared by the Group are reviewed by the Audit and Risk Committee prior to approval by the Board monitoring  the Board monitors the activities of the Group through the supply of reports from various areas of the business as contained in the Board papers.
The Executive Committee performs a more detailed review taking corrective action if required and financial position and prospects memorandum  senior management works with the Audit and Risk Committee to produce a comprehensive review of risks and internal procedures to control financial reporting in compliance with ICAEW Technical Release TECH 1414 CFF.
The Board through the Audit and Risk Committee reviews the effectiveness of the systems of internal control.
Given the Groups relative small size the Board does not consider it either necessary or practical at present to have its own internal audit function.
The Board continues to monitor the requirement to have an internal audit function.
Communication with shareholders The Board attaches great importance to communication with both institutional and private shareholders.
Regular communication is maintained with all shareholders through Company announcements the Annual Report and Accounts Preliminary Statements and Halfyear Report.
The Directors seek to build on a mutual understanding of objectives between the Company and its shareholders especially considering the long term nature of the business.
Institutional shareholders are in contact with the Directors through presentations and meetings to discuss issues and to give feedback regularly throughout the year.
With private shareholders this is not always practical.
The Board therefore intends to use the Companys Annual General Meeting as the opportunity to meet private shareholders who are encouraged to attend after which the Chief Executive Officer will give a presentation on the activities of the Group.
Following the presentation there will be an opportunity to ask questions of Directors on a formal and informal basis and to discuss the development of the business.
The Company operates a website at site The website contains details of the Group and its activities regulatory announcements and Company announcements Annual Reports and Halfyear Reports and the Terms of Reference of the Audit and Risk Committee and of the Remuneration Committee.
Going concern As disclosed in note 1 to the consolidated financial statements having made relevant and appropriate enquiries including consideration of the Company and Group current resources and working capital forecasts the Directors have a reasonable expectation that at the time of approving the financial statements the Company has adequate resources to continue in operational existence for at least the next 12 months.
Accordingly the Board continues to adopt the going concern basis in preparing the financial statements.
26 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
DIRECTORS REMUNERATION REPORT UNAUDITED
Ergomed has elected voluntarily to prepare an unaudited Directors remuneration report as set out below.
Remuneration policy overview The aim of the remuneration policy is to encourage and reward superior performance by the Executive Directors and senior management with performance being measured by reference to the achievement of corporate goals strong financial performance and the delivery of value to shareholders.
The policy is designed to offer rewards that enable the Group to attract and retain the management talent it needs to ensure its success incentivise the achievement of the Groups strategy and the delivery of sustainable long term performance of the Group by the executives and have flexibility to accommodate the changing needs of the Group as it grows and its strategy evolves.
Remuneration levels are benchmarked against a subset of companies in the UK life sciences and biotechnology sectors with the aim of achieving the following Base salary between average and upper quartile.
Performancebased bonus between average and upper quartile.
Share incentives industry average.
Total compensation between average and upper quartile.
The Remuneration Committee has established a policy that enables the Group to retain and motivate the Executive Directors and senior management appropriately while still maintaining a strong payforperformance culture within the Group.
The remuneration policy is reviewed by the Remuneration Committee on an annual basis to ensure that it is in line with the Groups objectives and shareholders interests.
Executive Directors Miroslav Reljanovic has a letter of appointment with Ergomed plc dated 14 July 2014 with continuous employment from 28 September 2009.
His appointment is terminable on six months notice by himself and 12 months by the Company.
Neil Clark had a service agreement with Ergomed plc dated 14 July 2014 with continuous employment from January 2009.
Neil Clark resigned as a Director with effect from 16 April 2017.
He remains a nonexecutive director of PrimeVigilance Limited a subsidiary of Ergomed plc.
Andrew Mackie has a service agreement with Ergomed plc dated 1 July 2015.
His appointment is terminable on six months notice by himself and 12 months by the Company.
Jan Petracek entered into a letter of appointment with Ergomed plc dated 14 December 2017.
His appointment is terminable on three months notice by himself and three months by the Company.
Stephen Stamp has a service agreement with Ergomed plc dated 11 January 2016.
His appointment is terminable on six months notice by himself and six months by the Company.
Dan Weng entered in to a letter of appointment with Ergomed plc dated 15 June 2017.
Dan Weng resigned as a Director with effect from 14 December 2017.
NonExecutive Directors The NonExecutive Directors have entered into letters of appointment with the Company with the Board determining any fees paid.
Peter Georges fees as a NonExecutive Director were increased to 120000 per annum when he was elected Chairman with effect from 1 April 2017.
The NonExecutive Directors do not participate in the Groups pension bonus or option schemes.
The NonExecutive appointments are terminable on one months notice by either party.
Remuneration
The Executive Directors during the year Miroslav Reljanovic Neil Clark Andrew Mackie Jan Petracek Stephen Stamp and Dan Weng were entitled to receive base salary travel allowance employer pension contributions share options and a discretionary performancerelated bonus.
27 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Strategic report Governance
Base salaries are generally reviewed annually and effective from the beginning of January.
The Remuneration Committee seeks to assess the market competitiveness of pay primarily in terms of total remuneration with less emphasis on base salary.
Stephen Stamps salary was increased from 175000 per annum to 200000 per annum with effect from 1 July 2016.
Bonuses
The timing and amount of bonuses are decided by the Remuneration Committee with reference to the individuals performance and contribution to the Group.
The maximum bonus that can be earned by an Executive Director is 75% of base salary.
Pensions
The Group does not operate a Group pension scheme.
The Group pays an employer pension contribution of 10% of base salary to personal pension schemes established by the Executive Directors.
Directors remuneration The Directors received the following remuneration during the year Name of Director Fees and salary
Annual bonus
Severance payment
Peter George Stephen Stamp Miroslav Reljanovic Andrew Mackie Jan Petracek Dan Weng Chris Collins 40     40 Neil Clark Rolf Stahel Name of Director Fees and salary
Annual bonus
Severance payment
Peter George 40     40 Stephen Stamp 183   18  201 Miroslav Reljanovic 242     242 Andrew Mackie Chris Collins 40     40 Neil Clark Rolf Stahel Peter Georges Board fees were increased from 40000 pa to 120000 pa upon becoming Chairman with effect from 1 April 2017.
Stephen Stamp Andrew Mackie Dan Weng and Neil Clark received private medical insurance as a benefit during the year.
Jan Petracek was appointed a Director with effect from 14 December 2017.
Dan Weng was appointed a Director with effect from 1 July 2017 and resigned as a Director with effect from 14 December 2017.
Neil Clark resigned as a Director with effect from 16 April 2017.
Rolf Stahels remuneration includes consultancy fees of 15000 paid to Chesyl Pharma Limited 2016 52000.
Mr Stahel retired as a Director with effect from 31 March 2017.
Miroslav Reljanovic has the occasional use of a Companyowned vehicle.
The amount payable to the highest paid Director in respect of emoluments was 276000 2016 nil comprising basic salary of 126000 healthcare benefits of 13000 pension contributions of 3000 and severance payment of 134000.
Share options The Company issues share options to the Directors and employees to reward performance to encourage loyalty and to enable valued employees to share in the success of the Company.
Aggregate emoluments disclosed above do not include any amounts for the value of options to acquire Ordinary Shares in the Company granted to or held by the Directors.
Prior to the IPO Ergomed had established an Unapproved Executive Share Option 2007 Scheme and the Rolf Stahel Option
A new share option scheme the Ergomed plc Long Term Incentive Plan was established immediately following the Companys IPO in July 2014.
Ergomed has established three share option schemes i the Unapproved Executive Share Option Scheme 2007 ii the Stahel Option Agreement and iii the Ergomed plc Long Term Incentive Plan.
In addition Neil Clark Andrew Mackie and Stephen Stamp hold options over shares held by Miroslav Reljanovic.
28 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 DIRECTORS REMUNERATION REPORT UNAUDITED continued Options granted as at 31 December 2017 Name of Director Date of grant Number of Ordinary Shares under option Exercise price per Ordinary Share
Exercise period to Name of scheme Options over new Ergomed shares Rolf Stahel 1842014 1260000 1.60 18042014 17042024 Stahel Option Agreement Neil Clark 31122009 1000000 0.01 31122009 30122019 Unapproved Share Option Scheme 2007 24122015 150000 1.69 03062018 23122025 Ergomed plc Long Term Incentive Plan Andrew Mackie 24122015 125000 1.69 03062018 23122025 Ergomed plc Long Term Incentive Plan Jan Petracek 12042017 50000 0.01 11042020 11042027 Ergomed plc Long Term Incentive Plan 12042017 25000 0.01 01012018 11042027 Stephen Stamp 11012016 400000 0.01 10012019 10012026 Ergomed plc Long Term Incentive Plan Options over Ergomed shares owned by Miroslav Reljanovic Neil Clark 20072015 88235 0.01 20072015 19072025 NA 20072015 88235 0.01 20072016 19072025 NA Andrew Mackie 20072015 88235 0.01 20072015 19072025 NA 20072015 88235 0.01 20072016 19072025 NA Stephen Stamp 30112016 50000 0.01 11012017 29112026 NA 30112016 50000 0.01 11012018 29112026 NA The 25000 options granted to Jan Petracek on 12 April 2017 lapsed on 31 December 2017.
No other options held by the Directors were exercised or lapsed during the year.
This report was approved by the Board of Directors on 14 May 2018 and signed on its behalf by Christopher I Collins Director Chairman of the Remuneration Committee 29 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Strategic report Governance DIRECTORS REPORT FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 The Directors present their report and financial statements for the Company and Group for the year ended 31 December 2017.
Principal activities Ergomed is a global business focused on providing specialised services to the pharmaceutical industry.
Business review and key performance indicators The Groups results are set out in the Consolidated income statement on page 38 and are explained in the Financial review on pages 18 and 19.
A detailed review of the business its results and future direction is included in the Chief Executive Officers review on pages 12 and 13.
Capital structure The Group is primarily financed through equity provided by its shareholders and net cash generated from operations.
Dividends
The Directors do not recommend the payment of a dividend 2016 nil.
Directors
The Directors of the Company who served during the year and to the date of this report unless stated are as follows Peter George Stephen Stamp Miroslav Reljanovic Andrew Mackie Jan Petracek appointed 14 December 2017 Dan Weng appointed 1 July 2017 resigned 14 December 2017 Christopher Collins Neil Clark resigned 16 April 2017 Rolf Stahel resigned 31 March 2017 At 31 December 2017 the Directors had the following beneficial interests in the Companys shares Number of shares
Peter George 276250 0.6% Stephen Stamp 200000 0.5% Miroslav Reljanovic 17632237 41.3% Andrew Mackie Jan Petracek 320288 0.8% Christopher Collins 31250 0.1% Biographical details of the Directors are set out on pages 22 and 23.
Directors interests The interests of Directors in the shares and options of the Company are set out above and in the Directors remuneration report on pages 26 to 28.
None of the Directors had a material interest at any time during the year in any contract of significance with the Group other than a service contract or an arms length commercial contract.
See note 37 for all related party transactions.
Information
Share capital As at 31 December 2017 the issued share capital of the Company was Number of ordinary shares of 0.01 each Ordinary Shares issued and fully paid up  42680813 2016 40504806.
The closing market price of the Companys Ordinary Shares at close of business on 29 December 2017 the last trading day of the year was 183.5 pence.
The maximum share price during the period from 1 January 2017 through 31 December 2017 was 216.5 pence and the minimum price was 165.5 pence per share.
30 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Each of the persons who is a Director at the date of approval of this Annual Report confirms that so far as the Director is aware there is no relevant audit information of which the Companys auditor is unaware and the Director has taken all the steps that he ought to have taken as a Director to make himself aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that the Companys auditor is aware of that information.
This confirmation is given and should be interpreted in accordance with the provisions of Section 418 of the Companies Act 2006.
Deloitte LLP have expressed their willingness to continue in office as auditor and a resolution to reappoint them will be proposed at the forthcoming Annual General Meeting.
Subsequent events Subsequent events are described in note 40.
Directors responsibilities statement The Directors are responsible for preparing the Annual Report and the financial statements in accordance with applicable law and regulations.
Company law requires the Directors to prepare Group and Company financial statements for each financial year.
The Directors are required by the AIM Rules of the London Stock Exchange to prepare Group financial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union EU and have elected under company law to prepare the Company financial statements in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the EU.
The financial statements are required by law and IFRS adopted by the EU to present fairly the financial position of the Group and the Company and the financial performance of the Group.
The Companies Act 2006 provides in relation to such financial statements that references in the relevant part of that Act to financial statements giving a true and fair view are references to their achieving a fair presentation.
Under company law the Directors must not approve the financial statements unless they are satisfied that they give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Group and the Company and of the profit or loss of the Group for that period.
In preparing each of the Group and Company financial statements the Directors are required to select suitable accounting policies and then apply them consistently make judgements and estimates that are reasonable and prudent present information including accounting policies in a manner that provides relevant reliable comparable and understandable information state whether they have been prepared in accordance with applicable IFRSs as adopted by the EU and prepare the financial statements on the going concern basis unless it is inappropriate to presume that the Group and the Company will continue in business.
The Directors are responsible for keeping adequate accounting records that are sufficient to show and explain the Groups and the Companys transactions and disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the financial position of the Group and the Company and enable them to ensure that the financial statements comply with the Companies Act 2006.
They are also responsible for safeguarding the assets of the Group and the Company and hence for taking reasonable steps for the prevention and detection of fraud and other irregularities.
The Directors are responsible for the maintenance and integrity of the Companys website.
Legislation in the United Kingdom governing the preparation and dissemination of financial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
We confirm that to the best of our knowledge the financial statements prepared in accordance with the relevant financial reporting framework give a true and fair view of the assets liabilities financial position and profit or loss of the Company and the undertakings included in the consolidation taken as a whole the Strategic report includes a fair view of the development and performance of the business and the position of the Company and undertakings included in the consolidation taken as a whole together with a description of the principal risks and uncertainties that they face and the Annual Report and financial statements taken as a whole are fair balanced and understandable and provide information necessary for shareholders to assess the Companys performance business model and strategy.
Approved by the Board of Directors and signed on behalf of the Board.
Sanja Juri Company Secretary 14 May 2018 DIRECTORS REPORT continued 31 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Governance Strategic report Report on the audit of the financial statements
In our opinion the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the Groups and of the parent companys affairs as at 31 December 2017 and of the Groups loss for the year then ended the Group financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union the parent company financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and as applied in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006 and the financial statements have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006.
We have audited the financial statements of Ergomed plc the parent company and its subsidiaries the Group which comprise the consolidated income statement the consolidated statement of comprehensive income the consolidated and parent company balance sheets the consolidated and parent company statements of changes in equity the consolidated and parent company cash flow statements and the related notes 1 to 39.
The financial reporting framework that has been applied in their preparation is applicable law and IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and as regards the parent company financial statements as applied in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006.
Basis for opinion We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing UK ISAs UK and applicable law.
Our
We are independent of the Group and the parent company in accordance with the ethical requirements that are relevant to our audit of the financial statements in the UK including the FRCs Ethical Standard as applied to listed entities and we have fulfilled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with these requirements.
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion.
Summary of our audit approach Key audit matters The key audit matters that we identified in the current year were Haemostatix goodwill impairment review Revenue recognition CRO service contracts Acquisition accounting Haemostatix contingent consideration Materiality The materiality that we used for the Group financial statements was 595300 which was determined on the basis of 1.25% of revenue for the year.
Scoping Full scope audit procedures have been performed on four components and represent 89% of Group revenue.
Six components were subject to an audit of specified balances in order to achieve sufficient coverage of the Groups absolute profit before tax and net assets.
The remaining Group entities were subject to analytical procedures.
Conclusions relating to going concern We are required by ISAs UK to report in respect of the following matters where the directors use of the going concern basis of accounting in preparation of the financial statements is not appropriate or the directors have not disclosed in the financial statements any identified material uncertainties that may cast significant doubt about the Groups or the parent companys ability to continue to adopt the going concern basis of accounting for a period of at least twelve months from the date when the financial statements are authorised for issue.
We have nothing to report in respect of these matters.
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT
TO THE MEMBERS OF ERGOMED PLC 32 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Key audit matters Key audit matters are those matters that in our professional judgement were of most significance in our audit of the financial statements of the current period and include the most significant assessed risks of material misstatement whether or not due to fraud that we identified.
These matters included those which had the greatest effect on the overall audit strategy the allocation of resources in the audit and directing the efforts of the engagement team.
These matters were addressed in the context of our audit of the financial statements as a whole and in forming our opinion thereon and we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters.
Haemostatix goodwill impairment review Key audit matter description The Group recognised goodwill of 2143k and intangible assets of 15200k from the acquisition of Haemostatix Ltd in 2016.
Given that the clinical trials of Peprostat and ReadyFlow are still ongoing significant assumptions judgements and estimates are required to be made by management in order to calculate the expected value in use of Haemostatix.
Following the profit warning announced on 5 March 2018 there is an increased risk of current year forecasts being inaccurate also increasing the risk that indicators of impairment exist.
Under IAS 36 an impairment review is required to be completed annually andor whenever there is an indication that the unit or Group of units may be impaired.
In preparing the cash flow forecasts management judgement is involved in the determination of the discount rate terminal growth rate the timing of drugs coming to market and forecast cash flows for each cash generating unit CGU.
Further details are included within the critical accounting judgements in note 2 and note 14 to the financial statements.
How the scope of our audit responded to the key audit matter We have assessed whether the CGUs identified are appropriately disaggregated and whether the assets included in the impairment model are complete by reconciling the assets to the consolidation and considering the disaggregation in line with the requirement of IAS 36.
We have further evaluated the existence and accuracy of the CGU assets by tracing them to supporting evidence.
We have challenged the cash flow forecasts by referencing to historical performance and external market data and an assessment of the Groups future strategy and budgets.
We performed sensitivity analysis around the key variables within the Goodwill impairment model such as when development costs are incurred when Peprostat and ReadyFlow come to market and when expected peak sales are reached to evaluate whether a reasonable change would trigger an impairment.
Key observations We are satisfied that there is no impairment required for the goodwill balance allocated to
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT continued
TO THE MEMBERS OF ERGOMED PLC 33 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Governance Strategic report Revenue recognition Open CRO service contracts Key audit matter description There is a risk that revenue from Clinical Research contracts see note 4 for segmental CRO revenues has not been appropriately recognised in line with the percentage completed as required by IAS 18 Revenue.
The percentage completed is an estimate based on managements judgements surrounding the costs incurred to date and the costs left to complete the contract.
The risk is that revenue is recognised on the basis of units completed which may not be indicative of the percentage of the contract that is actually complete.
IAS 18 para 20 states that when the outcome of a transaction involving the rendering of services can be estimated reliably revenue associated with the transaction shall be recognised by reference to the stage of completion of the transaction at the end of the reporting period.
Further details are included within the critical accounting judgements in note 2 to the financial statements.
How the scope of our audit responded to the key audit matter We have selected a sample of key revenue generating contracts during the year for testing.
For these contracts we have obtained the relevant project tracker and reconciled the value of services provided to the value of revenue recognised within the financial statements.
We have traced a sample of services provided in the year within the sampled contracts to supporting evidence such as external hospital data and timecards to evaluate whether the project tracker accurately reflects the work performed by the Group.
We have enquired of project managers as to the status of the project any ongoing concerns and the expected remaining duration of the project.
Considering all of the above we have assessed whether the revenue recognised by the Group is in line with evidence received and supports the percentage of completion that has occurred to date.
Key observations We concluded that the Group has recognised revenue on service contracts at an appropriate percentage completion rate.
Acquisition accounting Key audit matter description Significant judgement is required in respect of the purchase price allocation process on the acquisition of PSR Group BV note 34.
The acquisition was completed for a total consideration of 4.1m with 2.9m paid as initial consideration and the balance as deferred consideration.
Intangible assets valued at 0.7m and goodwill valued at 2.9m were recognised as a result of the acquisition.
The identification of intangible assets related deferred tax charges and fair valuation of the goodwill acquired and related assumptions such as the weighted average cost of capital and growth rates used is a key area of focus due to the judgemental nature of the assumptions used by management.
Further details are included within the critical accounting judgements in note 2 to the financial statements.
How the scope of our audit responded to the key audit matter For the acquisition of PSR Group BV we have obtained the share purchase agreement SPA as well as a management valuation paper detailing the purchase price consideration contingent consideration financing and the allocation of intangible assets and goodwill.
We have further assessed the purchase price allocation of goodwill and acquisition intangible assets by reviewing acquisition models and forecasts engaging a Deloitte valuation specialist to support where appropriate.
We also reviewed managements models for mathematical accuracy challenged the reasonableness of the assumptions made including the appropriateness of the forecasts and agreed consideration paid in the year to supporting evidence.
K e y observ a tions Based on work performed we consider the valuation and allocation of goodwill acquisition intangibles purchase price consideration and contingent consideration to be appropriate for the acquisition of PSR Group BV in the period.
34 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Haemostatix contingent consideration Key audit matter description Contingent consideration is required to be fair valued at each period end with the fair value being calculated based on managements forecasts.
A maximum value of 20m is payable as contingent consideration as part of the acquisition of Haemostatix and as such any inaccuracies in the forecasts could have a significant impact on the fair value of contingent consideration.
Following the profit warning announced on 5 March 2018 there is an increased risk of current year forecasts being inaccurate also increasing the risk that indicators of impairment exist.
Further details are included within the critical accounting judgements in note 2 and note 26 to the financial statements.
How the scope of our audit responded to the key audit matter We have obtained managements updated fair value calculation for the Haemostatix contingent consideration which include updated forecasts and challenged the key assumptions and judgements made i. come to market.
Our internal valuations specialists were engaged to assist in reviewing and re performing the fair value calculation.
Further to this we have also checked the mathematical accuracy of the calculation agreed whether the forecasts are consistent with those used within the goodwill impairment assessment and agreed whether the accounting adjustments have been appropriately recognised in the financial statements.
K e y observ a tions Our audit procedures concluded that an updated fair value calculation of the contingent consideration is appropriate as a result of progress of the clinical trials of Peprostat.
Our application of materiality We define materiality as the magnitude of misstatement in the financial statements that makes it probable that the economic decisions of a reasonably knowledgeable person would be changed or influenced.
We use materiality both in planning the scope of our audit work and in evaluating the results of our work.
Based on our professional judgement we determined materiality for the financial statements as a whole as follows Group financial statements Parent company financial statements Materiality 595300 350300 Basis for determining materiality We determined materiality based on 1.25% of revenue.
We determined materiality based on 1.40% of revenue.
Rationale for the benchmark applied Revenue is considered the most appropriate benchmark as it is the key performance metric for users of the financial statements.
Revenue is considered the most appropriate benchmark as it is the key performance metric for users of the financial statements.
Group materiality 595k Component materiality range 177k to 350k Audit Committee reporting threshold 30k
Group materiality Revenue 47.6m
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT continued
TO THE MEMBERS OF ERGOMED PLC 35 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Governance Strategic report We agreed with the Audit Committee that we would report to the Committee all audit differences in excess of 30000 for the Group and 18000 for the parent company as well as differences below that threshold that in our view warranted reporting on qualitative grounds.
We also report to the Audit Committee on disclosure matters that we identified when assessing the overall presentation of the financial statements.
An overview of the scope of our audit Our Group audit was scoped by obtaining an understanding of the Group and its environment including Groupwide controls and assessing the risks of material misstatement at the Group level.
Based on that assessment we focused our audit scope on the UK Croatian and Czech trading entities.
As such Ergomed plc PrimeVigilance Limited Haemostatix Limited and European PharmInvent Services were subject to a full audit.
The six additional components for which specified procedures were performed were chosen in order to provide sufficient coverage over the Groups key financial statement lines.
These components were selected for being the next most significant to the Group in terms of financial performance risk and geographical location.
Our audit work at the entities was executed at levels of materiality applicable to each individual entity which were lower than Group materiality and ranged between 177k and 350k.
We have engaged Deloitte Czech Republic as component auditors for the year ended 31 December 2017 to report on European PharmInvent Services s.
The locations subject to full scope audit procedures represent the principal business units and account for 89% of the Groups revenue for the year ended 31 December 2017.
They were also selected to provide an appropriate basis for undertaking audit work to address the risks of material misstatement identified above.
At the parent entity level we also tested the consolidation process and carried out analytical procedures to confirm our conclusion that there were no significant risks of material misstatement of the aggregated financial information of the remaining components not subject to audit.
The parent company is located in Guildford UK but operated out of Zagreb Croatia during 2017.
The parent company has been audited directly by the Group audit team.
Revenue Absolute profit before tax Net assets Full audit scope Specified audit procedures Review at group level Full audit scope Specified audit procedures Review at group level Full audit scope Specified audit procedures Review at group level 89% 8% 3% 83% 12% 86% 9% 5% 5% 36 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Other information The directors are responsible for the other information.
The other information comprises the information included in the annual report other than the financial statements and our auditors report thereon.
Our opinion on the financial statements does not cover the other information and except to the extent otherwise explicitly stated in our auditors report we do not express any form of assurance conclusion thereon.
In connection with our audit of the financial statements our responsibility is to read the other information and in doing so consider whether the other information is materially inconsistent with the financial statements or our knowledge obtained in the audit or otherwise appears to be materially misstated.
If we identify such material inconsistencies or apparent material misstatements we are required to determine whether there is a material misstatement in the financial statements or a material misstatement of other information.
If based on the work we have performed we conclude that there is a material misstatement of this other information we are required to report that fact.
We have nothing to report in respect of these matters.
Responsibilities of directors As explained more fully in the directors responsibilities statement the directors are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements and for being satisfied that they give a true and fair view and for such internal control as the directors determine is necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error.
In preparing the financial statements the directors are responsible for assessing the Groups and the parent companys ability to continue as a going concern disclosing as applicable matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless the directors either intend to liquidate the Group or the parent company or to cease operations or have no realistic alternative but to do so.
Auditors responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error and to issue an auditors report that includes our opinion.
Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with ISAs UK will always detect a material misstatement when it exists.
Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if individually or in the aggregate they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these financial statements.
A further description of our responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements is located on the Financial Reporting Councils website at www. rc. iteauditorsresponsibilities.
This description forms part of our auditors report.
Use of our report This report is made solely to the companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006.
Our audit work has been undertaken so that we might state to the companys members those matters we are required to state to them in an auditors report and for no other purpose.
To the fullest extent permitted by law we do not accept or assume responsibility to anyone other than the company and the companys members as a body for our audit work for this report or for the opinions we have formed.
Report on other legal and regulatory requirements Opinions on other matters prescribed by the Companies Act 2006 In our opinion based on the work undertaken in the course of the audit the information given in the strategic report and the directors report for the financial year for which the financial statements are prepared is consistent with the financial statements and the strategic report and the directors report have been prepared in accordance with applicable legal requirements.
In the light of the knowledge and understanding of the Group and or the parent company and their environment obtained in the course of the audit we have not identified any material misstatements in the strategic report or the directors report.
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT continued
TO THE MEMBERS OF ERGOMED PLC 37 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Governance Strategic report Matters on which we are required to report by exception Adequacy of explanations received and accounting records Under the Companies Act 2006 we are required to report to you if in our opinion we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit or adequate accounting records have not been kept by the parent company or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or the parent company financial statements are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns.
We have nothing to report in respect of these matters.
Directors remuneration Under the Companies Act 2006 we are also required to report if in our opinion certain disclosures of directors remuneration have not been made.
We have nothing to report in respect of this matter.
Matthew Hall For and on behalf of Deloitte LLP Statutory Auditor Cambridge United Kingdom 14 May 2018 38 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Restated
Net service revenue 39645 29224 Licence revenue 370 Reimbursement revenue 7609 10009 Revenue 3 4 47624 39233 Cost of sales 25394 17230 Reimbursable expenses 7609 10009 Gross profit 14621 11994 Administrative expenses 15954 10822 Administrative expenses comprises Other administrative expenses 9725 8323 Amortisation of acquired fair valued intangible assets 16 1167 771 Sharebased payment charge 31 1033 877 Deferred consideration for acquisitions expense 7 752 550 Revaluation of deferred consideration for acquisition 2875 Writeback of deferred consideration for acquisition  460 Acquisition costs 8 259 584 Exceptional items 9 143 177 Research and development 2689 1250 Other operating income 118 127 Operating lossprofit 3904 49 Investment revenues 10 3 2 Finance costs 11 546 274 Loss before taxation 4447 223 Taxation 13 57 153 Loss for the year 5 4504 70 Loss per share Basic 14 11.0p 0.2p Diluted 14 11.0p 0.2p All activities in the current and prior period relate to continuing operations.
The notes on pages 46 to 90 form an integral part of these financial statements.
The restatement of the income statement for 2016 is explained in note 1.
CONSOLIDATED INCOME STATEMENT FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 39 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Governance Strategic report CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017
Loss for the year 4504 70 Items that may be classified subsequently to profit or loss Exchange differences on translation of foreign operations 619 680 Other comprehensive income for the year net of tax 619 680 Total comprehensive lossincome for the year 3885 610 40 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEET AS AT 31 DECEMBER 2017
Restated
Restated
Noncurrent assets Goodwill 15 15269 12285 7488 Other intangible assets 16 20229 19842 2819 Property plant and equipment 17 1078 717 335 Investments 1telDeferred tax asset 20 1613 1448 365 38943 34563 11190 Current assets Trade and other receivables 21 19250 14958 9528 Other current assets 22 502 240 Cash and cash equivalents 23 3218 4424 3974 22970 19622 13502 Total assets 61913 54185 24692 Current liabilities Borrowings 24 12 3 5 Trade and other payables 25 10717 7077 5955 Deferred consideration 26 1957 Deferred revenue 976 1393 795 Current tax liability 201 119 478 Total current liabilities 13863 8592 7233 Net current assets 9107 11030 6269 Noncurrent liabilities Borrowings 24 6 5 7 Deferred consideration 26 9804 7772 Deferred tax liability 20 3397 3418 516 Total liabilities 27070 19787 7756 Net assets 34843 34898 16936
Share capital 2telShare premium account 28 20616 17957 9361 Merger reserve 29 11008 10264 2981 Sharebased payment reserve 30 2674 1829 1092 Translation reserve 30 762 143 537 Retained earnings 645 3799 3751 Total equity 34843 34398 16936 The notes on pages 46 to 90 form an integral part of these financial statements.
The restatement of the balance sheets for 2016 and 2015 are explained in note 1.
Approved by the Board of Directors and authorised for issue on 14 May 2018.
S A Stamp
Company Registration No.
41 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Governance Strategic report CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017
Share premium account
Share based payment reserve
Retained earnings
Balance at 31 December 2015 288 9361 2981 650 537 4193 16936 Prior period adjustment note 1    442  442 Balance at 31 December 2015 restated 288 9361 2981 1092 537 3751 16936 Loss for the year restated      70 70 Other comprehensive income for the year     680  680 Total comprehensive income for the year     680 70 610 Share issue during the year for cash net of expenses 66 8596     8662 Share issues during the year for noncash consideration 51  7144    7195 Contingent share issue for noncash consideration restated 1  139 140 Sharebased payment charge for the year restated    877   877 Deferred tax credit taken directly to equity      118 118 Balance at 31 December 2016 restated 406 17957 10264 1829 143 3799 34398 Loss for the year      4504 4504 Other comprehensive income for the year     619  619 Total comprehensive income for the year     619 4504 3885 Share issue during the year for cash net of expenses 18 2659     2677 Share issues during the year for noncash consideration 3  555    558 Contingent share issue for noncash consideration 1  189 188   2 Sharebased payment charge for the year    1033   1033 Deferred tax credit taken directly to equity      60 60 Balance at 31 December 2017 428 20616 11008 2674 762 645 34843 42 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 CONSOLIDATED CASH FLOW STATEMENT FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017
Restated
Cash flows from operating activities Loss before taxation 4447 223 Adjustment for Amortisation and depreciation 1626 1027 Gain on disposal of fixed assets 7 2 Sharebased payment charge 1033 877 Acquisition of shares for noncash consideration 462 54 Exchange adjustments 44 419 Acquisition costs 218 586 Revaluation of deferred consideration for acquisition 2875 Writeback of deferred consideration for acquisition  415 Investment revenues 3 2 Finance costs 546 274 Operating cash flow before changes in working capital and provisions 1335 2487 Increase in trade and other receivables 3445 3667 Increase in other current assets 262 195 Increasedecrease in trade and other payables 2753 58 Cash generated fromutilised by operations 381 1433 Taxation paid 355 941 Net cash inflowoutflow from operating activities 26 2374 Investing activities Investment revenues received 3 2 Acquisition of intangible assets 704 705 Acquisition of property plant and equipment 721 404 Acquisition of subsidiaries net of cash acquired 1946 4755 Acquisition related earnout paid 559 Receipts from sale of property plant and equipment 11 31 Net cash outflow from investing activities 3916 5831 Financing activities Issue of new shares 2900 9185 Expenses of fundraising 224 523 Finance costs paid 2 2 Increase in borrowings 20 Repayment of borrowings 10 5 Net cash inflow from financing activities 2684 8655 Net decreaseincrease in cash and cash equivalents 1206 450 Cash and cash equivalents at start of the year 4424 3974 Cash and cash equivalents at end of year 23 3218 4424 The restatement of the cash flow statement for 2016 is explained in note 1.
43 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Governance Strategic report COMPANY BALANCE SHEET AS AT 31 DECEMBER 2017
Restated
Restated
Noncurrent assets Intangible assets Property plant and equipment Investments 19 39618 34082 10557 Deferred tax asset 2tel40828 34716 10911 Current assets Trade and other receivables 21 15902 11808 6824 Cash and cash equivalents 23 288 930 1407 16190 12738 8231 Total assets 57018 47454 19142 Current liabilities Trade and other payables 25 12074 7524 5945 Deferred consideration 26 1957 Deferred revenue 855 1260 773 Total current liabilities 14886 8784 6718 Net current assets 1304 3954 1513 Noncurrent liabilities Deferred consideration 26 9804 7772 Deferred tax liability 20 12 5 2 Total liabilities 24702 16561 6720 Net assets 32316 30893 12422
Share capital 2telShare premium account 28 20616 17957 9361 Merger reserve 29 11008 10264 2981 Sharebased payment reserve 30 2674 1829 1092 Translation reserve 30 3693 2550 1046 Retained earnings 6103 2113 254 Total equity 32316 30893 12422 The notes on pages 46 to 90 form an integral part of these financial statements.
The restatement of the balance sheets for 2015 and 2016 are explained in note 1.
As permitted by Section 408 of the Companies Act 2006 the Income statement and Statement of comprehensive income of the parent company is not presented as part of these financial statements.
The parent companys loss after tax for the financial year was 4050000 2016 1977000.
Approved by the Board of Directors and authorised for issue on 14 May 2018.
S A Stamp
Company Registration No.
44 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 COMPANY STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017
Share premium account
Share based payment reserve
Retained earnings
Balance at 31 December 2015 288 9361 2981 650 1046 188 12422 Prior period adjustment note 1    442  442 Balance at 31 December 2015 restated 288 9361 2981 1092 1046 254 12422 Loss for the year restated      1977 1977 Other comprehensive income for the year     3596  3596 Total comprehensive income for the year     3596 1977 1619 Share issue for cash net of expenses during the year 66 8596     8662 Share issues for noncash consideration during the year 51  7144    7195 Contingent share issue for noncash consideration restated 1  139 140 Sharebased payment charge for the year re stated    877   877 Deferred tax credit taken directly to equity      118 118 Balance at 31 December 2016 restated 406 17957 10264 1829 2550 2113 30893 Loss for the year      4050 4050 Other comprehensive income for the year     1143  1143 Total comprehensive income for the year     1143 4050 2907 Share issue for cash net of expenses during the year 18 2659     2677 Share issues for noncash consideration during the year 3  555    558 Contingent share issue for noncash consideration 1  189 188   2 Sharebased payment charge for the year    1033   1033 Deferred tax credit taken directly to equity      60 60 Balance at 31 December 2017 428 20616 11008 2674 3693 6103 32316 45 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Governance Strategic report COMPANY CASH FLOW STATEMENT FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017
Restated
Cash flows from operating activities Loss before taxation 4183 1920 Adjustment for Amortisation and depreciation 33 21 Sharebased payment creditcharge 106 877 Exchange adjustments 186 118 Acquisition of shares for noncash consideration 462 54 Revaluation of deferred consideration 2875 Writeback of deferred consideration  415 Acquisition costs 218 586 Investment revenues 3 1 Finance costs 581 273 Operating cash flow before changes in working capital and provisions 1233 515 Increase in trade and other receivables 4299 4938 Increase in trade and other payables 5608 2066 Cash generated byutilised by operations 76 3387 Taxation received 299 Net cash inflowoutflow from operating activities 375 3387 Investing activities Investment revenues 3 Acquisition of intangible assets 278 150 Acquisition of property plant and equipment 100 34 Acquisition of subsidiaries 2759 5568 Acquisition related earnout paid 559 Net cash outflow from investing activities 3693 5752 Financing activities Issue of new shares 2900 9185 Expenses of fundraising 224 523 Net cash inflow from financing activities 2676 8662 Net decrease in cash and cash equivalents 642 477 Cash and cash equivalents at start of the year 930 1407 Cash and cash equivalents at end of year 23 288 930 The restatement of the cash flow statement for 2016 is explained in note 1.
46 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 Accounting policies
Ergomed plc is a public company limited by shares.
Its registered address is 2628 Frederick Sanger Road Surrey Research Park Guildford Surrey GU2 7YD UK.
Ergomed plc and its wholly owned subsidiaries provide a full range of clinical trial planning management and monitoring as well as drug safety and medical information services.
The Group has a worldwide presence with operations in the UK Poland Germany Bosnia Croatia Serbia The Netherlands Czech Republic Russia Switzerland Ukraine Taiwan the United Arab Emirates and the USA.
Ergomed plc is a company incorporated and domiciled in the UK.
The Group financial statements were authorised for issue by the Board of Directors on 14 May 2018.
Basis of accounting Consolidated financial statements The financial statements have been prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs and the Companies Act 2006.
The financial statements have also been prepared in accordance with IFRSs adopted by the European Union and therefore the Group financial statements comply with Article 4 of the EU IAS Regulation.
The financial statements have been prepared on the historical cost basis.
The principal accounting policies are set out below.
Basis of consolidation The consolidated financial statements incorporate the financial statements of the Company and entities controlled by the Company its subsidiaries made up to 31 December each year.
Control is achieved when the Company has the power over the investee is exposed or has rights to variable return from its involvement with the investee and has the ability to use its power to affect its returns.
The Company reassesses whether or not it controls an investee if facts and circumstances indicate that there are changes to one or more of the three elements of control listed above.
When the Company has less than a majority of the voting rights of an investee it considers that it has power over the investee when the voting rights are sufficient to give it the practical ability to direct the relevant activities of the investee unilaterally.
The Company considers all relevant facts and circumstances in assessing whether or not the Companys voting rights in an investee are sufficient to give it power including the size of the Companys holding of voting rights relative to the size and dispersion of holdings of the other vote holders potential voting rights held by the Company other vote holders or other parties rights arising from other contractual arrangements and any additional facts and circumstances that indicate that the Company has or does not have the current ability to direct the relevant activities at the time that decisions need to be made including voting patterns at previous shareholders meetings.
Consolidation of a subsidiary begins when the Company obtains control over the subsidiary and ceases when the Company loses control of the subsidiary.
Specifically the results of subsidiaries acquired or disposed of during the year are included in the Consolidated income statement from the date the Company gains control until the date when the Company ceases to control the subsidiary.
Profit or loss and each component of other comprehensive income are attributed to the owners of the Company.
Total comprehensive income of the subsidiaries is attributed to the owners of the Company.
All intragroup assets and liabilities equity income expenses and cash flows relating to transitions between the members of the Group are eliminated on consolidation.
When the Group loses control of a subsidiary the gain or loss on disposal recognised in profit or loss is calculated as the difference between i the aggregate of the fair value of the consideration received and the fair value of any retained interest and ii the previous carrying amount of the assets including goodwill less liabilities of the subsidiary and any noncontrolling interests.
All amounts previously recognised in other comprehensive income in relation to that subsidiary are accounted for as if the Group had directly disposed of the related assets or liabilities of the subsidiary i. or transferred to another category of equity as specifiedpermitted by applicable IFRSs.
The fair value of any investment retained in the former subsidiary at the date when control is lost is regarded as the fair value on initial recognition for subsequent accounting under IAS 39 Financial Instruments Recognition and Measurement or when applicable the costs on initial recognition of an investment in an associate or jointly controlled entity.
47 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Governance Strategic report Going concern The financial statements have been prepared on the going concern basis which assumes that the Group will have sufficient funds to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future being a period of no less than 12 months from the date of signing of the financial statements.
The Directors have reviewed a cash flow forecast the Forecast for the period ending 31 December 2019.
The Forecast represents the Directors best estimate of the Groups future performance and necessarily includes a number of assumptions including the level of revenues which are subject to inherent uncertainties.
However the Forecast demonstrates that the Directors have a reasonable expectation that the Group will be able to meet its liabilities as they fall due for a period of at least 12 months from the date of approval of these financial statements.
On the basis of the above factors and having made appropriate enquiries the Directors have a reasonable expectation that the Company and Group have adequate resources to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future.
Accordingly they continue to adopt the going concern basis in preparing these financial statements.
Compliance with accounting standards At the date of authorisation of these financial statements the following Standards and Interpretations which have not been applied in these financial statements were in issue but not yet effective and in some cases had not yet been adopted by the EU IFRS 9 Financial Instruments IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers IFRS 16 Leases IFRS 11 amendments Accounting for Acquisitions of Interests in Joint Operations IAS 1 amendments Disclosure Initiative IAS 16 and IAS 38 amendments Clarification of Acceptable Methods of Depreciation and Amortisation IAS 16 and IAS 41 amendments Agriculture Bearer Plants IAS 27 amendments Equity Method in Separate Financial Statements IFRS 10 and IAS 28 amendments Sale or Contribution of Assets between an Investor and its Associate or Joint Venture IFRS 10 IFRS 12 and IAS 28 amendments Investment Entities Applying the Consolidation Exemption Annual Improvements to IFRSs 20122014 Cycle Amendments to IFRS 5 Noncurrent Assets Held for Sale and Discontinued Operations IFRS 7 Financial Instruments Disclosures IAS 19 Employee Benefits and IAS 34 Interim Financial Reporting The Directors do not expect that the adoption of the Standards listed above will have a material impact on the financial statements of the Group in future periods except that IFRS 9 will impact both the measurement and disclosures of financial instruments.
IFRS 15 may have an impact on revenue recognition and related disclosures and IFRS 16 will have an impact on the measurement and recognition of leases and related disclosures.
Beyond the information above it is not practicable to provide a reasonable estimate of the effect of IFRS 9 IFRS 15 and IFRS 16 until a detailed review has been completed.
Restatement of prior year income statement balance sheet and cash flow statement Certain Directors former Directors and the Company Secretary hold options over shares held by Dr Miroslav Reljanovic under agreements between those parties.
The grant and vesting of such options was dependent on their continued employment by the Company.
Although these options are not dilutive and the Company is not party to the arrangements in accordance with IFRS 2 a sharebased payment charge arises.
No such charge was shown in the financial statements for the years ended 31 December 2015 and 31 December 2016.
In November 2016 the Company acquired European PharmInvent Services s.
Deferred consideration payable to the vendors is dependent on their remaining employees of the group.
The total amount payable to vendors for the year ended 31 December 2016 was charged to the income statement.
However a proportion of that deferred consideration is payable in equity.
In accordance with IFRS 2 this proportion should be treated as a sharebased payment.
In 2016 the raw material and manufacturing costs of clinical trial material to be used in clinical studies were capitalised and categorised as Clinical Trial Inventory.
However under IFRS the raw material costs were not eligible for capitalisation.
Therefore a prior year adjustment has arisen and the remaining capitalised amount is categorised as Other current assets.
48 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounting policies continued The impact on the Consolidated income statement Consolidated balance sheet and Consolidated cash flow statement are set out below.
Restatement of prior year Consolidated income statement
Adjustment
Restated
Net service revenue 29224  29224 Reimbursement revenue 10009  10009 Revenue 39233  39233 Cost of sales 17230  17230 Reimbursable expenses 10009  10009 Gross profit 11994  11994 Administrative expenses 10483 339 10822 Administrative expenses comprises Other administrative expenses 8323  8323 Amortisation of acquired fair valued intangible assets 771  771 Sharebased payment charge 398 479 877 Deferred consideration for acquisition expense 690 140 550 Writeback of deferred consideration 460  460 Acquisition costs 584  584 Exceptional items 177  177 Research and development 1040 210 1250 Other operating income 127  127 Operating profit 598 549 49 Investment revenues 2  2 Finance costs 274  274 Profitloss before taxation 326 549 223 Taxation 153  153 Profitloss for the year 479 549 70 Earningsloss per share Basic 1.3p 0.2p Diluted 1.3p 0.2p NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS continued FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 49 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Governance Strategic report Restatement of prior year Consolidated balance sheet
Adjustment
Restated
Noncurrent assets Goodwill 12285  12285 Other intangible assets 19842  19842 Property plant and equipment 717  717 Investments 271  271 Deferred tax asset 1448  1448 34563  34563 Current assets Trade and other receivables 14958  14958 Clinical trial inventory 450 450 Other current assets  240 240 Cash and cash equivalents 4424  4424 19832 210 19622 Total assets 54395 210 54185 Current liabilities Borrowings 3  3 Trade and other payables 7077  7077 Deferred revenue 1393  1393 Current tax liability 119  119 Total current liabilities 8592  8592 Net current assets 11240 210 11030 Noncurrent liabilities Borrowings 5  5 Deferred consideration 7772  7772 Deferred tax liability 3418  3418 Total liabilities 19787  19787 Net assets 34608 210 34398
Share capital 406  406 Share premium account 17957  17957 Merger reserve 10264  10264 Sharebased payment reserve 1048 781 1829 Translation reserve 143  143 Retained earnings 4790 991 3799 Total equity 34608 210 34398 50 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounting policies continued Restatement of 2015 Consolidated balance sheet
Adjustment
Restated
Noncurrent assets Goodwill 7488  7488 Other intangible assets 2819  2819 Property plant and equipment 335  335 Investments 183  183 Deferred tax asset 365  365 11190  11190 Current assets Trade and other receivables 9528  9528 Cash and cash equivalents 3974  3974 13502  13502 Total assets 24692  24692 Current liabilities Borrowings 5  5 Trade and other payables 5955  5955 Deferred revenue 795  795 Current tax liability 478  478 Total current liabilities 7233  7233 Net current assets 6269  6269 Noncurrent liabilities Borrowings 7  7 Deferred tax liability 516  516 Total liabilities 7756  7756 Net assets 16936  16936
Share capital 288  288 Share premium account 9361  9361 Merger reserve 2981  2981 Sharebased payment reserve 650 442 1092 Translation reserve 537  537 Retained earnings 4193 442 3751 Total equity 16936  16936 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS continued FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 51 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Governance Strategic report Restatement of prior year Consolidated cash flow statement
Adjustment
Restated
Cash flows from operating activities Profitloss before taxation 326 549 223 Adjustment for Amortisation and depreciation 1027  1027 Gain on disposal of fixed assets 2  2 Sharebased payment charge 398 479 877 Acquisition of shares for noncash consideration 54  54 Exchange adjustments 419  419 Acquisition costs and deferred consideration 726 140 586 Writeback of deferred consideration 415  415 Investment revenues 2  2 Finance costs 274  274 Operating cash flow before changes in working capital and provisions 2697 210 2487 Increase in trade and other receivables 3667  3667 Increase in inventory 405 405 Increase in other current assets  195 195 Decrease in trade and other payables 58  58 Cash utilised by operations 1433  1433 Taxation paid 941  941 Net cash outflow from operating activities 2374  2374 Investing activities Investment revenues received 2  2 Acquisition of intangible assets 705  705 Acquisition of property plant and equipment 404  404 Acquisition of subsidiaries net of cash acquired 4755  4755 Receipts from sale of property plant and equipment 31  31 Net cash outflow from investing activities 5831  5831 Financing activities Issue of new shares 9185  9185 Expenses of fundraising 523  523 Finance costs paid 2  2 Increase in borrowings Repayment of borrowings 5  5 Net cash inflow from financing activities 8655  8655 Net increase in cash and cash equivalents 450  450 Cash and cash equivalents at start of the year 3974  3974 Cash and cash equivalents at end of year 4424  4424 52 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounting policies continued Restatement of prior year Company balance sheet
Adjustment
Restated
Noncurrent assets Intangible assets 153  153 Property plant and equipment 24  24 Investments 34082  34082 Deferred tax asset 457  457 34716  34716 Current assets Trade and other receivables 11808  11808 Cash and cash equivalents 930  930 12738  12738 Total assets 47454  47454 Current liabilities Trade and other payables 7524  7524 Deferred revenue 1260  1260 Total current liabilities 8784  8784 Net current assets 3954  3954 Noncurrent liabilities Deferred consideration 7772  7772 Deferred tax liability 5  5 Total liabilities 16561  16561 Net assets 30893  30893
Share capital 406  406 Share premium account 17957  17957 Merger reserve 10264  10264 Sharebased payment reserve 1048 781 1829 Translation reserve 2550  2550 Retained earnings 1332 781 2113 Total equity 30893  30893 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS continued FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 53 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Governance Strategic report Restatement of 2015 Company balance sheet
Adjustment
Restated
Noncurrent assets Intangible assets 4  4 Property plant and equipment 8  8 Investments 10557  10557 Deferred tax asset 342  342 10911  10911 Current assets Trade and other receivables 6824  6824 Cash and cash equivalents 1407  1407 8231  8231 Total assets 19142  19142 Current liabilities Trade and other payables 5945  5945 Deferred revenue 773  773 Total current liabilities 6718  6718 Net current assets 1513  1513 Noncurrent liabilities Deferred tax liability 2  2 Total liabilities 6720  6720 Net assets 12422  12422
Share capital 288  288 Share premium account 9361  9361 Merger reserve 2981  2981 Sharebased payment reserve 650 442 1092 Translation reserve 1046  1046 Retained earnings 188 442 254 Total equity 12422  12422 54 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounting policies continued Restatement of prior year Company cash flow statement
Adjustment
Restated
Cash flows from operating activities Loss before taxation 1581 339 1920 Adjustment for Amortisation and depreciation 21  21 Sharebased payment charge 398 479 877 Exchange adjustments 118  118 Acquisition of shares for noncash consideration 54  54 Writeback of deferred consideration 415  415 Acquisition costs and deferred consideration 726 140 586 Investment revenues 1  1 Finance costs 273  273 Operating cash flow before changes in working capital and provisions 515  515 Increase in trade and other receivables 4938  4938 Increase in trade and other payables 2066  2066 Cash utilised by operations 3387  3387 Taxation paid Net cash outflow from operating activities 3387  3387 Investing activities Acquisition of intangible assets 150  150 Acquisition of property plant and equipment 34  34 Acquisition of subsidiaries 5568  5568 Net cash outflow from investing activities 5752  5752 Financing activities Issue of new shares 9185  9185 Expenses of fundraising 523  523 Net cash inflow from financing activities 8662  8662 Net decrease in cash and cash equivalents 477  477 Cash and cash equivalents at start of the year 1407  1407 Cash and cash equivalents at end of year 930  930 Property plant and equipment and depreciation Property plant and equipment are stated at cost less depreciation less any provision for impairment.
Depreciation is provided on assets at rates calculated to write off the cost less their estimated residual value over their expected useful lives on the following bases Leasehold improvements 2.5% straight line or over the remaining lease term whichever is shorter Motor vehicles 8.3350% straight line Computer equipment 8.3350% straight line Fixtures and fittings 1050% straight line Laboratory equipment 20% straight line Business combinations Acquisitions of companies are accounted for in accordance with the principles of IFRS 3 as the Directors consider it reflects the economic substance of transactions.
Acquisitions of subsidiaries and businesses are accounted for using the acquisition method.
The consideration transferred in a business combination is measured at fair value which is calculated as the sum of the acquisitiondate fair values of assets transferred by the Group liabilities incurred by the Group to the former owners of the acquiree and the equity interest issued by the Group in exchange for control of the acquiree.
Deferred consideration in a business combination is measured at fair value which is calculated as the sum of the acquisitiondate fair values of assets expected to be transferred by the Group to the former owners of the acquiree and the equity interest to be issued by the Group in exchange for control of the acquiree.
Acquisitionrelated costs are recognised in profit or loss as incurred.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS continued FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 55 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Governance Strategic report At the acquisition date the identifiable assets acquired and the liabilities assumed are recognised at their fair value at the acquisition date except that deferred tax assets or liabilities and assets or liabilities related to employee benefit arrangements are recognised and measured in accordance with IAS 12 Income Taxes and IAS 19 Employee Benefits respectively and assets or disposal groups that are classified as held for sale in accordance with IFRS 5 Noncurrent Assets Held for Sale and Discontinued Operations are measured in accordance with that Standard.
Goodwill is measured as the excess of the sum of the consideration transferred the amount of any noncontrolling interests in the acquiree and the fair value of the acquirers previously held equity interest in the acquiree if any over the net of the acquisition date amounts of the identifiable assets acquired and the liabilities assumed.
If after reassessment the net of the acquisition date amounts of the identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed exceeds the sum of the consideration transferred the amount of any noncontrolling interests in the acquiree and the fair value of the acquirers previously held interest in the acquiree if any the excess is recognised immediately in profit or loss as a bargain purchase gain.
If the initial accounting for a business combination is incomplete by the end of the reporting period in which the combination occurs the Group reports provisional amounts for the items for which the accounting is incomplete.
Those provisional amounts are adjusted during the measurement period see above or additional assets or liabilities are recognised to reflect new information obtained about facts and circumstances that existed as of the acquisition date that if known would have affected the amounts recognised as of that date.
Goodwill
Goodwill arising in a business combination is recognised as an asset at the date that control is acquired the acquisition date.
Goodwill is measured as the excess of the fair value of the sum of the consideration transferred the amount of any non controlling interest in the acquiree and the fair value of the acquirers previously held equity interest if any in the entity over the net of the acquisitiondate amounts of the identifiable assets acquired and the liabilities assumed.
Goodwill is not amortised but is reviewed for impairment at least annually.
For the purpose of impairment testing goodwill is allocated to each of the Groups cashgenerating units expected to benefit from the synergies of the combination.
Cashgenerating units to which goodwill has been allocated are tested for impairment annually or more frequently when there is an indication that the unit may be impaired.
If the recoverable amount of the cashgenerating unit is less than the carrying amount of the unit the impairment loss is allocated first to reduce the carrying amount of any goodwill allocated to the unit and then to the other assets of the unit prorata on the basis of the carrying amount of each asset in the unit.
An impairment loss recognised for goodwill is not reversed in a subsequent period.
The recoverable amount is the higher of the fair value less costs to sell and the value in use.
In assessing value in use the estimated future cash flows are discounted to their present value using a pretax discount rate that reflects current market assessments of the time value of money and the risks specific to the asset for which the estimates of future cash flows have not been adjusted.
If the recoverable amount of an asset or cashgenerating unit is estimated to be less than its carrying amount the carrying amount of the asset or cashgenerating unit is reduced to its recoverable amount.
An impairment loss is recognised immediately in profit or loss.
Investments
Investments are stated at cost less provision for impairment in value.
Intangible assets acquired separately Intangible assets with finite useful lives that are acquired separately are carried at cost less accumulated amortisation and accumulated impairment losses.
Amortisation is recognised on a straightline basis over their estimated useful lives as follows
2030% straight line The estimated useful life and amortisation method are reviewed at the end of each reporting period with the effect of any changes in estimate being accounted for on a prospective basis.
Intangible assets with indefinite useful lives that are acquired separately are carried at cost less accumulated impairment losses.
Costs associated with the development of computer software are initially capitalised at cost which includes the purchase price net of any discounts and rebates and other directly attributable costs of preparing the asset for its intended use.
Direct expenditure including employee costs which enhances or extends the performance of computer software beyond its specifications and which can be reliably measured is added to the original cost of the software.
Costs associated with maintaining the computer software are recognised as an expense when incurred.
56 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounting policies continued The computer software under development is currently under construction and so no amortisation has been recognised in the current year.
The asset will subsequently be carried at cost less accumulated amortisation and accumulated impairment losses.
These costs will be amortised to profit or loss using the straight line method over their estimated useful lives of five years once the asset is in use.
Intangible assets acquired in a business combination Intangible assets acquired in a business combination and recognised separately from goodwill are initially recognised at their fair value at the acquisition date which is regarded as their cost.
Subsequent to initial recognition intangible assets acquired in a business combination are reported at cost less accumulated amortisation and accumulated impairment losses on the same basis as intangible assets that are acquired separately as follows.
Customer contracts 2066.7% straight line Customer relationships 2050% straight line
1213.3% straight line
40% straight line Inprocess RandD Not currently amortised Impairment of tangible and intangible assets excluding goodwill At each balance sheet date the Group reviews the carrying amounts of its tangible and intangible assets to determine whether there is any indication that those assets have suffered an impairment loss.
If any such indication exists the recoverable amount of the asset is estimated to determine the extent of the impairment loss if any.
Where the asset does not generate cash flows that are independent from other assets the Group estimates the recoverable amount of the cashgenerating unit to which the asset belongs.
When a reasonable and consistent basis of allocation can be identified corporate assets are also allocated to individual cashgenerating units or otherwise they are allocated to the smallest group of cashgenerating units for which a reasonable and consistent allocation basis can be identified.
The recoverable amount is the higher of the fair value less costs to sell and the value in use.
In assessing value in use the estimated future cash flows are discounted to their present value using a pretax discount rate that reflects current market assessments of the time value of money and the risks specific to the asset for which the estimates of future cash flows have not been adjusted.
If the recoverable amount of an asset or cashgenerating unit is estimated to be less than its carrying amount the carrying amount of the asset or cashgenerating unit is reduced to its recoverable amount.
An impairment loss is recognised immediately in profit or loss unless the relevant asset is carried at a revalued amount in which case the impairment loss is treated as a revaluation decrease.
Financial instruments Financial assets and financial liabilities are recognised in the Groups balance sheet when the Group becomes a party to the contractual provisions of the instrument.
Financial assets and financial liabilities are initially measured at fair value.
Transaction costs that are directly attributable to the acquisition or issue of financial assets and financial liabilities other than financial assets and financial liabilities at fair value through profit or loss are added to or deducted from the fair value of the financial assets or financial liabilities as appropriate on initial recognition.
Transaction costs directly attributable to the acquisition of financial assets or financial liabilities at fair value through profit or loss are recognised immediately in profit or loss.
Financial assets The Company classifies its financial assets in the following categories at fair value through profit or loss FVTPL loans and receivables availableforsale financial assets AFS heldtomaturity investments The classification depends on the purpose for which the financial assets were acquired.
Management determines the classification of its financial assets at initial recognition and reevaluates this designation at every reporting date.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS continued FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 57 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Governance Strategic report Financial assets at fair value through profit or loss This category has two subcategories financial assets held for trading and those designated at fair value through profit or loss at inception.
A financial asset is classified in this category if it was acquired principally for the purpose of selling it in the short term or if so designated by management.
Financial instruments at fair value through profit and loss comprise of derivative financial instruments.
Assets in this category are classified as current assets if they are either held for trading or are expected to be realised within 12 months of the balance sheet date.
Loans and receivables Loans and receivables are nonderivative financial assets with fixed or determinable payments that are not quoted in an active market.
They are included in current assets except for maturities greater than 12 months after the balance sheet date.
These are classified as noncurrent assets.
Loans and receivables comprise of trade and other receivables and cash and cash equivalents in the balance sheet.
Impairment of financial assets Financial assets other than those at FVTPL are assessed for indicators of impairment at each balance sheet date.
Financial assets are impaired where there is objective evidence that as a result of one or more events that occurred after the initial recognition of the financial asset the estimated future cash flows of the investment have been affected.
For listed and unlisted equity investments classified as AFS a significant or prolonged decline in the fair value of the security below its cost is considered to be objective evidence of impairment.
For all other financial assets including redeemable notes classified as AFS and finance lease receivables objective evidence of impairment could include significant financial difficulty of the issuer or counterparty or default or delinquency in interest or principal payments or it becoming probable that the borrower will enter bankruptcy or financial reorganisation.
For certain categories of financial asset such as trade receivables assets that are assessed not to be impaired individually are in addition assessed for impairment on a collective basis.
Objective evidence of impairment for a portfolio of receivables could include the Groups past experience of collecting payments an increase in the number of delayed payments in the portfolio past the average credit period of 60 days as well as observable changes in national or local economic conditions that correlate with default on receivables.
For financial assets carried at amortised cost the amount of the impairment is the differences between the assets carrying amount and the present value of estimated future cash flows discounted at the financial assets original effective interest rate.
The carrying amount of the financial asset is reduced by the impairment loss directly for all financial assets with the exception of trade receivables where the carrying amount is reduced through the use of an allowance account.
When a trade receivable is considered uncollectible it is written off against the allowance account.
Subsequent recoveries of amounts previously written off are credited against the allowance account.
Changes in the carrying amount of the allowance account are recognised in profit or loss.
Financial liabilities and equity Debt and equity instruments are classified as either financial liabilities or as equity in accordance with the substance of the contractual arrangement.
Equity instruments An equity instrument is any contract that evidences a residual interest in the assets of an entity after deducting all of its liabilities.
Equity instruments issued by the Group are recognised at the proceeds received net of direct issue costs.
Repurchase of the Companys own equity instruments is recognised and deducted directly in equity.
No gain or loss is recognised in profit or loss on the purchase sale issue or cancellation of the Companys own equity instruments.
Financial liabilities Financial liabilities are classified as either financial liabilities at FVTPL or other financial liabilities.
Other financial liabilities Other financial liabilities including borrowings are initially measured at fair value net of transaction costs.
Other financial liabilities are subsequently measured at amortised cost using the effective interest method with interest expense recognised on an effective yield basis.
The effective interest method is a method of calculating the amortised cost of a financial liability and of allocating interest expense over the relevant period.
The effective interest rate is the rate that exactly discounts estimated future cash payments through the expected life of the financial liability or where appropriate a shorter period to the net carrying amount on initial recognition.
58 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounting policies continued Derecognition of financial liabilities The Group derecognises financial liabilities when and only when the Groups obligations are discharged cancelled or they expire.
Cash and cash equivalents Cash and cash equivalents comprise cash on hand and demand deposits and other short term highly liquid investments that are readily convertible to a known amount of cash and are subject to an insignificant risk of changes in value.
Revenue recognition Revenue is measured at the fair value of the consideration received or receivable and represents amounts receivable for services provided in the normal course of business net of discounts and estimated credit notes.
Revenue from a contract to provide services is recognised by reference to the stage of completion of the contract based on time spent.
Revenue is recognised when it is probable that economic benefits will flow to the Company.
Interest income is accrued on a time basis by reference to the principal outstanding and at the effective interest rate applicable.
Amounts received from customers before the related work is performed are included in the Consolidated balance sheet as deferred revenue.
Amounts billed for work performed but not yet invoiced to the customer are included in the Consolidated balance sheet under Trade and other receivables as accrued income.
Reimbursement revenue and reimbursable expenses Reimbursable expenses are reflected in the Consolidated income statement as Reimbursement revenue in total revenue and as Reimbursable expenses separately from cost of sales as the Company is the primary obligor for these expenses despite being reimbursed by its clients.
Reimbursable expenses are comprised primarily of payments to physicians investigators who oversee clinical trials and travel expenses for our clinical monitors and other employees.
Costs for such activities are recorded based upon payment requests or invoices that have been received from third parties in the periods presented or accrued based on patient recruitment.
Reimbursed expenses may fluctuate from periodtoperiod due in part to the lifecycle of contracts that are in progress at a particular point in time.
Service revenues or revenues before reimbursements net service revenues include any margin earned on reimbursed expenses.
When such an expense is not reimbursed they are classified as costs of sales on the Consolidated income statement.
Operating lossprofit Operating lossprofit is stated before investment income finance costs and tax.
Taxation
The tax expense represents the sum of tax currently payable and deferred tax.
Taxable profit differs from net profit as reported in the income statement because it excludes items of income and expenditure that are taxable or deductible in other periods and it further excludes items that are never taxable or deductible.
Deferred tax is the tax expected to be payable or recoverable on differences between the carrying amount of assets and liabilities in the financial statements and the corresponding tax bases used in the computation of taxable profit and is accounted for using the balance sheet liability method.
Deferred tax liabilities are recognised for all temporary differences and deferred tax assets are recognised to the extent that it is probable that taxable profits will be available against which deductible temporary differences can be utilised.
Such assets and liabilities are not recognised if the temporary differences arise from goodwill or from the initial recognition other than in a business combination of other assets and liabilities in a transaction that affects neither the taxable profit nor the accounting profit.
Deferred tax is calculated at the tax rates that are enacted or substantively enacted at the reporting date.
Foreign currency translation The functional currency of the Company is the Euro and the presentational currency is UK Sterling meeting the requirements of shareholders.
Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are translated into Sterling at the rates of exchange ruling at the balance sheet date.
Transactions in foreign currencies are recorded at the rate ruling at the date of the transaction.
All differences are taken to the income statement.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS continued FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 59 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Governance Strategic report The results and financial position of all the Group entities that have a functional currency different from the presentation currency are translated into the presentation currency as follows assets and liabilities for each balance sheet presented are translated at the closing rate at the reporting date income and expenses for each income statement are translated on a monthly basis at average exchange rates unless this average is not a reasonable approximation of the exchange rates at the dates of the transactions in which case income and expense items are translated at the exchange rates at the dates of the transactions and all resulting exchange differences are recognised directly in Other comprehensive income.
Pensions
The pension costs charged in the financial statements represent the contributions payable by the Company during the year in accordance with lAS 19.
Leasing and hire purchase commitments Assets obtained under hire purchase contracts and finance leases are capitalised as tangible assets and depreciated over their useful lives.
Obligations under such agreements are included in creditors net of the finance charge allocated to future periods.
The finance element of the rental payment is charged to the income statement so as to produce a constant periodic rate of charge on the net obligation outstanding in each period.
Rentals payable under operating leases are charged against income on a straight line basis over the lease term.
Sharebased payments The Group operates an equitysettled sharebased option scheme under which the Group receives services from employees in consideration for equity instruments options of the Company.
The fair value of the employees services received in exchange for the grant of options is recognised as an expense.
The total amount to be expensed is determined by reference to the fair value of the options granted excluding the impact of any nonmarket service and performance vesting conditions.
The total amount expensed is recognised over the vesting period which is the period over which all the specified conditions are satisfied.
At each balance sheet date the entity revises its estimates of the number of options that are expected to vest based on the vesting conditions.
The Group has acquired entities under terms which include equitysettled deferred consideration payable to vendors.
Where settlement of such deferred consideration is dependent on the continued employment by the Group of that vendor a sharebased payment charge arises.
The total amount to be expensed is determined by reference to the fair value of the deferred consideration at the date of the acquisition.
The total amount expensed is recognised over the period from date of acquisition to the date the conditions are met for settlement of the deferred consideration.
Under IFRS 2 where such share options relate to employees of group companies other than the Company a charge arises.
Where such charge is not reimbursed by the entity a capital contribution arises.
Exceptional items Significant nonrecurring transactions undertaken by the Group during the year are classified as exceptional items.
Company
The financial statements have been produced in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards the Companies Act 2006 and under the historical cost convention.
The principal accounting policies adopted are the same as those for the Group consolidated financial statements except as noted below.
Investments in subsidiaries are stated at cost less provision for impairment in value.
As permitted by Section 408 of the Companies Act 2006 the Income Statement and Statement of comprehensive income of the parent company is not presented as part of these financial statements.
The parent companys loss after tax for the financial year was 4050000 2016 1977000.
60 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Critical accounting judgements and key sources of estimation and uncertainty In the application of the Groups accounting policies which are described in note 1 the Directors are required to make judgements estimates and assumptions about the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources.
The estimates and associated assumptions are based on historical experience and other factors that are considered to be relevant.
Actual results may differ from these estimates.
The estimates and underlying assumptions are reviewed on an ongoing basis.
Revisions to accounting estimates are recognised in the period in which the estimate is revised if the revision affects only that period or in the period of the revision and future periods if the revision affects both current and future periods.
Critical judgements in applying the Groups accounting policies The following are the critical judgements apart from those involving estimations which are dealt with separately below that the Directors have made in the process of applying the Groups accounting policies and that have the most significant effect on the amounts recognised in the financial statements.
Revenue recognition The amount of revenue to be recognised is based on inter alia managements estimate of the fair value of the consideration received or receivable the stage of completion and of the point in time at which management considers that it becomes probable that economic benefits will flow to the entity as the outcome is not always certain at the inception of a contract.
Key sources of estimation uncertainty The key assumptions concerning the future and other key sources of estimation uncertainty at the reporting period that may have a significant risk of causing a material adjustment to the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities within the next financial year are discussed below.
Bad debt provision
In determining the level of provisioning for bad debts the Directors have considered the aging of trade receivables and the payment history and financial position of debtors.
The provision against trade receivables as at 31 December 2017 was 214000 2016 1016000 note 21.
Company
In determining the level of provisioning for bad debts the Directors have considered the aging of trade receivables and the payment history and financial position of debtors.
The provision against trade receivables as at 31 December 2017 was 212000 2016 1013000 note 21.
Impairment of goodwill Under IFRSs goodwill is reviewed for impairment at least annually.
Determining whether goodwill is impaired requires an estimation of the recoverable amount of the cashgenerating units to which goodwill has been allocated.
The calculation of the recoverable amount requires the entity to estimate the future cash flows expected to arise from the cashgenerating unit and a suitable discount rate in order to determine whether the recoverable amount is greater than the carrying value.
The key inputs for estimating the future cash flows of operating businesses are revenue growth over the next five years terminal revenue growth working capital changes and discount rate.
PrimeVigilance PharmInvent and Sound Opinion have been merged into a single cash generating unit.
If revenue growth rates including terminal growth are reduced to zero there would be no impairment to goodwill.
If revenue growth rates for Ergomed Virtuoso were reduced by 20% including terminal growth from 10% to 30% an impairment to goodwill would be required.
If revenue growth rates for OP and GASD were reduced by 3% from 5% to 2% and terminal growth rate from 2% to zero an impairment to goodwill would be required.
The key inputs for estimating the cash flows of Haemostatix a development company are the probabilities of clinical success expected market launch date the expected royalty rate and the discount rate.
The impact on the present value of Haemostatix projected cash flows is as follows If the probability of clinical success at each stage of development is reduced by 14% from Phase I 50% Phase III 80% an impairment to goodwill would be required.
If the expected market launch date of PeproStat  and ReadyFlow  are each delayed by more than one year an impairment to goodwill would be required.
If the expected royalty rate was reduced by 3% from 20% an impairment to goodwill would be required.
If the discount rate was increased by 3.2% from 19.7% an impairment to goodwill would be required.
The impairment provision against goodwill as at 31 December 2017 was nil 2016 nil.
The carrying amount of goodwill and any impairment loss is disclosed in note 15.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS continued FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 61 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Governance Strategic report Fair value measurements Some of the Groups assets and liabilities are measured at fair value for financial reporting purposes.
In estimating the fair value of an asset or a liability the Group uses marketobservable data to the extent it is available and management estimates of commercial and development risk where appropriate.
Where Level 1 inputs are not available the Group engages third party qualified valuers to perform the valuation.
The Directors work closely with the qualified external valuers to establish the appropriate valuation techniques and inputs to the model.
This includes fair valued acquired intangible assets with a net value of 18217000 and deferred consideration relating to acquisitions valued at 11761000.
Deferred consideration relates to the acquisitions of Haemostatix and PSR note 26.
The deferred consideration for Haemostatix comprises milestones of up to 4.0 million at start of Phase III dependent on the Companys market capitalisation plus 16.0 million salesbased milestone payments and an additional sum in the event that the enlarged group is able to utilise certain existing tax losses that are currently available to Haemostatix.
The deferred consideration for Haemostatix was revalued at the yearend giving rise to an increase in value of 2875000 reflecting the successful progress of PeproStat through the Phase II study.
The Group incurs sharebased payment charges in relation to share options awards made in the current and prior periods.
This charge is based on the fair value of such share options for financial reporting purposes.
In estimating the fair value of a sharebased payment the Group engages third party qualified valuers to perform the valuation.
The Directors work closely with the qualified external valuers to establish the appropriate valuation techniques and inputs to the model.
Revenue
An analysis of the Groups revenue is as follows Provision of clinical research services 24782 25777 Licence revenue 370 Provision of drug safety and medical information services 22472 13456 47624 39233 Other operating income 118 127 Investment revenues 41 2 47783 39362 The provision of clinical research services includes the revenues of PSR following its acquisition by the Company on 2 October 2017.
Operating segments Products and services from which reportable segments derive their revenues Information reported to the Groups Chief Executive Officer who is the chief operating decision maker CODM for the purpose of resource allocation and assessment of segment performance is focused on the Group operating as two business segments being Clinical Research Services CRS and Drug Safety and Medical Information DSandMI.
All revenues arise from direct sales to customers.
The segment information reported below all relates to continuing operations.
The CRS business segment includes the results of PSR which was acquired on 2 October 2017.
Revenue from external customers
DSandMI
Total
Net service revenue 17386 22259 39645 Licence revenue 370  370 Reimbursement revenue 7396 213 7609 25152 22472 47624 Revenue from external customers
DSandMI
Total
Net service revenue 15938 13286 29224 Reimbursement revenue 9839 170 10009 25777 13456 39233 62 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Operating segments continued Geographical information The Groups revenue from external customers by geographical location is detailed below Revenue from external customers
DSandMI
Total
UK 4535 5923 10458 Rest of Europe Middle East and Africa 13550 9292 22842 North America 6756 6992 13748 Australia  112 112 25152 22472 47624 Revenue from external customers
DSandMI
Total
UK 3330 4746 8076 Rest of Europe Middle East and Africa 15590 4461 20051 North America 6490 4018 10508 Australia  204 204 25777 13456 39233
CRS
DSandMI
Eliminations
Consolidated total Third party sales 25152 22472  47624 Intersegment sales and recharges 655 19 674 Total revenue 25807 22491 674 47624
DSandMI
Eliminations
Consolidated total Segment result 631 4376 7 5014 Research and development 2689 Amortisation of acquired fair valued intangible assets 1167 Sharebased payment charge 1033 Deferred consideration for acquisitions expense 752 Revaluation of deferred consideration for acquisition 2875 Acquisition costs 259 Exceptional items 143 Operating loss 3904 Investment revenues 3 Finance costs 546 Loss before tax 4447 Tax 57 Loss after tax 4504 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS continued FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 63 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Governance Strategic report
CRS
DSandMI
Eliminations
Consolidated total Third party sales 25777 13456  39233 Intersegment sales and recharges 670 2 672 Total revenue 26447 13458 672 39233
DSandMI
Eliminations
Consolidated total
Segment result 203 3586 9 3798 Research and development 1250 Amortisation of acquired fair valued intangible assets 771 Sharebased payment charge 877 Deferred consideration for acquisition expense 550 Writeback of deferred consideration for acquisition 460 Acquisition costs 584 Exceptional items 177 Operating profit 49 Investment revenues 2 Finance costs 274 Loss before tax 223 Tax 153 Loss after tax 70 The accounting policies of the reportable segments are the same as the Groups accounting policies described in note 1.
Segment profit represents the profit earned by each segment.
This is the measure reported to the Groups Chief Executive Officer for the purpose of resource allocation and assessment of segment performance.
Segment net assets
CRS 12703 16279 DSandMI 22140 18119 Consolidated total net assets 34843 34398 For the purposes of monitoring segment performance and allocating resources between segments the Groups Chief Executive Officer monitors the net assets attributable to each segment.
All assets are allocated to reportable segments.
Goodwill has been allocated to reportable segments as described in note 15.
Other segment information Depreciation and amortisation Additions to noncurrent assets CRS 72telDSandMI 89tel1626 1027 1425 1109 Information about major customers In 2017 the Group had one customer that contributed 10% or more to the Groups revenue.
Revenues of approximately 4989000 were recognised from this customer for clinical research services.
In 2016 the Group had two customers that contributed 10% or more to the Groups revenue.
Revenues of approximately 5479000 and 4771000 were recognised from these customers respectively all relating to the provision of clinical research services.
64 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Loss for the year
Loss for the year is stated after chargingcrediting Depreciation of property plant and equipment  owned 423 231 Depreciation of property plant and equipment  leased 4 5 Amortisation of intangible assets 32 20 Depreciation and amortisation charges within Administrative expenses 459 256 Amortisation of acquired fair valued intangible assets 1167 771 Exchange lossgain 526 274 Gain on disposals of property plant and equipment 7 2 Bad debt provision reversedmade during the year note 21 834 855 Staff costs note 12 19581 11839 Auditors remuneration The analysis of the auditors remuneration is as follows Fees payable to the Companys auditor and their associates for the audit of the Companys annual accounts 161 128 Total audit fees 161 128 Interim review 33 33 Total nonaudit fees 33 33 Fees payable to Deloitte LLP and their associates for nonaudit services to the Company are not required to be disclosed because the consolidated financial statements are required to disclose such fees on a consolidated basis.
Deferred consideration for acquisitions expense
PSR 1 PharmInvent 75telThe terms of the acquisitions of PSR Group BV and European Pharminvent Services s. now PrimeVigilance s. provisions for deferred consideration payable in cash and in equity.
Where that deferred consideration is contingent upon the continued employment of the vendors in accordance with IFRS 3 a charge through the income statement arises.
The above amounts relate to the element of deferred consideration that is reimbursable in cash and that is contingent on the continued employment of the vendors.
The element that is repayable in equity and that is contingent on the continued employment of the vendors is included as part of sharebased payments in accordance with IFRS 2 note 31.
Acquisition costs Acquisition of PSR note 34 218 Acquisition of Haemostatix  370 Acquisition of OP and Ergomed CDS  85 Acquisition of PharmInvent  118 Acquisition of Sound Opinion  7 Other MandA activities NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS continued FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 65 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Governance Strategic report Exceptional items Severance costs relating to former CEO 143 Establishment of PrimeVigilance US office  177 In line with the way the Board and chief operating decision maker review the business large oneoff exceptional costs of severance costs regarding the former CEO and the establishment of the subsidiaries in US are shown as exceptional items.
Investment revenues Bank and other interest 3 2 Finance costs Loan and other interest payable 2 2 Reversal of finance charges 37 Finance charge for deferred consideration for acquisitions 58telThe finance charge for deferred consideration for acquisitions relates to the unwind of the discount used in the fair valuation of deferred consideration for Haemostatix and PSR.
Employees
Number of employees The average monthly number of persons employed by the Group including Executive Directors and excluding NonExecutive Directors during the year was
Number
Administration 78 52 Project staff 453 296 Management 25 18 Directors Employment costs Wages and salaries 16651 9923 Social security costs 2607 1734 Other pension costs note 36 323 182 19581 11839 Disclosures relating to key management personnel are included within the Directors remuneration report on pages 26 to 28.
66 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Current tax UK corporation tax credit for the year  181 Overseas corporation tax 426 180 Adjustment in respect of prior years 31 16 Current tax chargecredit for the year 395 17 Deferred tax Origination and reversal of timing differences 338 40 Effect of changes in tax rates  96 Total tax chargecredit for the year 57 153 Under IAS 12 Income Taxes the amount of tax benefit that can be recognised in the income statement is limited by reference to the IFRS 2 sharebased payment charge.
The excess amount of tax benefit in respect of share options gives rise to a credit which has been recognised directly in equity in addition to the amounts charged to the income statement and other comprehensive income as follows Deferred tax Change in estimated excess tax deductions related to sharebased payments 60 118 Total income tax credit recognised directly in equity 60 118 The standard rate of tax for the year based on the UK standard rate of corporation tax is 19.25% 2016 20%.
The actual tax charges for the years differ from the standard rate for the reasons set out in the following reconciliation.
Restated
Loss on ordinary activities before taxation 4447 223 Tax on loss on ordinary activities at blended standard rate of 19.25% 2016 20% 856 45 Nondeductible expenses 1347 517 Additional allowable expenses 180 449 Timing differences arising in the year 339 64 RandD tax credit receivable  181 Adjustments to previous periods 31 13 Effect of different tax rates of subsidiaries operating in other jurisdictions 2 3 Difference due to change in rate of taxation  80 Increaseutilisation of tax losses 109 186 Translation effect 9 21 Tax chargecredit for the year 57 153 The Finance Act 2017 which provides for a reduction in the main rate of corporation tax from 20% to 19% effective from 1 April 2017 and from 19% to 17% effective from 1 April 2020 was substantively enacted on 16 November 2017.
These rate reductions have been reflected in the calculation of deferred tax at the balance sheet date.
Loss per share The calculation of the basic and diluted earnings per share is based on the following data Loss for the purposes of basic earnings per share being net profit attributable to owners of the Company 4504 70 Loss for the purposes of diluted earnings per share 4504 70 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS continued FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 67 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Governance Strategic report Number of shares Weighted average number of Ordinary Shares for the purposes of basic earnings per share 41086201 35573733 Effect of dilutive potential Ordinary Shares Share options 2056583 1429257 Equity related earnout 213033 31150 Weighted average number of Ordinary Shares for the purposes of diluted earnings per share 43355817 37034140 Loss per share Basic 11.0p 0.2p Diluted 11.0p 0.2p
Group
Cost
At 1 January 2016 7488 Arising on acquisition of subsidiary 4797 At 31 December 2016 12285 Adjustments on amounts arising on acquisition of subsidiaries note 33 57 Arising on acquisition of subsidiaries note 34 2535 Translation movement 392 At 31 December 2017 15269 Accumulated impairment losses At 1 January 2016 1 January 2017 and 31 December 2017 Net book value At 31 December 2017 15269 At 31 December 2016 12285 The goodwill arising during the year ended 31 December 2017 relates to an adjustment arising on the acquisition of Haemostatix and to the acquisition of PSR on 2 October 2017.
Goodwill acquired in a business combination is allocated at acquisition to the cashgenerating units CGUs that are expected to benefit from that business combination.
The carrying amount of goodwill had been allocated as follows Clinical Research Services Ergomed Virtuoso 506 455 455 Haemostatix 2143 2086 Ergomed CDS 568 487 PSR 2564 5781 3028 455 Drug Safety and Medical Information 9488 9257 7033 15269 12285 7488 The goodwill associated with the Drug Safety and Medical Information segment has arisen from the acquisitions of PrimeVigilance Sound Opinion and PharmInvent.
These businesses trade as a single cash generating unit and the associated goodwill is combined.
The Group tests goodwill for impairment annually or more frequently if there are indications that goodwill might be impaired.
The recoverable amounts of the CGUs are determined from value in use calculations.
The key assumptions for the value in use calculations are those regarding discount rates and growth rates.
68 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Goodwill continued Management estimates discount rates using pretax rates that reflect current market assessments of the time value of money and the risks specific to the CGUs.
The growth rates are based on managements estimates based on the Groups planned organic expansion of its operations and broadened overall offering and the increased demand for services.
Profit margins included in the projections are based on industry standards.
The Group prepares cash flow forecasts for the next five years derived from the most recent financial budgets approved by the Board and forecasts cash flows for the following five years based on a terminal growth rate of 2% except for the Ergomed Virtuoso Sarl CGU and the Haemostatix Limited CGU both of the CRS segment.
This rate does not exceed the average long term growth rate for the relevant markets.
The Ergomed Virtuoso Sarl CGU forecasts cash flows over the remaining life of the Customer Contract using a terminal growth rate of 0%.
The Haemostatix Limited CGU forecasts cash flows over the patent life of the Inprocess research and development using a terminal growth rate of 0%.
The pretax rate used to discount the forecast cash flows from the CGUs of both the CRS and DSandMI segments is 19.7%.
Company
As at 31 December 2017 the Company does not hold any Goodwill.
Other intangible assets
Software
Customer contracts
Brands
InProcess
RandD
Technology
Total
Cost
At 1 January 2016 751 1070 1690 460   3971 Acquired with subsidiaries   1487  15200 419 17106 Additions 705      705 Assets writtenoff 18      18 Reallocation to tangible fixed assets 2      2 Translation movement 22      22 At 31 December 2016 1458 1070 3177 460 15200 419 21784 Acquired with subsidiary see note 34  189 162 349   700 Additions 704      704 Translation movement  26 187 At 31 December 2017 2178 1278 3461 813 15200 445 23375
At 1 January tel469 92   1152 Charge for the year 20      20 Amortisation cost of acquired fair valued intangible assets  214 398 61  98 771 Assets writtenoff 18      18 Translation movement 17      17 At 31 December tel867 153  98 1942 Charge for the year 32      32 Amortisation cost of acquired fair valued intangible assets  246 681 72  168 1167 Translation movement 5      5 At 31 December tel1548 225  266 3146 Net book value At 31 December 2017 2012 337 1913 588 15200 179 20229 At 31 December 2016 1329 375 2310 307 15200 321 19842 The intangible assets acquired with subsidiaries during 2016 relate to the acquisitions of Haemostatix OP and GASD and PharmInvent on 24 May 2016 12 June 2016 and 28 November 2016 respectively.
The intangible assets acquired with subsidiary during 2017 relate to the acquisition of PSR Group BV on 2 October 2017.
Included within Software is software under development with an asset value of 1683000 2016 1125000.
The software is currently still under construction and so no amortisation has been recognised in the current year.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS continued FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 69 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Governance Strategic report
Software
Cost
At 1 January 2016 82 Translation movement 12 Additions 150 At 31 December 2016 244 Translation movement 12 Additions 278 At 31 December 2017 534
At 1 January 2016 78 Charge for the year 1 Translation movement 12 At 31 December 2016 91 Charge for the year 3 Translation movement 4 At 31 December 2017 98 Net book value At 31 December 2017 436 At 31 December 2016 153 Intangible assets represent software currently in use by the business.
Property plant and equipment
Leasehold improvements
Motor vehicles
Laboratory equipment
Cost
At 1 January   737 Additions Acquired with subsidiaries Reallocation from Intangible assets 2     2 Disposals   2 52  54 Translation movement  123 At 31 December 2016 8tel45 1400 Additions Acquired with subsidiaries note 34  5  27  32 Reallocations  4 14 10 Disposals 2 1 10 11  24 Translation movement  75 At 31 December tel319 1440 56 2204
At 1 January   402 Charge for the year Disposals    25  25 Translation movement  70 At 31 December Charge for the year Disposals 2  7 11  20 Translation movement  36 At 31 December 2017 6tel20 1126 Net book value At 31 December 2017 4tel36 1078 At 31 December Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Property plant and equipment continued
Fixtures and fittings
Total
Cost
1 January Additions 18 16 34 Translation movement 1 5 6 At 31 December Additions 40 60 100 Translation movement 2 3 5 At 31 December Depreciation 1 January Charge for the year 12 8 20 Translation movement  4 4 At 31 December Charge for the year 10 20 30 Translation movement 2 1 3 At 31 December Net book value At 31 December At 31 December Included above are assets held under finance leases or hire purchase contracts as follows
Motor
Vehicles
Net book value At 31 December 2017 39 At 31 December 2016 32 Depreciation charge for the year Year ended 31 December 2017 6 Year ended 31 December 2016 5
As at 31 December 2017 no assets in the above were held by the Company under finance leases or hire purchase contracts.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS continued FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 71 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Governance Strategic report
The Ergomed Group consists of a parent company Ergomed plc incorporated in the UK and a number of subsidiaries held directly and indirectly by Ergomed plc which operate and are incorporated around the world.
Information about the composition of the Group at the end of the reporting period is as follows Number of wholly owned subsidiaries Principal activity Place of incorporation and operation 2017 2016 Clinical research services Germany 2 3 Clinical research services Poland 1 1 Clinical research services Serbia 1 1 Clinical research services USA 1 1 Clinical research services Croatia 1 1 Clinical research services Russia 1 1 Clinical research services Bosnia 1 1 Clinical research services UAE 1 1 Clinical research services Switzerland 1 1 Clinical research services Taiwan 1 1 Clinical research services Netherlands 1 Drug safety and medical information services United Kingdom 2 2 Drug safety and medical information services Croatia 1 1 Drug safety and medical information services Serbia 1 1 Drug safety and medical information services USA 1 1 Drug safety and medical information services Czech Republic 2 2 Research and development United Kingdom 1 1 Dormant United Kingdom 1 1 The registered offices of the Companys subsidiaries are as follows Company Registered address Ergomed GmbH Herriotstrae 1 60528 Frankfurt am Main Germany Ergomed Sp. z o.
Kolowa 8 30134 Krakow Poland Ergomed d.
Novi Sad Avgusta Cesarca 18 21 000 Novi Sad Serbia Ergomed Clinical Research Inc 9901 IH10W Suite 800 78230 San Antonio TX USA Ergomed Istraivanja Zagreb d.
Orekovieva 20a 10 020 Zagreb Croatia Ergomed Clinical Research LLC  Moscow 17 Skakovaya Street Building 2 Office 2714 The Russian Federation Ergomed d.
Sarajevo Zmaja od Bosne 77a Sarajevo Bosnia and Herzegovina Ergomed Clinical Research FZLLC Dubai International Academic City Premises 06 Floor Ground Building 03 Dubai UAE Ergomed Virtuoso Sarl 18 Avenue LoisCasai 1209 Geneva Switzerland Ergomed Clinical Research Limited Fl.
2 No.
467 Sec.6 Zhongxiao E Rd.
Nangang District Taipei City 115 Taiwan Ergomed CDS GmbH Im Mediapark 2 D50670 Cologne Germany PSR Group BV Planetenweg 5 in 2132 HN Hoofddorp Netherlands PrimeVigilance Limited 2628 Frederick Sanger Road Surrey Research Park Guildford Surrey GU2 7YD UK PrimeVigilance Zagreb d.
Orekovieva 20a 10 020 Zagreb Croatia PrimeVigilance d.
Beograd ora Stanojevia 14 Beograd  Novi Beograd Serbia PrimeVigilance Inc Reservoir Place 1601 Trapelo Road Waltham MA 02451 USA Sound Opinion Limited 2628 Frederick Sanger Road Surrey Research Park Guildford Surrey GU2 7YD UK PrimeVigilance s.
Prague 3  Vinohrady Slezska 85674 13000 Czech Republic Pharminvent regulatory s.
Prague 3  Vinohrady Slezska 85674 13000 Czech Republic Haemostatix Limited BioCity Nottingham Pennyfoot Street Nottingham NG1 1GF UK Ergomed Clinical Research Limited 2628 Frederick Sanger Road Surrey Research Park Guildford Surrey GU2 7YD UK 72 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Subsidiaries continued The Company has direct interests in the following subsidiaries which are included in the consolidated financial statements Principal activity  clinical research services Place of incorporation and operation Class Holding Ergomed GmbH Germany Ordinary 100% Ergomed Spolka z o.
Poland Ordinary 99% Ergomed d.
Novi Sad Serbia Ordinary 100% Ergomed Clinical Research Inc USA None issued 100% Ergomed Istrazivanja Zagreb d.
Croatia Ordinary 100% Ergomed Clinical Research LLC Russia Ordinary 100% Ergomed d.
Sarajevo Bosnia Ordinary 100% Ergomed Clinical Research FZ LLC UAE Ordinary 100% Ergomed Virtuoso Sarl Switzerland Ordinary 100% Ergomed Clinical Research Limited Taiwan Ordinary 100% Ergomed CDS GmbH Germany None issued 100% PSR Group BV Netherlands Ordinary 100% Principal activity  drug safety and medical information services Place of incorporation and operation Class Holding PrimeVigilance Limited United Kingdom Ordinary 100% Sound Opinion Limited United Kingdom Ordinary 100% PrimeVigilance s.
Czech Republic None issued 100% Principal activity  research and development Place of incorporation and operation Class Holding Haemostatix Limited United Kingdom Ordinary 100% Principal activity  dormant Place of incorporation and operation Class Holding Ergomed Clinical Research Limited United Kingdom Ordinary 100% 1 The noncontrolling interest is not disclosed as it is not material and does not take a benefit from the holding.
2 This company was acquired by the Company on 2 October 2017 note 34.
There are no significant restrictions on the ability of the Group to access or use assets and settle liabilities.
Investments
Group
Asarina
Pharma AB
Therapeutics
Holding AB
Saudi
Limited
Total
Cost
At 1 January 2016  144 39 183 Additions  54  54 Translation movement  30 4 34 At 31 December 2016  228 43 271 Additions 280 181  461 Translation movement At 31 December tel45 754 Provision for impairment At 31 December 2016 and 31 December 2017 Net book value At 31 December tel45 754 At 31 December 2016  228 43 271 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS continued FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 73 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Governance Strategic report
Capital contribution to subsidiary undertakings Shares in subsidiary undertakings
Pharma AB
Therapeutics
Holding AB
Saudi
Limited
Total
Cost
At 1 January 2016  10374  144 39 10557 Additions  20007  54  20061 Translation movement  3430  30 4 3464 At 31 December 2016  33811  228 43 34082 Additions 124 3649 280 181  4234 Translation movement  1302 At 31 December 2017 124 38618 Provision for impairment At 31 December 2016 and 31 December 2017 Net book value At 31 December 2017 124 38618 At 31 December 2016  33811  228 43 34082 Modus Therapeutics Holding AB Under the codevelopment agreement with Modus Therapeutics AB the Group receives shares in Modus Therapeutics Holding AB in return for its contribution to the codevelopment programme.
During the year shares valued at 181000 2016 54000 were issued to the Group.
Asarina Pharma AB Under the codevelopment agreement with Asarina Pharma AB the Group receives shares in Asarina Pharma AB in return for its contribution to the codevelopment programme.
During the year shares valued at 280000 2016 nil were issued to the Group.
Ergomed Saudi Limited On 22 July 2014 the Group invested 40000 for a 50% holding in a joint venture in Saudi Arabia  Ergomed Saudi Limited.
The operation is still in the set up phase and the asset is held at cost.
Deferred tax The following are the major deferred tax liabilities and assets recognised by the Group and movements thereon during the current and prior reporting period.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are offset where the Group has a legally enforceable right to do so.
The following is the analysis of the deferred tax balances after offset for financial reporting purposes Deferred tax assets Group Company T ax losses
Total
T ax losses
Total
1 January Acquired with subsidiaries  1015 1015 Charge to profit or loss 3 47 50 3  3 Credit direct to equity  118 118  118 118 At 31 December 2016  1448 1448  457 457 Fair value adjustment  58 58 Credit to profit or loss  163 163  161 161 Credit direct to equity  60 60  60 60 At 31 December 2017  1613 1613  678 678 74 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Deferred tax continued Deferred tax liabilities Group Company
Timing differences
ACAs
Timing differences
1 January 2016 124 392 516 2  2 Acquired with subsidiaries  3145 3145 Chargecredit to profit or loss 48 291 243 3  3 At 31 December 2016 172 3246 3418 5  5 Acquired with subsidiaries  175 175 Chargecredit to profit or loss 45 241 196 7  7 At 31 December 2017 217 3180 3397 12  12 Deferred tax assets and liabilities are offset where the Company has a legally enforceable right to do so.
The following is the analysis of the deferred tax balances after offset for financial reporting purposes Group Company Deferred tax assets 1613 1448 678 457 Deferred tax liabilities 3397 3418 12 5 Net deferred tax liabilitiesassets 1784 1970 666 452 At 31 December 2017 the Group had unused tax losses of 6615000 2016 5731000 available for offset against future profits.
A deferred tax asset has been recognised in respect of 5324000 2016 5639000 of such losses.
No deferred tax asset has been recognised in respect of the remaining 1291000 2016 nil as it is not considered probable that there will be future profits available.
These losses may be carried forward indefinitely.
Included in the deferred tax arising on timing differences 674000 2016 452000 relates to a deferred tax asset arising on unexercised share options.
Trade and other receivables Group Company Trade receivables 13390 9540 6743 5117 Amounts receivable from Group companies   6714 3963 Other receivables 1702 1025 884 527 Prepayments 73telAccrued income 2443 2538 1378 1671 Corporation tax receivable 982 1014  299 19250 14958 15902 11808 Included in trade receivables are the following amounts that are past due at the reporting date by the following periods.
Group Company Less than 30 days overdue 3293 1795 1252 964 31 to 60 days overdue 932 1to 90 days overdue More than 90 days overdue 2180 221 1956 138 6808 3709 3732 1361 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS continued FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 75 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Governance Strategic report The decrease in provision for doubtful debts shown below gives rise to an increase in trade receivables more than 90 days overdue of 834000.
Movement in the provision for doubtful debts.
Group Company Balance at the beginning of the year 1016 233 1013 188 Impairment losses recognised  116  72 Acquired with subsidiaries  3 Provision reversedmade during the year 834 855 833 856 Translation movements  1016 212 1013 The carrying value of trade receivables approximates to their fair value at the balance sheet date.
The carrying values of the Groups and the Companys trade and other receivables are uncovered.
The Group and the Company have not pledged as security any of the amounts included in receivables.
Other current assets Group Company Clinical trial material 502 240 Other current assets relates to the preparation of GMP material for use in the clinical development programmes of Haemostatix
Cash and cash equivalents Group Company Cash at bank 3218 4424 288 930 The effective interest rate at the balance sheet date on cash at bank was 0.005% 2016 0.006%.
The carrying amount of cash and cash equivalents approximates to their fair value at the balance sheet date and are denominated in the following currencies Group Company GBP 185 1144 67 36 Euro 1890 1239 200 395 USD 383 1078 1 472 Other 218 4Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Group
2017 2016
Interest
Capital
Interest
Secured borrowings at amortised cost Finance leases Borrowings within one year 12 1 3 Between one and two years 6  3 Between two and five years   2 Borrowings greater than one year 6  5 Totals 18 1 8 Finance leases are secured on the assets to which they relate.
Company
As at 31 December 2017 the Company had no borrowings.
Trade and other payables The carrying amount of the Groups trade and other payables approximates to their fair value at the balance sheet date and are uncovered.
Group Company Trade creditors 4942 3037 2541 1754 Amounts payable to related parties Amounts payable to Group companies   7163 3502 Social security and other taxes 1Other payables 1Customer advances 751 Accruals 2307 2759 1374 2074 10717 7077 12074 7524 The carrying amount of the Group and Companys trade and other payables approximates to their fair value at the balance sheet date and are uncovered.
Deferred consideration Group Company Due within one year Haemostatix 1957  1957 Due after one year Haemostatix 9168 7772 9168 7772 9804 7772 9804 7772 11761 7772 11761 7772 This amount relates to the fair value of the deferred consideration in relation to the acquisition of Haemostatix Limited and PSR Group BV being the Boards best estimates based on discounted and risk adjusted forecasts.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS continued FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 77 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Governance Strategic report Share capital Group Company
No.
No.
No.
Allotted called up and fully paid Ordinary shares of 0.01 each Balance at 1 January 40599424 28750000 40599424 28750000 Shares issued during the year net of contingent shares 2081389 11754806 2081389 11754806 Contingent shares for deferred consideration 101163 94618 101163 94618 Balance at 31 December 42781976 40599424 42781976 40599424 Group Company Allotted called up and fully paid Ordinary shares of 0.01 each Balance at 1 January 40telShares issued for cash during the year Shares issued for noncash consideration during the year Contingent shares for deferred consideration Balance at 31 December 42telDuring 2017 a total of 2176007 ordinary shares of 0.01 each Ordinary Shares were issued of which 94618 were shown as contingent shares for deferred consideration in 2016 1757576 were issued for cash in an institutional placing and 323813 were issued as part consideration for PSR Group BV.
In addition a further 100818 Ordinary Shares will be issued to part satisfy the second component of deferred consideration for PharmInvent and 345 Ordinary Shares will be issued to part satisfy the first component of deferred consideration for PSR Group BV.
Share premium account Group Company Allotted called up and fully paid Balance at 1 January 17957 9361 17957 9361 Shares issued for cash during the year 2882 9120 2882 9120 Expenses of share issue for cash during the year 223 524 223 524 Balance at 31 December 20616 17957 20616 17957 The share premium arising during 2017 related to the issue of 1757576 Ordinary Shares at a price of 1.65 per share on 2 October 2017 in connection with an institutional placing.
Expenses of 223000 relating to the issue of shares were deducted from the Share premium account.
Merger reserve Group Company Balance at 1 January 10264 2981 10264 2981 Shares issued for noncash during the year 555 7144 555 7144 Contingent shares for deferred consideration 18telBalance at 31 December 11008 10264 11008 10264 The merger reserve arising during 2017 for noncash consideration related to the issue of a total of 323813 Ordinary Shares.
These were issued at 1.72 per share as part consideration for PSR Group BV.
In addition 100819 Ordinary Shares will be issued at 1.87 per share to part satisfy the second component of deferred consideration for PharmInvent. for PSR Group BV.
78 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
The movements in reserves of the Group are shown in the Consolidated statement of changes in equity and the movements in reserves of the Company are shown in the Company statement of changes in equity.
Sharebased payment reserve The corresponding credit associated with the charge for share options note 31 is recognised as a credit to the sharebased payment reserve.
Translation reserve The translation reserve records any exchange differences arising as a result of the translation of foreign currency equity balances and foreign currency nonmonetary items.
Sharebased payments The Company operates three share option schemes the Ergomed plc Long Term Incentive Plan the Unapproved Executive Share Option Scheme 2007 and an Unapproved Executive Share Option Agreement made with Rolf Stahel.
In addition arrangements are in place between Dr Miroslav Reljanovic a shareholder of the Company and certain Directors former Directors and the Company Secretary.
Under the terms of the acquisitions of PharmInvent in November 2016 and PSR Group BV in October 2017 a proportion of deferred consideration is payable in equity.
Where such deferred consideration is dependent on the relevant vendor remaining as an employee of the acquired company a sharebased payment charge arises.
Sharebased payment charges for the year arose as follows Ergomed plc Long Term Incentive Plan 550 331 Rolf Stahel Unapproved Executive Share Option Agreement 4 67 Nondilutive share options 175 339 Deferred consideration for acquisitions 304 140 Weighted average number of Ordinary Shares for the purposes of diluted earnings per share 1033 877 Included in the above sharebased payment charges 253000 2016 474000 relates to share option awards made to key management personnel.
Ergomed plc Long Term Incentive Plan The Ergomed plc Long Term Incentive Plan allows for the grant of options to both executives and all other Group employees which may or may not be subject to performance criteria.
It further provides for any options granted under its terms to be options that qualify under the Enterprise Management Incentives legislation Qualifying EMI options as well as options that do not qualify Unapproved options.
Selected Directors and employees of the Group may be granted options under the Long Term Incentive Plan at the discretion of the Companys Board of Directors or a duly authorised committee thereof the Committee.
Employees and Directors will be eligible to participate in the Long Term Incentive Plan as follows i Qualifying EMI options can be granted to an employee or Director of the Company or a Group company who commits at least 25 hours per week or if less at least 75% of his or her working time on the business of the Company or Group company and at the grant date does not either individually or together with his associates control more than 30% of the ordinary share capital of the Company. ii Unapproved options can be granted to any employee including an Executive Director of a Group company.
At 31 December 2017 the following unexercised share options to acquire Ordinary Shares were outstanding 2017 2016 Number of share options
Number of share options
Outstanding at the beginning of the year 2038000 1.20 1353000 1.64 Granted during the year 257000 1.407 835000 0.56 Lapsed during the year 40000 0.616 150000 1.625 Outstanding at the end of the year 2255000 1.217 2038000 1.20 Vested at the end of the year 172357 26429 Exercisable at the end of the year 172357 26429 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS continued FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 79 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Governance Strategic report At 31 December 2017 the following unexercised share options to acquire Ordinary Shares were outstanding Year of grant Exercise period
No.
No.
2015 03062018  02062025 1.625 913000 928000 2015 03062018  23122025 1.69 275000 275000 2016 11012019  10012026 0.01 200000 200000 2016 11012019  10012026 0.01 200000 200000 2016 02082016  02062026 1.39 185000 185000 2016 03072016  02062026 0.01 100000 100000 2016 03012017  02122026 1.39 150000 150000 2017 24022020  23022027 2.10 155000 2017 29042017  28032027 0.01 27000 2017 16042020  11042027 0.01 50000 The weighted average remaining life was eight years 2016 eight years and ten months.
Options were valued using a BlackScholes option pricing model using the following inputs Award date 24 February 29 March 12 April 12 April Fair value per share option 0.3267 1.9404 1.9016 1.9410 Share price 2.09 0.01 1.97 1.97 Exercise price 2.10 1.39 0.01 0.01 Volatility 25.38% 26.3% 25.2% 25.4% Expected life 3 years 1 year 0.97 years 3.01 years Expected dividends 1.0% 1.0% 1.0% 1.0% Risk free rate 0.7% 0.12% 0.08% 0.18% Award date 11 January 11 January 3 July 3 July 3 December Fair value per share option 1.6327 0.4300 0.1441 1.1791 0.2493 Exercise price 0.01 0.01 1.39 0.01 1.39 Volatility 27% 27% 27% 28% 28% Expected life 3 years 3 years 2.9 years 1.7 years 2.5 years Expected dividends 1.0% 1.0% 1.0% 1.0% 1.0% Risk free rate 0.7% 0.7% 0.23% 0.11% 0.21% Award date 3 June 24 December Fair value per share option 0.4468 0.4238 Share price 1.625 1.660 Exercise price 1.625 1.660 Volatility 28% 27% Expected life 5 years 5 years Expected dividends 0% 0% Risk free rate 1.52% 1.29% Volatility was based upon the historical volatility for a basket of comparable listed companies measured over a period commensurate with the expected life of the grant.
Based on the calculation of the total fair value of the options granted the Company recognised a total charge through the income statement of 550000 related to equitysettled sharebased payment transactions in the year ended 31 December 2017 2016 331000.
80 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Sharebased payments continued Unapproved Executive Share Option Scheme 2007 The Unapproved Executive Share Option Scheme 2007 is an unapproved equitysettled share option scheme for the benefit of employees.
Grants are made at the discretion of the Board of Directors or an authorised committee thereof.
Options are forfeited even if already vested if the employee ceases employment with the Company and can only be exercised upon a sale listing or the passing of a resolution for the voluntary windingup of the Company or making of an order for the compulsory winding up of the Company.
The employee retains the options vested at the time of the cessation of the employees employment for a six month period.
The movement on options in issue under these schemes is set out below 2017 2016 Number of share options
Number of share options
Outstanding at the beginning and end of the year 1000000 0.01 1000000 0.01 Vested at the end of the year 1000000 1000000 Exercisable at the end of the year 1000000 1000000 Based on the calculation of the total fair value of the options granted the Company recognised a total charge through the income statement of nil related to equitysettled sharebased payment transactions in the year ended 31 December 2017 2016 nil.
At 31 December 2017 the following unexercised share options to acquire Ordinary Shares were outstanding Year of grant Exercise period
No.
No.
2009 31012009  30122019 0.01 1000000 1000000 The weighted average remaining life was two years 2016 three years.
Unapproved Executive Share Option Agreement made with Rolf Stahel On 18 April 2014 an award of share options was made to Rolf Stahel under a separate option agreement.
The award comprised options over 1260000 Ordinary Shares.
The exercise of the options is linked to the timing of the Admission which has given rise to an exercise price of 1.60 per share.
The option becomes exercisable in respect of one thirtysixth of the options one month from the date of the share option agreement and on the same date in each subsequent calendar month over one thirtysixth of the options.
2017 2016 Number of share options
Number of share options
Outstanding at the beginning of the year 1260000 1.60 1260000 1.60 Granted during the year Outstanding at the end of the year 1260000 1.60 1260000 1.60 Vested at the end of the year 1260000 1120000 Exercisable at the end of the year 1260000 1120000 All of the total amount of options awarded have vested by 31 December 2017 representing 1260000 shares at an exercise price of 1.60.
All unexercised options carry an exercise price of 1.60.
The awards have a 10 year contractual life.
At 31 December 2017 the following unexercised share options to acquire Ordinary Shares were outstanding Exercise period
No.
No.
Year of grant per share 2014 18042014  17042024 1.60 1260000 1260000 The weighted average remaining life was six years and four months 2016 seven years and four months.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS continued FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 81 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Governance Strategic report The options were valued using a BlackScholes option pricing model using the following inputs Award date 18 April Fair value per share option 0.4779 Share price 1.60 Exercise price 1.60 Volatility 30% Expected life 5 years Expected dividends 0% Risk free rate 1.91% Volatility was based upon the historical volatility for a basket of comparable listed companies measured over a period commensurate with the expected life of the grant.
Based on the calculation of the total fair value of the options granted the sharebased remuneration expense in respect of equitysettled schemes is an amount of 4000 2016 67000.
There are no outstanding liabilities.
Nondilutive share options Agreements are in place whereby certain employees and former employees hold options over shares held by Dr Miroslav
The grant of such options was related to their employment by the Company.
At 31 December 2017 the following unexercised share options to acquire Ordinary Shares were outstanding 2017 2016 Number of share options
Number of share options
Outstanding at the beginning of the year 602940 0.01 352940 0.01 Granted during the year   250000 0.01 Outstanding at the end of the year 602940 0.01 602940 0.01 Vested at the end of the year 552940 427940 Exercisable at the end of the year 552940 427940 The options were valued using a BlackScholes option pricing model using the following inputs Award date 30 November 30 November 30 November 30 November Fair value per share option 1.3884 1.3746 1.39 1.3761 Share price 1.40 1.40 1.40 1.40 Exercise price 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 Volatility 26.5% 26.5% na 26.5% Expected life 0.1 years 1.1 years 0 years 1 year Expected dividends 1.0% 1.0% na 1.0% Risk free rate 0.2% 0.11% na 0.11% Award date 20 July 20 July Fair value per share option 1.74 1.7226 Share price 1.75 1.75 Exercise price 0.01 0.01 Volatility na 23.4% Expected life 0 years 1 year Expected dividends na 1.0% Risk free rate na 0.5% 82 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Sharebased payments continued Volatility was based upon the historical volatility for a basket of comparable listed companies measured over a period commensurate with the expected life of the grant.
Based on the calculation of the total fair value of the options granted the Company recognised a total charge through the income statement of 175000 related to equitysettled sharebased payment transactions in the year ended 31 December 2017 2016 restated 339000.
At 31 December 2017 the following unexercised share options to acquire Ordinary Shares were outstanding Year of grant Exercise period
No.
No.
2015 20072015  19072025 0.01 176470 176470 2015 20072016  19072025 0.01 176470 176470 2016 30112016  29112026 0.01 75000 75000 2016 30112017  29112026 0.01 75000 75000 2016 11012017  29112026 0.01 50000 50000 2016 11012018  29112026 0.01 50000 50000 The weighted average remaining life was nine years and one month 2016 eight years and one month.
Deferred consideration for acquisitions The terms of the acquisitions of PSR Group BV and European Pharminvent Services s. now PrimeVigilance s. provisions for deferred consideration payable in cash and in equity.
Where that deferred consideration is contingent upon the continued employment of the vendors in accordance with IFRS 3 a charge through the income statement arises.
The element that is repayable in equity and that is contingent on the continued employment of the vendors is included as part of sharebased payments in accordance with IFRS 2.
A charge of 304000 arises in the year ended 31 December 2017 2016 restated 140000.
The element that is repayable in cash and that is contingent on the continued employment of the vendors is charged separately to the income statement and is shown a deferred consideration for acquisitions expense note 7.
Financial instruments Capital risk management The Groups objectives when managing capital are to safeguard the Groups ability to continue as a going concern in order to provide returns for shareholders and benefits for other stakeholders and to maintain an optimal capital structure to reduce the cost of capital.
Significant accounting policies Details of the significant accounting policies and methods adopted including the criteria for recognition the basis of measurement and the bases for recognition of income and expenses for each class of financial asset financial liability and equity instrument are disclosed in note 1.
Financial instruments carried at fair value by valuation method The tables below analyse financial instruments carried at fair value and at contractual amount.
The valuation method was Level 3 being where inputs for the liability that are not based on observable market data i. unobservable inputs.
Group
2017 2016 Fair value Level 3
Fair value Level 3
Due within one year Deferred consideration 1957 4000 Due after one year Deferred consideration 9804 17330 7772 20453 11761 21330 7772 20453 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS continued FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 83 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Governance Strategic report
2017 2016 Fair value Level 3
Fair value Level 3
Due within one year Deferred consideration 1957 4000 Due after one year Deferred consideration 9804 17330 7772 20453 11761 21330 7772 20453 Movements in level 3 liabilities were as follows
Company
Cost
At 1 January 2016 Arising on acquisition 7495 7495 Finance charge 272 272 Translation movement 5 5 At 31 December 2016 7772 7772 Arising on acquisition 1109 1109 Finance charge 581 581 Amounts settled 585 585 Revaluation 2875 2875 Translation movement 9 9 At 31 December 2017 11761 11761 Categories of financial instruments The Companys financial assets held for managing liquidity risk being loans and receivables which are considered to be readily saleable or are expected to generate cash inflows to meet cash outflows on financial liabilities within six months.
Group
31 December 2017
Loans and receivables
Current financial liabilities at fair value through profit and loss
Noncurrent financial liabilities at amortised cost
Fair value Financial assets Investments 709      709 709 Trade receivables  13390     13390 13390 Other receivables  282     282 282 Accrued income  1884     1884 1884 Cash and cash equivalents  3218     3218 3218 709 18774     19483 19483 Financial liabilities Finance leases   12   6 18 18 Trade creditors   4942    4942 4942 Amounts payable to related parties   418    418 418 Other payables   1186    1186 1186 Customer advances   751    751 751 Accruals   2307    2307 2307 Deferred consideration    1957 9804  11761 11761 9616 1957 9804 6 21383 21383 84 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial instruments continued 31 December 2016
Loans and receivables
Noncurrent financial liabilities at fair value through profit and loss
Carrying amount Fair value Financial assets Investments 228     228 228 Trade receivables  9540    9540 9540 Other receivables  198    198 198 Accrued income  2233    2233 2233 Cash and cash equivalents  4424    4424 4424 228 16395    16623 16623 Financial liabilities Finance leases   3  5 8 8 Trade creditors   3037   3037 3037 Amounts payable to related parties   49   49 49 Other payables   600   600 600 Accruals   2759   2759 2759 Deferred consideration    7772  7772 7772 6448 7772 5 14225 14225
31 December 2017
Loans and receivables
Current financial liabilities at fair value through profit and loss
Carrying amount Fair value Financial assets Investments 709     709 709 Trade receivables  6743    6743 6743 Amounts receivable from Group companies  6714    6714 6714 Other receivables  76    76 76 Accrued income  831    831 831 Cash and cash equivalents  288    288 288 709 14652    15361 15361 Financial liabilities Trade creditors   2541   2541 2541 Amounts payable to related parties   401   401 401 Amounts payable to Group companies   7163   7163 7163 Other payables   417   417 417 Accruals   1374   1374 1374 Deferred consideration    1957 9804 11761 11761 11896 1957 9804 23657 23657 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS continued FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 85 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Governance Strategic report 31 December 2016
Loans and receivables
Noncurrent financial liabilities at fair value through profit and loss
Fair value Financial assets Investments 228    228 228 Trade receivables  5117   5117 5117 Amounts receivable from Group companies  3963   3963 3963 Other receivables  54   54 54 Accrued income  1366   1366 1366 Cash and cash equivalents  930   930 930 228 11430   11658 11658 Financial liabilities Trade creditors   1754  1754 1754 Amounts payable to related parties   42  42 42 Amounts payable to Group companies   3502  3502 3502 Other payables   69  69 69 Accruals   2074  2074 2074 Deferred consideration    7772 7772 7772 7441 7772 15213 15213 The Groups financial assets held for managing liquidity risk being loans and receivables are considered to be readily saleable or are expected to generate cash inflows to meet cash outflows on financial liabilities within six months.
Financial risk management objectives The Groups Finance function provides services to the business monitors and manages the financial risks relating to the operations of the Group.
These risks include market risk including currency risk credit risk liquidity risk and cash flow interest rate risk.
Market risk The Groups activities expose it primarily to the financial risks of changes in foreign currency exchange rates and interest rates see below.
Foreign currency risk management The Group undertakes transactions denominated in foreign currencies consequently exposures to exchange rate fluctuations arise.
Exchange rate exposures are managed by natural hedging in currency accounts.
The carrying amounts of the Groups financial assets and financial liabilities by currency at the reporting date are as follows Financial assets Group Company GBP 2356 2487 3877 2504 Euro 8214 6396 6771 5997 USD 6914 5797 3857 2858 Other 1999 1943 762 299 19483 16623 15267 11658 Financial liabilities Group Company GBP 12288 9026 15170 8586 Euro 4554 4032 8008 6295 USD 278telOther 175tel21383 14225 24578 15213 86 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial instruments continued Foreign currency sensitivity analysis The Group is mainly exposed to the GBP currency Euro currency and the US Dollar currency.
The following table details the Groups sensitivity to a 10% increase and decrease in Sterling being the reporting currency against the relevant foreign currencies.
10% is the sensitivity rate used when reporting foreign currency risk internally to key management personnel and represents managements assessment of the reasonably possible change in foreign exchange rates.
The sensitivity analysis includes only outstanding foreign currency denominated financial assets and liabilities and adjusts their translation at the period end for a 10% change in foreign currency rates.
A positive number below indicates an increase in profit and other equity and a negative number indicates a decrease in profit and other equity.
Group Company
10%
10%
10%
10% Other 22 27 3 3 Group Company Strengthen Weaken Strengthen Weaken 10% 10% 10% 10% Interest rate risk management The Group and the Company are exposed to the interest rate risks associated with its holdings of cash and cash equivalents and short term deposits and finance leases payable.
Ultimate responsibility for liquidity risk management rests with the Board of Directors which regularly monitors the Groups short medium and long term funding and liquidity management requirements.
The Group manages liquidity risk by maintaining adequate cash and cash equivalents and by continuously monitoring forecast and actual cash flows and matching the maturity profiles of financial assets and liabilities.
The impact on profit and other comprehensive income due to interest rate exposure is not considered significant and no interest rate sensitivity has been performed.
Credit risk management Credit risk refers to the risk that a counterparty will default on its contractual obligations resulting in financial loss to the Group.
The Group has adopted a policy of only dealing with creditworthy counterparties.
The Group and the Company assesses the creditworthiness of customers in advance of entering into any contract.
During the life of a contract the customers financial status is monitored as well as payment history.
The Group does have some larger customer balances representing more than 15% of the trade receivables at a particular time but these will be large profitable pharmaceutical companies with good credit ratings or smaller biotech companies with supportive shareholders and a history of successful fundraising and this is not considered indicative of an increased credit risk.
Credit information is supplied by independent rating agencies where appropriate and if available.
Alternatively the Group uses other publicly available financial information and its own trading records to rate its major customers.
Trade receivables consist of a large number of customers spread across diverse geographical areas.
Ongoing credit evaluation is performed on the financial condition of accounts receivable.
The credit risk on liquid funds is limited because the counterparties are banks with high credit ratings assigned by international credit rating agencies.
There has been no history of bad debts as the majority of its sales are to multinational pharmaceutical companies and as a consequence the Directors do not consider that the Group has a significant credit risk.
The carrying amount of financial assets recorded in the financial statements which is net of impairment losses represents the Groups maximum exposure to credit risk as no collateral or other credit enhancements are held.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS continued FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 87 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Governance Strategic report Liquidity and interest risk tables The Group and the Company has no significant long term financial liabilities.
Fair value estimation The carrying value less impairment provision of trade receivables and payables are assumed to approximate their fair values.
The fair value of long term trade receivables and payables is estimated by discounting the future contractual cash flows at the current market interest rate for the underlying currency of the transaction.
Fair value measurements The financial instruments measured subsequent to initial recognition at fair value comprise investments.
The fair value hierarchy of these assets is Level 2.
The valuation technique is market value based on the most recent investment price.
The Group and the Company did not have any other financial instruments that are measured subsequent to initial recognition at fair value.
An analysis of the fair value hierarchy has therefore not been presented.
Acquisition of subsidiary  Haemostatix On 24 May 2016 Ergomed plc acquired 100% of the issued share capital of Haemostatix Limited Haemostatix a research and development company based in Nottingham UK developing novel products for the surgical bleeding market.
The acquisition of Haemostatix enhances Ergomeds portfolio of development products with the potential to generate significant shareholder value.
Goodwill in relation to the acquisition of Haemostatix was increased by 57000 during the period following a reassessment of the deferred tax asset arising on the transaction during the measurement period which ended on 23 May 2017.
The adjustment to the amounts recognised in respect of the identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed are as set out in the table below.
Fair valuation Fair value adjustments
Intangible assets 15200  15200 Property plant and equipment 4  4 Deferred tax asset 1015 57 958 Total noncurrent assets 16219 57 16162 Trade and other receivables 164  164 Other assets 45  45 Cash and equivalents 63  63 Current assets 272  272 Trade and other payables 1365  1365 Deferred tax liability 2736  2736 Financial liabilities 4101  4101 Total identifiable net assets 12390 57 12333 Goodwill 2086 57 2143 Total consideration 14476  14476 Satisfied by Cash 800  800 Equity 6181  6181 Deferred consideration 7495  7495 Total consideration 14476  14476 Net cash outflow arising on acquisition Cash consideration 800  800 Less cash and cash equivalent balances acquired 63  63 Transaction expenses 370  370 1107  1107 88 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Acquisition of subsidiary  PSR Group BV On 2 October 2017 Ergomed plc acquired 100% of the issued share capital of PSR Group BV a full service specialist orphan drug CRO based in Amsterdam Netherlands.
The acquisition of PSR enhances Ergomeds ability in running complex orphan drug development programs.
The amounts provisionally recognised in respect of the identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed are as set out in the table below.
The amounts provisionally recognised in respect of the identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed are as set out in the table below.
Book values Fair value adjustments
Intangible assets  700 700 Property plant and equipment 32  32 Total noncurrent assets 32 700 732 Trade and other receivables 879  879 Cash and equivalents 812  812 Current assets 1691  1691 Trade and other payables 1060  1060 Tax payable 74  74 Deferred tax liability  175 175 Financial liabilities 1134 175 1309 Total identifiable net assets 589 525 1114 Goodwill 3060 525 2535 Total consideration 3649  3649 Satisfied by Cash 1982  1982 Equity 558  558 Deferred consideration 1109  1109 Total consideration 3649  3649 Net cash outflow arising on acquisition Cash consideration 1982  1982 Less cash and cash equivalent balances acquired 812  812 Payments in to escrow 558  558 Transaction expenses 218  218 1946  1946 The provisional fair value of intangible assets relates to Customer Relationships of 162000 Orders Backlog of 189000 and the Trade Name of 349000.
The provisional fair value of the financial assets includes receivables with a fair value of 879000 and a gross contractual value of 879000.
The best estimate at acquisition date of the contractual cash flows not to be collected is nil.
Goodwill is provisionally valued at 2535000.
None of the goodwill is expected to be deductible for income tax purposes.
Deferred consideration represents the provisional fair valuation of the additional consideration payable which could be between nil and an aggregate maximum undiscounted amount of 2806000 subject to the future performance of the business.
Ergomed plc has a 12 month measurement period from the date of acquisition and therefore the measurement period ends on 1 October 2018.
PSR contributed revenues of 977000 and profit before tax of 38000 to the results of the group for the year.
If
31 December 2017 would have been 3302000 higher and group profit before tax would have been 309000 higher.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS continued FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 89 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Governance Strategic report Financial commitments At 31 December 2017 the Group was committed to making the following payments under noncancellable operating leases which fall due as follows
Land and buildings Other Within one year 84telBetween two and five years 210tel2952 1122 427 313 At 31 December 2017 the Company was committed to making the following payments under noncancellable operating leases which fall due as follows
Land and buildings Other Within one year 54 35  4 Pension costs The Group makes contributions to defined contribution personal pension schemes of the employees.
The pension cost represents contributions payable by the Group to the schemes and amounted to 323000 2016 182000.
Contributions payable to the schemes at 31 December 2017 were 185000 2016 193000.
The Company makes contributions to defined contribution personal pension schemes of the employees.
The pension cost represents contributions payable by the Company to the schemes and amounted to 57000 2016 43000.
Contributions payable to the schemes at 31 December 2017 were nil 2016 25000.
Related party transactions Ergomed d. of the Company.
During the year the Company and its subsidiaries were charged 266000 2016 240000 by Ergomed d. and its subsidiaries in respect of clinical research costs and other administrative services.
At 31 December 2017 a balance of 40000 was owed by the Company and its subsidiaries to Ergomed d.
2016 37000.
In addition during 2016 the Group sold medical equipment to a subsidiary of Ergomed d. for 33000.
There were no such sales in 2017.
Chesyl Pharma Limited is a company owned by Rolf Stahel who was a Director and shareholder of the Company.
During the year the Company was charged consultancy fees of 15000 2016 52000 in relation to the services of Rolf Stahel included in the remuneration paid to Rolf Stahel.
At 31 December 2017 amounts payable to Chesyl Pharma in relation to such consultancy services and associated expenses were nil 2016 12000.
Under the terms of the acquisition of European PharmInvent Services s. now PrimeVigilance s.
Dr Jan Petracek who was a shareholder of that company and became a Director during the year and is a shareholder of the Company was entitled to deferred consideration.
During the year 472000 was charged to the income statement in relation to this deferred consideration and was payable in cash and equity at 31 December 2017.
All transactions with related parties take place on an arms length basis.
Balances and transactions between the Company and its subsidiaries which are related parties have been eliminated on consolidation and are not disclosed in this note.
90 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 EBITDA and EBITDA adjusted
Operating lossprofit 3904 49 Adjust for Depreciation and amortisation charges within Other administrative expenses 459 256 Amortisation of acquired fair valued intangible assets 1167 771 EBITDA 2278 1076 Sharebased payment charge 1033 877 Deferred consideration for acquisitions expense 752 550 Revaluation of deferred consideration for acquisition 2875 Writeback of deferred consideration for acquisition  460 Acquisition costs 259 584 Exceptional items 143 177 EBITDA adjusted 2784 2804 The Directors make certain adjustments to EBITDA to derive adjusted EBITDA which they consider more reflective of the Groups underlying trading performance and enables comparisons to be made with prior periods.
Certain items such as share based payment charge revaluation of deferred consideration for acquisition and writeback of deferred consideration for acquisition are noncash items and reflect adjustments to expected future deferred consideration payments.
Deferred consideration for acquisitions expense relates to the cash component of deferred consideration which is payable contingent on the continued employment of the vendors note 7.
These costs together with acquisition costs and exceptional items are all cash costs but are not considered trading items and therefore not included in adjusted EBITDA.
Adjusted earnings per share
Loss for the purposes of basic earnings per share being net profit attributable to owners of the Company 4504 70 Loss for the purposes of diluted earnings per share 4504 70 Adjust for Amortisation of acquired fair valued intangible assets 1167 771 Sharebased payment charge 1033 877 Deferred consideration for acquisitions expense 752 550 Revaluation of deferred consideration for acquisition 2875 Writeback of deferred consideration for acquisition  460 Acquisition costs 259 584 Exceptional items 143 177 Adjusted earnings for the purposes of diluted earnings per share 1725 2429 Adjusted earnings per share Basic 4.2p 6.8p Diluted 4.0p 6.6p Subsequent events On 1 February 2018 the Company completed a placing whereby 2029971 ordinary shares of 1p each were issued at a price of 1.90 per share.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS continued FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 91 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Governance Strategic report NOTES 92 Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Ergomed plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ergomed plc The Surrey Research Park 26 Frederick Sanger Road
Surrey
