Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 Progress and delivery Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 Rathbone Brothers Plc through its subsidiaries is a leading provider of highquality personalised investment and wealth management services for private clients charities and trustees.
This includes discretionary investment management unit trusts tax planning trust and company management pension advice and banking services.
As at 31 December 2017 Rathbone Brothers Plc managed 39.1 billion of client funds of which 33.8 billion were managed by our Investment Management segment.
A reconciliation between underlying profit before tax and profit before tax is shown on page 31 Underlying profit before tax as a percentage of average equity of each quarter end 2017 financial highlights
2016 50.1m Basic earnings per share 2016 78.9p Dividends paid and proposed per share 2016 57 .0p
2016 74.9m
2016 122.1p Return on capital employed ROCE 19.5% 2016 19.3%
For a full five year record please see page 188 Strategic report 1 Our investment case 2 Our business at a glance Our business model
Chairmans statement
Chief executives review Our strategy Market review Continuing our strategy Our strategic objectives 21 Risk management Our performance Financial performance Segmental review Financial position Liquidity and cash flow Corporate responsibility report
58 Corporate governance report Group risk committee report Audit committee report Nomination committee report Group executive committee report Remuneration committee report Directors report Statement of directors responsibilities in respect of the report and accounts Financial statements Independent auditorsite Dividends paid and proposed per share p Total funds under management bn 39.1bn 30.6% underlying operating margin Includes Vision Independent Financial Planning A relationshipbased approach A direct relationshipbased approach which supports clients and advisers by providing the flexibility to meet their investment needs across different economic and lifestyle conditions Longevity of client and adviser relationships High service levels and reliable administrative resources clients UK offices and Jersey Unique investment culture Significant participation by investment managers in a nonprescriptive investment process which uses a whole of market approach and accesses both direct and collective investments An active investment approach that allows teams to respond to market conditions and manage tax considerations An expanding inhouse research team Leading margins An ongoing cost discipline that preserves underlying operating margins A balanced investment in technology to improve communication and manage investment team capacity Selective investment in initiatives that support organic and acquired growth Positive shareholder returns A progressive dividend policy The ability to identify accretive acquisitions that fit our culture A consistent return on capital employed Delivering through our strengths Our investment case site Strategic report Our business at a glance Delivering our services Investment Management Through Rathbone Investment Management we provide personal discretionary investment management solutions to private clients with investible assets of 100000 upwards.
Clients of this service can expect Direct access to their investment manager An investment manager that understands their requirements and agrees a strategy that meets their objectives An investment process that aims to provide riskadjusted returns to meet clients needs today and in the future Within Investment Management we have several specialist capabilities including
Our charities business manages 4.7 billion of funds and is the second largest investment management provider to the top 5000 charities in the UK.
The team is diverse in both its expertise and experience and aims to deliver a suitably tailored investment portfolio to meet the complex needs of charity clients and trustees.
Rathbone Greenbank Investments As one of the pioneers in the field of ethicallyfocused investments Rathbone Greenbank Investments manages over 1.1 billion in ethical and sociallyresponsible investment portfolios for private clients charities and trusts.
The team is highly proactive on ethical and sustainability issues engaging directly with companies and government to improve business practices.
Rathbone Investment Management International Our offshore discretionary investment services are headquartered in Jersey and are provided by Rathbone Investment Management International.
Rathbone Private Office We have also recently established the Rathbone Private Office to help larger clients with more complex needs to protect enhance and organise their wealth across multiple managers asset classes and investment markets.
39.1bn for our clients UK locations and Jersey FTSE 250 company listed on the London Stock Exchange Includes Vision Independent Financial Planning We employ over We manage over We operate from We are a 2 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 Private clients 368% ISAs 165% Charities 134% Pensions 125% Trusts 114%
94% Investment Management funds under management have increased by 102.4 % to 33.8bn over the past five years Complementary services Banking and loan services We offer loans to our existing clients secured against their investment portfolios and in some cases other assets.
As a licensed deposit taker we are also able to offer our clients a range of banking services including currency and payment services and fixed interest term deposits.
These additional services are valued by our clients and are an important point of differentiation from many of our peers.
Financial planning We offer inhouse financial planning which provides whole of market advice to clients.
Our inhouse financial planners are experts at thinking ahead and have longstanding experience of advising individuals couples and families companies and trusts.
Unitised Portfolio Service Using Rathbone Multi Asset Portfolio Funds we offer clients with investible assets of 25000 or more our modelbased discretionary investment management services.
This is designed for clients who do not require a fully bespoke investment solution but still want access to an investment manager who will undertake suitability to ensure investment needs are selected and monitored to suit their individual circumstance as well as ensuring that their investments are managed in a taxefficient manner.
Managed Portfolio Service A simple and straightforward executiononly investment service which gives clients with 15000 or more the ability to access highquality investments.
The service is delivered at a price that reflects the competitive nature of our sector but to a standard that clients have come to expect from Rathbones.
We also operate the following additional entities Rathbone Trust Company Rathbone Trust Company provides UK trust and some legal estate and tax advice to clients.
Vision Independent Financial Planning Vision Independent Financial Planning is an independent IFA network providing financial advisory solutions to UK private clients.
Unit Trusts Rathbone Unit Trust Management is a leading UK fund manager with 5.3 billion of funds under management providing a range of activelymanaged specialist and multi asset unit trusts that are designed to meet core investment needs in the retail client market.
These funds are distributed primarily through financial advisers in the UK.
Funds can also be accessed by international clients through a Rathbone Luxembourg Funds SICA V Socit dInvestisement Capital Variable which allows access to a similar range of actively managed master funds through a masterfeeder structure.
Unit Trusts funds under management have increased by 307.7% to 5.3bn over the past five years Rathbone Income Fund Rathbone Global Opportunities Fund 1168m Rathbone Ethical Bond Fund 1100m Rathbone Active Income Fund for Charities Rathbone Global Alpha Fund Rathbone Strategic Bond Fund Rathbone Blue Chip Income and Growth Fund Rathbone UK Opportunities Fund Rathbone Multi Asset Portfolio Funds 736m Other funds 5367m Client account type by value 0250k 73% 250k500k 119% 500k750k 97% 750k15m 178% 15m50m 243% 50m100m 94% 10m 196%site Strategic report Progress with relationships We place individuality at the centre of our approach and are committed to continuing to offer our clients a personal service.
During the year we have upgraded our client management systems improved our communication programmes implemented a new way of capturing and evaluating our clients attitude to investment risk.
Read more on our business model on page 8 4 Progress with knowledge We use our intellectual capital to set us apart and continue to invest in new skills and capabilities.
During the year we have improved firmwide access to research team outputs developed our portfolio monitoring processes and increased the use of asset allocation tools completed an extensive range of training and development courses.
Strategic report Progress with advisers We work with a wide range of financial and other professional advisers helping them navigate changing markets and new regulations.
During the year we have established a stronger presence in the intermediary market continued growth in Vision Independent Financial financial planning teams.
Read more on our business model on page 8 6 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 Progress with advisers Progress with quality We maintain high standards of service delivery by adapting and evolving our processes.
During the year we have established the infrastructure necessary to support more efficient deployment of IT across the firm implemented the changes necessary to meet the requirements of MiFID II Markets in Financial Instruments Directive continued to improve our data management capabilities.
Strategic report Our business model Building value Through a personalised approach to investment management we offer investors a compelling and attractive way to build value.
Our business model What we do What makes us different How we do it How we create long term value Our vision is to be the UKs leading independentlyowned provider of investment and wealth management services to private clients charities and trustees.
We have two main areas of operation as well as several complementary services Rathbone Investment Management which offers personal discretionary investment management solutions Rathbone Unit Trust Management which provides unit trust and multi asset fund products Complementary services including banking and loan services inhouse financial planning advice a unitised portfolio service UK trust legal estate and tax advice Vision Independent Financial
A sound investment case A relationshipbased approach A unique investment culture Leading margins Scale and expertise 290 trained investment professionals 39.1 billion of funds under management A broad range of investment solutions Brand and reputation An established brand with local presence Reliable systems and infrastructure Accredited performance reporting Independent ownership Listed on the London Stock Exchange and a constituent of the FTSE 250 High standards of corporate governance Our service is delivered directly through investment managers who make portfolio decisions Our aim is to build lasting and trusted relationships We access investments across the whole market with no bias towards inhouse funds Our online presence complements our service For investors A track record of strong operating margins Successful acquisition capability for people and firms that fit our culture Stable dividend growth Consistent return on capital employed For clients Active management of portfolios through changing market conditions A valued and quality service that builds trust For employees Responsibility for investment decisions Valuebased remuneration Investment in training and development Graduate and apprenticeship programmes We have a bespoke approach to portfolio construction supported by a central research team Our firmwide processes allow us to pool intellectual capital and provide strategic asset allocation methodologies We operate a range of specialist mandates including specialist investment teams who provide services to charities and ethical investors Our internal quality assurance and performance measurement capabilities provide a sound control framework Clients have the ability to join Rathbones either directly or through their own financial intermediary Our dedicated intermediary sales team provide our discretionary and unit trust services to national adviser networks and strategic partners Direct client and adviser referrals remain the most important source of organic growth Our Vision Independent Financial Planning business operates independently but maintains a close relationship with Rathbone Investment Management We have dedicated inhouse custody and settlement services Our operations team is highly experienced We outsource selected services where costeffective to reliable and carefully chosen partners We invest incrementally in IT to ensure that our infrastructure keeps pace with change
An informed investment process Working flexibly with advisers
8 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 What we do What makes us different How we do it How we create long term value Our vision is to be the UKs leading independentlyowned provider of investment and wealth management services to private clients charities and trustees.
We have two main areas of operation as well as several complementary services Rathbone Investment Management which offers personal discretionary investment management solutions Rathbone Unit Trust Management which provides unit trust and multi asset fund products Complementary services including banking and loan services inhouse financial planning advice a unitised portfolio service UK trust legal estate and tax advice Vision Independent Financial
A sound investment case A relationshipbased approach A unique investment culture Leading margins Scale and expertise 290 trained investment professionals 39.1 billion of funds under management A broad range of investment solutions Brand and reputation An established brand with local presence Reliable systems and infrastructure Accredited performance reporting Independent ownership Listed on the London Stock Exchange and a constituent of the FTSE 250 High standards of corporate governance Our service is delivered directly through investment managers who make portfolio decisions Our aim is to build lasting and trusted relationships We access investments across the whole market with no bias towards inhouse funds Our online presence complements our service For investors A track record of strong operating margins Successful acquisition capability for people and firms that fit our culture Stable dividend growth Consistent return on capital employed For clients Active management of portfolios through changing market conditions A valued and quality service that builds trust For employees Responsibility for investment decisions Valuebased remuneration Investment in training and development Graduate and apprenticeship programmes We have a bespoke approach to portfolio construction supported by a central research team Our firmwide processes allow us to pool intellectual capital and provide strategic asset allocation methodologies We operate a range of specialist mandates including specialist investment teams who provide services to charities and ethical investors Our internal quality assurance and performance measurement capabilities provide a sound control framework Clients have the ability to join Rathbones either directly or through their own financial intermediary Our dedicated intermediary sales team provide our discretionary and unit trust services to national adviser networks and strategic partners Direct client and adviser referrals remain the most important source of organic growth Our Vision Independent Financial Planning business operates independently but maintains a close relationship with Rathbone Investment Management We have dedicated inhouse custody and settlement services Our operations team is highly experienced We outsource selected services where costeffective to reliable and carefully chosen partners site Strategic report Chairmans statement 10 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 A strong 2017 2017 was a good year for Rath bones and we produced some robust financial results.
The executive team responded well to developments in a rapidly changing wealth management market and our investment managers achieved good riskadjusted returns for our clients in a time of great uncertainty and persistently low interest rates.
UK and global investment markets performed well in 2017 with some indices reaching record levels towards the end of the year.
This outcome has been positive for both Rathbones and our clients with the WMA Balanced Index up 7.2% in the year and our funds under management reaching 39.1 billion up 14.3% in the year.
Profit before tax for 2017 increased 17.6% to 58.9 million after incurring the costs associated with the relocation of our London office and in pursuing strategic opportunities.
These costs were partially offset by a plan amendment gain arising from the closure of our defined benefit pension schemes.
Accordingly basic earnings per share of 92.7p in creased 17.5% from the 78.9p reported last year.
A full analysis of all nonunderlying items impacting profit before tax can be found on page 127.
Underlying profit before tax was 87.5 million for the year ended 31 December 2017 up 16.8% from the previous year and we have continued to balance our need to continue strategic expenditure with maintaining good profitability reporting an underlying profit margin of 30.6% 2016 29.8% for the year.
Underlying earnings per share of 138.8p for 2017 increase d 13.7% from 122.1p last year.
In line with our progressive dividend policy the board is recommending a final dividend of 39.0p per share.
This brings the total dividend for the year to 61.0p per share an increase of 7.0% over last year.
We continually monitor opportunities to grow the business through smaller acquisitions but during the year we discussed with an industry peer Smith and Williamson the benefits of combining our businesses.
The benefits to both parties and our respective clients could have been considerable but following extensive discussions we were unable to conclude a transaction that was in the best interests of both parties.
Nevertheless
I believe that our measured approach to this opportunity served us well.
We will continue to apply this discipline when we pursue other opportunities.
Continued momentum In 2014 we set out a fiveyear strategy which had the ambition to reach 40 billion of funds under management by the end of 2018.
Accepting that investment market s have been favourable we are now well within sight of that goal with many of our strategic initiatives continuing to gain momentum.
Accordingly over the next few months the board and executive team will work to refresh our strategy to ensure our core business remains robust and that we can benefit from the changing landscape of our industry.
I look forward to sharing the outcome of these discussions with our stak eholders at the appropriate time.
We remain committed to ensuring that Rathbones remain well positioned for the future.
Governance culture and the board Last year I wrote that one of my priorities was to ensure board oversight of the firms culture and its development.
This is now one of my specific responsibilities.
Rathbones culture professionalism putting clients first a collegiate approach and integrity has long been a competitive advantage.
Despite growth regulation and the pace of change in our industry we have endeavoured to protect our culture and this remains a board priority.
As part of this initiative both I and my nonexecutive director colleagues actively seek opportunities for direct engagement with employees both formal and informal across the firm.
From our engagement this year we have witnessed the challenging effects that an increased workload driv en by internal and external change has placed on our teams.
On the other hand we have been reassured that our strong culture remains at the heart of the business.
Preserving this culture is clearly fundamental to achieving the best results for clients and shareholders over the long term.
As part of our normal succession planning the board continues to monitor our existing capabilities and assess what new skills are necessary to develop both the boa rd and the wider business over time taking into account the existing balance of knowledge experience and diversity.
After a rigorous recruitment process we were delighted to welcome Jim Pettigrew to the board in March 2017.
Jim has extensive experience in financial services and was appointed senior independ ent director in August 2017 following the retirement of David Harrel.
In late 2017 we completed an externallyfacilitated board effectiveness review which has confirmed that the board continues to operate well.
There are always areas to improve however and in particular we will ensure that good communication and interaction between the board and the business remains a priority.
Responding to risks and regulation The report from the chairman of the group ri sk committee Kathryn Matthews is set out on page 68.
We continue to enhance our risk management processes and this year have paid particular attention to identifying and monitoring emerging risks such as cybercrime money laundering and data theft.
We remain vigilant to the financial risks associated with subletting our existing space in Curzon Street and these risks are also reviewed at every board meeting.
We also took action to reduce the risks associated with our defined bene fit pension schemes.
We believe that the other significant risks to our business are operational risks which are increased by growth and regulatory risks which are increased by continual changes to regulations in our sector.
The past year has been a very demanding one from a regulatory perspective as we prepared for the changes brought about by MiFID II Markets in Financial Instruments Directive the General Data Protection Regulation the FCAs Asset Management Market Report and PRIIPs Packaged Retail and Insurancebased Investment Products.
Maintaining our regulatory standards has always been a high priority for our senior management and we will continue to monitor the regulatory risks that arise from the changes to guidelines and standards in our sector.
Engaging with shareholders During the year we have had the opportunity to engage with shareholders through various channels including conferences companyhosted events group meetings and oneonone discussions.
We are fo rtunate to have a number of longstanding committed institutional shareholders and will continue to maintain a regular and constructive dialogue with them to gather feedback on our progress.
In early 2018 we consulted with them on changes to our remuneration policy.
As it has been three years since our last policy was approved a revised remuneration policy will be laid before shareholders for approval at the annual general meeting in May 2018.
Working with the companys advisers the remuneration committee has reassessed our policy in the context of a changing external environment and the firms own future aspirations.
Although we have maintained the principal features of our existing policy some changes have been proposed to align the interests of executives and investors more closely.
These changes follow a number of consultation meetings with shareholders and governing bodies.
Listening to our employees As a service business our people are our greatest asset and we are committed to retaining the many highcalibre individuals we employ across the firm and creating a stimulating and supportive environment for them.
I listen carefully to the views of my colleagues and I recognise that this year has been a challenging one for employees given the pace and nature of change.
I am very grateful for their continued perseverance and dedication.
Outlook
The UK wealth management industry continues to evolve driven by client needs regulation demographics technological innovation and a changing competitive landscape.
Rathbones as a leading UK discretionary wealth manager remains well placed to respond to and capitalise on these evolving trends.
We remain committed to growing the business both organically via disciplined investment and inorganically via acquisitions that not only fit our strategic and financial criteria but also share our culture and values.
Notwithstanding some caution which naturally emerges at a time of high investment markets and political uncertainty we enter 2018 well positioned to provide longterm value for shareholders.
Strategic report Chief executives review 12 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 The wealth management sector remains robust The wealth management industry continues to be an exciting and rapidly changing place to do business.
In 2017 the industry has not only had to navigate a particularly uncertain political climate but has also had to respond to a considerable amount of new regulation.
Importantly many positive drivers for longterm private wealth accumulation are still in place.
The challenge the current climate brings is to secure the scale economies and operational efficiencies necessary to respond positively to demographic changes and technological advances whilst reacting to a climate of increasing price pressure.
In this respect Rathbones contin ues to be well positioned in the industry with our own funds under management reaching 39.1 billion at 31 December 2017 up 14.3% from 34.2 billion at the end of 2016.
Total funds under management in our Investment Management business at 31 December 2017 were 33.8 billion up 11.9% from 30.2 billion in 2016 whilst our Unit Trusts business reached a milestone of 5.3 billion up 32.5% from last year.
Strong financial performance underpinned by a 30% operating margin Despite investing in a number of areas across the business during the year we maintained a leading operating margin of 30.6% 2016 29.8% through a combination of relatively supportive investment markets and continued net funds growth and cost discipline.
Underlying profit before tax totalled 87.5 million 2016 74.9 million generating an underlying earnings per share of 138.8p an increase of 13 .7% from 122.1p in 2016.
In 2017 the group added 4.8 billion gross funds under management organically split between 3.1 billion in our Investment Management business and 1.7 billion in our Unit Trusts business 2016 2.3 billion and 1.3 billion respectively.
Outflows from intergenerational wealth transfer property purchases and other uses of funds to support lifestyle continue unabated in this low interest rate environment.
Net organic growth in this business was 3.0% 2016 2.9% which represents a satisfactory result in an investment climate that was largely directionless until the end of the year.
Net flows into our Unit Trusts business were very strong however totalling 883 million in the year 2016 554 million and helping its total funds under management to reach a record 5.3 billion 2016 4.0 billion at 31 December 2017.
Profit before tax for the year of 58.9 million was 17.6% higher than the 50.1 million in 2016 and reflects the impact of a number of nonunderlying items.
A full analysis of these items can be found on page 31.
As reported on page 116 our balance sheet remains stable with a consolidated Common Equity Tier 1 ratio at 31 December 2017 of 20.7% compared with 17.7% at 31 December 2016.
Our consolidated leverage ratio at 31 December 2017 was 7.8% compared with 6.6% at 31 December 2016.
We remain a capitalefficient business generating an underlying return on capital employed of 19.5% for the year compared to 19.3% a year ago.
A detailed analysis of our regulatory capital position at 31 December 2017 can be found on page 38.
The journey to 40 billion has significantly improved our capabilities as a firm Four years ago I shared an ambition for the firm to reach 40 billion of funds under management by the end of 2018 and I am encouraged that this goal is within our reach.
Since 2014 we have delivered a significantly improved investment platform to support our investment teams built new distribution channels addressing both IFA networks and professional intermediaries acquired Vision Independent Financial Planning expanded our research and specialist investment capabilities simplified our pricing structures and materially grown our Unit Trusts business.
We have also delivered learning and development programmes to employees strengthened our brand profile improved our website and broadened our marketing capability.
Alongside this demanding programme we have taken advantage of a number of opportunities to deliver inorganic growth through team hiring and bolton acquisitions.
Our culture of professional autonomy with accountability on which our investment managers thrive remains very much at the heart of our business but does place more demands on our ability to manage risk.
Hand in hand with this considerable level of activity we have ensured that we continue to operate a risk and control framework that allows us to adhere to our core philosophies of delivering an investmentled highly personal whole of market investment service to our clients.
Investing in the future There are of course areas of the business that we must continue to develop to adapt to the changing needs of our clients.
This year we have been reviewing the processes we use to maintain and manage information about our clie nts and have made a number of enhancements.
In 2017 we embedded a new way of capturing and evaluating our clients attitude to investment risk and significantly increased the usage of asset allocation tools across the firm with over 97% of discretionary funds now linked to these tools.
In 2018 we will continue to keep abreast of evolving client suitability standards.
We will also be looking to improve our account opening processes making use of a material upgrade to our client relationship management systems and providing more administrative support to ensure that investment teams can continue to focus on serving our clients well.
The output from our research team has increased considerably over the last two years as has access to this output through the introduction of a research hub which disseminates information to our growing community of investment managers.
In 2018 we will continue to ensure that we attract the right level of investment skills to support and develop our in vestment process but just as importantly ensure that the amount of external research we procure is right for us.
MiFID II Markets in Financial Instruments Directive has made some signif icant changes to the way in which external research is priced delivered and administered and we will work hard to keep abreast of developments to secure value for money.
Building our presence in the inte rmediary market has remained a key priority so a May 2017 report by Defaqto which confirmed that the use of Rathbones as a discretionary fund management provider to advisers had more than doubled in the last year was a good outcome.
Vision Independent Financial Planning made strong progress during the year growing funds under management to 1.4 billion 2016 1.0 billion and continuing to attract quality advisers.
In addition our specialist intermediary team continues to focus on a number of important strategic partnerships and is now well established.
We expect flows to improve from the 265 million introduced in 2017 to around 350 million as the proposition continues to gain momentum.
This year we deliberately invested in establishing the right infrastructure to support our internal financial planning teams and further develop the proposition.
We are now able to expand its footprint across more of our regional offices over the next year and expect to increase the number of professional staff in 2018.
In total we expect net costs to increase by up to 1.5 million as a result.
The Rathbone Private Office became fully operational during 2017 with a marketing programme positioning the firm as a credible alternative for larg er and more complex clients and raising its profile within the intermediary community.
We remain mindful that current employee ownership in the business is culturally important and over recent years there has been a decline primarily as a result of retirement.
From 2018 we will seek to correct this by creating opportunities for more employees to build a larger el ement of equity ownership.
Finally investment markets inevitably present an element of cyclicality to earnings and stock performance and we will continue to monitor this as we review and update our goals for the next five years.
Strategic report Chief executives review continued 14 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 Regulation and infrastructure continue to evolve In 2017 we and the industry have had the task of implementing the significant regulatory changes that arise from the introduction of MiFID II and the General Data Protection Regulation GDPR in particular.
Whilst MiFID II has be en successfully delivered on time and work on GDPR is advanced these new regimes will continue to require some significant chan ges to our core processes and systems with costs continuing at similar levels into 2018.
MiFID II in particular will have an impact on our Unit Trusts business which will bear the full cost of external research in 2018.
Research costs borne by the funds in 2017 were 0.8 million.
This is in addition to the expect ed ban on riskfree box dealing profits 2017 3.1 million foll owing the FCAs Asset Management Market Study.
We will look to offset these impacts in profit terms by continuing to grow the business and build on the momentum the team has achieved.
Technology continues to be a significant entrant in our sector and I believe it will continue to play a disruptive role in the future if not wholly embraced.
Whilst we are committed to our highly personal approach to providing investment and advisory services we will continue to invest to capture the opportunities that these new technologies can offer to improv e our services and operational efficiency while increasing the capacity of our investment teams.
In 2017 we reorganised and upgraded the skills of our IT team which over the medium term will improve our data management capabilities enhance our client communications and introduce additional security measures to combat the evergrowing cyber threat.
We expect that this expansion of our IT capability together with more general cost inflation will add approximately 2.5 million to our running costs.
Outlook
This year has presented many challenges and opportunities and I fully expect 2018 to do so in equal measure.
Brexit continues to be a regular discussion topic wi thin the investment community but as a predom inantly UKbased firm our own view is largely focused on the wider economic environment and any impact it may have on the investments we make for our clients.
I would like to take this opportunity to praise the efforts of our employees in this eventful last year.
Notwithstanding the demands of our own change programme and a complicated market environment they have ke pt the needs of our clients at the forefront of what we do and concentrated on providing an exemplary service.
We enter 2018 in a good position with industryleading operating margins and a strong balance sheet.
We will continue to look for accretive acquisition opportunities and to invest in our future with discipline.
Philip Howell Chief Executive 21 February 2018 14 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 Chief executives review continued 14 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 Regulation and infrastructure continue to evolve In 2017 we and the industry have had the task of implementing the significant regulatory changes that arise from the introduction of MiFID II and the General Data Protection Regulation GDPR in particular.
Whilst MiFID II has be en successfully delivered on time and work on GDPR is advanced these new regimes will continue to require some significant chan ges to our core processes and systems with costs continuing at similar levels into 2018.
MiFID II in particular will have an impact on our Unit Trusts business which will bear the full cost of external research in 2018.
Research costs borne by the funds in 2017 were 0.8 million.
This is in addition to the expect ed ban on riskfree box dealing profits 2017 3.1 million foll owing the FCAs Asset Management Market Study.
We will look to offset these impacts in profit terms by continuing to grow the business and build on the momentum the team has achieved.
Technology continues to be a significant entrant in our sector and I believe it will continue to play a disruptive role in the future if not wholly embraced.
Whilst we are committed to our highly personal approach to providing investment and advisory services we will continue to invest to capture the opportunities that these new technologies can offer to improv e our services and operational efficiency while increasing the capacity of our investment teams.
In 2017 we reorganised and upgraded the skills of our IT team which over the medium term will improve our data management capabilities enhance our client communications and introduce additional security measures to combat the evergrowing cyber threat.
We expect that this expansion of our IT capability together with more general cost inflation will add approximately 2.5 million to our running costs.
Outlook
This year has presented many challenges and opportunities and I fully expect 2018 to do so in equal measure.
Brexit continues to be a regular discussion topic wi thin the investment community but as a predom inantly UKbased firm our own view is largely focused on the wider economic environment and any impact it may have on the investments we make for our clients.
I would like to take this opportunity to praise the efforts of our employees in this eventful last year.
Notwithstanding the demands of our own change programme and a complicated market environment they have ke pt the needs of our clients at the forefront of what we do and concentrated on providing an exemplary service.
We enter 2018 in a good position with industryleading operating margins and a strong balance sheet.
We will continue to look for accretive acquisition opportunities and to invest in our future with discipline.
Strategic report Wider political and economic uncertainty remains as the UK economy begins the process of adjusting to a new relationship with the European Union.
Demographics are also shifting and firms must respond to the evolving needs of clients in order to remain competitive.
Increased regulatory pressures mean firms will need to invest to keep up with the pace of change and capture market share.
The need for advice is increasing given the complexities surrounding the UK economy tax requirements and regulatory changes The persistence of a lower interest rate environment continues to accentuate the need for investment An ageing population with increased life expectancy increases the need to save for retirement and finance lifestyles over a longer period of time Increasing demands on clients time encourages them towards a full service investment solution The trends for intergenerational wealth transfer property purchases and other uses of funds to support lifestyle continue unabated Demographic shifts will continue as millennials overtake baby boomers as the largest generation and bring evolving needs and requirements Wealth management firms are well positioned to benefit from greater pension freedoms as declining levels of government and company pension support will encourage individuals to save The weight of regulation is likely to create higher barriers to entry and lead to further industry consolidation More expenditure will be required to keep up with the pace of regulatory change Regulatory changes could place pressure on the time investment teams can devote to delivering key services The opportunities The challenges Stability in a changing market Increased regulatory pressures greater IT demands and the prospect of lower new wealth generation in the UK all mean firms will need to be at the forefront of innovation to capture market share.
Alongside these pressures the UK population is ageing while state and corporate sectors shift the burden of retirement on to individuals and families.
Favourable savings trends overall though twinned with everincreasing tax complexities will continue to drive further demand for wealth management services over the longer term placing Rathbones in a strong position to proactively respond to developments in the market and provide a quality service for clients.
Market review Regulatory change Macroeconomic conditions 16 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 Defining a sustainable service model and proposition that captures the market opportunity is critical Harnessing elements of technology to improve client communications and automate processes is essential to using investment manager time efficiently The industry will continue to face pricing pressures Increased IT expenditure will be required to adopt new technologies and remain competitive We aim to provide our clients with the highest quality of service to maintain our brand reputation and competitive positioning.
Principal risks Performance and advice see page 25 Processing see page 26 Regulatory see page 25 Reputational see page 25 Our aim is to build highquality revenues that support ongoing investment and provide a growing stream of dividend income for shareholders over each economic cycle.
Principal risks Performance and advice see page 25 Processing see page 26 Regulatory see page 25 Our ability to achieve growth and deliver a quality service is dependent on the ability of our people.
We are committed to rewarding our staff in line with business objectives and providing them with an interesting and stimulating career environment.
Principal risks Regulatory see page 25 Reputational see page 25 Quality service Page 18 Earnings growth Page 19 Employee value Page 20
Our strategy can be broken down into the three key objectives outlined below.
The industry continues to change with varying business models looking for technological advantages.
Keeping pace with this change is fundamental to sustaining a quality service.
Regulatory change Industry developments Each objective is considered carefully when setting executive remuneration targets and criteria.
For more information on how these strategic objectives feed into our executive incentive plan see page 87.
18 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 Quality service We aim to provide our clients with the highest quality of service to maintain our brand reputation and competitive positioning.
Key initiatives Ongoing development of our investment process to support investment team decisions and driv e positive portfolio outcomes Investment in technology to better evaluate client attitudes to risk improve communication and manage investment team capacity and efficiency Selectively add complementary service offerings that support the core investment service Progress in 2017 Embedded a new way of capturing and evaluating our clients attitude to investment risk Improved access to and availability of research team outputs Established a communication programme to engage clients potential clients and advisers comprising regular investment reports market commentaries and digital and social media content Began a technology upgrade programme which will improve data management capabilities and client communications and introduce additional security measures to combat the growing cyber threat over the medium term Improved infrastructure to support our internal financial planning teams and the Rathbone Private Office became fully operational Awarded Private Client Asset Manager of the Year by Citywealth in May and Investment Weeks Gold Standard Award for Discretionary Portfolio Management in November and received both the Citywealth and Charity Times awards for Charity Investment Manager of the Year in May and September respectively Priorities for 2018 Develop a client relationship management system and improve account opening processe s to ensure th at investment teams can continue to focus on serving clients well while meeting regulatory demands Invest in client support resources to capture opportunities to improve service and enhance the operational efficiency of investment teams Continue to attract highquality investment professionals to support and develop the investment process and proactively monitor the value of the external research we procure Quality service Total funds under management bn 22.0tel 2015 2014 bn Investment Management net organic growth rates %tel 2015 2014 Capital expenditure excluding property mtel 2015 2014 Number of Investment Management clients 000teltel site Earnings growth Our aim is to build highquality revenues that su pport our ongoing investment and provide a growing stream of dividend income for shareholders over each economic cycle.
Key initiatives Increasing feebased revenues to improve earnings quality Promoting ongoing cost discipli ne to preserve underlying operating margins and manage pension and property risks Selectively investing in initiatives that support organic and acquired growth Progress in 2017 Enhanced management information tools and realigned remuneration structures to improve support for commercial decisionmaking at investment team level in our private client business Generated net inflows of 261 million during 2017 from our now wellestablished specialist intermediary team with increased recognition in the sector confirme d in a May 2017 Defaqto report The Vision Independent Financial Planning adviser network expanded to 115 advisers from 99 a year earlier while funds under advice increased to 1.4 billion from 1.0 billion in 2016 Continued momentum in our Unit Trusts business which grew funds to a record 5.3 billion at 31 December 2017 Successfully closed defined benefit pension schemes Evaluated a number of acquisition opportunities Increased fee income to 76.0% of total underlying operating income up from 73.5 % a year earlier Priorities for 2018 Continue to invest in growth with discipline mindful of investment markets Support investment teams on a selective basis to ensure that they have the resources needed to grow Refresh mediumterm strategy such that the business can continue to benefit from the changing landscape of the industry Continue to strengthen engagement with financial advisers UK and international intermedia ries and Vision Independent Financial Planning Sublet 1 Curzon Street premises Earnings growth Dividend per share pteltel Underlying operating margin % 28.6tel 2015 2014 Underlying earnings per share p 86.7tel 2015 2014 Return on capital employed % 16.1tel 2015 2014 site Strategic report Our strategic objectives continued 20 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 Employee value Our ability to achieve growth and deliver a quality service is dependent on the ability of our people.
We are committed to rewarding our staff in line with business objectives and providing them with an interesting and stimulating career environment.
Key initiatives Continue to monitor succession and development plans for critical roles and functions Promote a collaborative working environment that supports personal and professional development of staff Ensure remuneration alignment with business objectives Progress in 2017 Reviewed senior management succession plans Implemented performancebased enhancements to investment manager remuneration schemes Completed a board review on cu lture and developed a culture risk dashboard with metrics for ongoing monitoring by the conduct risk committee Actively promoted both the graduate and apprenticeship schemes Increased average annual training investment per person to 783 2016 634 with particular focus on regulatory training and business development sessions Launched an online performance management tool to help better support both line managers and employees and improved the annual employee appraisal process to place more focus on feedback perfor mance career development and succession planning Conducted a comprehensive review of family leave policies leading to significant improvemen ts in maternity and paternity policies as well as additional support to employees in the form of group coaching for working parents Continued to increase employee participation in SIP and SAYE schemes with SIP participants increasing to 1089 employees from 1010 employees the number of outstanding SAYE share options increasing to 525891 from 507714 a year earlier and the number of employees with SIP partnership shares increasing from 844 to 946 Priorities for 2018 Closely monitor investment team capacity and provide support as required to manage necessary regulatory change Roll out a training programme covering diversity inclusion and unconscious bias to all managers across the firm following completion by the execut ive committee in 2017 Create opportunities for more employees to build a larger element of equity ownership
6tel Number of participants with SIP partnership sharesteltel 76tel Average full time equivalent employeesteltel Variable sta costs as a % of underlying pro t before tax and variable sta costs 35.6tel 2015 2014 Employee value 20 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 Risk management Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 21 During 2017 we have continued to evolve our risk management approach in support of our three lines of defence model.
Our risk governance risk processes and risk infrastructure have continued to mature to ensure our management of risk considers existing and emerging challenges.
In 2018 we will maintain our approach and ensure that appropriate risk management is applied across the group to protect our stakeholders.
Risk culture We believe that an appropriate risk culture enhances the effectiveness of risk management.
The board is responsible for setting the right tone and through our senior management team encouraging characteristics and behaviours which support a strong risk culture.
The considerat ion of risk is therefore accepted as being part of everyones daytoday responsibilities and activities.
Risk management is linked to performance and development as well as to the groups remuneration and reward schemes.
The purpose of this is to create an open and transparent working environment encouraging employees to engage positively in risk management and support the effective achievement of our strategic objectives.
Three lines of defence We continue to apply a three lines of defence model to support our risk management framework with responsibility and accountability for risk management broken down as follows First line Senior management and operational business units are responsible for managing risks by developing and maintaining effective internal controls to mitigate risk.
Second line The risk compliance and antimoney laundering functions maintain a level of independence from the first line.
They are responsible for providing oversight and challenge of the first lines daytoday management monitoring and reporting of risks to both senior management and governing bodies.
Third line The internal audit function is responsible for providing independent assurance to both senior management and governing bodies as to the effectiveness of the groups governance risk management and internal controls.
Risk appetite We define risk appetite as both the amount and type of risk the group is prepared to accept or retain in pursuit of our strategy.
Our appetite is subject to regular review to ensure it remains aligned to our strategic goals.
Our risk appetite framework contains some overarching parameters alongside specific primary and secondary measures for each principal risk.
At least annually the board executive committee and group risk committee will formally review and approve the groups risk appetite statement and assess whether the firm has operated in accordance with the stated risk appetite measures during the year.
Notwithstanding the continued expectations for business growth along with a strategic and regulatory change programme for 2018 the board remains committed to having a relatively low overall appetite for risk ensuring that our internal controls mitigate risk to appropriate levels.
The board recognises that the business is susceptible to fluctuations in investment markets and has the potential to bear losses from financial and operational risks from timetotime either as reductions in income or increases in operating costs.
Identification and profiling of principal risks Our risks are classified using a hierarchical approach.
The highest level Level 1 comprises financial conduct and operational risks.
The next level Level 2 contains 16 risk categories each allocated to a Level 1 risk.
Detailed risks Level 3 are then identified as subsets of Level 2 risks.
Level 3 risks ar e captured and maintained within our group risk register which is the principal tool for monitoring risks.
We recognise that some Level 2 and Level 3 risks have features which need to be considered under more than one Level 1 risk and this is facilitated in our framework thro ugh a system of primary and secondary co nsiderations.
Our risk classification is regularly reviewed and takes a structured approach to the identification of all known material risks to the business and those emerging risks which may im pact future performance.
Our risk exposures and overall risk profile are reviewed and monitored regularly considering the potential impact existing internal controls and management actions required to mitigate the impact of emerging issues and li kelihood of future events.
To ensure we identify and manage our principal risks reviews take place with risk owners senior management and business units across the group.
The risk function conducts these reviews and risk workshops regularly during the year.
Strategic report Risk management continued 22 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 A watch list is maintained to record any current emerging or future issues threats business developments and regulatory or legislative change which will or could have the potential to impact the firms current or future risk profile and therefore may require active risk management usually through process changes or systems development.
The groups risk profile risk register and watch list are regularly reviewed by the executive committee senior management board and group risk committee.
We assess risks using a 14 scorin g system.
Each Level 3 risk is rated by assessing the inherent likelihood of its occurrence in a fiveyear period and the associated impact.
A residual risk score and overall risk rating of high medium low or very low is then derived for the fiveyear period by taking into account an assessment of the internal cont rol environment or insurance mitigation.
The assessment of our control environment carried out by senior management within the firm includes contributions from first second and third line data monitoring andor assurance activity.
Risk assessment process The board and senior management are actively involved in a continuous risk assessment process as part of our risk management framework supported by the annual Internal Capital Adequacy Assessment Process ICAAP and Internal Liquidity Adequacy Assessment Process I LAAP work which assesses the principal risks facing the group.
Stress tests include consideration of the impact of a number of severe but plausible events that could impact the business.
The work also takes account of the availability and likely effectiveness of mitigating actions that could be taken to avoid or reduce the impact or occurrence of the underlying risks.
Daytoday our risk assessment pr ocess considers both the impact and likelihood of risk events which could materialise affecting the delivery of strategic goals and annual business plans.
A topdown and bottomup approach ensures th at our assessment of key risks is challenged and reviewed on a regular basis.
The board and executive committee receive regular reports and information from senior management operational business units risk oversight functions and specific risk committees.
The executive committee group risk committee and other key riskfocused committees consider the risk assessments and provide challenge which is reported through the governance framework and ultimately considered by the board.
Profile and mitigation of principal risks As explained above our risks are classified hierarchically in a threelevel model.
There are three Level 1 risks 16 Level 2 risks and at Level 3 there are 44 risks all of which form the basis of the groups risk register.
Our approach to managing risk continues to be underpinned by an understanding of our current risk exposures and consideration of how risks change over time.
The underlying risk profile and ratings for the majority of Level 2 risks have remained consistent during 2017.
However there have been some changes to risk ratings and the following table summarises the most important of these.
Based upon the risk assessment processes identified above the board believes that the principal risks and uncertainties facing the group have been identified.
These reflect the impact of strategic and regulatory change in the year including for example MiFID II Markets in Financial Instruments Directive and the General Data Protection Regulation GDPR.
The board remains vigilant to the risks associated with the pension schemes deficit and the subletting of vacant office space in London.
Otherwise
22 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 23 Our overall risk profile and control environment are described below.
The board receives assurance from first line senior management that the systems of internal control are operating effectively and from the activities of the second line and third line that there are no material control issues which would affect the boards view of its principal risks and uncertainties.
In line with current guidance we also include in the tables the potential impacts I the firm might face and our assessment of the likelihood L of each principal risk crystallising in the event it materialises.
These assessments take into account the controls in place to mitigate the risks.
However as is always the case should a risk materialise a range of outcomes both in scale and type might be experienced.
This is particularly relevant for firms such as Rathbones where the outcome of a risk event can be influenced by market conditions as well as internal control factors.
We have used ratings of high medium and low in this risk assessment.
We perceive as highrisk items those which have the potential to impact the delivery of strategic objectives with medium and lowrated items having proportionately less impact on the firm.
Likelihood is similarly based on a qualitative assessment.
Emerging risks and threats Emerging risks including legislative and regulatory change have the potential to impact the group and its strategy.
These risk factors are monitored through our watch list.
During the year the executive committee continued to recognise a number of emerging risks and threats to the financial services sector as a whole and to our business.
We also recognise that the risk profile associated with outsourced activities can change over time and this will be an area of continued focus in 2018.
In addition to the groups view that we can reasonably expect current market conditions and uncertainties to remain throughout 2018 other developing risks include for example cyber threats regulatory change and scenar ios potentially arising from geopolitical developments including Brexit.
We are monitoring the potential consequences of Brexit very closely.
Our current assessment is that the direct impacts of Brexit are manageable given our larg ely UK based business model.
However we are conscious that the position might change and could raise unexpected challenges and also that second order effects might have broader impacts on the UK economy as a whole.
Ref Risk Description of change Risk change in 2017 D Pension The schemes valuation and funding deficit decreased materially due to the closure of the schemes during the year with a significant number of members transferring benefits out of the schemes.
However this still remains an important risk for the firm to manage.
F Performance and advice Our forwardlooking risk assessment increased during the year largely reflecting regulatory drivers.
In addition to changes delivered in 20 17 we plan to improve our processes further in 2018 including how we take on clients an d our approach to a ssessing suitability.
G Regulatory Our risk assessment recognises the extent of regulatory change implemented in 2017 which continues into 2018 including for exam ple MiFID II optimisation and GDPR.
K Data Integrity and security We have increased our risk rating in this ar ea based on our assessment of the increasing external threat profile despite continuing investment in technology improvements.
O People Although still regarded as a medium risk ou r forwardlooking risk assessment increased during the year reflecting in dustrywide trends.
We also recognise the importance of addressing the drivers behind our gender pay gap over the coming years.
Strategic report Risk management continued 24 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 Financial risks Residual rating Ref Level 2 risk I L How the risk arises Control environment A Credit The risk that one or more counterparties fail to fulfil contractual obligations including stock settlement Low Low This risk can arise from placing funds with other banks and holding interestbearing securities.
There is also a limited level of lending to clients Banking committee oversight Counterparty limits and credit reviews Treasury policy and procedures Active monitoring of exposures Client loan policy and procedures Annual ICAAP B Liquidity The risk of having insufficient financial resources to meet obligations as they fall due or that to secure access to such resources would be at an excessive cost Low Low This risk can arise through day today operations in so far as a significant proportion of client funds could be withdrawn in a short time period and marketable assets may not be realised in time and at the value required Banking committee oversight Daily treasury procedures reconciliations and reporting to senior management Cash flow forecasting Contingency funding plan Annual ILAAP including stress testing C Market The risk that regulatory own funds will be adversely affected by changes in the level or volatility of interest rates foreign currency exchange rates or market prices Low Low This risk can arise through two primary areas the exposure to mismatch between repricing of the firms own financial assets and liabilities and to a lesser extent transactional foreign exchange risk Banking committee oversight Documented policies and procedures Daily monitoring of interest rates exchange rates maturity mismatch and extent of marketable assets Robust application of policy and investment limits D Pension The risk that the cost of funding our defined benefit pension schemes increases or their valuation affects dividends reserves and capital High High This risk can arise through a sustained deficit between the schemes assets and liabilities.
A number of factors impact a deficit including increased life expectancy falling interest rates and falling equity prices Board senior management and trustee oversight Monthly valuation estimates Triennial independent actuarial valuations Investment policy Senior management review and defined management actions Annual ICAAP Further detailed discussion of the groups exposures to financial risks is included in note 31 to the financial statements.
24 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 25 Conduct risks Residual rating Ref Level 2 risk I L How the risk arises Control environment E Business model The risk that the business model does not respond in an optimal manner to changing market conditions such that sustainable growth market share or profitability is adversely affected Med Med This risk can arise from strategic decisions which fail to consider the current operating environment or can be influenced by external factors such as material changes in regulation or legislation within the financial services sector Board and executive oversight A documented strategy Annual business targets subject to regular review and challenge Regular reviews of pricing structure Continued investment in the investment process service standards and marketing Trade body participation Regular competitor benchmarking and analysis F Performance and advice The risk that clients receive inappropriate financial trust or investment advice inadequate documentation or unsuitable portfolios resulting in a failure to meet clients investment andor other objectives or expectations Med Med This risk can arise through a failure to appropriately understand the wealth management needs of our clients and a failure to apply suitable advice or investment strategies along with having inadequate tools and systems in place to support our client facing financial professionals Investment governance and structured committee oversight Management oversight and segregated quality assurance and performance teams Performance measurement and attribution analysis Know your client KYC suitability processes Weekly investment management meetings Investment manager reviews through supervisor sampling Compliance monitoring G Regulatory The risk of failure by the group or a subsidiary to fulfil regulatory requirements and comply with the introduction of new or changes to existing regulation High Med This risk can arise from failures by the business to comply with existing regulation or failure to identify and react to regulatory change Board and executive oversight Active involvement with industry bodies Compliance monitoring programme to examine the control of key regulatory risks Separate antimoney laundering role with specific responsibility Oversight of industry and regulatory developments Documented policies and procedures Staff training and development H Reputational The risk of reputational damage from financial and nonfinancial events or from failing to meet stakeholders expectations Med Low This risk can arise due to a variety of reasons primarily within Rathbones.
These could include the conduct of the company or its employees or the service or products provided to clients Staff training and development Board and executive oversight Strong corporate values and approach to governance Positive culture regarding risk and regulation supported by appropriate remuneration practices Appropriate emphasis on the control environment through the three lines of defence Proactive and positive communications with key stakeholders Crisis response plan site Strategic report Risk management continued 26 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 Operational risks Residual rating Ref Level 2 risk I L How the risk arises Control environment I Business change The risk that the planning or implementation of change is ineffective or fails to deliver desired outcomes the impact of which may lead to unmitigated financial exposures Med Low This risk can arise if the business is too aggressive and unstructured in its change programme to manage project risks resource capacity and capabilities to deliver business benefits.
The firm also recognises the risks associated with its office move in London which will lead to the sub letting of some premises Executive and board oversight of material change programmes Group project programme board Dedicated project office function use of internal and where required external subject matter experts Documented business plans and IT strategy Twostage assessment challenge and approval of project plans Documented project and change procedures Active marketing of vacant space J Business continuity The risk that an internal or external event results in either failure of or detriment to core business processes or services Med Low This risk can arise from the business failing to effectively control and administer its core operating systems manage current and future resource requirements or maintain appropriate security of its infrastructure Group business continuity committee oversight Documented crisisincident management and disaster recovery plans Regular disaster recovery testing Continuous monitoring of IT systems availability Offsite data centre K Data integrity and securit y The risk of a lack of integrity of inappropriate access to or disclosure of client or companysensitive information Med Med This risk can arise from the firm failing to maintain and keep secure at all times sensitive and confidential data through its operating infrastructure including the activities of employees and cyber threats Data security committee oversight Data protection policy and procedures System access controls and encryption Penetration testing and multilayer network security Training and employee awareness programmes Physical security L Fraud The risk of fraudulent action either internal or external being taken against the group or a subsidiary Med Low This risk can arise from failures to implement appropriate management controls to detect or mitigate impropriety either within or external to the business and services provided Executive oversight Documented policies and procedures Segregation of duties between front and back office System authority and payment limits System access controls Training and employee awareness programmes M Legal The risk of legal action being taken against the group or a subsidiary or failure to comply with legislative requirements resulting in financial loss and reputational damage Med Low This risk can arise from inappropriate behaviour of individuals or from the inadequate drafting of the firms contractual documentation Executive oversight Retained specialist legal advisers Routine control of risks which might lead to litigation if adverse outcomes are experienced by clients or other third parties Documented policies and procedures Training and employee awareness programmes 26 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 27 Residual rating Ref Level 2 risk I L How the risk arises Control environment N Outsourcing The risk of one or more third parties failing to provide or perform outsourced services to standards expected by the group impacting the ability to deliver core services Med Low This risk can arise due to significant unknown operational changes at key outsourced relationships or a material change to their business model which affects their ability to provide the required services for Rathbones Executive oversight Supplier due diligence and regular financial reviews Active relationship management including regular service review meetings Service level agreements and monitoring of key performance indicators Compliance monitoring over regulated activities O People The risk of loss of key staff lack of skilled resources and inappropriate behaviour or actions.
This could lead to lack of capacity or capability threatening the delivery of business objectives or behaviour leading to complaints regulatory action or litigation Med Med This risk can arise across all areas of the business as a result of resource management failures or from external factors such as increased competition or material changes in regulation Executive oversight Succession and contingency planning Transparent consistent and competitive remuneration schemes Contractual clauses with restrictive covenants Continual investment in staff training and development Employee engagement survey Appropriate balanced performance measurement system P Processing The risk that the design or execution of clientfinancialsettlement transaction processes including dealing activity are inadequate or fail to deliver an appropriate level of service and protection to client or company assets Low Med This risk can arise from the failure of management to implement and control operational processes and systems to support the volumes of transactions processed on a daily basis Authorisation limits and management oversight Dealing limits and supporting system controls Active investment in automated processes Counterreviewfoureyes processes Segregation of duties Documented procedures Annual controls assessment ISAE3402 reportsite Strategic report Risk management continued Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 28 Assessment of the companys prospects The board prepares or reviews its strategic plan annually completing the ICAAP and ILAAP work which form the basis for capital planning and regular discussion with the Prudential Regulation Authority PRA.
During the year the board has considered a number of stress tests and scenarios which focus on mate rial or severe but plausible events that could impact the business and companys financial position.
The board al so considers the plans and procedures in place in the event that contingency funding is required to replenish regulatory capital.
On a monthly basis critical capital projections and sensitivities have been refreshed and reviewed taking into account current or expected market movements and business developments.
The boards assessment considers all the principal risks identified by the group and assesses the suff iciency of our response to all Pillar 1 risks credit market and operational risks to the required regulatory standards.
In addition the following risks were focused on for enhanced stress testing equity market risk interest rate risk a loss of businesscomp etition risk business expansion risk and pension obligation risk.
The group considers the possible impacts of serious business interruption as part of its operational risk assessment process and remains mindful of the importance of maintaining its reputation.
Although the business is almost wholly UKsituated it does not suffer from any material client geographical or counterparty concentrations.
Whilst this review does not consider all of the risks that the group may face the directors consider that this stress testingbased assessment of the groups pros pects is reasonable in the circumstances of the inherent uncertainty involved.
Viability statement In accordance with the UK Corporate Governance Code the board has assessed the prospects and viability of the group over a three year period taking into account the risk assessments which are based upon a fiveyear period as detailed above.
The directors have taken into account the firms current position and the potential impact of the principal risks and uncertainties set out above.
As part of the viability statement the directors confirm that they have carried out a robust assessment of both the principal risks facing the group and stre ss tests and scenarios that would threaten the sustainability of its business model future performance solvency or liquidity.
The board considers fiveyear projections as part of its annual regulatory reporting cycle which includes strategic and investment plans and its opinio n of the likelihood of risks materialising.
However given the uncertainties associated with predicting the future impact of investment markets on the business over this longer period the directors have determined that a threeyear period to 31 December 2020 continues to constitute an appropriate period ov er which to provide its viability statement.
This is more closely aligned to its detailed capital planning activity.
Stress testing analysis shows that under scenarios such as a 45% fall in FTSE 100 levels or a 0% interest rate environment the group would remain profitable and is able to withstand the impact of such scenarios.
An example of a mitigating action in such scenarios would be a reduction in dividend.
Based on this assessment the directors confirm that they have a reasonable expectation that the co mpany will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the period to 31 December 2020.
Strategic report Financial performance 30 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 Paul Stockton Finance Director Table 1.
Groups overall performance unless stated unless stated Underlying operating income 286.0 251.3 Underlying operating expenses 198.5 176.4 Underlying profit before tax Underlying operating margin 30.6% 29.8% Profit before tax 58.9 50.1 Effective tax rate 20.5% 23.8% Taxation 12.1 11.9 Profit after tax 46.8 38.2 Underlying earnings per share 138.8p 122.1p Earnings per share 92.7p 78.9p Dividend per share Return on capital employed 19.5% 19.3% A reconciliation between underlying profit before tax and profit before tax is shown in table 2 Underlying profit before tax as a % of underlying operating income The total interim and final dividend proposed for the financial year Underlying profit after tax note 13 as a % of average equity at each quarter end Underlying operating income Underlying operating income grew 13.8% in 2017 driven by higher investment markets and continued organic and acquired growth in all business areas.
Fee income of 217.5 million in 2017 increased 17.7% compared to 184.8 million in 2016 reflecting positive markets and growth in organic and acquired new business over the period.
Fee income represented 76.0% of total underlying operating income in the year ended 31 December 2017 2016 73.5% as our fee only tariff becomes more widely adopted helping to support our move to higher quality feebased income.
Net commission income of 38.7 million was broadly consistent with 2016 as the impact of higher trading volumes was offset by the greater number of accounts now operating on a fee only tariff.
Net interest income was unchange d at 11.6 million as higher liquidity offset the impact of a lo wer interest rate environment for much of 2017.
A full reconciliation between underlying operating income and reported operating income is provided on page 128.
Underlying operating expenses Underlying operating expenses increased by 12.5% largely due to continuing investment in strategic initiatives and underlying growth in the business.
In line with our strategy planned additions to headcount increased fixed staff costs by 10.0 % to 87.8 million with average headcount up 7.6% to 1147.
Total variable staff costs increased by 18.4% to 53.3 million principally driven by growth in profits and funds under management as well as the introduction of additional performancebased incentives for investment managers during the year.
Variable staff costs in 2017 represented 18.6% of underlying operating income 2016 17.9% and 37.9% of underlying profit before variable staff costs and tax 2016 37.5%.
Underlying operating expenses also included 5.1 million 2016 4.0 million for awards payable to new investment managers for the introduction of new clients where those managers have been in situ for more than 12 months see note 2.1 to the financial statements.
The adoption of IFRS 15 in 2018 requires us to change the accounting policy for these awards which will result in more of these costs being capitalised and amortised over the life of the client relationship.
The adoption of IFRS 9 is not expected to have a material impact on our financial performance.
Further details can be found in note 1.3.
Outlook
Profitability
Staff costs in 2018 will reflect the full year impact of hiring activity in 2017 in addition to salary inflation of around 3.5%.
During 2018 we plan to continue the IT change programme started in 2017.
This is expected to add approximately 2.5 million to our cost base in 2018.
We also plan to expand the footprint of our financial planning service across more regional offices which is expected to add up to 1.5 million to the cost base of this business net of growth in associated revenues.
In addition from 2018 the Unit Trusts business will no longer charge research costs to the funds and it is expected that managers box dealing profits will no longer be retained.
In 2017 research costs of 0.8 million were incurred by the funds and managers box dealing profits totalled 3.1 million.
Capital expenditure Overall capital expenditure of 11.3 million in 2017 was down 3.8 million compared to 2016 a fall of 25.2%.
As planned expenditure on software increased by 4.2 million as we upgraded our client relationship management systems and embarked on an IT change programme.
These activi ties are expected to continue into 2018 with a similar level of capital expenditure.
Premises related capital expenditure fell by 7.8 million primarily due to the fit out of our new London Head Office which was largely completed in 2016.
Group underlying profit before taxoperating margin Underlying profit before tax and earnings per share are considered by the board to be a better reflection of true business performance than looking at our results on a statutory basis only.
These measures are widely used by re search analysts covering the group.
Underlying results exclude income and expenditure falling into the four cate gories explained below.
Underlying profit before tax grew by 16.8% to 87.5 million in 2017.
The underlying operating margin which is calculated as the ratio of underlying profit before tax to underlying operating income was 30.6% for the year in line with our target of 30% over the cycle 2016 29.8%.
Profit before tax increased by 17.6% to 58.9 million for the year.
Table 2.
Reconciliation of underlying profit before tax to profit before tax Underlying profit before tax 87.5 74.9 Gain on plan amendment of defined benefit pension schemes 5.5 Charges in relation to client relationships and goodwill 11.7 11.8 Acquisitionrelated costs 6.2 6.0 Head office relocation costs 16.2 7.0 Profit before tax 58.9 50.1 Gain on plan amendment of defined benefit pension schemes note 27 With effect from 30 June 2017 we closed the defined benefit pension schemes ceasing all future accrual and breaking the link to salaries.
These changes resulted in a plan amendment gain of 5.5 million which was recognised in operating income.
This gain is a significant oneoff item which does not relate to the trading performance of the business and it has therefore been excluded from underlying results.
Charges in relation to client relationships and goodwill note 21 As explained in notes 1.14 and 2.1 client relationship intangible assets are created when we acquire a business or a team of investment managers.
The charges associated with these assets represent a significant noncash item and they have therefore been excluded from un derlying profit which represents largely cashbased earnings more directly relating to the reporting period.
Charges for amortisation of client relationship intangibles in the year ended 31 December 2017 were 11.7 million 2016 11.8 million reflecting historic acquisitions.
Strategic report Financial performance continued 32 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 Acquisitionrelated costs note 8 Acquisitionrelated costs are significant costs which arise from strategic investments to grow the business.
They primarily relate to corporate actions rather than trading performance and are therefore excluded from underlying results.
As announced on 31 August 2017 we incurred professional services costs of 4.9 million in relation to the me rger discussions with Smith and Williamson.
Costs of 1.3 million 2016 6.0 million were incurred in relation to the acquisitions of Vision Independent Financial Planning and Castle Investment Solutions which were completed on 31 December 2015.
These amounts include the cost of payments to vendors of the business who remain in employment with the group as required by accounting standards.
Further costs totalling 3.6 million will be charged to the income statement on a straight line basis over the deferral period ending in 2019.
Head office relocation costs note 9 During February 2017 we moved our London head office to the new premises following a ninemonth fitout period.
Charges incurred in relation to the double running of both London premises and the relocation amounted to 16.2 million in 2017 2016 7.0 million.
As described in note 25 following the vacation of 1 Curzon Street a provision has been recognised for the discounted value of the cost of the surplus property until the en d of the existing lease net of any expected rental income from su bletting the space.
As a result net charges totalling 14.1 million were recognised in the income statement during 2017 in relation to the onerous lease provision.
Charges of 2.1 million were also incurred during the year for professional fees accelerated de preciation and double running costs 2016 7.0 million.
These costs represent an investment to expand our operating capacity in a key location and are not expected to recur in the short to medium term they have therefore been excluded from underlying results.
Taxation
The corporation tax charge for 2017 was 12.1 million 2016 11.9 million and represents an effective tax rate of 20.5% 2016 23.8%.
A full reconciliation of the income tax expense is provided in note 11 to the financial statements.
The Finance Bill 2016 which included provisions for the UK corporation tax rate to be reduced to 17% in April 2020 from 19% in April 2017 gained royal assent in September 2016.
Deferred tax balances have therefore been calculated based on these reduced rates where timing differ ences are forecast to unwind in future years.
Basic earnings per share Basic earnings per share for the year ended 31 December 2017 were 92.7p compared to 78.9p in 2016.
This reflects the full impact of nonunderlying income and charges and the issue of 0.6 million shares to satisfy sharebased remu neration scheme awards.
On an underlying basis earnings per share increased by 13.7% to 138.8p in 2017 see note 13 to the financial statements.
Dividends
We operate a generally progressive dividend policy as set out in the directors report on page 104.
In determining the level of any proposed dividend the board has regard to current and forecast financial performance.
Any proposal to pay a dividend is subject to compliance with the Companies Act which requires that the company must have sufficient distributable reserves from which to pay the dividend.
The companys distributable reserves are primarily dependent on compliance with regulatory capital requirements for the minimum level of own funds the level of profits earned by the company including distributions received from trading subsidiari es some of which are subject to minimum regulatory capital requirements themselves actuarial changes in the value of the pension schemes that are recognised in the companys other comprehensive income net of deferred tax.
At 31 December 2017 the companys distributable reserves were 63.9 million 2016 42.8 million.
In light of the results for the year the board has proposed a final dividend for 2017 of 39.0p.
This results in a full year dividend of 61.0p an increase of 4.0p on 2016 7.0%.
The proposed full year dividend is covered 1.5 times by basic earnings and 2.3 times by underlying earnings.
Return on capital employed The board monitors the return on capital employed ROCE as a key performance measure which fo rms part of the assessment of managements performance for remuneration purposes as described in the remuneration report on page 80.
For monitoring purposes ROCE is defined as unde rlying profit after tax expressed as a percentage of quarterly average total equity across the year.
Consideration of the return on capital is a key consideration in all investment decisions particularly in relation to acquired growth.
In 2017 ROCE was 19.5% 2016 19.3%.
The group is managed through two key operating segments Investment Management and Unit Trusts.
Investment Management The activities of the group are described in detail on pages 2 to 9.
The Investment Management segment comprises those activities described under the headings Investment Management and Complementary services on pages 2 to 3.
The financial performance of Investment Management is largely driven by revenue margins earned from funds under management.
Revenue margins are expressed as a basis point return which depends on a mix of tiered fee rates commissions charged for transactions undertaken on behalf of clients and the interest margin earned on cash in client portfolios and client loans.
Yearonyear changes in the key performance indicators for Investment Management are shown in table 3.
Table 3.
Investment Management  key performance indicators 2017 2016 Funds under management at 31 December 33.8bn 30.2bn Underlying rate of net organic growth in Investment Management funds under management 3.0% 2.9% Underlying rate of total net growth in Investment Management funds under management 3.9% 4.5% Average net operating basis point return 72.7 bps 74.2 bps Number of Investment Management clients 50000 48000 Number of investment managers 277 273 See table 4 See table 7 During 2017 Investment Management has continued to attract new clients both organically and through acquisitions.
The total number of clients or groups of closely related clients increased from 48000 in 2016 to approximately 50000 during the year.
During 2017 the total number of investment managers increased to 277 at 31 December 2017 from 273 at the end of 2016.
Chart 1.
Investment Management  number of clients and investment managers Investment Management clients 000 Investment managers 000site Strategic report Segmental review continued 34 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 Funds under management Investment Management funds under management increased by 11.9% to 33.8 billion at 31 December 2017 from 30.2 billion at the start of the year.
This increase is analysed in table 4.
Table 4.
Investment Management  funds under management bn bn As at 1 January 30.2 26.1 Inflows 3.4 2.7 organic acquired
Market adjustment As at 31 December 33.8 30.2 Net organic new business Underlying rate of net organic growth 3.0% 2.9% Underlying rate of total net growth 3.9% 4.5% Value at the date of transfer inout Value at 31 December Represents the impact of market movements and investment performance Organic inflows less outflows Net organic new business as a % of opening funds under management Net organic new business and acquired inflows as a % of opening funds under management Net organic growth in our Investment Management business was 3.0% 2016 2.9%.
This was below the 5% target we have set for ourselves in large part due to an investment climate that was largely directionless until the end of the year.
We saw outflows of approximately 7% of funds under management as clients continued to transfer wealth to younger generations purchase property and use capital to support income during the year.
Charity funds under management continued to grow strongly and reached 4.7 billion at 31 December 2017 up 14.6% from 4.1 billion at the start of the year.
We also retained our strategic focus on intermediaries during the year.
Funds under management in accounts linked to independent financial advisers and provider panel relationships increased by 1.0 billion during 2017 ending the year at 7.7 billion.
Chart 2.
Investment Management  funds under management five year growth In total net organic and acquired growth added 1.2 billion to Investment Management funds under management in 2017 2016 1.2 billion representing an underlying rate of total net growth of 3.9% 2016 4.5%.
As at 31 December 2017 Vision Independent Financial Planning advised on client assets of 1.4 billion up 35.9% from 2016.
Average investment returns across all Investment Management clients were positive and outper formed the MSCI WMA Balanced Index by 1.8%.
This outperformance was generated across both UK and overseas equities as the global markets rallied on US President Trumps potential fiscal stimulus stronger European economic data and the dollar trending lower throughout the year.
Our overweight position in UK equities generated the greatest outperformance for 2017.
Overall performance against other competitor indices such as the Private Client Indices published by ARC was robust.
Funds under management bn bn FTSE 100 Index MSCI WMA Balanced Index Index gures show how funds under management would have changed between 2013 and 2017 if they had tracked each index ite Financial performance Table 5.
Investment Management  financial performance Net Investment Management fee income Net commission income 38.7 38.9 Net interest income Fees from advisory services and other income 14.8 12.5 Underlying operating income 254.6 226.3 Underlying operating expenses Underlying profit before tax 76.8 66.2 Underlying operating margin 30.2% 29.3% Net Investment Management fee income is stated after deducting fees and commission expenses paid to introducers Presented net of interest expense paid on client accounts excludes interest on own reserves and interest payable on Tier 2 loan notes issued Fees from advisory services includes income from trust tax and financial planning services including Vision See table 8 Underlying profit before tax as a percentage of underlying operating income Net Investment Management fee income increased by 16.0% to 189.5 million in 2017 benefiting from positive markets as well as organic and acquired growth in funds under management.
Fees are applied to the value of funds on quarterly charging dates.
Average funds under management on these billing dates in 2017 were 32.4 billion up 14.9% from 2016 see table 6.
Table 6.
Investment Management  average funds under management bn bn Valuation dates for billing 5 April 31.5 26.1 30 September 32.5 29.3 31 December 33.8 30.2 Average 32.4 28.2 Average FTSE 100 level 7426 6659 Based on the corresponding valuation dates for billing In 2017 net commission income of 38.7 million was broadly consistent with 2016.
Higher trading volumes offset the impact of the greater number of accounts operating on a fee only tariff.
Net interest income of 11.6 mi llion in the year was unchanged from 2016.
The impact of lower base rates during much of 2017 was offset by a higher balance of cash in client portfolios over the course of the year.
Cash held at the Bank of England grew from 1.1 billion at 31 December 2016 to 1.4 billion at the end of 2017.
The Investment Management loan book grew to 120.5 million by the end of the year and contributed 3.1 million to net interest income in 2017 2016 3.0 million.
Also included in net interest income is 1.3 million 2016 1.3 million of interest payable on the Tier 2 notes which are callable in August 2020.
As shown in table 7 the average net operating basis point return on funds under management has fallen by 1.5 bps to 72.7 bps in 2017.
This largely reflects the changes in business mix and the fee tiering impact of higher market levels.
Table 7.
Investment Management  revenue margin bps bps Basis point return from fee income 58.4 57.9 commission 11.9 13.8 interest 2.4 2.5 Basis point return on funds under management 72.7 74.2 Underlying operating income see table 5 excluding interest on own reserves interest payable on Tier 2 notes issued fees from advisory services and other income divided by the average funds under management on the quarterly billing dates see table 6 Fees from advisory services an d other income increased 18.4% to 14.8 million.
This largely reflects a higher level of advisory fees earned by Vision following a slower period of activity last year as the business completed a comprehensive file review exercise and growth in inhouse financial planning revenues.
Underlying operating expenses in Investment Management for 2017 were 177.8 million compared to 160.1 million in 2016 an increase of 11.1%.
This is highlighted in table 8.
Table 8.
Investment Management  underlying operating expenses Staff costs fixed 59.5 57.6 variable 40.2 32.4 Total staff costs 99.7 90.0 Other operating expenses 78.1 70.1 Underlying operating expenses 177.8 160.1 Underlying costincome ratio 69.8% 70.7% Represents the costs of investment managers and teams directly involved in clientfacing activities Underlying operating expenses as a % of underlying operating income see table 5 Fixed staff costs of 59.5 million increased by 3.3% yearonyear principally reflecting a 5.9% increase in average headcount and salary inflation.
As results improved variable staf f costs also increased by 24.1% reflecting both the higher profitability in the period and an improved investment performance element for growth awards.
Other operating expenses of 78.1 million include property depreciation settlement IT finance and other central support services costs.
The yeartoyear increase of 8.0 million 11.4% reflects increased investment in the business recruitment and higher variable awards in support departments in line with overall business performance.
Strategic report Segmental review continued 36 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 Unit Trusts Rathbone Income Fund 1433 1366 Rathbone Global Opportunities Fund 1168 924 Rathbone Ethical Bond Fund 1100 579 Rathbone Active Income Fund for Charities 173 116 Rathbone Global Alpha Fund 127 120 Rathbone Strategic Bond Fund 108 62 Rathbone Blue Chip Income and Growth Fund 78 71 Rathbone UK Opportunities Fund 61 78 Rathbone Multi Asset Portfolios 736 447 Other funds 383 291 5367 4054 Unit Trusts financial performance is principally driven by the value and growth of funds under management.
Yearonyear changes in the key performance indicators for Unit Trusts are shown in table 9.
Table 9.
Unit Trusts  key performance indicators 2017 2016 Funds under management at 31 December 5.3bn 4.0bn Underlying rate of net growth in Unit Trusts funds under management 21.8% 18.0% Underlying profit before tax See table 10 See table 12 Funds under management Net retail sales in the asset management industry of approximately 47 billion were up around 40 billion on 2016 as reported by the Investment Association IA.
The IA pointed specifically to substantial growth of inflows into ethical funds with sustainable investment becomi ng an increasing priority for todays investors.
The industry funds under management total reached a record 1.2 trillion by the end of the year up around 15% on the total at the end of 2016.
In total the IA sectors in which we manage funds saw net inflows of 11.9 billion compared to net outflows of 6.1 billion in 2016.
Gross sales in those sectors were up 31.7% at 99.8 billion in 2017.
In line with these trends positive momentum in sales of our funds continued through 2017 with gross sales up 30.8% in the year to 1.7 billion.
Redemptions also re mained elevated in 2017 at 0.9 billion 2016 0.7 billion reflecting the increased levels of disinvestment seen across the industry.
This level of net sales put us in the top 20 fund managers for 2017 according to the Pridham Report.
Net inflows of 0.9 billion 2016 0.6 billion continued to be spread across the range of funds although the Ethical Bond Fund saw particularly strong net flows in the year nearly doubling in size to 1.1 billion by the end of the year.
As a result Unit Trusts funds under management closed the year up 32.5% at 5.3 billion see table 10.
At 31 December 2017 we managed 428 million via the Luxembourgbased feeder funds up 95.4% from 219 million at the end of 2016.
Table 10.
Unit Trusts  funds under management bn bn As at 1 January 4.0 3.1 Net inflows 0.9 0.6 inflows outflows Market adjustments As at 31 December Underlying rate of net growth 21.8% 18.0% Valued at the date of transfer inout Impact of market movements and relative performance Net inflows as a % of opening funds under management Chart 3.
Unit Trusts  annual net flows During the year the retail and multi asset funds delivered strong positive returns and a solid perf ormance against their relevant benchmarks.
The Global Opportunities Fund benefited from a high exposure to US equities and a substantial weighting to technology stocks.
Both fixed in come funds delivered excellent returns and effectively managed volatility with the Ethical Bond Fund recording the best return of any fund in its sector.
The UK Opportunities Funds exposure to mid and smallcap names contributed to a top quartile performance.
Annual net ows m tel400 1site Whilst the Income and Blue Chip Funds generated positive returns over the year both underperformed compared to other funds in the UK equity income sector due to the more defensive positioning of the portfolios and a small number of stockspecific issues.
The multi asset range of funds outperformed their risk adjusted benchmarks and added value through their increased exposure to direct equities.
Table 11.
Unit Trusts  performance 2017 Quartile ranking over 1 year 3 years 5 years Rathbone Blue Chip Income and Growth Fund 4 3 4 2 4 2 Rathbone Ethical Bond Fund 1 4 1 2 1 1 Rathbone Global Opportunities Fund 1 4 1 2 1 1 Rathbone Income Fund 4 3 3 1 3 2 Rathbone UK Opportunities Fund 1 3 1 3 2 2 Rathbone Strategic Bond Fund 2 2 2 2 2 3 Quartile ranking data is sourced from FE Trustnet Excludes multi asset funds for which quartile rankings are prohibited by the IA nonpublicly marketed funds and segregated mandates.
Funds included in the above table account for 74% of the total funds under management of the Unit Trusts business Ranking of institutional share classes at 31 December 2017 and 2016 against other funds in the same IA sector based on total return performance net of fees consistent with investment performance information reported in the funds monthly factsheets As at 31 December 2017 88% of holdings in Unit Trusts retail funds were in institutional units 31 December 2016 85%.
During 2017 the total number of investment professionals in Unit Trusts decreased to 13 at 31 December 2017 from 14 at the end of 2016.
Financial performance Unit Trusts income is primarily derived from annual management charges which are calculated on the daily value of funds under management net of rebates and trail commission payable to intermediaries net dealing profits which are earned on the bidoffer spread from sales and redemptions of units and market movements on the stock of units that are held on our books overnight.
Net annual management charges increased 30.2% to 28.0 million in 2017 driven principally by the rise in average funds under management.
Net annual management charges as a percentage of average funds under management fell to 60 bps 2016 62 bps reflecting the strong growth in the Ethical Bond Fund which levies a lower rate of annual management charges.
Table 12.
Unit Trusts  financial performance Net annual management charges 28.0 21.5 Net dealing profits 3.1 3.1 Interest and other income 0.3 0.4 Underlying operating income 31.4 25.0 Underlying operating expenses Underlying profit before tax 10.7 8.7 Underlying operating margin 34.1% 34.8% See table 13 Underlying profit before tax divided by underlying operating income Net dealing profits of 3.1 million were unchanged compared with the previous year.
We continue to expect that these revenues will be lost when the FCA publishes its final guidance following the Asset Management Market Study.
Underlying operating income as a percentage of average funds under management fell to 67 bps in 2017 from 72 bps in 2016.
Table 13.
Unit Trusts  underlying operating expenses Staff costs fixed 3.0 3.0 variable 7.2 5.3 Total staff costs 10.2 8.3 Other operating expenses 10.5 8.0 Underlying operating expenses 20.7 16.3 Underlying costincome ratio 65.9% 65.2% Underlying operating expenses as a % of underlying operating income see table 12 Fixed staff costs of 3.0 million for the year ended 31 December 2017 were unchanged from the 3.0 million recorded in 2016.
In 2017 the cost of Unit Trusts compliance team was absorbed into the central compliance function and recharged as an intersegment charge.
Variable staff costs of 7.2 mill ion were 35.8% higher than the 5.3 million in 2016 as higher profitability and growth in gross sales drove increases in profit share and sales commissions.
Other operating expenses have increased by 31.3% to 10.5 million reflecting an increase in third party administration costs in line with growth in the business and higher intersegment charges for the central compliance and distribution teams.
Strategic report Financial position 38 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 Table 14.
Groups financial position unless stated unless stated Capital resources Common Equity Tier 1 ratio 20.7% 17.7% total own funds ratio 22.2% 19.5% total equity 363.3 324.8 Tier 2 subordinated loan notes 19.7 19.6 riskweighted assets 977.2 892.7 return on assets 1.8% 1.8% leverage ratio 7.8% 6.6% Other resources total assets 2738.9 2404.0 treasury assets 2303.9 1995.2 Investment Management loan book intangible assets from acquired growth tangible assets and software
2170.5 1888.9 net defined benefit pension liability 15.6 39.5 Common Equity Tier 1 capital as a proportion of total risk exposure amount Total own funds see table 15 as a proportion of total risk exposure amount Profit after tax divided by average total assets Common Equity Tier 1 capital as a % of total assets excluding intangible assets plus certain off balance sheet exposures Balances with central banks loans and advances to banks and investment securities See note 16 to the financial statements Net book value of acquired client relationships and goodwill note 21 Net book value of property plant and equipment and computer software notes 19 and 21 Total amounts of cash in client portfolios held by Rathbone Investment Management as a bank note 23 Capital resources Rathbones is classified as a banking group for regulatory capital purposes and is therefore required to operate within the restrictions on capital resources and banking exposures prescribed by the Capital Requirements Regulation as applied in the UK by the Prudential Regulation Authority PRA.
At 31 December 2017 the groups regulatory capital resources including verified profits for the year were 216.8 million 2016 174.2 million.
Table 15.
Regulatory capital resources Share capital and share premium 145.7 142.5 Reserves 222.5 188.5
Total Common Equity Tier 1 capital resources 202.0 158.4 Tier 2 capital resources 14.8 15.8 Total own funds 216.8 174.2 Net book value of goodwill client rela tionship intangibles and software are deducted directly from capital resources Common Equity Tier 1 capital CET1 resources increased by 43.6 million during 2017 largely due to the inclusion of verified profits for the 2017 financial year net of dividends paid in the year and posttax actuarial gains of 14.4 million arising from the remeasurement of defined benefit pension schemes.
The CET1 ratio has grown to 20.7% from 17.7% at the previous year end in line with the growth in CET1 resources.
Our consolidated CET1 ratio is higher than the banking industry norm reflecting the low risk nature of our banking activity.
The leverage ratio was 7.8% at 31 December 2017 up from 6.6% at 31 December 2016.
The leverage ratio represents our CET1 capital as a percentage of our total assets  excluding intangible assets plus certain off balance sheet exposures.
The business is primarily funded by equity but also supported by 20 million of 10year Tier 2 subordinated loan notes.
The notes introduce a small amount of gearing into our balance sheet as a way of financing future growth in a costeffective and capital efficient manner.
They are repayable in August 2025 with a call option for the issuer in August 2020 and annually thereafter.
Interest is payable at a fixed rate of 5.856% until the first call option date and at a fixed margin of 4.375% over sixmonth London Interbank Offered Rate LIBOR thereafter note 26.
The consolidated balance sheet remains healthy with total equity of 363.3 million at 31 December 2017 up 11.9% from 324.8 million at the end of 2016 primarily reflecting retained profits for the year and an improvement in the reported position of our defined benefit pension schemes.
Own funds and liquidity requirements As required under PRA rules we perform an Internal Capital Adequacy Assessment Process ICAAP and Internal Liquidity Adequacy Assessment Process ILAAP annually which include performing a range of stress tests to determine the appropriate level of regulatory capital and liquidity that we need to hold.
In addition we monitor a wide range of capital and liquidity statistics on a daily monthly or less frequent basis as required.
Surplus capital levels are forecast on a monthly basis taking account of proposed dividends and investment requirements to ensure that appropriate buffers are maintained.
Investment of proprietary funds is controlled by our treasury department.
We are required to hold capital to cover a range of own funds requirements classified as Pillar 1 and Pillar 2.
Pillar 1  minimum requirement for capital Pillar 1 focuses on the determinat ion of riskweighted assets and expected losses in respect of the groups exposure to credit counterparty credit market and operational risks and sets a minimum requirement for capital.
At 31 December 2017 the group s riskweighted assets were 977.2 million 2016 892.7 million.
Pillar 2  supervisory review process Pillar 2 supplements the Pillar 1 minimum requirement with a firmspecific Individual Capital Guidance Pillar 2A and a framework of regulatory capital buffers Pillar 2B.
The Pillar 2A own funds requirement which is set by the PRA reflects those risks specific to the firm which are not fully captured under the Pillar 1 own funds requirement.
Our Pillar 2A own funds requirement was reviewed by the PRA during 2017 and we have agreed a revised requirement.
This includes the incorporation of a higher Pillar 2A requirement in respect of pension risk.
Pension obligation risk The potential for additional unplanned capital strain or costs that the group would incur in the event of a significant deterioration in the funding position of the groups defined benefit pension schemes.
Interest rate risk in the banking book The potential losses in the no ntrading book resulting from interest rate changes or widening of the spread between Bank of England base rates and LIBOR rates.
Concentration risk Greater loss volatility arising from a higher level of loan default correlation than is assumed by the Pillar 1 assessment.
The group is also required to maintain a number of Pillar 2B regulatory capital buffers all of which must be met with CET1 capital.
Capital conservation buffer CCB The CCB is a general buffer designed to provide for losses in the event of a stress and is being phased in from 1 January 2016 to 1 January 2019.
As at 31 December 2017 the buffer rate was 1.25% of riskweighted assets.
On 1 January 2018 it increased to 1.875% of riskweighted assets and it wi ll finally increase to 2.5% of riskweighted assets from 1 January 2019.
Countercyclical capital buffer CCyB The CCyB is designed to act as an incentive for banks to constrain credit growth in times of heighten ed systemic risk.
The amount of the buffer is determined by reference to rates set by the Bank of England Financial Policy Commi ttee FPC from timetotime depending on prevailing market conditions for individual countries where the group has credit risk exposures.
The buffer rate is currently set at zero for the UK.
However non zero rates for Norway Sweden and Hong Kong where the group has small relevant credit risk exposures result in an overall rate of 0.01% of riskweighted assets for the group as at 31 December 2017.
The FPC has announced the rate for UK exposures will increase to 0.5% with effect from June 2018 and to 1.0% with effect from November 2018.
PRA buffer The PRA also determines whether any incremental firmspecific buffer is required in addition to the CCB and the CCyB.
The PRA requires any such buffer to remain confidential between the group and the PRA.
Strategic report Financial position continued 40 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 The groups own funds requirements were as follows Table 16.
Groups own funds requirements Credit risk requirement 39.5 36.9 Market risk requirement 0.4 0.4 Operational risk requirement 38.4 34.2 Pillar 1 own funds requirement 78.3 71.5 Pillar 2A own funds requirement 46.1 27.9 Total Pillar 1 and 2A own funds requirements 124.4 99.4 CRD IV buffers capital conservation buffer CCB 18.3 11.2 countercyclical buffer CCyB 0.1 0.3 Total Pillar 1 and 2A own funds requirements and CRD IV buffers 142.8 110.9 Own funds requirements stated above include the impact of trading results and changes to requirements and buffers that were known as at 31 December and which became effective prior to the publication of the preliminary results The surplus of own funds including verified profits for the full year over total Pillar 1 and 2A own funds requirements and CRD IV buffers was 74.0 million up from 63.3 million at the end of 2016.
In managing the groups regulatory capital position over the next few years we will continue to be mindful of future volatility in pension scheme valuations which affect both the level of CET1 own funds and the value of the Pillar 2A requirement for pension risk the staged introduction of incremental CRD IV buffers over the next two years regulatory developments the demands of future acquisitions which generate intangible assets and therefore direct ly reduce CET1 resources.
We keep these issues under constant review to ensure that any necessary capital raising activities are carried out in a planned and controlled manner.
The groups Pillar 3 disclosures are published annually on our website siteinvestorrelationsresultsand presentations and provide further details about regulatory capital resources and requirements.
Total assets Total assets at 31 December 2017 were 2.7 billion 2016 2.4 billion of which 2.2 billion 2016 1.9 billion represents the cash element of client portfolios that is held as a banking deposit.
Treasury assets As a licensed deposit taker Rathbone Investment Management holds our surplus liquidity on its balance sheet together with clients cash.
Cash in c lient portfolios as held on a banking basis of 2.2 billion 2016 1.9 billion represented 6.4% of total investment management funds at 31 December 2017 compared to 6.3% at the end of 2016.
Cash held in client money accounts was 4.5 million 2016 4.5 million.
The treasury department of Rathbone Investment Management reporting through the banking commi ttee to the board operates in accordance with procedures set out in a boardapproved treasury manual and monitors exposure to market credit and liquidity risk as described in note 31 to the financial statements.
It invests in a range of securities issued by a relatively large number of counterparties.
These counterparties must be single Arated or higher by Fitch and are regula rly reviewed by the banking committee.
During the year we increased the share of treasury assets held with the Bank of Englan d to 1.4 billion from 1.1 billion at 31 December 2016 reflecting the increase in the level of cash held in client portfolios over the period and a consistent appetite for credit risk.
Loans to clients Loans are provided as a service to Investment Management clients who have short to medi umterm cash requirements.
Such loans are normally made on a fullysecured basis against portfolios held in our nominee name requiring two times cover and are usually advanced for up to one year see note 16 to the financial statements.
In addition charges may be taken on property held by the client to meet security cover requirements.
All loans and any extensions to the initial loan period are subject to review by the banking committee.
Our ability to provide such loans is a valuable additional service for example to clients who require bridging finance when moving home.
Loans advanced totalled 120.5 million at the end of 2017 2016 106.3 million.
Intangible assets Intangible assets arise principally from acquired growth in funds under management and are categorised as goodwill and client relationships.
At 31 December 2017 the total carrying value of intangible assets arising from acquired growth was 151.7 million 2016 160.7 million.
During the year client relationship intangible assets of 2.7 million were capitalised 2016 7.9 million.
No goodwill was acquired during 2017 2016 nil.
Client relationship intangibles are amortised over the estimated life of the client relationship generally a period of 10 to 15 years.
When client relationships are lost any related intangible asset is derecognised in the year.
The total amortisation charge for client relationships in 2017 including the impact of any lost relationships was 11.4 million 2016 11.7 million.
Goodwill which arises from business combinations is not amortised but is subject to a test for impairment at least annually.
During the year the goodwill relating to the trust and tax business was found to be impaired as the gr owth forecasts for that business have not kept pace with cost inflation.
An impairment charge of 0.3 million was recognised in relation to this element of goodwill 2016 0.1 million.
Further detail is provided in note 21 to the financial statements.
As described in note 1.3 to the financial statements the adoption of IFRS 15 in 2018 requires us to change the accounting policy for these awards.
Currently the cost of awards for funds introduced by investment managers who have been in situ for more than 12 months are charged to profit or loss 2017 5.1 million.
Under the new accounting standard these amounts will also be capitalised and amortised over the life of the client relationship.
Capital expenditure During 2017 we have continued to invest for future growth with capitalised expenditure on our premises and systems totalling 11.3 million 2016 15.1 million.
As noted above capital expenditure in 2016 included 9.9 million for the fit out of the new London head office.
Further costs of 2.8 million were incurred to complete this in 2017.
Investment in new systems accelerated in 2017 with the development of a new client relationship management CRM system.
Total costs of 7.1 million for the purchase and development of software were incurred in 2017 2016 2.9 million.
Excluding the London office fitout costs new investment accounted for approximately 79% of capital expenditure in 2017 2016 67% with the balance be ing maintenance and replacement of existing software and equipment.
This is more weighted to new investment than in prior years due to the development of the CRM system and improvements relating to the introduction of MiFID II Markets in Financial Instruments Directive and the General Data Protection Regulation GDPR.
Defined benefit pension schemes We operate two defined benefit pension schemes both of which have been closed to new members for several years.
With effect from 30 June 2017 we closed both schemes ceasing all future benefit accrual and breaking the link to salary.
The closure of the schemes resulted in a 5.5 mill ion improvement in the reported position of the schemes.
The member consultation to close the scheme coincided with a period of historically exceptiona lly low yields on the government bonds that are used to derive cash equivalent transfer values CETVs for members wishing to ex it the scheme increasing the value of these CETVs markedly.
Th is resulted in a significant increase in the number of members seeking to transfer their benefits out of the scheme by taking a cash lump sum and over the course of 2017 members transferred benefits with cumulative CETVs of 60.6 million out of the scheme.
This reduced the accounting value of the liabilities of the Laurence Keen Scheme by 17% and the Rathbone 1987 Scheme by 29% compared to the position at 31 December 20 16 and helped support an improvement in the schemes deficit and funding levels.
As a result of the large value of transfers out the accounting valuation of the schemes liabilities has also fallen.
At 31 December 2017 the combined schemes liabilities measured on an accounting basis had fallen to 164.1 million down 29.4% from 232.4 million at the end of 2016.
Reflecting the performance of the schemes assets over the course of the year the reported position of the schemes at 31 December 2017 was a deficit of 15.6 million 2016 deficit of 39.5 million.
Triennial funding valuations form the basis of the annual contributions that we make in to the schemes.
During 2017 funding valuations of the schemes as at 31 December 2016 were being carried out.
We have agr eed with the trustees of the Rathbone 1987 Scheme to put in place a funding deficit reduction plan which requires annual contribu tions of 2.75 million so long as that scheme remains in deficit.
The funding valuation for the Laurence Keen Scheme has not yet been finalised but we do not expect that it will result in a material funding deficit reduction plan.
Strategic report Liquidity and cash flow 42 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 Table 17.
Extracts from the consolidated statement of cash flows Cash and cash equivalents at the end of the year 1567.8 1263.1 Net cash inflows from operating activities 351.5 567.3 Net change in cash and cash equivalents 304.7 559.5 Fee income is largely collected directly from client portfolios and expenses by and large are predic table.
Consequently we operate with a modest amount of working capital.
Larger cash flows are principally generated from banking and treasury operations when investment managers make asset allocation decisions about the amount of cash to be held in client portfolios.
As a bank we are subject to the PRAs ILAAP regime which requires us to hold a suitable Li quid Assets Buffer to ensure that shortterm liquidity requirements can be met under certain stressed scenarios.
Liquidity ri sks are actively managed on a daily basis and depend on operational and investment transaction activity.
Cash and balances at central banks was 1.4 billion at 31 December 2017 2016 1.1 billion.
Cash and cash equivalents as defined by accounting standards includes cash money market funds and banking deposits which had an original maturity of less than three months see note 36 to the financial statements.
Consequently cash flows as reported in the financial statements include the impact of capital flows in treasury assets.
Net cash flows from operating activities include the effect of a 282.6 million increase in banking client deposits 2016 486.0 million increase and a 16.6 million increase in the component of treasury assets placed in term deposits for more than three months 2016 16.8 million decrease.
Offsetting this cash flows included a net outflow of 4.0 million from the purchase of longerdated certificates of deposit 2016 7.0 million net inflow from the maturity of longerdated certificates of deposit which is shown within investing activities in the consolidated statement of cash flows.
The most significant nonoperating cash flows during the year were as follows.
2016 26.5 million outflows relating to payments to acquire intangible assets other than as part of a business combination of 11.9 million 2016 14.0 million 4.2 million of capital expenditure on property plant and equipment 2016 12.2 million.
Chief executives annual statement on corporate responsibility Rathbones corporate responsibility strategy aims to ensure that social environmental and ethical considerations are taken into account throughout the business.
With regard to environmental social and governance ESG matters as they affect our business the board believes that the soci al and environmental committee SEC has identified and assessed the significant risks to the company.
The SEC focuses not only on potential risks but also on opportunities for the company to play its part as a good employer and as a contributor to the environment and communities in which we work and our clients live.
This report provides an overview of our activities  more information can be found on our website.
As reported in last years report 2017 marked the firms tenyear anniversary for reporting on carbon footprint and a review was conducted to align our environmental and sustainability objectives with the broader commercial goals of the business.
The objective of this review was to set the framework for the firms corporate social responsibility CSR  strategy for the long term and develop key initiatives to ensure the sustainability of the firm.
You will find further details below.
Responsible investing The concept of stewar dship and responsible investment SRI means focusing on the client and ensuring an active approach to the ownership of securities.
Implem enting effective stewardship is integral to our investment proces s as a means of protecting and enhancing value for clients often through encouraging high standards of corporate governance.
During 2017 we reviewed and updated our policies in this area and are pleased to report on our progress below.
Also we remain a constituent company of the FTSE4Good Index series and a signatory to the UNbacked Principles for Responsible Investment PRI.
Our employees Our business success is depend ent upon delivering a highly professional and personal service to our clients and we believe this can only be achieved by having engaged and motivated employees with a diverse rang e of skills and experience.
Our employee strategy policies and investment plans are all designed to achieve th ese goals.
Members of staff have access to management and leadership courses continuous professional development CPD programmes to achieve continuous learning and agreed career development programmes to enable progression within the firm.
Charities and communities The Rathbone Brothers Foundations have continued to support small local charities where its donations can make a real difference.
During the year each office across the firm created a foundation in order to be able to donate to and support local charities.
The overall charitable objective of the firm is to support small locallybased charities that help to improve the lives of young people.
Further information on our various initiatives can be found below.
In 2017 Rathbones was lead sponsor of the FIL Rathbones Womens Lacrosse World Cup the largest international womens sporting event in the UK that ye ar.
As well as supporting and highlighting the importance of womens sport we used the opportunity to encourage young women in particular to get involved in sport through the tournaments legacy programme and our ongoing partnerships with English Lacrosse and Lacrosse
Through our sponsorship of the Rathbones Folio Prize we were also involved in the establishment of a mentoring programme for young writers.
Strategic report Corporate responsibility report continued 44 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 Environmental reporting Despite the continued growth in our business total carbon emissions were reduced to 2553 tCO2e tonnes carbon dioxide equivalent 9% lower than reported in 2016 and 10% lower than our baseline.
Emissions from buildings energy consumption fell by 14% due to reduced energy use and the continued decarbonisation of the UK grid .
Following a 17% increase in headcount our business travel emissions increased slightly by 2% despite a 7% reduction in emissions from flights.
For further details of our carbon footprint please read the environmental impact section of this report.
This year also marks the 10year anniversary of Rathbones reporting on its environmental impacts.
In recognition of this milestone we completed several initiatives in 2017 to improve our performance and further enhance our knowledge and management of environmental issues.
We conducted an in depth review of our wider sustainability strategy improved our environmental management and reporting processes and completed our move to an awardwinning energyefficient head office building at Finsbury Circus.
Philip Howell Chief Executive and Chairman of the SEC 21 February 2018 Our approach Rathbones corporate responsibility approach can be summarised as follows Investing for clients Considering corporate responsibility and governance issues in the companies in which we inve st on behalf of our clients Developing our employees Motivating and rewarding our employees appropriately encouraging their development Working with communities Engaging in the communit ies in which we operate Being aware of our environment Managing our environmental impact and reducing our carbon footprint by the efficient use of resources Responsible investment Rathbones specialises in discretionary private client investment management.
We manage assets for clients based on their goals.
Central processes provide guidance on equity analysis and strategic asset allocation advice and are shared by the group.
But it is central to our business model that investment managers retain their independence to buy and sell securities for clients.
Therefore a topdown responsible investment framework is provided whilst maintaining investment flexibility for investment managers.
Nonetheless we are longterm investors and ESG factors form a key part of our equity analysis.
To this end in 2016 we formalised our approach to the longterm stew ardship of our clients assets with the approval of a group stewardship policy which was approved by the board in 2017.
The concept of our stewardship policy means taking a client first active approach to the ownership of securities.
Implementing effective stewardship is integral to our investment process as a means of protecting and enhancing value for clients.
The core principles that we follow are 1 Materiality We recognise that governance and stewardship risks can be material to the performance and valuation of companies.
2 Active voting We actively consider proxy votes for client holdings.
3 Engagement Active engagement with companies on governance issues is an important adjunct to voting activities.
4 Transparency We report annually on our stewardship activities.
In addition the issue of governance as a risk factor is covered by the work of our stewardship committeesite issues can be material in the compan ies in which we invest on behalf of our clients.
As well as conducting our own inhouse analysis we subscribe to specialist providers of ESG research as part of our research budget.
Governance risk scoring is now integrated into the work of various investment committees.
Social environmental and ethical considerations are also taken into account for specific mandates throughout the group particularly those managed by our specialist ethical investment unit Rathbone Greenbank Investments and a number managed by our charities team.
Through Rathbone Greenbank Investments and Rathbone Unit Trust Managements Ethical Bond Fund the company is able to provide investment services tailored to clients interests in the area of socially responsible or sustainable investment.
Where appropriate the company is also able to participate in new share issues offered by companies th at provide environmentally or socially beneficial products or services.
As at 31 December 2017 Rathbone Greenbank Investments had 1.1 billion of funds under management equivalent to 2.52% of Rathbone Investment Managements funds under management.
The Rathbone Ethical Bond Fund had 1.1 billion of funds under management.
Affiliations
The firm has the following affiliations and accreditations CDP Carbon Disclosure Project as well as being a signatory to the CDP sister programmes on water disclosure and forests UNbacked PRI.
We also play an active role in the PRI Collaboration Platform.
Out of over 1800 members of this leading initiative Rathbones was named as one of the top 20 most active and influential members of the PRI Collaboration Platform in 2015 and 2016 a significant achievement given our size relative to other PRI members.
In 2017 we launc hed our stewardship policy and moved into the A band in the Strategy and Governance module of the UN PRIs annual reporting framework UK Sustainable and Investment Finance Association UKSIF and the Ecumenical Council for Corporate Responsibility.
Rathbone Greenbank Investments is also a leading member of the Institutional Investors Group on Climate Change IIGCC
The cornerstone of all responsible investment is an active and considered approach to proxy voting.
Since 2010 the groups voting activity has been coordinated by a dedicated committee established in line with Rathbones obligations under the PRI and pays heed to the Financial Reporting Councils FRC UK Stewardship Code.
Composed of investment managers and other representatives from across the business and supported by a permanent stewardship director the committee maintains general group policy on corporate governance.
Advice and research received by the committee supplements the analysis carried out internally as part of the investment process.
The committee issues voting recommendations based on best practice which establishes a baseline for consideration by the major holders of the companies in question.
Our investment managers retain the ability to vote independently of this advice if appropriate.
Rathbone Investment Management exercises the voting rights attached to its largest holdings covering the most widelyheld stocks across the business.
Voti ng is also undertaken on any company if requested by an underlying shareholder.
Rathbone Unit Trust Management as an institutional investor meets its obligations as a signatory to the Stewardship Code and was classified as a Tier 2 signator y by the FRC in 2016.
In addition to expanding the scope of proxy voting in 2015 and now employing ISS to vote actively on all of its holdings Rathbone Unit Trust Management has recently clarified its policy on stewardship and company engagement in line with the demand of regulators.
Votes are entered in line with UK corporate governance best practice overseen by the stewardship director and fund managers and investment managers.
During 2017 the committee oversaw active proxy voting on 5046 resolutions at 398 company meetings.
Voting on these resolu tions includes consideration of such issues as executive remuneration auditor independence appointment of directors and nonfinancial reporting.
Case study  Smith and Nephe w Our major issues with variable pay come when the experience of management and shareholders becomes misaligned.
It is vital that remuneration policies be desi gned in such a way that investors can have confidence that exceptional variable pay will only come under certain prescribed circumstances meeting performance conditions which are unambi guous and easily understood.
However most companies equip their remuneration committees with discretion to make awards even where performance conditions have not been met.
In the year in question the remuneration committee at the company exercised discretion to provide for elements of a Long Term Incentive Plan to vest despite targets on Total Shareholder Return not being met.
We wrote to the company expressing our concern over the use of discretion and the lack of convincing rationale for doing so.
The performance targets were set by the remuneration committee with full knowledge of the market conditions and we consider it a matter of sound precedent that the company should be prepared to accept the outcome of the structure an d incentives that it has chosen.
Given the companys relative size and standing we viewed th e use of discretion in such a manner to fall short of best practice.
We are committed to transparency in this area and regularly report on our activities via our corporate website.
A more detailed assessmen t of our votes against management can be found in our review of Stewardship and Proxy Voting which can be found on our website.
Strategic report Corporate responsibility report continued 46 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017
Engagement with companies on ESG matters is largely undertaken by Rathbone Greenbank Investments ethical research team and the stewardship director on behalf of the stewardship committee.
Engagement may occur as a result of fundamental analysis of companies ESG reporting or through collaborative efforts initiated by interest groups such as CDP UKSIF or the PRI Collaboration Platform.
It covers a wide range of themes spanning the whole of the environmental social and governance spectrum.
In 2017 we joined the steering committee for the PRIcoordinated engagement on cyber security.
Employees
Our approach We are firmly committed to evolving our people policies and practices and having continued high levels of employee engagement in line with our corp orate values.
Our goal continues to be the delivery of the highest possible quality of service to our clients through talented and professional employees.
Rathbones has over 1100 staff in 16 locations in the UK and Jersey.
We promote a culture where we recrui t and retain individuals whose values match those of the business.
To promote engagement with our values we actively encourage employees to become involved in the financial performance of the group through our all employee SIPs UK Share Incentive Plan and International Share Incentive Plan and SAYE Save As You Earn share option plan.
We also encourage our employees to become financially aware and offer discounted independent financial advice.
We have offered share ownership plans to our employees since 1996 and now have 55% in our SAYE and 87% in our SIP plans.
Employee statistics % of female employees 48.7% % of employees working parttime 10.6% % resignation rate 4.7%
We continue to support the development of all our employees and have maintained our average investment per person at a significant level of 783 20166 34 and an average of two days training per year.
These figures are a very conservative estimate because there is much more employee development that has no direct cost and is conducted at the desk.
Our aim when delivering highquality programmes is to ensure that employees have the best opportunity to put their learning into practice.
We do this by engaging with line managers and other stakeholders in the business to ensure that the opportunity and support is in place for employees to use new skills.
We regularly implement new initiatives across the group to ensure that all employees have access to the de velopment they need for their current and possible future roles.
1630 226 3145 32 Number of employees by length of service 1620 19 2135 469 3650 437 Number of employees by age range
Number of employees in SAYE Headcount at 31 Dec 2017 Number of employees in SIP tel1200 1500 1site Leadership and management development We have developed a comprehensive suite of management and leadership courses.
These are desi gned to enable the business to identify highpotential employees and progress them through key stages of learning from being highly effective team members to ultimately growing into senior leadership roles.
The leadership programme continued successfully throughout the year and the programme again involved senior managers focusing on how to lead their teams to achieve corporate goals.
The programme culminates in a presentation ab out leadership changes and the value of the learning.
This format will continue to cascade through the firm during 2017 to build leadership and management skills across the group.
We have aligned some of our management development to formal qualifications.
A number of managers have successfully achieved a level 5 qualificat ion awarded by the Chartered Management Institute.
This included a module on managing operational risk which was tailor ed to the specific issues in
We will continue to support this type of development where the formal recognition of learning is appropriate.
Continuing professional development CPD Our clientfacing employees contin ue to meet and mostly exceed the required CPD targets set by our regulators.
Investment
Talent development Rathbones is keen to develop a pipeline of highcalibre talent to ensure appropriate skills and succession planning for the future.
Our third apprenticeship programme is well underway with 11 participants and in light of the ongoing success of this programme a further group will be recruited in 2018.
Our continued commitment to developing younger talent means that the existing graduate development programme will be completed in March 2018 and a new programme started in September.
The programme sees the trainees participate in a variety of placements around the firm to gain a broad range of experience.
Career development and performance management We have further developed our career frameworks to help employees see their future pathway for progression within the organisation.
There is further work to do in this area and there is a commitment to help employees and managers with the skills required for career management.
A leadership framework has been developed that we inte nd to incorporate into our management training and promotion processes in 2018.
The performance management process is reviewed on an ongoing basis and in 2017 we have launched an online performance management tool to help us better support both line managers and employees.
Diversity and inclusion Rathbones is an equal opportunities employer and it is our policy to ensure that all job applicants and employees are treated fairly and on merit regardless of race sex maritalcivil partnership status age disability religious belief pregnancy maternity gender reassignment or sexual orientation.
We have two female directors out of seven and have thus achieved our commitment to meet Lord Davies target of 25% female board representation.
We are working towards achieving the adjusted target of 33% of female board representation for FTSE 350 companies by 2020 and are deve loping a policy aligned to the recommendations published in the HamptonAlexander review in November 2017.
Historically women have been less well represented in the investment management industry and addressing this imbalance is a key priority.
We are working hard to bring in more women in graduate trainee positions our graduate and apprenticeship programmes currently comprise broadly equal numbers of men and women and by encouraging more applications from women to our work experience and fi nancial career programmes.
We continue to target the progression and development of existing female employees with opportunities for leadership and management programmes.
After engaging with our recently returned maternity leavers in 2016 we undertook a comprehensive review of our fam ily leave policies.
In 2017 we implemented significant improvements to our maternity adoption and paternity policies.
We also introduced group coaching and online support for working parents.
We have started a training pr ogramme covering diversity inclusion and unconscious bias.
Our executive committee were amongst the first to participate and are actively supporting the roll out to all managers across the firm.
Rathbones prides itself on being a real Living Wage employer and pays Living Wage Foundation rates of pay to subcontractor staff and internal employees.
Modern slavery Rathbones is committed to maintaining and improving our practices to tackle slavery and human trafficking violations with respect to our own operations our supply chain and our services.
We welcomed the introduction of the Modern Slavery Act in 2015 and used this as an opportunity to build on our existing policies and develop a focused approach to addressing the risk of modern slavery.
Rathbones already has a rang e of relevant policies in place such as our policy on stewardship being a living wage employer equal opportunities and whistle bl owing.
To further develop our approach we set ourselves a set of objectives over the next three years.
These include carrying ou t a thirdparty risk assessment developing prioritised actions base d on the results introducing a modern slavery screening process training our staff and communicating what we are doing.
Strategic report Corporate responsibility report continued 48 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 This year we engaged a thirdparty sustainability consultancy Carbon Smart to carry out a modern slavery risk assessment of our operations and supply chain.
This was important to us because although we are a professional services business in a highly regulated market and therefore low risk we do know that no supply chain is risk free.
Carbon Smart mapped our annual supplier spend based on sector an d location to identify areas of elevated risk in our su pply chain.
The majority of our spend is in the UK with a small proportion in the US and Canada and the majority is with professional services which is low risk.
However the risk assessment did show that there was an elevated risk although still below the UK average and well below the global average in the following sectors Construction  refurbishment of our buildings Paper  the stationery that we buy Chemicals  cleaning chemicals that we purchase With an understanding of our level of risk and the relevant sectors we were able to develop a riskbas ed approach which allows us to focus our attention and resources where it matters the most.
In the event our staff wish to procure products or services from the above sectors additional checks must be performed.
All new suppliers in the above categories must share with us their modern slavery statements.
In addition to this we have engaged with all our current suppliers to understand the due diligence they have in place to mitigate the risk of modern slavery in their supply chains.
This year our focus is on embe dding the due diligence checks.
Our key staff will receive modern slavery training to ensure that they understand how modern slavery may manifest itself and what they can do to mitigate the risk when engaging with suppliers.
To raise awareness we will also communicate to wider staff what we are doing in this space.
At the end of the year we also plan to review the due diligence checks we have carried out to understand the effe ctiveness of our approach and update accordingly.
Antibribery policy As a firm we value our reputation for ethical behaviour and upholding the utmost integrity and we comply with the Prudential Regulation Authority PRA and the Financial Conduct Authority FCA clients best interests rule.
We understand that in addition to the criminality of bribery and corruption any such crime would also have an adverse effect on our reputation and integrity.
Rathbones has a zero tolerance approach to bribery and corruption and we ensure all our employees and suppliers are adequately trained as to limit our exposure to bribery by setting out clear antibribery and corruption policies providing mandatory training to all employees encouraging our employees to be vigilant and report any suspected cases of bribery in accordance with the specified procedures escalating and investigating in stances of suspected bribery and assisting the police or othe r appropriate authorities in their investigations.
Gender pay reporting The firm will be preparing and submitting its data on gender pay to the government and will ensure its available on the website ahead of the deadline of 4 April 2018.
Performance and reward We offer a comprehensive remuneration package which is regularly reviewed to ensure that our employees are fairly rewarded.
This is supported by challenging objectivesetting and appraisal processes to align reward to corporate goals and motivate and encourage high performance.
All employees have the opportunity to participate in a pension arrangement and are eligible to re ceive at least a 3% contribution from the company to a group personal pension arrangement rising to 10% with additional employee contributions.
In 2017 we concluded a consultation with members of the company defined benefit pension scheme and this resulted in closure of the Rathbones 1987 defined benefit pension scheme to future accrual in June 2017.
Going forward we have provided members of this scheme with access to the same pens ion benefits provided to all of our other employees.
We provide a wide range of core benefits such as private medical cover income protection insurance and life assurance.
All employees are eligible for an annual medical examination funded by the company.
Employees are encouraged to identify with and benefit from the financial performance of the group through sharematching within the SIP free shares and SAYE schemes.
We have a continued focus on employee wellbeing.
Employees have access to an employee assist ance programme EAP offering confidential advice and support to them and their families.
We have rolled out a number of training and dropin sessions on wellbeingrelated topics.
Our people can also take advantage of the vast range of voluntary benefits available such as the cycle to work scheme childcare vouchers flexible holidays voluntary leave and discounts on products and services through our Reward Board benefits platform.
Employee relations Engagement with our employees is crucial to the continuing success of the group.
We communicate regularly and openly with them on matters affecting them and on the issues that have an impact on the performance of the group and actively seek their feedback on these matters.
After the success of the engagement survey run in 2016 we will be running a second employee survey in 2018 in order to asse ss employee engagement.
Rathbones recognises the importance of an appropriate worklife balance both to the health and welfare of employees and to the business.
Holiday entitlement begins at 25 days per annum for all employees increasing to 30 days after five years service with the opportunity to buy up to five additional days of flexible leave each year.
Communities
Donations and fundraising During the year the group made total charitable donations of 378000 representing 0.70% of group pretax profits 2016 353000 representing 0.6% of group pretax profits.
It also included the matching of employee donations made through the tax efficient Give As You Earn GAYE payroll giving scheme.
In 2017 Rathbones employees made payments totalling 225000 2016 196000 through this scheme which is administered by the Charities Aid Foundation.
The company matched staff donations of up to 200 per month made through GAYE and in 2017 donated 161000 2016 164000 to causes chosen by employees through this method.
During 2017 the Rathbone Brothers Foundations across the country considered many requests for assistance and met a number of charities.
Significant donations were made to and volunteering activities organised for the following organisations The Rathbones Winchester office staff chose to do their annual volunteering week at Shepherds Down school.
The team helped improve the outdoor envi ronment of the school that provides care and education to children with special needs Enabling Enterprise is an awardwinning notforprofit social enterprise set up by a team of teachers in 2009.
Their mission is to equip young people with the skills experiences and aspirations they need to succeed in life.
The Liverpool team hosted children from Blessed Sacrament Primary School.
Guided by Rathbones employees the children took part in a fun activity where they played the role of stock market traders who had to evaluate potential investments and make decisions on behalf of their clients.
The London office hosted children from years four and six of Holly Park Primary School and St Francis de Sales.
The same challenge applied and gave the kids a great opportunity to use their imaginations work in teams and give a presentati on at the end of the day Clearvision is a lending library that adds Braille to childrens books before loaning them to visually impaired children.
The charitys library is well established and serves over 1000 families schools Vision Support Services and public libraries.
The London Rathbone Brothers Foundation has donated money for the past three years The Teapot Trust is a childrens charity which uses art therapy as a way of helping young people cope with longterm medical conditions.
The Edinburgh office supported the charity through its annual inhouse art exhibition.
Over 200 Rathbones guests attended the exhibition which was held across two evenings in November showcasing local artists The Cambridge office supports two local charities the Cambridge Central Aid Society which offers rapid financial help to individuals and families in Cambridge who are in need and the Connections Bus Project a charity providing youth work services across Cambridgeshire delivering youth clubs training courses and consultations and support for smaller community youth projects.
Investing in brighter futures The FIL Rathbones Womens Lacrosse World Cup was the largest womens international sporting event in the UK in 2017.
As lead sponsor of the tournament Rathbones put on and supported many activities throughout the year to highlight the importance and encourage the advancemen t of womens sport.
Rathbones has been a strong suppor ter of lacrosse in the UK since 2011 through our partnerships with English Lacrosse and Lacrosse
Our focus for these programmes has been on encouraging girls to play sport as we acknowledge the value of sport in the lives of young people in teaching key life skills.
The Rathbones Financial Awareness programme is another significant element of our investment in young people.
Investment managers deliver presentations to 1625yearolds within our offices and at schools around the UK.
The programme aims to equip those attending with the necessary information to take ownership of their finances at a young age.
In 2017 the programme was delivered to nearly 2000 young people.
Strategic report Corporate responsibility report continued 50 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 Rathbones also supports the arts through the Rathbones Folio programme.
The pinnacle of the programme is the Rathbones Folio Prize a prize awarded to the best English language book across all genres.
However just as important are the other parts of the programme which include the Rathbones Folio Mentorship for aspiring young writers and the Rathbones Folio Sessions which encourage thought and stimulate debate at literary festivals throughout the country.
Environmental impact This year marks the tenth year in which Rathbones has reported its carbon footprint.
As a respon sible investor Rathbones leads by example in our approach to environmental matters striving to understand the environmental impacts of our business activities and wherever possible act to reduce them.
In 2017 we enhanced our environmental monitoring and reporting process thereby improving our performance management capabilities.
Key benefits of the revised approach include the alignment of our carbon footprint reporting with Rathbones financial year and an improved ability to assess and influence environmental performance throughout the year.
Our 2017 carbon footprint We are pleased to report a 9% reduction in our overall emissions to 2553 tCO2e down from 2798 tCO2e in 2016.
Furthermore our emissions intensity has also reduced by over 20% following continued growth in both headco unt and funds under management.
These reductions are primarily at tributable to reduced energy consumption across our offices reduced emissions from flights paper and waste and the continued decarbonisation of the UKs electricity supply.
Notably our new head office building in Finsbury Circus has proved significantly less energy intensive than our previous Curz on Street location.
Building energy emissions arising from energy consumption at our offices and data centres were 1484 tCO 2e in 2017 down 14% from 1730 tCO 2e in 2016.
Business travel emissions increased to 716 tCO 2e up 2% from 699 tCO2e last year despite a reported 7% reduction in emissions from flights.
Our travel emissions rose largely due to a 17% increase in headcount and increased use of employeeowned cars for business purposes.
Emissions from other resources  namely paper waste and refrigerants were 353 tCO 2e down 4% from 369 tCO 2e in 2016 following reductions in paper and waste emissions.
Total emissions tCO 2e since baseline year Aligning our carbon reporting with the financial year required a rebaselining of emissions back to 2013 and resulted in some mi nor variations to previously reported annual emissions.
Further information on rebaselining is provided below
Baseline
Energy
Travel
Other resources Emissions tCO e since baseline year 2843 2985 3052 2798 2553 Operational indicatorstel 2016 2017 Staff FTE 829 867 965 1045 1227 Net internal area of offices  m 14430 14430 14518 15369 22924 Operating income  m 176.4 209.3 230.1 243.8 291.6 Funds under management  bn 22 27.2 29.2 33.2 39.1 Carbon intensity  tCO2e Staff FTE 3.4 3.4 3.2 2.7 2.1 Net internal area of offices  m Operating income  m 16.1 14.3 13.3 11.5 8.8 Funds under management  bn 129.2 109.8 104.5 84.3 65.
Key achievements in 2017 Rathbones completed several important initiatives in 2017 to mark the tenth anniversary of our reporting on environmental impac ts.
Our new head office In February 2017 we completed our move to 8 Finsbury Circus a building which has achieved a Building Research Establishment Environmental Assessment Method BREEAM Excellent rating in recognition of its performance and facilities across a range of environmental criteria.
Although our new head office provides over 50% more fl oor area it used 20% less energy in 2017 than Cu rzon Street in the previous year.
Fu rthermore it enables Rathbones to reduce enviro nmental impacts through the provision of 160 cyc le spaces photovoltaics and a green roof grey water recycling system.
Improved performance management and reporting Having reported Rathbones environmental impacts on an annual basis over the last 10 years in 2017 we increased the focus and frequency of this process to provide quarterly performance updates analysis and trending information throughout the year.
This has delivered the following key benefits to management More timely provision of environment data enabling the alignmen t of carbon footprint reporting with Rathbones financial year Improved data quality and accuracy reducing the number of estimations required due to unavailable or incomplete data Intrayear visibility of environmental performance thereby creating capacity for the management team to identify actions durin g the year that will influence yearend performance.
Compliance with regulations Rathbones complies with the regulations for reporting greenhouse gas emissions.
Following an operational control approach to de fining our organisational boundary our 2017 greenhouse gas emissions from business activities amounted to 321 tCO 2e resulting from the combustion of fuel and the operation of any facilities classified as Scope 1 in this report 851 tCO 2e from the purchase of elec tricity by the company for its own use classified as Scope 2 in this report.
In February 2017 we moved to our new head office location in Finsbury Circus which increased our reporting boundary.
It was n ot possible to obtain consumption data during the fitout period in 2016 and so these emissions were excluded from last years report.
This data has now been obtained and included within our rebaselining of 2016 data.
It has not been practical to gather data on energy use at our Lymington office and we have used typical energy consumption benchmarks to calculate the energy use at this site based on floor area.
The methodology used is in accordance with the requirements of the fo llowing standard The World Re sources Institute Greenhouse Gas Protocol revised version.
This includes best practice Scope 2 guidance using the ma rketbased method Environmental Reportin g Guidelines including mandatory greenhouse gas emissions reporting guidance Defra October 2013 and ISO 14064  part 1.
Strategic report Corporate responsibility report continued 52 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017
Rathbones reporting period for greenhouse gas emissions is now 1 January to 31 December aligned to our financial year.
The re porting period was previously offset by three months to allow additional time for data collation.
To ensure comparability of 2017 perfo rmance against previous years we have rebaselined emissions back to 2013.
Variations in seasonal co nsumption and emissions factors pr oduced several minor variations as detailed below.
Rebaseline Original Rebaseline Original Rebaseline Original Rebaseline Original 1516 2015 1415 2014 1314 2013 1213 Scope tel30tel304 Scope 2 947 1009 1282 1332 1443 1450 1424 1463 Scope 3 1447 1449 1453 1446 1232 1145 1113 1114 Total 2798 2814 3052 3081 2985 2907 2843 2882 Variance 0.6% 0.9% 2.7% 1.4% Last years report of 201516 emissions excluded 28 tCO 2e of Scope 1 and 2 emissions linked to the fit out of our new Finsbury Circus head office due to unavailable data.
These emissions have been included in the above rebaseline Carbon footprint by scope tCO 2e Locationbased emissions 1tel 2014 baseline Scope tel310 306 Natural gas 29tel276 Refrigerant 25  2 39 30 Company cars   0.02 0.01 Scope 2 851 947 1282 1443 1424 Purchased electricity 851 947 1282 1443 1424 Scope 3 1383 1447 1453 1232 1113 Data centres Business travel 71tel496 Paper 31tel328
Electricity TandD 82 8telTotal locationbased 2553 2798 3052 2985 2843 Marketbased emissionstel Purchased electricity 909 1061 1282 Data centres 285 317 317 In accordance with best practice introduced in 2015 we report two numbers to reflect emissions from electricity.
Locationbase d emissions based on average emissions intensity of the UK grid and marketbased emissions to reflect emissions from our specific suppliers and tariffs Data centre emissions are reported as Scope 3 as per the Greenhouse Gas Protocol.
However where figures are stated in this re port for overall buildings electricity consumption we have included data centres to ensure transparency of electricity use ite Carbon intensity The table below shows the emissions intensity of Rathbones in relation to the number of staff office space operating income and funds under management.
Operational indicators Carbon intensity tCO 2 e 1telteltel 2013 Staff FTE 1227 104tel2.1 2.7 3.2 3.4 3.4 Net internal area of offices m 22924 15369 14518 14430 14430 0.11 0.18 0.21 0.20 0.20 Funds under management bn 39.1 33.2 29.2 27.2 22.0 64.4 84.3 104.5 109.8 129.2 Carbon intensity is the total all scopes tCO 2e per FTE m m of operating income bn of funds under management Carbon Smart opinion statement This statement provides Rathbones and its stakeholders with a thirdparty assessment of the quality and reliability of Rathbone s carbon footprint data for the reporting period 1 January 2017 to 31 De cember 2017.
It does not represent an independent thirdparty as surance of Rathbones management approach to sustainability.
Carbon Smart has been commissioned by Rathbones for the tenth co nsecutive year to calculate Rathbones carbon footprint for all offices for its 2017 annual report.
Through this engagement Carbon Smart has assured Rathbones that the reported carbon footprint is representative of the business and that the data presented is credible and compliant with the appropriate standards and industr y practices.
Data has been collected and calculated foll owing the ISO 14064  part 1 standard and verified against the WRI GHG Protocol prin ciples of completeness consistency and accuracy.
Carbon Smarts work has included interviews with key Rathbones personnel a review of i nternal and external documentation interrogation of source data and data collection systems including comparison with the previous ye ars data.
Carbon Smart has concluded the points listed below.
Relevance
We have ensured the GHG inventory appropriately reflects the GHG emissions of the company and serves the decisionmaking needs of users both internal and external to the company.
Completeness
Rathbones continues to use the operational control approach to define its organisational boundary.
Rathbones calculates total direct Scope 1 2 and major Scope 3 emissions.
Reported environmental data covers all employees and all entities that meet the criteri a of being subject to control or significant influence of the reporting organisation.
Consistency
To ensure comparability we have used the same calculation methodologies and assumptions as for the previous year.
In 2017 pre vious years emissions have been rebaselined to align with Rathbones financial year.
Transparency
Where relevant we have included appropriate references to the accounting and calculation methodologies assumptions and recalculations performed.
Accuracy
To our knowledge data is considered accurate within the limits of the quality and completeness of the data provided.
Strategic report Corporate responsibility report continued 54 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 10 years of corporate social responsibility at Rathbones Rathbones has a longstanding commitment to action on CSR matters.
Here is a selection of our achievements over the last 10 years.
CDP respondent since 2006 Over 2.3 million in charitable donations since 2007 UN PRI Signatory since 2009 PwC Building Public Trust Award 2011 Best People Reporting in a FTSE 250 2013 FTSE4Good ranking 98th percentile 2014 ICSA Excellence in Governance Award Best sustainability and stakeholder disclosure in a FTSE 250 CDP investor member since 2015 One of the top 20 most active and influential members of the UN PRI Collaboration Platform 2015 and 2016 Over 5000 16 to 24yearolds engaged in Rathbones Financial Awareness Programme Moved head office to awardwinning BREEAM Excellent rated building in 2017 Corporate responsibility report continued 54 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 10 years of corporate social responsibility at Rathbones Rathbones has a longstanding commitment to action on CSR matters .
Here is a selection of our achievements over the last 10 years.
CDP Respondent since 2006 Over 2.3 million in charitable donations since 2007 United Nations PRI Signatory since 2009 PwC Building Public Trust Award 2011 Best People Reporting in a FTSE250 2013 FTSE4Good Ranking 98th Percentile 2014 ICSA Excellence in Governance Award Best sustainability and stakeholder disclosure in a FTSE 250 CDP Investor member since 2015 Top 20 most active and influential members UN PRI Clearinghouse 2015 and 2016 49% Female employees in 2016 Over 5000 16 to 24 year olds engaged in Rathbones Financial Awareness Programme Moved head office to awardwinning BREEAM Excellent rated building in 2017 Corporate responsibility report continued 54 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 10 years of corporate social responsibility at Rathbones Rathbones has a longstanding commitment to action on CSR matters .
Here is a selection of our achievements over the last 10 years.
CDP Respondent since 2006 Over 2.3 million in charitable donations since 2007 United Nations PRI Signatory since 2009 PwC Building Public Trust Award 2011 Best People Reporting in a FTSE250 2013 FTSE4Good Ranking 98th Percentile 2014 ICSA Excellence in Governance Award Best sustainability and stakeholder disclosure in a FTSE 250 CDP Investor member since 2015 Top 20 most active and influential members UN PRI Clearinghouse 2015 and 2016 49% Female employees in 2016 Over 5000 16 to 24 year olds engaged in Rathbones Financial Awareness Programme Moved head office to awardwinning BREEAM Excellent rated building in 2017 Corporate responsibility report continued 54 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 10 years of corporate social responsibility at Rathbones Rathbones has a longstanding commitment to action on CSR matters .
Here is a selection of our achievements over the last 10 years.
CDP Respondent since 2006 Over 2.3 million in charitable donations since 2007 United Nations PRI Signatory since 2009 PwC Building Public Trust Award 2011 Best People Reporting in a FTSE250 2013 FTSE4Good Ranking 98th Percentile 2014 ICSA Excellence in Governance Award Best sustainability and stakeholder disclosure in a FTSE 250 CDP Investor member since 2015 Top 20 most active and influential members UN PRI Clearinghouse 2015 and 2016 49% Female employees in 2016 Over 5000 16 to 24 year olds engaged in Rathbones Financial Awareness Programme Moved head office to awardwinning BREEAM Excellent rated building in 2017 Corporate responsibility report continued 54 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 10 years of corporate social responsibility at Rathbones Rathbones has a longstanding commitment to action on CSR matters .
Here is a selection of our achievements over the last 10 years.
CDP Respondent since 2006 Over 2.3 million in charitable donations since 2007 United Nations PRI Signatory since 2009 PwC Building Public Trust Award 2011 Best People Reporting in a FTSE250 2013 FTSE4Good Ranking 98th Percentile 2014 ICSA Excellence in Governance Award Best sustainability and stakeholder disclosure in a FTSE 250 CDP Investor member since 2015 Top 20 most active and influential members UN PRI Clearinghouse 2015 and 2016 49% Female employees in 2016 Over 5000 16 to 24 year olds engaged in Rathbones Financial Awareness Programme Moved head office to awardwinning BREEAM Excellent rated building in 2017 Corporate responsibility report continued 54 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 10 years of corporate social responsibility at Rathbones Rathbones has a longstanding commitment to action on CSR matters .
Here is a selection of our achievements over the last 10 years.
CDP Respondent since 2006 Over 2.3 million in charitable donations since 2007 United Nations PRI Signatory since 2009 PwC Building Public Trust Award 2011 Best People Reporting in a FTSE250 2013 FTSE4Good Ranking 98th Percentile 2014 ICSA Excellence in Governance Award Best sustainability and stakeholder disclosure in a FTSE 250 CDP Investor member since 2015 Top 20 most active and influential members UN PRI Clearinghouse 2015 and 2016 49% Female employees in 2016 Over 5000 16 to 24 year olds engaged in Rathbones Financial Awareness Programme Moved head office to awardwinning BREEAM Excellent rated building in 2017 Corporate responsibility report continued 54 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 10 years of corporate social responsibility at Rathbones Rathbones has a longstanding commitment to action on CSR matters .
Here is a selection of our achievements over the last 10 years.
CDP Respondent since 2006 Over 2.3 million in charitable donations since 2007 United Nations PRI Signatory since 2009 PwC Building Public Trust Award 2011 Best People Reporting in a FTSE250 2013 FTSE4Good Ranking 98th Percentile 2014 ICSA Excellence in Governance Award Best sustainability and stakeholder disclosure in a FTSE 250 CDP Investor member since 2015 Top 20 most active and influential members UN PRI Clearinghouse 2015 and 2016 49% Female employees in 2016 Over 5000 16 to 24 year olds engaged in Rathbones Financial Awareness Programme Moved head office to awardwinning BREEAM Excellent rated building in 2017 Corporate responsibility report continued 54 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 10 years of corporate social responsibility at Rathbones Rathbones has a longstanding commitment to action on CSR matters .
Here is a selection of our achievements over the last 10 years.
CDP Respondent since 2006 Over 2.3 million in charitable donations since 2007 United Nations PRI Signatory since 2009 PwC Building Public Trust Award 2011 Best People Reporting in a FTSE250 2013 FTSE4Good Ranking 98th Percentile 2014 ICSA Excellence in Governance Award Best sustainability and stakeholder disclosure in a FTSE 250 CDP Investor member since 2015 Top 20 most active and influential members UN PRI Clearinghouse 2015 and 2016 49% Female employees in 2016 Over 5000 16 to 24 year olds engaged in Rathbones Financial Awareness Programme Moved head office to awardwinning BREEAM Excellent rated building in 2017 Corporate responsibility report continued 54 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 10 years of corporate social responsibility at Rathbones Rathbones has a longstanding commitment to action on CSR matters .
Here is a selection of our achievements over the last 10 years.
CDP Respondent since 2006 Over 2.3 million in charitable donations since 2007 United Nations PRI Signatory since 2009 PwC Building Public Trust Award 2011 Best People Reporting in a FTSE250 2013 FTSE4Good Ranking 98th Percentile 2014 ICSA Excellence in Governance Award Best sustainability and stakeholder disclosure in a FTSE 250 CDP Investor member since 2015 Top 20 most active and influential members UN PRI Clearinghouse 2015 and 2016 49% Female employees in 2016 Over 5000 16 to 24 year olds engaged in Rathbones Financial Awareness Programme Moved head office to awardwinning BREEAM Excellentsite CSR strategy review During 2017 Rathbones undertook an indepth review of CSR with the aim of developing a framework for promoting sustainability across the business and ensuring good corporate citizenship.
Through consultation with key stakeholders we considered material sustai nability issues alongside key drivers for our business.
This review was an important first step towards the definition of a longerterm roadmap to sustainability and identified the following four pillars as most relevant to our business.
Employees
Rathbones began life as a family business.
Many of our employees are also shareholders and the success of our business is intri nsically linked to our people.
We recognise that ev ery person around the world deserves to be treated with dignity and equality and our responsibility to respect the human rights of our direct employees and those within our supply chain.
Governance and stewardship At Rathbones we believe in the importance of adopting best practice corporate governance standards and managing companies and investments in the longterm interests of shareholders.
As with good governance and responsible stewardship sustainability at its heart is about promoting longterm success.
Environment
For the last 10 years Rathbones has reported its environmental impacts and acted to reduce them.
No w more than ever we recogn ise the importance of tackling environmental issues and that every business regardless of sect or must act to reduce its ecological footprint.
Social and community Rathbones is part of an increasingly interconnected global commun ity.
We recognise the importance of acting to promote wellbein g and maximise the positive impacts of our business in the societies and communities within which we operate.
By promoting the succes s of those around us we can help to generate the co nditions for sustainable growth in our business.
Four pillars of sustainability High level sustainability drivers themes and stakeholders Key drivers Stakeholders Themes Governance and stewardship
Climate change low carbon investment Air pollution
Paper usedeforestation
Social and community
Communities
Suppliers
Clients
Responsible investment trends
Millennials as employees and clients Diversity transparency gender pay in financial services Employee engagement Supply chain workers action on modern slavery Responsible investment Anticorruption practices
Management structure
Respect for human rights Volunteering charitable giving site Strategic report Corporate responsibility report continued 52 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 Looking forward Rathbones continued action on CSR is driven by the following co nsiderations.
Firstly it is our longstanding and collective de sire to be a good corporate citizen.
We recognise that acting on sustainability issues is the right thing to do.
Over the next 10 years we fully expect the importance of acting sustainably to increa se for our business and its stakeholders  the clients we serve our employees the local and global communities within which we operate and our suppliers and delivery partners.
Secondly we recognise this increasing focus on sustainability issues as one of several leading trends that will impact and def ine businesses in every sector the over the coming years.
Already we see a growth in related regulation and the need for transparency on socia l and environmental issues.
The advent of millenni als as employees and customers of our busi ness will serve to accelerate interest bo th in acting responsibly as a business and in responsible investme nt opportunities.
For these reasons Rathbones will continue to increase its focus on sustainability issues.
In 2018 we will further develop our programme of action across the four pillars identified above and by 2020 we will produce a dedicated standalone report on our CSR perform ance.
The strategic report contains certain forwardlooking statements which are made by the directors in good faith based on the information available to them at the time of their approval of this annual report.
Statements contained within the strategic report should be treated with some caution due to the inherent uncertainties including but not limited to those arising from economic regulatory and business risk factors underlying any such forwardlooking statements.
The strategic report has been prepared by Rathbone Brothers Plc to provide information to its shareholders and should not be relied upon for any other purpose.
Pages 1 to 56 constitute the strategic report which was approved by the board and signed on its behalf by Philip Howell Paul Stockton Chief Executive Finance Director 21 February 2018 56 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 Governance 58 Corporate governance report 58 Introduction from the chairman 60 Governance at a glance 62 Our leadership 64 The role of the board 66 Board and board committee evaluation 67 Risk management 67 Relations with shareholders 68 Group risk committee report 70 Audit committee report 76 Nomination committee report 78 Group executive committee report 80 Remuneration committee report 80 Remuneration committee chairmans annual statement 84 Remuneration outcomes for 2017 86 Our new remuneration policy 88 Directors remuneration policy 91 Key changes to the remuneration policy 94 Annual report on remuneration 104 Directors report 106 Statement of directorssite Governance Corporate governance report 58 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 I am pleased to introduce the co rporate governance report for 2017 which includes commenta ries from me and the other committee chairmen.
The report explains how we applied the principles of good governance including the provisions of the 2016 edition of the Financial Reporting Councils FRC UK Corporate Governance Code the Code The board recognises and champions the benefits of good governance across the firm.
We understand that a good governance framework creates a solid foundation which enables us to act in the best interests of our clients shareholders and other stakeholders.
Culture
The board places great importance on the firms culture which has developed over many years and represents a key competitive advantage.
The firms client focus and integrity is fundamental to achieving the best results for clients and shareholders over the long term.
In order to assess the firms culture a fundamental review was conducted in 2016 and the findings were discussed at length by the board and executive committee.
A number of metrics were agreed with ongoing monitoring by the conduct risk committee and quarterly board updates.
In addition a cu lture dashboard relating to clients colleagues and other stakeholders has been developed which enables the group risk committee and the board to review and monitor key metrics.
To provide helpful colour to this data an additional paper is prepared giving illustrative examples of good and poor conduc t in the firm.
My nonexecutive director colleagues and I have also continued during the year to assess the firms culture through direct engagement both formal and informal with in vestment managers and other employees throughout the business.
The biggest challenges to our cult ure include the increase in the size of our business and the plethora of new regulation.
This brings with it the need for greater formalities in processes and for more detailed data on clients and their changing circumstances .
Board and executive succession After a rigorous recruitment proce ss we were delighted to welcome Jim Pettigrew to the board in March 2017.
A comprehensive and tailored induction programme was arranged for Jim to introduce him to the business and provide industry context.
Additional detail of the induction programme is provided later in the report.
Jim was appointed senior indepe ndent director in May 2017 following the retirement of David Harrel.
The board recognises the importance of planning for the future and ensuring that succession pl ans are in place and embedded throughout the firm.
Kathryn Matthews is due to stand down by the end of 2018 having served nine years as a director.
We have engaged independent search consultants to find someone with the experience and skills to repl ace Kathryn as chairman of the group risk committee.
Following a skills audit which was initiated by the nomination committee and presented to the board consideration is being given to recruiting an additional non executive director with the aim of bringing new skills to the board taking account of the existing ba lance of knowledge experience and diversity.
In addition the board has discussed and approved the recommendations from the nomination committee to strengthen and formalise executive succession planning and talent management processes throughout the firm.
The Code can be found at www. rc.
58 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 Board meetings During the year the board held seven scheduled meetings and met formally and informally on many occasions.
Prior to each scheduled board meeting I meet with the nonexecutive directors to discuss any significant matters arising from the board papers and the focus of any challenges.
We receive written reports on the development of the business and key performance indicators together with detailed updates on the progress of agreed strategic initiatives.
Each board meeting is attended for relevant items by members of the executive committee so that we can discuss their respective areas of responsibility in depth.
In between board meetings I main tain frequent contact with the executive team and in particular the chief executive who keeps me apprised of progress and key developments.
Philip and I also discuss how to bring issues to th e board in the most effective way.
Our senior independent direct or Jim Pettigrew and I are in frequent contact and I often discuss with him my thinking on significant board issues.
Jim and I are also in regular dialogue with our other nonexecutive colleagues to ensure that any areas of concern are aired.
Board effectiveness As it had been three years since our last external board evaluation Independent Audit were appointed during 2017 to conduct a review of the board.
Their report provided a helpful analysis of the boards strengths and weaknesses and overall was both positive and constructive.
Further details can be found later in the report.
Remuneration policy We are due to present our remuneration policy for approval at the 2018 annual general meeting AGM  as it has been three years since our policy was last approved in 2015.
The remuneration committee has assessed our policy in the context of a changing external environment and the firms own requirements.
While maintaining the principal features of our existing policy a number of small changes have been proposed to align the interests of executives and investors more closely.
The chairman of the remuneration committee Sarah Gentleman carried out an extensive consultation exercise with our largest shareholders before finalising the new policy.
Further details about the changes to our policy can be found in the remuneration report on page 80.
Looking forward The nomination committee continues to take into consideration the recommendations of the Davies report and the McGregor Smith initial review on board diversity.
Currently our two female directors represent 29% of the total board membership.
As a board we acknowledge the importance of board diversity and looking forward regard will be given to female representation targets during the recruitment process.
The firm will ensure that there are no barriers to women succeeding at the highest levels.
Governance Chairman
Leads the board and sets the agenda for board discussions Ensures the board is effective Encourages the presentation of accurate clear and timely information Promotes effective and constructive dialogue between nonexecutive directors executive directors and the executive team Chairs the nomination committee which considers the composition of the board and succession plans Evaluates the performance of the board its committees and individual directors on an annual basis Governance at a glance Our governance framework An overview of the firms governance structure and respective roles are provided below.
Corporate governance report continued Company Secretary Develops board and committee agendas and distributes board packs Ensures board procedures are observed Advises on corporate governance matters Available to all directors Board committees Remuneration committee Chaired by Sarah Gentleman Determines and sets the firms remuneration philosophy ensuring it is aligned with the business plan and risk appetite Approves the remuneration policy for executive directors for final approval by shareholders and makes remuneration decisions within the policy Approves total annual remuneration for executive directors based on achievements against objectives set by the committee Reviews total annual remuneration for executive committee members and material risk takers
Chief Executive Officer
Provides executive leadership and management to the business Responsible for the effectiveness of the executive committee Delivers on strategic objectives set by the board in line with the groups risk appetite Oversees the financial position of the group Maintains strong relationships with the chairman the board and key shareholders Nonexecutive Directors Provide constructive challenge to management performance and strategy Contribute to the firms strategy Provide independent judgement to the board Senior Independent Director Acts as a sounding board for the chairman and serves as an intermediary for the other directors if required Holds meeting with the nonexecutive directors without the chairman present at least annually Leads the board in the ongoing monitoring and annual performance evaluation of the chairman Is available to meet with a range of major shareholders to develop a balanced understanding of their issues and concerns and report the outcome of such meetings to the board
Board of directors Chaired by Mark Nicholls Accountable to shareholders for the longterm sustainable success of the group.
This is achieved through setting out the strategy monitoring strategic objectives and providing oversight of the implementation of these objectives by the management team.
60 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 Group risk committee Chaired by Kathryn Matthews Reviews the effectiveness of the risk management framework Reviews the firms risk appetite Assesses the firms compliance and antimoney laundering policies Reviews key regulatory submissions Audit committee Chaired by James Dean Reviews the integrity of the firms financial reporting and financial statements Assesses the performance and independence of the external auditor Approves the annual internal audit plan Reviews the effectiveness of the internal audit function and managements response to their findings Nomination committee Chaired by Mark Nicholls Reviews the structure size and composition of the board and committees Assesses and nominates suitable candidates to be appointed to the board Considers talent and succession planning for directors and senior management Board activities in 2017
Held strategy day with group executive to review and discuss progress Reviewed and analysed strategic acquisition opportunities Focused on delivery of organic growth initiatives
Risk management
Monitored the firms principal risks and compliance programme Received detailed report on significant regulatory risks Reviewed the implications of Brexit on the organisation Performance review Oversight of the financial performance of the group Reviewed and approved capital requirements of the firm Approved 2018 budget
Conducted an external board evaluation Appointed senior independent director Approved the firms Modern Slavery Act statement Assessed and oversaw the firms culture Executive committee Chaired by Philip Howell Implements the agreed strategy and the daytoday management of the firm Reviews and discusses the annual business plan and budget Implements investment process and client proposition Male 5
Board diversity 02 years 20% 36 years 40% Over 6 years 40%
Independent nonexecutive 57% Executive 29%
14%site Our leadership Corporate governance report continued Background and career Mark is a lawyer and corporate financier and was appointed as chairman at our 2011 AGM.
After studying law at Cambridge he qualified as a solicitor at Linklaters before joining S G Warburg in 1976.
He became a director of Warburgs in 1984 and head of investment banking in 1994.
In 1996 he joined Royal Bank of Scotland and became head of their private equity group leaving in 2003 to pursue a plural career.
He is currently chairman of the West Bromwich Building Society and a nonexecutive director of Northern Investors Company PLC.
Current external nonexecutive director roles Northern Investors Company PLC West Bromwich Building Society Background and career Philip was appointed in 2013.
Following an early military career Philip spent over 30 years in the investment banking and private banking sectors undertaking a range of leadership roles as well as gaining considerable general management experience.
He was with Barclays for 24 years which included leadership assignments in Asia and South Africa and subsequently as head of strategy and corporate development focused on the international and private banking divisions.
He continued his involvement in private wealth management firstly as chief executive of Fortis Private Banking and subsequently of Williams de Bro.
Current external nonexecutive director roles
Background and career Paul was appointed group finance director in 2008.
He qualified as a chartered accountant with PriceWaterhouse in 1992.
In 1999 he joined Old Mutual Plc as group financial controller becoming director of finance in 2001 and finance director of Gerrard Limited eight months later.
Two years after the sale of Gerrard in 2005 he left to work initially for Euroclear and subsequently as a divisional finance director of the Phoenix Group.
He was formerly a director of the Financial Services Compensation Scheme.
Current external nonexecutive director roles
Appointment 01122010 Age 68 Board committees Re N Appointment 01122013 Age 62 Board committees E Appointment 24092008 Age 52 Board committees E Mark Nicholls
Philip Howell Chief Executive Paul Stockton Finance Director Executive directors Chairman Board committees A Audit committee E Executive committee N Nomination committee Re Remuneration committee Ri Group risk committee Bold in biographies indicates committee chairman 62 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 Background and career Jim was appointed as a nonexecutive director at our 2017 AGM and was appointed as senior independent director in May 2017.
He is a chartered accountant and was formerly president of ICAS and Chief Executive Officer of CMC Markets plc Chief Operating Officer of Ashmore Group plc and Group Finance Director of ICAP plc.
He was previously nonexecutive director of Aberdeen Asset Management plc AON UK Ltd Hermes Fund Managers Ltd Crest Nicholson Plc and Edinburgh Investment Trust Plc.
Current external nonexecutive director roles CYBG Plc RBC Europe Limited Miton Group Plc Scottish Financial Enterprise Appointment 06032017 Age 59 Board committees A Re N Ri Jim Pettigrew Nonexecutive Director and Senior Independent Director Nonexecutive directors Background and career James was appointed as a nonexecutive director in 2013 and is chairman of our audit committee.
He is a chartered accountant with over 30 years experience working in financial services.
He has worked in a variety of roles at Ernst and Y oung over a period of 14 years including holding the position of managing partner for the UK Financial Services Audit Practice for four years.
Current external nonexecutive director roles Liverpool Victoria Friendly Society The Stafford Railway Building Society Background and career Sarah was appointed as a nonexecutive director in 2015 and is chairman of our remuneration committee.
She started her career as a consultant at McKinsey and Company and then worked for several years in the telecoms and digital sectors latterly as chief financial officer of the LCR Telecom
In 1999 she joined the internet bank Egg the internet banking subsidiary of Prudential where she was responsible for business development and strategy.
In 2005 she joined Sanford C.
Bernstein and Co the institutional research and trading arm of Alliance Bernstein as a banking analyst covering the European banking sector.
Current external nonexecutive director roles
Background and career Kathryn was appointed as a nonexecutive director in 2010 and is chairman of the risk committee.
She has spent her entire career in investment management including her time as chief investment officer Asia Pacific ex Japan for Fidelity International.
Prior to that she held senior appointments with William M Mercer AXA Investment Managers Santander Global Advisers and Baring Asset Management.
Current external nonexecutive director roles Aperam S.
J P Morgan Chinese Investment Trust Plc BT Investment Management
Barclays Bank UK Plc Appointment 01112013 Age 60 Board committees A Re N Ri Appointment 21012015 Age 47 Board committees A Re N Ri Appointment 06012010 Age 58 Board committees A Re N Ri James Dean Nonexecutive Director
Sarah Gentleman Nonexecutive Director
Kathryn Matthews Nonexecutive Director
Governance Corporate governance report continued 64 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 The role of the board The board provides the leaders hip and oversight to ensure longterm success for the company and its stakeholders.
To achieve this goal the board requires a diverse and talented membership with a range of skills and experience and the ability to challenge and support the executive management.
The board has a strong nonexecutive team which currently comprises former executives with financial risk management and operational experience drawn from a variety of financial institutions.
In addition the broad experience of the nonexecutive directors allows them to understand the challenges and opportunities that face the firm and enables them to contribute to discussions and decisions.
Board meetings Most scheduled board meetings are preceded by a board dinner which allows for broader discussions on particular topics.
The board dinners also provide an opportunity for the board to meet members of the management team or to receive training.
In months where no formal board meeting is scheduled an informal meeting of the nonexecutive directors the chairman and the chief executive is generally held.
The nonexecutive directors also have informal meetings without the chairman or chief executive present.
The roles of the chairman the chief executive the senior independent director and the non executive directors have been clearly defined and agreed by the board to ensure a separation of power and authority.
At every board meeting the chief executive updates the board on the implementation of strategy and recent developments.
The finance director reviews the financial performance and forecasts against plan and market expectations.
The chief risk officer updates the board on key risk areas and any emerging regulatory issues which impact the busine ss.
The board is updated on shareholder sentiment and sign ificant changes in the share register.
In addition members of the executive committee attend meetings as required to presen t and discuss progress in their individual businesses and functions.
Specific areas of focus and major decisions taken by the board during the year in line with its matters reserved mandate are listed below.
Reviewed and assessed st rategic initiatives Scrutinised the benefits of and monitored progress on the proposed merger with Smith and Williamson Approved the firms risk framework and appetite Reviewed the firms risk management and internal controls systems Oversaw financial performance against plan and market expectations Focused on managements delivery of organic growth initiatives Assessed and approved the firms capital adequacy annual budget Monitored and assessed the firms culture Approved interim and full year financial statements interim dividend and recommended final dividend Approved the firms viability statement and going concern disclosure for the year ended 31 December 2016 Approved the 2016 report and accounts to shareholders against the fair balanced and understandable criteria.
Operations of the board The board has a rolling agenda which ensures that key matters are addressed.
The board held seven scheduled meetings during the year a strategy day and had a num ber of additional formal and informal meetings.
The board also appointed a committee to ensure close nonexecutive di rector involvement in the discussions with Smith and Williamson.
The chairman and the company secretary manage board and committee meetings and ensure that the board and particularly the nonexecutive directors receive appropriate and balanced information.
The company secretary manages the timely circulation of information to the board.
All board papers ar e prepared by executives and clearly indicate the action required.
As part of the annual board evaluation process board members provided input into the level and quality of the information that is provided.
In addition the company secretary ensures board procedures are complied with and applicable rules are followed.
The company secretary facilitates the induction process for new directors assists with their professional development and advises the board on corporate governance matters and on the rules and regulations that affect a UKlisted company.
The appointment or removal of the company secretary is a matter for the board.
Board attendance
Meetings attended eligible to attend M P Nicholls chairman 77 J W Dean 77 S F Gentleman 77 J N Pettigrew P L Howell 77 K A Matthews 77 R P Stockton 77 Former directors D T D Harrel Jim Pettigrew joined the board on 6 March 2017 David Harrel stepped down as a director on 10 May 2017 64 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017
The board on the recommendation of the nomination committee considers that all of the nonexec utive directors are independent.
All board members are required to disclose any external positions or interests which may conflict with their directorship of Rathbones prior to their appointment so that any potential conflict can be properly assessed.
The board has regard to the fact the experienced nonexecutive directors in financial firms are a valuable resource and may sit on several boards.
Conflicts of interest can generally be mana ged by due proc ess and common sense.
In this regard the board carefully analysed the regulatory and governance risks attached to the appointment of Jim Pettigrew since he is chairman of Miton Group.
After consulting with Jim and asse ssing his time comm itments the board approved the appointment but put in place procedures and requirements which need to be observed by Jim.
The board also considered carefully the risks attached to the proposed appointment of Kathryn Matthews to the board of Barclays Bank UK Plc.
After consulting with Kathryn and assessing her time commitments the board approved the appointment but put in place procedures and requirements which Kathryn must observe.
Board induction Our nonexecutive directors are offered a comprehensive and tailored induction programme to introduce them to the business industry and regulatory context.
The programme is based on one toone meetings with the executive directors and executive committee members the heads of group functions and the company secretary and covers the areas of business outlined below.
Business review
Strategic direction and priorities Business strategy and market analysis Risk appetite principal risks and risk management framework
Performance and market positioning Review of financial and market performance Recent analyst and media coverage Budget review Analysis of shareholder base and investor perception Shareholder engagement Regulatory environment Overview of the groups key compliance and regulatory policies Recent changes in regulatory landscape and impact of upcoming regulatory developments Hot topics and key priorities People culture and values Discussion of key business principles and the firms culture Key people and succession plans Board procedures and governance framework Board structure processes and relationships Board interaction with key business areas Overview of listed company obligations reporting and governance framework Directors duties and responsibilities Board development The firm is committed to the training and development of all staff to ensure professional standards are maintained and enhanced.
All directors are encouraged to update their skills and any training needs are assessed as part of the board evaluation process.
Their knowledge and the nonexecutive directors familiarity with the firm is facilitated by access to senior management and visits to teams in London and offices across the country.
The company secretary assists with profession al development requirements of the board.
In addition the boa rd receives mandatory annual training on the following areas
SEC obligations ICAAP and ILAAP During the year the board received presentations on the impact of the General Data Protection Regulation GDPR and MiFID II Markets in Financial Instruments Directive on the firm including the associated change programmes that will be involved.
Finally committee members also receive regular updates on technical developments at scheduled meetings.
Governance of the company In relation to compliance with the Code this report together with the directors report states the position at 21 February 2018.
The Code was updated in April 2016 by the FRC and applies to the companys 2017 financial year.
The directors have considered the contents and recommendations of the Code and confirm that throughout the year the company has applied the main principles and complied with the provisions of the Code.
Board diversity policy Diversity including professional and ethnic diversity is a key factor when assessing the boards composition.
It ensures there is the correct balance of skills ex perience and expertise amongst nonexecutive directors to lead decisionmaking and assess the performance and strategy of the company.
The board has adopted a board diversity policy to ensure transparency and diversity in making appointments to the board on the recommendation of the nomination committee.
This policy expresses our commitment to the principle of nondiscrimination and to the promotion of fair participation and equality of opportunity for all.
The gender balance of the board is also taken into consideration when recruiting a new nonexecutive director.
This is reflected by the current composition of the board.
Governance Corporate governance report continued 66 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 Board and board committee evaluation The boards effectiveness composition and operation are reviewed and assessed on an annual basis.
Every three years the evaluation is undertaken externally.
Accordingly in 2017 Independent Audit Limited were selected to evaluate the board.
Independent Audit have no connection to the firm.
This evaluation involved observ ing a board meet ing reviewing board papers and conducting interviews with all board members members of the executive committee who attend board meetings and the company secretary.
The review covered a number of topics including succession planning board operations and dynamics governance and compos ition.
The evaluation also looked at the board committees and how they operated.
The review concluded that all directors enjoy serving on the board and are proud to be associated with Rathbones.
The review identified a number of strengths but also areas for further improvement.
All the interviewees described the very high degree of integrity shared by all directors matched by a strong commitment to Rathbones and a universal desire to see it flourish.
The key themes identified in the report were as follows.
Strengths of the board Board dynamics the board is not only functioning well but also has the capacity and will to improve.
Interactions have a balance between efficiency and amicability although there is still a need to work on buildin g a more collegiate atmosphere and sense of common purpose Risk control there have been significant improvements in this area in recent years.
It was widely felt that risks are correctly identified and that mechanisms for controlling and mitigating them are effective Internal audit praise for the way audit issues are managed at board level Board committees the board committees were found to be operating effectively and were we ll run.
There was timely and effective reporting to the board Areas for improvement Communication communication from top management could be improved.
This is an area where relatively minor changes could deliver significant improvement Succession planning the board should have clearer timelines generally and greater visibility of the executive succession planning process including increasing the nonexecutive exposure to senior management below executive committee level Board diversity a need to revi ew the composition of the board to ensure that diversity in its br oadest sense age outlook skills and ethnicity is considered Overall the conclusion from th e board evaluation and appraisal process was positive with all directors contributing actively to the effective performance of the board and the board committees of which he or she is a member.
Th e new nonexecutive director had settled in well and felt he had received a comprehensive and useful induction.
The review confirmed the strengths that had been identified in 2014 and identi fied a number of areas of focus for further improvement.
The board is committed to making improvements in these areas.
In addition to the board evaluation process the senior independent director led a separate performance review in respect of the chairman which involved a review with the nonexecutive directors excluding the chairman and a separate consultation with the chief executive.
The senior independent director subsequently provided feedback to the chairman on his appraisal which confirmed his effectiveness.
Succession planning The nomination committee is responsible for both executive and nonexecutive director succession planning and recommends new appointments to the board.
When making board appointments the board seeks to ensure that there is a diverse range of skills backgrounds and experience including relevant industry experience.
Further information is included in the nomination committee report.
Board committees Details of the work of the principal board committees are set out in the separate reports for each comm ittee which follow this report.
Accountability
The statement of directors responsibility for preparing the annual report and accounts is set out at the end of this governance section.
Within this the director s have included a statement that the annual report and accounts present a fair balanced and understandable assessment of the gr oups position and prospects.
To help the board discharge its responsibilities in this area the board consulted the audit committee which advised on the key considerations to comply with best practice and the Codes requirements.
Following the committees advice the board considered and concluded that the business model and strate gy were clearly described the assessment of performance was balanced the language used was concise with good linkages to different parts of the document an appropriate forwardlooking orientation had been adopted.
The directors report on viability and the going concern basis of accounting which the directors have determined to be appropriate can be found in the strategic report which also describes the groups perf ormance during the year.
66 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017
Risk management
In accordance with the Code the board is required to monitor the firms risk management and internal controls systems on an ongoing basis.
They carry out a re view of their effectiveness and report on this review to shareholders.
Details of the companys ongoing process for identifying assessing and managing the principal risks faced by the firm are contained in the risk management section on pages 21 to 27 together with details of those principal risks and their relate d mitigating factors.
Whilst the board retains overall responsibility for the firms risk management and internal controls systems it has delegated oversight to the audit and risk committees.
The groups financial controls fr amework is designed to provide assurance that proper accoun ting records are adequately maintained and that financial information used with in the business and for external publication is reliable and free from material misstatement thereby safeguarding the companys assets.
The board receives regular reports from the chairman of the risk committee and chief risk officer on the key risks facing the firm that may impact on operational and financial objectives.
This assessment is completed together with assurance that the level of risk retained is consistent with and is being managed in accordance with the boards risk appetite.
These reports include current and forwardlooking assessments of capital and liquidity adequacy and a summary risk dashboard is presented.
Also during the year the board reviewed and approved the operational risk assessment process for the 2017 ICAAP document which includes a capital assessment of financial conduct and operational risks.
The board assesses the effectiveness of the firms internal controls on an annual basis an d a report is provided for consideration.
The report is considered one element of the overall assurance processes and other references for board consideration include reports emanating from first line of defence and second line of defence assurance teams including group compliance anti money laundering AML as well as the investment risk team and information security.
A oneyear riskbased approach drives internal audit coverage and over the course of the year review work by the function covers all material controls across the firm including compliance operations and financial.
The observations arising from this work form the basis for the annual internal audit opinion.
Following these reviews the board concluded that the firms risk management processes were effective and there were no significant weaknesses or fa ilings in the system of internal controls.
Relations with shareholders The board is committed to proactive and constructive engagement with the firms investors and is keen to develop its understanding of shareholder views.
Effective communication with investors and analysts regarding the firms strategy and performance is held through regular meetings and roadshows by th e chief executive and finance director.
The board receives and discusses shareholder and analyst feedback at each boar d meeting.
The chairman and nonexecutive directors are also available to meet with investors at the AGM.
Investor relations activity in 2017 included the following 2016 yearend results UK in vestor roadshow and analyst presentations Q1 trading update analyst call Annual general meeting all directors available for questions 2017 interim results UK investor roadshow and analyst presentations.
On the initiative of the chairman of the remuneration committee shareholder consultation letters were issued to our 15 largest shareholders on our proposed new remuneration policy and meetings held with those interested to discuss the proposed changes.
We will also continue to engage with ISS Institutional Shareholder Services and the Institutional Voting Information Service IVIS of the Investment Association and Pensions and Investment Research Consultants Ltd PIRC before the AGM.
During 2017 the key areas which the chief executive and finance director have discussed wi th investors included progress on strategic initiatives the proposed merger with Smith and Williamson industry trends including consolidation and the increased use of technology upcoming changes to regulation including MiFID II the FCA Asset Management Review and GDPR the closure of our defined benefit pension schemes the London office move to Finsbury Circus and progress on the letting of our Curzon Street premises.
Shareholder meetings We welcome shareholders to our AGM in May each year.
At every AGM our shareholders are given an overview of the progress of the business and outlook for the year.
This is followed by the opportunity for shareholders to ask questions about the resolutions before the meeting and about the business more generally.
We look forward to meeting shareholders and providing a further business update at our 2018 AGM in May this year.
Governance Group risk committee report 68 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 Membership and attendance Director Meetings attended eligible to attend K A Matthews chairman 44 J W Dean 44 S F Gentleman 44 J N Pettigrew Former director D T D Harrel Jim Pettigrew joined the committee on 6 March 2017 David Harrel retired from the committee on 10 May 2017 Roles and responsibilities The key activities of the commit tee are to provide oversight on the firms risk appetite and framework.
To do this we Review reports from the risk team on risk appetite issues including any early wa rning signals and advise the board accordingly Discuss any loss events and near misses the lessons learned and management action taken Review endtoend process ri sk assessments undertaken and any resulting internal control enhancements Advise the board on the risk aspects of proposed major strategic change Review risk weightings on performance objectives for executive remuneration Review prior to board ap proval key regulatory submissions including the Group Internal Capital Adequacy Assessment Process ICAAP document Full terms of reference for the committee are reviewed annually and are available on the companys website.
Group risk committee chairmans annual statement The group risk committee plays a vital part in helping support the firms governance structure and the ongoing monitoring of the firms risk management framework.
During the year the economic challenges and heavy regulatory agenda coupled with firmspecific risks have kept the committee fully occupied.
There have been ongoing enhancements to our risk management and risk appetite frameworks and we are satisfied that we have the skills and talent across the group to meet the challenges and opportunities that lie ahead.
The committee apportions its time between the planned periodic review of key risks and the close scrutiny of topical business risks as they develop.
This approach allows us to ensure that emerging risks can be identified and debated.
Details of management risk mitigation plans are well understood and appropriate resource is provided.
The committee saw furt her improvement in the quality of the management information that it receives.
During the year I met with the Prudential Regulatory Authority PRA to keep them apprised of our key risks and mitigating factors and the impact of the regulatory agenda on the firm.
Committee meetings Our current members are the independent nonexecutive directors who met on four occasi ons in 2017 2016 four.
Jim
Pettigrew was appointed to the committee following David Harrels retirement as a director in May 2017.
In addition to the members of the committee standing invitations are extended to the chairman th e executive directors the chief risk officer and the head of internal audit.
All attend committee meetings as a matter of course and inform the committees discussions.
Other executive committee members and risk team members are invited to attend the committee from timetotime as required to present and advise on reports commissioned.
I regularly meet with the chief risk officer and her risk team in a combination of formal and informal sessions an d with senior management across all divisions of the group to discuss the business environment and to gather their views of emerging risks.
The committee has an agreed annual standing agenda to cover key risk events in the year and are required to be addressed in accordance with the terms of refe rence.
Prior to each meeting I agree the agenda with the chief risk officer and the company secretary to identify key issues impacting on the firm that may require the committees attention.
At each meeting the committee reviews and considers the risk and compliance dashboards which highlight changes in key risks impacting on the firm.
These dashboards are designed to enable the committee to monitor and focus on ongoing or emerging risks.
In addition the committee receiv es reports and presentations on compliance and antimoney laundering matters including any regulatory changes impacting on the firm.
68 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 69 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 Finally the committee conducted d eep dive reviews on key risks such as the General Data Protection Regulation GDPR internal investment processes and the Internal Liquidity Adequacy Assessment Process ILAAP.
Committee effectiveness A formal and rigorous evaluation of the committees effectiveness was undertaken during the year as part of the external board effectiveness review.
The review found that the committee operated well and ensured that the firms risks were sufficiently analysed during the year.
In addition the committee is satisfied that it has access to sufficient resource to enable it to carry out its duties and continue to perform effectively.
Committee activity in 2017 Further enhancements were made to the groups risk management framework in 2017 including the co ntinued evolution of the three lines of defence model to ensure that it remains aligned to industry and regulatory standards.
The co mmittee also reviewed the risk assessment on the firms vari ous strategic initiatives.
A number of areas of operational risk were stressed as part of the annual ICAAP.
Following robust debate and challenge the committee and board were satisfie d that the groups business model and allocated risk appetite remained appropriate.
This is an important outcome given the number of change management programmes underway across the group and in our regular meetings there is specific focus on the progress of key projects and initiatives.
The list below summarises the key issues that the committee considered at each of its meetings during the year in addition to standing reports from each control function.
February 2017 Review of investment risk report Annual review of the firms risk appetite Review of the compliance report Approval of ICAAP operational risk factors Approval of the firms risk assessment plan Review of risk register and emerging risks June 2017 Approval of ICAAP and reverse stress testing Approval of ILAAP and liquidity contingency plan Approval of recovery and resolution plan Review of the firms culture dashboard Review of risk profile for business continuity Approval of the money laundering reporting officers MLRO annual report Review of risk register and emerging risks Review of terms of reference September 2017 Assessment of key risks of GD PR and investment process Review of risk register and emerging risks December 2017 Approval of risk management policy statement Review of remuneration policy and associated risks with executive remuneration Review of risk register and emerging risks Approval of 2018 ICAAP and ILAAP stress testing proposals Looking ahead to 2018 In reviewing the committees pr iorities for the coming year consideration will be given to the following areas Preparation and continued risk assessment of recent and upcoming regulatory changes such as GDPR Effective risk management framework for external and internal emerging risks Continued assessment of the firms risk culture against its core values Risk assessment on the impact of technology Know Your Client KYC and suitability requirements.
We are committed to the continuing development of our approach to risk management across the three lines of defence.
In the first line we expect to se e delivery of a number of projects currently underway that should strengthen further the sustainability of good client outcomes.
We have recently agreed several additional resources which will be used to strengthen the second line teams in anticipati on of the likely demands arising from the current change agenda.
We also see further convergence between culture risk and compensation as the risk culture approach in the firm is developed and revised compensati on schemes are implemented.
The group risk committee and remuneration committee will continue to work in cooperation to ensure that risk behaviours and the management of risk issues over the course of the financial year are appropriately reflec ted in decisions taken about performance and reward.
Full details of our risk management framework are included in the strategic report on pages 21 to 27.
Governance Audit committee report 70 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 Membership and attendance Director Meetings attended eligible to attend J W Dean chairman 66 S F Gentleman 66 K A Matthews 66 J N Pettigrew Former director D T D Harrel Jim Pettigrew joined the committee on 6 March 2017 David Harrel retired from the committee on 10 May 2017 Roles and responsibilities The key activities of the co mmittee are as follows Provide oversight of the firms financial performance and reporting announcement of results and significant judgements areas Review the firms whistleblowing arrangements and ensuring appropriate and in dependent investigations on matters Review the firms internal controls and effectiveness of the internal audit function Oversee the appointment performance and remuneration of the external auditor including the provision of nonaudit services to the firm Full terms of reference for the committee are reviewed annually and are available on the companys website.
Audit committee chairmans annual statement The audit committees key role is to ensure there is confidence in the integrity of our processes and procedures as they relate to internal financial controls and corporate reporting.
The board relies on the committee to review financial reporting and to appoint and oversee the work of the internal and external auditors.
During 2017 the external environment and market conditions impacted Rathbones which led to another busy year for the audit committee.
The committee has considered a wide range of topics with a focus on the following areas analysis of the firms financial reporting with particular consideration of accounting judgments taken during the preparation of the financial statements review of the firms client assets sourcebook CASS audit and submissions impact of the reporting standards relating to IFRS 9 Financial Instruments IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers and IFRS 16 Leases.
In addition the Financial Reporting Council FRC informed the company that it had reviewed the presentation of investment performance in the annual report for the year ended 31 December 2016.
The FRC stated that th e disclosure on investment performance metrics for asset managers should be expanded to provide additional information on the quartile rankings for fund performance.
The firm submitted a response to the FRC which included the information requested and consideration of potential disclosure in the future.
The FRC confirmed in October 2017 that this matter was closed.
Committee meetings Our current members are the independent nonexecutive directors who met on six occasions in 2017 2016 six.
The board is satisfied that at le ast one member of the committee has recent and relevant financia l experience.
I am a chartered accountant while the other co mmittee members have extensive experience of financial matters and of the financial services industry.
In addition to the members of the committee standing invitations are extended to the chairman execut ive directors chief risk officer head of internal audit financial controller the external audit partner and manager.
Other executives and external advisers are invited to attend the committee fr om timetotime as required to present and advise on reports commissioned.
During the year I have regular meetings with the finance director head of internal audit and the external audit partner to discuss key auditrelated topics ahead of each meeting.
Following the publication of the 2016 UK Corporate Governance Code the Code and revised FRC Guidance for Audit Committees the committees terms of reference were updated.
The changes formalise the committees oversight of internal and external audit arrangements.
The committee has an agreed annual standing agenda to ensure key areas are covered during the year which it is required to address under its terms of reference.
Prior to each meeting I agree the agenda with the finance director and the company secretary.
Committee effectiveness A formal and rigorous evaluation of the committees effectiveness was undertaken during the year as part of the external board effectiveness review.
The review found that the committee was well run and performed at a high standard.
For further information please refer to the corporate governance report.
Governance Audit committee report continued 72 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 Committee activity in 2017 Below is a summary of the ke y issues that the committee considered at each of its meetings during the year.
January 2017 Review of the report and accounts Review of key judgements for the annual report Assessment of going concern and the viability statement Review of 2016 internal audit plan and 2017 internal audit cycle February 2017 Annual review of audit fees Approval of the report and accounts Assessment of the report being fair balanced and understandable Review of the firms distributable reserves and dividend policy for 2017 Year end external audit report and audit opinion Review and approval of representation letter Review of external auditors letter of independence Review and approval of the firms CASS submission May 2017 Annual review of external audit firm processes Review and approval of the Q1 interim management statement Review and approval of the external auditors letter of engagement and audit fee Review of internal audit plan for 2017 and completed assessments across the firm Annual review of the whistleblowing reports for 2016 July 2017 Approval of half year report for 2017 Assessment of the firms statement of going concern External auditors half year review Review and approval of representation letter Review of external auditors letter of independence Proposed audit plan for the year end Review of nonaudit services fees for the year Review of internal audit plan for 2017 and completed assessments across the firm Approval of committees terms of reference October 2017 Review and approval of th e Q3 interim management statement Review of internal audit plan for 2017 and completed assessments across the firm Review planning of internal audit plan for 2018 Approval of the firms nonaudit service policy December 2017 Review of key judgements and provisioning for the year end Review of audit and nonaudit fees for the year Assessment of reporting standard ch anges relating to IFRS 9 15 and 16 site Financial reporting Accounting judgements As part of the committees role of monitoring the integrity of the firms financial information contained in the interim and annual financial statements a review of key accounting judgements and policies that were adopted by management was conducted and assessed.
Following discussion with management and the external auditors the committee concluded that these judgements were appropriate and proportionate for the firm.
Details of these key significant judgements can be found in note 2 of the financial statements on page 126.
Fair balanced and understandable statement The committee considered whethe r the interim statement and report and accounts were fair balanced and understandable and provided the information necessary for shareholders to assess the firms performance business model and strategy.
The committee reviewed the interim and annu al financial statements in conjunction with the narrative sections of the reports to ensure that there was consistency in the information reported that appropriate weight had been given to both positive and negative aspects of business performance and that key messages had been presented coherently.
The committee concluded that taken as a whole the interim statement and the annual report and accounts were fair balanced and understandable.
Viability and going concern The committee considered the re quirements contained in the Code regarding the companys viability statement including the proposed threeyear assessment period.
After significant discussion and having considered the firms current position and impact of potential risks the committee concluded that the three year assessment period cont inued to be appropriate and recommended the draft viability statement as set out on page 28 to the board for approval.
The committee also reviewed the going concern disclosure as set out on page 105 and concluded that the firm had adequate resources to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future and confirmed to the board that it was appropriate for the firms financial statements to be prepared on a going concern basis.
The carrying value of assets We reviewed the methodology for valuing assets where a significant amount of judgement is required including intangible assets particularly goodwill and client relationships.
The valuation of defined benefit pension obligations We reviewed the key assumptions supporting the valuation of defined benefit pension obligations particularly salary increases investment returns inflation and the discount rate which are disclosed in note 27 to the financial statements.
We reviewed the professional advice taken by the company and discussed the assumptions used by us and by other companies with the external auditors.
We satisfied ourselves that the assumptions used were reasonable.
Provisions and contingent liabilities The committee discussed provisions totalling 23.7 million which have been summarised in note 25 to the financial statements.
The main areas of provisions relate to the recognition of the onerous lease relating to 1 Curzon Street deferred payment for acquired business and property dilapidation liabilities.
New accounting standards During the year the committee reviewed three new accounting standards that will be implemen ted over the next two years and will impact on the financial statements as they will have a number of transitional arrangements.
The committee looked at the following i IFRS 9 Following a review of this standard internally and having received external advice the committee ensured that the firms accounting policies and working models were updated to reflect the changes from this standard.
It was noted that no material changes to the financial statements are anticipated as result of adopting this new standard.
IFRS 15 A review was conducted on the impact of this standard and the manner in which the firm is required to capitalise earn out payments.
Following an extensive re view of our contracts it was determined that the net impact of this standard would result in a 8 million adjustment to the op ening equity position and is disclosed in the financial statements.
A review of the firms future lease payments was conducted during the year to establish the potential financial liability that will need to be recognised on the balance sheet.
The firms most significant property lease cont racts were examined and may lead to the firm being required to hold additional capital from the inception of the standard from 1 January 2019.
For further information please refer to note 1.3 to the financial statements on page 118.
Governance Audit committee report continued 74 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 Internal audit Internal audit plan The 2017 internal audit plan was approved by the committee ahead of the start of the year with a greater focus on thematic work.
The internal audit plan is subject to an annual riskbased appraisal.
In setting audit scope the internal audit function will take into account business strategy and form an independent view of whether the key risks to the organisation have been identified including emerging and systematic risks and assess how effectively these risks are being managed.
The status of scheduled work and the followup of agreed actions arising from reviews is reviewed at each meeting to ensure that agreed recommendations are acted upon promptly and regularly reported to the committee.
At each meeting the committe e reviewed the internal audit reports presented by the head of internal audit and monitored progress against the 2017 plan.
In response to feedback from the committee a number of changes were made to the format of the committee report to strengthen the focus on any significant issues identified in the audits and highlight any overdue items.
Whilst no significant weaknesses were identified in any of the internal audit reports a number of improvements to certain processes and controls were implemented in response to the recommendations put forward.
Internal audit function The internal audit func tion is an independent objective assurance activity designed to add value and improve the organisations operations by bringing a system atic disciplined approach to evaluating and improving the effe ctiveness of risk management control and governance processes.
The internal audit function is the third line of defence within the controls framework providing independent assurance to both senior management and the audit committee and reporting to the chairman of the audit committee.
Deloitte LLP were engaged on 1 July 2015 as a cosource partner supplementing the inhouse team.
Deloittes significant resource and knowledge base means they ar e able to provide specialist assistance supporting the annual internal audit planning process as well as technical input into individual audit reviews. and internal audit work.
The committee reviewed the effectiveness of the internal audit function during the year to assess whether the function continued to meet key stakeholder objectives.
The outcome of this review indicated that the internal audit function continued to be effective operating in line with profession al standards and well supported by Deloitte.
As well as meetings with management I have regular meetings on a onetoone basis with the head of internal audit before audit committee meetings to ensure that any concerns can be raised in confidence.
External audit Audit work 2017 KPMG present their audit plan to the committee for review each year.
The committee reviewed and challenged reports from KPMG which outlined their risk assessments and audit plans for 2017 including their proposed materiality level for the performance of the annual audit the status of their audit work and issues arising from it.
Particul ar focus was given to their testing of internal controls their work on the key judgement areas and possible audit adjustments.
We can confirm that there are no such material items remaining unadjusted in the financial statements.
External audit effectiveness and reappointment We place great importance on the quality effectiveness and independence of the external audit process.
In order to review the external audit process including the performance of the external auditors feedback is gathered from both committee members and management.
This process was undertaken by internal audit.
We also reviewed the annual FRC Audit Quality Inspection report prepared on our external auditor and discussed this report with the audit partner.
The assessment of the auditors effectiveness forms part of our annual consid eration of whether the auditor should be recommended to the board for reappointment.
We continue to believe that KPMG LL P are performing effectively and their reappointment will be recommended to shareholders at the 2018 annual general meeting AGM .
There are no contractual or similar obligations restricting the firms choice of external auditors.
External audit review The committee is responsible for reviewing external audit arrangements and for any re commendation to the board regarding change of audit firm.
This includes consideration of the external auditors period in office their compensation and the scope quality and costeffectiveness of their work.
The last audit services contract tender proces s was undertaken in June 2009 which led to the appointment of KPMG in 2009.
We plan to undertake an audit services contract tender process and planning will commence during 2018.
The committee is satisfied that the company has complied during the financial year under review and up to the date of this report with the provisions of the Statutory Audit Services for Large Companies Market Investigation Mandatory Use of Competitor Tender Processes and Audit Committee Responsibilities Order 2014.
Auditor independence and nonaudit services We discussed the independence of the external auditor the nature of nonaudit services supplied by them and nonaudit fee levels relative to the audit fee.
As a result of the EU Audit Directive and Audit Regulations the nonaudit services policy was updated and approved.
The revised policy includes prohibited services and sets a fee guide that aims to achieve a target cap of 70% of the statutory audit fee in any year by 2019.
The committees prior approval is only required where the fee for an individual nonaudit service is expected to exceed 50000 and it is on the list of preapproved services.
Nonaudit fees excluding services re quired by national legislation payable to the auditor in 2017 were 274000.
This represents 71% of the threeyear average statutory audit fee of 385000.
Other
We recognise that given KPMGs knowledge of the business there are often advantages in using the external auditor to provide certain nonaudit services and we are satisfied that their independence has not been impaired by provid ing these services.
This was the case in respect of the work relating to the proposed corporate transaction during the year which resulted in fees slightly exceeding the 70% target cap on nonaudit services.
Prior to undertaking any nonaudit service KPMG LLP also completes its own independence confirmation processes which are approved by the engagement partner.
To provide the committee with oversight in this area it submits sixmonthly reports on the nonaudit services it has provided.
Following a formal assessment of the external auditors independence and objectivity the committee concluded that KPMG continued to be independent and objective.
We agreed the external auditors fees which are shown in note 7 to the financial statements and reviewed the audit engagement letter.
We also had discussions with the external auditor with no management present to provide an opportunity for any concerns to be raised and discussed.
Whistleblowing policy We annually review the firms whistleblowing policy approve any changes to the document and receive details of any reports made.
As well as meetings with management I have regular meetings on a onetoone basis with the head of internal audit before audit committee meetings to ensure that any concerns can be raised in confidence.
Overview of priorities for 2018 As well as considering the standing items of business the committee will also focus on the following areas during 2018 Initiation of the external audit tender process Assessment and implementation of new accounting standards In light of its work the committee was content with the effectiveness of the groups processes governing financial and regulatory reporting and controls its ethical standards and its relationships with regulators.
Approval
This report in its entirety has been approved by the committee and the board of directors and signed on its behalf bysite Governance Nomination committee report 76 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 Membership and attendance Roles and responsibilities The responsibilities of the committee include reviewing the composition including the skills knowledge experience and diversity of the board and making recommendations to the board for the appointment of directors.
The board as a whole then decides on any such appointment.
The committee also has wider responsibilities for succession planning and the leadership n eeds of the organisation both executive and nonexecutive to ensure the continued ability of the firm to implement its st rategy and compete effectively in the marketplace.
Full terms of reference for the committee are reviewed annually and are available on the companys website.
Nomination committee chairmans annual statement The nomination committees primary focus this year has been on succession planning for the board and executive team.
In April 2017 the committee agreed to recommend to the board that Jim Pettigrew be appointed senior independent director following the annual general meeting AGM.
In the following months a number of informal discussions were held about the appropriate composition of the board in the event of a merger with Smith and Williamson.
Following termination of these me rger discussions the committee approved the appointment of Independent Audit Limited to carry out an external board effectiveness review.
This generally positive review was discussed at the November nomination committee meeting prior to being presented to the board in December.
A draft skills matrix was presented to the committee in November in the context of a wider discussi on about strategy and succession planning.
As Kathryn Matthews chairman of the group risk committee will be close to the end of her nine year tenure as a director by the end of 2018 a jo b description for an experienced replacement nonexecutive director was approved in November and an independent search consultant Zygos now part of Russell Reynolds was chosen to undertake the search.
It was agreed that a second nonexecutive appointment would be made if an appropriate candidate is identified.
During 2017 a number of discussions have taken place in the committee about identifying and developing future leaders within the firm.
There has historically been a reluctance among investment managers to take on management responsibilities.
The firm is addressing this by developing a broader management structure within investment management together with a remuneration structure that encourages investment managers to take on management responsibilities.
Succession planning and talent development As mentioned above a key responsibility of the committee is to ensure that the board maintains a balance of skills knowledge and experience appropriate to the operation of the business and required to deliver the strategy.
During 2017 the committee reviewed the composition of the boa rd and considered a the core skills and experience of each director b the independence of each director and c the diversity including age and gender of the board as a whole.
This was used to develop a skills matrix which will underpin the evolution of the board.
Following this review the committee was satisfied that the board continues to have an appropriate mix of skills knowledge and experience to operate effectively.
In addition to their professional skills the directors have collectively many years of experience gained in a wide range of businesses and excellent track records in a range of sectors.
During this process the committee assessed areas which require further development or skills and experience that could be addressed through the recruitment of a new non executive director.
Director
Meetings attended eligible to attend Mark Nicholls chairman S F Gentleman J W Dean K A Matthews J N Pettigrew Former directors D T D Harrel 11site The committee also takes a keen interest in executive succession plans which include executive directors the group executive committee members and management roles across the business.
Potential successors have been identified for many senior management positions and nonexecutive directors have met key individuals as part of normal board interactions and their visits to various teams in London and offices across the country.
The committee continues to receive reports on the talent pipeline which identifies highcalibre individuals with management potential.
The committee acknowledges that in a company the size of Rathbones there may no t always be successors for every senior role.
The committee will continue to focus on this issue as a key part of its remit.
Independence and conflicts of interest It is of the utmost importance that the board of a financial services firm has highquality experience d nonexecutive directors with the skills and integrity to undertake senior management roles.
At Rathbones we are fortunate to have such nonexecutives.
I maintain a dialogue with each of them on potential conflicts of interest and time commitments.
I am quite satisfied that in each case potential conflicts of interest are likely to be rare and will be handled appropriately by the indi vidual concerned.
I have also been impressed by the wholehearted commitment of all our non executive colleagues to Rathbones during a year in which they were often called upon to attend nonscheduled or informal meetings at short notice.
All nonexecutive directors will be standing for reelection at the 2018 AGM.
Board diversity The board recognises the importance of diversity and that it is a wider issue than gender.
We beli eve that members of the board should collectively possess a diverse range of skills expertise industry knowledge business and other experience necessary for the effective oversight of the group.
The nomination committee considers diversity as one of many factors when recommending new appointments to the board.
For further information on our approach to diversity please refe r to the corporate responsibility report on pages 43 to 56.
Board effectiveness review Full details of the process and outcome of this review are set out on page 66.
Looking forward We will continue to keep under review a succession timetable for both executives and nonexecut ives.
We will also monitor the development of management talent below board level in light of the Hampton Alexander review and encourage greater diversity and challenge management to develop the talent that exists in the firm.
Governance Group executive committee report 78 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 Membership and attendance Director Meetings attended eligible to attend P L Howell chairman R N K Baron M T Bolsover J A Butcher I D Darnley A T Morris S OwenJones R I Smeeton R P Stockton M M Webb Roles and responsibilities The committee has been delegated the full powers of the board subject to a list of matters which are reserved for decision by the board.
This li st is reviewed annually and approved by the board.
Full terms of reference for the committee are reviewed annually and are available on the companys website.
Executive committee chairmans annual statement Please see the chief executives review on pages 12 to 14.
Biographies for the executive committee members are available on our website.
Committee meetings We formally meet each month.
These formal meetings are minuted and copies of the mi nutes are sent to committee members and to the board.
Ad hoc and informal meetings are held as required.
Noncommittee members are regularly invited to attend part of a meeting to report on a part icular aspect of our business and nonexecutive directors may also attend meetings.
The committee has an agreed annual standing agenda to cover key areas in the year.
Prior to ea ch meeting I agree the agenda with the company secretary.
What we have done Our main focus is on the implementation of the agreed strategy and on the daytoday manageme nt of the group.
We review and discuss the annual business plan and budget prior to its submission to the board for approval.
We discuss the management and performance of the operating businesses including their results compar ed to the budget risks and regulatory compliance and growth initiatives such as possible acquisitions and new products and services.
Items of particular focus in 2017 were as follows Implementation of the strategic initiatives relating to Rathbone Financial Planning Development of intermediary distribution channel The move to new London premises Implementation of an IT transformational programme Implementation of regulatory changes relating to the General Data Protection Regulation GDPR and MiFID II Markets in Financial Instruments Directive Review of investment processes and development of the client journey site Our people are our main asset and so human resources HR matters and learning and development are important agenda items.
The maintenance of and improvement in our core IT and operations infrastructure are key to the continuing success of the business and are subject to close scrutiny.
The chief risk officer reports on the work of the risk and compliance teams and updates us on risk and internal control matters as well as on industry developments.
We receive updates from internal audit on their work schedule and discuss any significant issues they raise following their work.
The head of internal audit may attend any meeting.
We also have oversight of business units banking matters marketing social and environmental matters business continuity and investor relations.
Overview of priorities for 2018 As well as considering the standing items of business the committee will also focus on the following areas during 2018 Implementation of planned enhancements to our investment process Implementation of our IT transformation programme Implementation of new regulatory regimes including MiFID II and GDPR Delivery of our strategic growth projects Formulation of the next fiveyear strategic plan Sublet of our former Curzon Street premises Philip Howell Chairman of the executive committee 21 February 2018 Executive committee members Our current members are below.
Governance Remuneration committee report 80 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 Membership and attendance Director Meetings attended eligible to attend S F Gentleman chairman 44 J W Dean 44 K A Matthews 44 M P Nicholls 44 J N Pettigrew Former director D T D Harrel Jim Pettigrew joined the committee on 6 March 2017 David Harrel stepped down as chairman of the committee on 11 May 2017 Roles and responsibilities The committees responsibilities are Determine and set the firms remuneration philosophy ensuring that it is aligned wi th the business plan and risk appetite Approve the remuneration poli cy for executive directors for final approval by shareholders and make remuneration decisions within the policy Approve total annual remuneration for executive directors based on achievements against objectives set by the committee Review total annual remuneration for executive committee members and material risk takers Full terms of reference for the committee are reviewed annually and are available on the companys website.
Remuneration committee chairmans annual statement On behalf of the board I am pleased to present my first directors remuneration report as chairman having been appointed following the 2017 annual general meeting AGM.
I would like to thank my predecessor David Harr el for his contribution to the committee and support throughout my transition to this role.
2017 has been a busy year for the remuneration committee.
In addition to the committees usual activities we have undertaken an extensive review of the remune ration policy which applies to executive directors in order to ensure that it remains fit for purpose aligned to our business strategy and supportive of the interests of shareholders and clients.
We have also ensured that the key principles of the remuneration policy are consistently applied to executive committee members.
As part of this process I had the opportunity to meet with a number of our larger shareholders to discuss our proposed revisions to our remuneration policy that will apply for the next three years.
I would personally like to thank them all for their valuable and considered input into this process.
Their feedback has been very helpful in info rming the committees view.
2017 performance and remuneration outcomes Our remuneration framework is closely aligned with the financial performance of the group which has been strong in 2017 as continued growth and robust investment markets helped funds under management reach 39.1 billion at 31 December 2017.
This performance is reflected in the 17.6% growth in 2017 profit before tax to 58.9 million and an underlyi ng operating margin of 30.6%.
Consequently these financial outc omes are directly reflected in the respective elements of the Executive Incentive Plan EIP which delivered above target performance in respect of threeyear return on capital employed ROCE  annual profit before tax and underlying operating margin.
Due largely to the nonunderlying costs associated with the relocation of our London office threshold performance in respect of earnings per share EPS was not achieved.
Similarly whilst th e total net organic growth of our Investment Management and Unit Trusts businesses in 2017 was 5.2% this was not enough to meet the 5.5% threshold.
Positive progress was made during the year on the nonfinancial objectives which cover critical project performance stakeholder measures and client experience.
We have set out in more detail the EIP results for 2017 on page 95.
A new remuneration policy for 2018 In line with our now established threeyear cycle a new remuneration policy is being put forward to our shareholders for approval at our AGM in May 2018.
In setting this policy the priorities for the committee have been to ensure that remuneration structures and performance measures support the future strategy of ou r business reflecting the need for investment at different times in the market cycle and the opportunities for inorganic growth that may arise align the reward received by our executive directors and the experience and interests of our shareholders continue to comply with regulations and industry best practice.
A summary of the proposed changes to our policy is set out below with further details presented on pages 86 and 87.
There are no material changes to the EIP structure but we have increased the level of disclosure We operate one single incentive plan for executive directors the EIP which combines both short and long term metrics and recognise that it is atypical in the market.
We believe however that it continues to work well in incentivising positive business and financial performance and aligning the interests of executive directors with our shareholders and clients.
We therefore propose to retain the EIP structure in its current form.
The committee has however recognised that market practice has moved on since the policy was last approved.
From a shareholder perspective the key difference in our approach when compared with a more traditional annual bonus and longterm incentive construct is the additional disclosure of longterm performance metrics that accompany separate longterm incentive schemes.
This year therefore we will disclose on a forwardlooking basis the longterm performance ranges against which we will be assessing performance.
This aims to improve transparency for shareholders as to the performa nce ranges that will apply to the longterm elements of our plan.
The longterm targets for the 20182020 cycle are disclosed on page 87 of this report.
Increase the maximum opportunity under the EIP from 200% to 300% of salary and retained holding restrictions Our existing remuneration policy was introduced at a time when there was significant regulatory uncertainty as to whether smaller banks would be required to comply with new bonus capping requirements introduced under the Capital Requirements Directive.
In response to this uncertainty and anticipating that this would be likely to become requir ed practice across the sector a maximum 200% cap was included in our remuneration policy which was approved in advance of any clarification from the regulator regarding its expectation.
Our approach however reserved the firms position regarding fixed salaries until the regulations became clearer.
The UK regulator has since confirmed that it does not expect smaller banks including Rathbones to comply with this capping requirement.
In reviewing our remuneration policy the committee has concluded that this cap has reduced total remuneration levels to an uncompetitive level when compared to peers who as nonbanks did not and were not required to apply the cap in a similar way.
Governance Remuneration committee report continued 82 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 The committee discussed at length the appropriateness of increasing the maximum opportunity of the EIP in the current environment recognising the wider sensitivities and market focus on executive pay and the award quantum at this time.
We placed considerable emphasis on the importance to shareholders an d stakeholders of ensuring that the remuneration arrangements we have in place were sufficiently competitive and appropriate both for current and any future executives.
In order to increase alignment with performance it was determined that any increase should be applied to the incentive element of the plan as opposed to fixed pay.
In setting the quantum of the award the committee observed that the proposed package for the executive directors was consistent with the lower quartile of our competitive market.
This reflected the committees de sire to balance the need for an award increase with any concerns on pay ratcheting andor excessive focus on benchmarking.
The committee reaffirmed the current fiveyear holding and vesting provisions associated with all deferred share awards to ensure that executive director interests were aligned for the longer term.
Recognising the wider sensitivities to increasing quantum the committee was very keen to test the proposal with shareholders as part of a consultation process before finalising its decision.
The committee gained a high level of confidence from this process as a significant majority of the shareholders consulted which covered 50% of our register understood the changes and were very supportive noting the context of current relatively modest salary levels and lower leverage compared to other listed peers.
Increase in the weighting of pe rformance metrics linked to both the longterm and financial performance whilst removing personal objectives In the consultation process some shareholders did highlight a desire for a greater proportion of the EIP to be based on financial metrics only to ensure that only a similar proportion of the total EIP award as a percentage of base salary could be earned from the nonfinanc ial components.
We have accordingly amended the weightings of our performance measures to reduce the nonfinancial weighting and have removed the personal component altogether.
The personal objective element 20% has been replaced with a 5% increase in the strategic element a 5% increase to the shortterm financial metrics and a 10% increase to the long term financial metrics.
Overall this means the EIP will be 80% weighted towards financial metrics of which 50% are weighted to longterm.
This combined with the fiveyear deferral and full restriction on share sales over this period means a significant portion of this plan is measured over eight years.
In removing the personal element the committee noted the tension between investors desire for less subjectivity and the desire of UK regulators to align conduct with remuneration.
Our policy requires that a minimum of 70% of the EIP will be based on financial performance measures.
This is to ensure that the committee has maximum flexibility to change the weightings of these different elements as appropriate.
This is importan t recognising that we are coming towards the end of our current fiveyear strategy planning period and require an incentive structure which can support any refinements of our strategy in 2019.
We would consult with shareholders before making any changes to the weightings as they have been implemented for 2018.
Other changes In order to align to best practice and the expectations of our shareholders the current shareholding requirements applied to our executive directors will increase to 200% from the current 100% of base salary.
In addition new postcessation holding requirements will also apply requiring our executive directors to continue to meet the shareholding requirements in full for at least one year postcessation and to continue to meet 50% of the shar eholding requirements for the second year postcessation.
In light of other changes the committee felt it appropriate to reduce the maximum policy level of pension contributions for the executive directors from 14% of base salary to 12%.
This change aligns more closely to the maximum level of pension contributions of the majority of our wider workforce.
Our new remuneration policy will have immediate effect subject to approval from our shareholders.
Further detail on the new remuneration policy and more detail on these changes can be found on pages 86 and 91 respectively.
Fees and salaries The 2018 budget for salary increa ses across the company is set at around 3.5%.
In setting directors remuneration the committee takes into account the pay and employment conditions of all our employees the performance of the firm and the views of shareholders and their representatives.
Remuneration arrangements at other firms of similar size and complexity are also reviewed for guidance.
The commi ttee will continue to use a number of reference points to determine future pay structure quantum and peer group positioning for executive directors and members of the executive committee.
Conclusion
I hope that you find the information in this letter and sections of the directors remuneration report clear and useful.
The remuneration landscape continues to be the subject of many political and regulatory policy changes and as these evolve the committee will ensure that our policy and practices change to be compliant balancing the need to remain performancedriven and competitive.
I welcome any feedback you may have during the year and hope to receive your support for the approval of the remuneration policy.
Sarah Gentleman Chairman of the remuneration committee 21 February 2018 Where to find relevant informatio n 1 Remuneration outcomes for 2017 page 84 2 Our new remuneration policy page 86 3 Remuneration policy page 88 Introduction page 88 Table page 88 Notes page 91 4 Annual report on remuneration page 94 Single total figure page 95 EIP page 99
Governance Remuneration outcomes for 2017 Our remuneration policy is designed to be linked to our strategy aligned with shareholders interests with significant longterm equity participation simple and transparent include both annual and longterm elements compliant with financial services rules and regulations in line with the market having regard to the size and complexity of the groups operations fair for both the director and the company with some element of discretion aligned with the boards approved risk appetite flexible recognising that the business is evolving and responsibilities change.
Key features
The core fixed component of the package is designed to enable the recruitment and retention of highcalibre individuals no increase for the last three years for the executive directors Pensions and benefits Defined contribution benefit or a fixed maximum pension allowance Shareholding requirement Executive directors and executive committee members are required to build and maintain a shareholding of at least 100% of base salary
One variable pay plan with annual and longterm measures Balanced scorecard approach linked to strategic and financial targets Aligns the interests of shareholders and directors with longterm value creation Five year deferral period for each award Malus and clawback provisions To read about our remuneration policy please see page 88 Our remuneration philosophy Overview of our 2017 remuneration framework 84 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 EIP performance EIP achievement summary 2017 Oneyear financial 25% of award Underlying profit before tax compared to the budget Net organic growth in funds under management compared to the target Underlying operating profit margin compared to target range Threeyear financial 40% of award Compound annual growth in EPS over three years Average ROCE over three years Nonfinancial metrics 15% of award Performance relating to delivery of strategic objectives Assessed and approved by remuneration committee Personal performance metrics 20% of award Personal performance against annual objectives Approved by remuneration committee Annual profit before tax
ROCE average 0% Total net organic growth
EPS growth
8.34% 8.33% 11.00% 18.4% Remuneration outcomes 000 EIP performance targets EIP achievement summary 2017
Achieved
Threeyear measures
20% % of salary 8.34% 8.33% 8.33% 15.00% 20% Philip Howell Minimum T arget Paul Stockton Maximum Actual 1site Our new remuneration policy A summary of the proposed changes to our policy is provided below .
Current policy Proposed policy Fixed remuneration Salary Reviewed annually on 1 January . are normally in line with wider workforce.
No change.
Benefits Additional benefits set by the committee and make up a small percentage of total remuneration costs.
No change.
Pension Maximum 14% of base salary .
Maximum reduced to 12% of base salary .
Variable remuneration Maximum opportunity 200% of base salary .
Maximum increased to 300% of base salary .
Deferral 60% deferred into Rathbones shares for five years.
No change.
Retention period Vested deferred shares cannot be sold until five years postaward.
No change.
Performance measures The level of EIP awarded depends on a robust assessment of performance weighted as follows 25%  1year financial measures 40%  3year rolling financial measures 15%  nonfinancial strategic measures 20%  personal performance measures.
Changes in weightings are as follows no less than 70% based on financial measures.
The remainder will be based on nonfinancial performance measures at least 50% based on longterm financial performance removal of personal performance objectives.
Malusclawback Applied in certain circumstances.
No change.
Other
Shareholding requirements 100% of base salary within five years of appointment.
No postcessation holding.
Increased to 200% of base salary within five years of appointment.
Retain 200% of base salary in the first year postcessation and 100% of base salary in the second year postcessation.
Disclosure In line with regulatory requirements.
Will prospectively disclose the range of performance that will give rise to threshold and maximum vesting.
86 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 Strategic measures 20% Annual PBT 10% FUM growth 10% Profit margin 10% How the implementation of our new policy in 2018 supports our strategic priorities How does the EIP work and how will performance be assessed for 2018 EIP measures We measure short and long term historic performance to determine an award value.
We pay a portion immediately in cash and we defer the remaining portion in shares over a fiveyear period.
Strategic target Weighting 30% 50% 20% Financial  1 year Annual profit before tax Total net organic growth in funds under management FUM Underlying operating margin Financial  3 year EPS growth Underlying ROCE average Nonfinancial strategic Quality service See page 18 Employee value See page 20 Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5
300% max
EIP
Cash
40% Nonfinancial measures 20% Financial measures 80% EPS growth 25%
ROCE average 25%teltel 2023 2024
EIP
Shares
60%site Governance Remuneration committee report continued 88 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 Directors remuneration policy The directors remuneration policy Policy outlined below includes the proposed changes set out in the remuneration committe e chairmans annual statement and describes the policies principles and structures that guide the remuneration committees decisions on executive remuneration.
If approved at the AGM in May 2018 it will apply for a period of three years from the date of the 2018 AGM unless a revised Policy is put to shareholders before then.
Executive directors Base salary Purpose and link to strategy Operation Opportunity Applicable performance measures Recovery The core fixed component of the package designed to enable the recruitment and retention of highcalibre individuals.
Base salaries are reviewed annually on 1 January and are compared to salaries in other companies of similar size and complexity to ensure that a competitive rate is being paid.
Adjustments may be made at other times to reflect a change of responsibility.
There is no maximum base salary but percentage increases will normally be no higher than the general level of increase for the wider employee population unless there are special circumstances such as a material change of responsibilities or where a salary is significantly below market median and is being brought into line.
Not applicable.
Not applicable.
Benefits
Purpose and link to strategy Operation Opportunity Applicable performance measures Recovery Benefits are typically provided to directors to be generally consistent with other employees and to complement the remuneration package to ensure that it is sufficiently competitive.
Benefits are set by the committee and may include for example private medical insurance for directors and their dependants death in service cover Share Incentive Plan free and matching shares Save As You Earn scheme annual medicals limited legal and professional advice on companyrelated matters relocation costs.
Benefits make up a small percentage of total remuneration costs.
Not applicable.
Not applicable.
Executive Incentive Plan Purpose and link to strategy Operation Opportunity Applicable performance measures Recovery The EIP rewards shortterm performance the achievement of corporate and individual goals and aligns the interests of shareholders and directors in creating longterm shareholder value.
The performance measures as described have been selected to support the controlled delivery of our business strategy as set out in the strategic report.
EIP awards are paid in cash 40% and deferred Rathbones shares 60% which vest over a fiveyear period in equal tranches of 20% per annum.
A full five year sale restriction period will operate from the date of the award and will continue to operate for directors who have left the company.
Directors will not be permitted to sell shares during the sale restriction period except for the purpose of meeting tax liabilities on vesting.
Deferred awards are increased by notional adjustments for dividends paid until vesting calculated using shares held at the record date.
The committee has the discretion to make changes to its EIP policy where required under regulations.
The maximum EIP award is 300% of base salary.
Target performance is 60% of maximum.
Threshold performance is 25% of maximum.
Actual awards for performance above or below target performance are calculated on a straight line basis between threshold and maximum.
The EIP is based on the remuneration committees assessment of financial and nonfinancial performance against a balanced scorecard of measures which are aligned to the companys strategy.
No less than 70% of the EIP will be based on financial measures.
The remainder will be based on non financial performance measured against strategic objectives.
At least 50% of the EIP will be based on longterm financial performance.
The performance metrics and range of outcomes for each financial measure one year and three year trailing are set by the committee and reviewed annually.
Additional considerations The remuneration committee may make an adjustment when determining the overall award including to zero if appropriate to take account of any of the following material events underlying financial performance risk management or regulatory compliance issues personal performance.
All unvested awards will normally lapse on termination of office unless the termination was as a good leaver.
A good leaver is a director who leaves on retirement due to injury or disability on the sale of the business or in any other circumstances where the committee determines good leaver treatment is appropriate in relation to the malusclawback there is a slight misalignment between the policy and the provisions of the rules.
The rules provide that malusclawback can be applied at any time up to 7 years from the date of grant in the case of share awards and 7 years from the payment of cash on cash awards.
The vesting schedule for the share awards is 20% p. years.
The policy provides that clawback can be applied up to 3 years from vesting.
In all but the 5th tranche of share awards the rules grant the power to effect the clawback in line with the terms of the policy the rules actually give more power but the remuneration committee could choose not to exercise it if to do so would be more onerous than the policy.
The last tranche of the share awards could in theory under the policy be clawed back up to 8 years from the date of award.
This is wider than the power given under the rules so it would be necessary to change the rules to ensure that the policy could be complied with.
As this would be a detrimental change to participants it could be made without shareholder approval being required.
Governance Remuneration committee report continued 90 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 Directors remuneration policy continued Pension or cash allowance Purpose and link to strategy Operation Opportunity Applicable performance measures Recovery To provide the executive directors with retirement benefits.
Payments may be made to a defined contribution pension arrangement such as a selfinvested personal pension SIPP or to the group defined contribution scheme.
Alternatively they may receive a cash allowance in lieu of pension.
The maximum personal pension or allowance payment is 12% of salary.
This is in line with the maximum personal pension or allowance payment for the majority of other employees.
Not applicable.
Not applicable.
Chairman and other nonexecutive directors Base fee Purpose and link to strategy Operation Opportunity Applicable performance measures Recovery To enable the recruitment of highcalibre non executive directors with the appropriate skills and experience.
Base fees are reviewed annually by the board on 1 January and are compared to fees in other companies of similar size and complexity to ensure that the market rate is being paid.
Adjustments may be made at other times to reflect a change of responsibility.
Fees are paid in cash.
The base fee for the chairman in 2016 was 160000.
This was retained at 160000 on 1 January 2017.
The base fee for the other non executive directors in 2016 was 50000.
This was retained at 50000 on 1 January 2017.
Not applicable.
Not applicable.
Additional responsibility fee Purpose and link to strategy Operation Opportunity Applicable performance measures Recovery To recognise the additional responsibility involved in chairing a committee audit group risk and remuneration or being the senior independent director.
Additional responsibility fees are reviewed annually by the board on 1 January.
The additional responsibility fee remained unchanged and payable at 10000 per annum.
Not applicable.
Not applicable.
90 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 Remuneration committee report continued 90 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 Directors remuneration policy continued Pension or cash allowance Purpose and link to strategy Operation Opportunity Applicable performance measures Recovery To provide the executive directors with retirement benefits.
Payments may be made to a defined contribution pension arrangement such as a selfinvested personal pension SIPP or to the group defined contribution scheme.
Alternatively they may receive a cash allowance in lieu of pension.
The maximum personal pension or allowance payment is 12% of salary.
This is in line with the maximum personal pension or allowance payment for the majority of other employees.
Not applicable.
Not applicable.
Chairman and other nonexecutive directors Base fee Purpose and link to strategy Operation Opportunity Applicable performance measures Recovery To enable the recruitment of highcalibre non executive directors with the appropriate skills and experience.
Base fees are reviewed annually by the board on 1 January and are compared to fees in other companies of similar size and complexity to ensure that the market rate is being paid.
Adjustments may be made at other times to reflect a change of responsibility.
Fees are paid in cash.
The base fee for the chairman in 2016 was 160000.
This was retained at 160000 on 1 January 2017.
The base fee for the other non executive directors in 2016 was 50000.
This was retained at 50000 on 1 January 2017.
Not applicable.
Not applicable.
Additional responsibility fee Purpose and link to strategy Operation Opportunity Applicable performance measures Recovery To recognise the additional responsibility involved in chairing a committee audit group risk and remuneration or being the senior independent director.
Additional responsibility fees are reviewed annually by the board on 1 January.
The additional responsibility fee remained unchanged and payable at 10000 per annum.
Not applicable.
Not applicable.
Key changes to the remuneration policy The new Policy for which approval is being sought at the AGM in May 2018 is similar in structure to the Policy that was previou sly approved by shareholders at the 2015 AGM.
As such we propose to maintain the structure of our variable award but as amended by the changes set out in the table below.
Remuneration elements Aspect Overview of changes Rationale
Incentive Plan Maximum opportunity Increase from 200% to 300% To ensure that maximum opportunity levels of the current executive directors remain competitive following the clarification of UK bank regulations.
Executive
Incentive Plan Nature of performance measures Weightings of performance measures Removal of the personal performance element to be replaced with a 5% increase to the strategic element a 5% increase to the shortterm financial metrics and a 10% increase to the longterm financial metrics Performance weightings are now 80% derived from financial outcomes was 65% with the remaining 20% assessed against strategic objectives.
To orientate awards more objectively towards financial performance overall with now a 50% weighting linked to the longer term.
Pension contributions Maximum opportunity Reduction from 14% to 12% To align the Policy more closely with the majority of other employees.
Shareholding requirements Level of shareholding Increased from 100% to 200% To align to emerging best practice and to increase alignment with shareholder interests.
Shareholding requirements Postcessation holding Introduced for the first time.
A requirement for executive directors to retain 200% of base salary in the first year postcessation in shares and 100% of base salary in the second year postcessation.
To align to emerging best practice and to increase alignment with shareholder interests.
Definition of performance metrics The EIP performance metrics chosen by the committee are key indicators of performance used by the business and shareholders whi ch are detailed below.
The committee reviews the specific choice of performance metrics fo r the EIP on an annual basis at the beginning of each financ ial year to ensure that the nature and weighting of th ese remain appropriate to ensure alignment between the interests of our executive dir ectors our business strategy and the interests of our clients and shareholders.
Further detail on how the specific choice of measures for the 2018 EIP links to our strategic goals is provided on page 87.
The targets for these measures are considered annually by the committee and are set to encourage stretching levels of performan ce without inadvertently motivating inappropriate behavior.
Rathbones will prospectively disclose the target ranges for threeyear financial measures but will not disclose any of the oneyear measures on a prospective basis as these are considered commercially sensit ive however actual performance against these will be retrospectively disclosed.
Oneyear nancial 30% Threeyear nancial 50% Nonnancial metrics 20%site Governance Remuneration committee report continued 92 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 The use of discretion The committee may make minor amendments to the Policy set out above for regulatory exchange control tax or administrative purposes or to take account of a change in legislation without obtaining shareholder approval for that amendment.
In relation to the EIP the committee retains discretion when selecting participants determining the treatment of leavers agreeing the timing of awards and reviewing the balanced scorecard of performance measures targets and weightings.
The committee reserves the right to adjust retrospectively performance measures and targets if events for example a major acquisition make them inappropriate.
Adjustments will not be made to make the conditions materially easier to satisfy.
The committee reserves the right to make any remuneration payments and payments for loss of office including exercising any discretions available to it in connection with such payments notwithstanding that they are not in line with the Policy where the terms of the payment were agreed i before the Policy came into effect or ii at a time when the relevant individual was not a director of the company and in the opinion of the committee the payment was not in consideration for the individual becoming a director of the company.
For these purposes payments include awards of variable remuneration and in relation to an award over shares the associated terms agreed at the time the award is granted.
Consultation
The company consulted extensively with major shareholders and their representative bodies on re muneration issues including in the development of this new directors remuneration Policy.
While we did not consult explicitly with employees on this new Policy the committee took account of remuneration policies elsewhere in the group.
Appointment of new directors For new executive and nonexecutive directors the structure of the package offered will mirror that provided to current directors under the new directors remuneration Policy.
The package quantum will depend on the role and the experience and background of the new director.
Advice from our remuneration consultants will be taken to ensure that the package is in line with median market levels for companies of similar size and complexity.
Any future variable award will be made within the 300% maximum subject to shareholder approval.
The company may pay compensation to new directors for remuneration the individual has forfeited in order to take up the role with Rathbones.
Rathbones will ensure that these awards are no more generous in either amount or terms than the awards they replace.
These awards may be structured differently from awards made under our standard directors remuneration Policy in order to best reflect the remuneration being forfeited.
Service contracts It is company policy that service contracts should not normally contain notice periods of more than 12 months.
Details of the notice periods in the contracts of employment of executive directors serving during the year are as shown below.
Executive director Date of contract Notice period P L Howell 12 Feb 2013 12 months R P Stockton 14 Oct 2011 6 months There are no provisions within the contracts to provide automatic payments in excess of payment in lieu of notice upon termination by the company and no predetermined compensation package exists in the event of terminatio n of employment.
Payment in lieu of notice would include basic salary pension contributions and benefits.
There are no provisions for the payment of liquidated damages or any statements in respect of the duty of mitigation.
In the event of entering into a termination agreement the board will take steps to impose a legal obliga tion on the director to mitigate any loss incurred.
There are no clauses in contracts amending employment terms and conditions on a change of control.
Executive directors contracts of service which include details of remuneration are available for inspection at the companys registered office and will be available for inspection at the AGM.
Nonexecutive directors have a letter of appointment rather than a contract of employment and these are available for inspection at the AGM.
As with all other directors they are required to stand for reelection annually in accordance with the UK Corporate Governance Code.
The effectiveness of the nonexecutive directors is subject to an annual assessment.
Any term beyond six years is subject to particularly rigorous review and takes into account the need for progressive refreshing of the board.
The executive directors are responsible for determining the fees of the nonexecutive directors.
Payments for loss of office Compensation payments will be determined on a casebycase basis in the light of current market practice.
Compensation will include loss of salary and other co ntractual benefits but mitigation will be applied where appropriate.
Any entitlement to EIP awards will depend on whether the individual is treated as a good or bad leaver in line with the table below.
Status Definition
Good leaver Leave for reasons including retirement ill health sale of the business and any other reason as the committee determines.
All unvested awards will be delivered in line with the existing vesting schedule.
Awards in the year of departure will be made at the discretion of the committee depending on the circumstances at the time and if made will be reduced to reflect time served Bad leaver Leave for other reasons unless the committee determines otherwise.
All unvested awards will normally lapse.
Other directorships The board believes that the firm can benefit from experience gained when executive directors hold nonexecutive directorships.
Executive directors are permitted to hold external appointments and to receive payments provided such appointments are agreed by the board in advance there no conflicts of interests and the appointment does not lead to deterioration in the executives performance.
Consideration of remuneration across the firm The committee provides oversight of remuneration structures across the firm including members of the group executive committee material risk takers and the risk and compliance teams.
In addition the committee reviews on an annual basis total remuneration costs across the firm in light of its short and longerterm financial targets and ongoing sustainability.
The committee is well aware of the remuneration structures across the firm and takes these into consideration when taking decisions on remuneration for executive directors.
Legacy arrangements Authority is given to the committee to honour previous remuneration awards or arrangements entered into with current or former directors such as th e payment of a pension or the unwinding of legacy share schemes.
Details of any payments will be set out in the annual report on remuneration as they arise.
Difference between directors remuneration policy and other employees All employees including executive directors benefit from fixed and variable pay pension and noncash benefits.
The company operates a number of variable remuneration schemes within the group some fully discretionary others with mechanistic elements in addition to a discretionary element.
Membership of such schemes is defined by status and job type.
Only executive committee members are eligible to benefit from membership of an EIP.
Governance Remuneration committee report continued 94 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 Annual report on remuneration This part of the directors remuneration report explains how we have implemented our remuneration policy during the year in line with the remuneration policy that was approved by shareholders at the 2015 AGM.
This annual report on remuneration will be subject to an advisory vote at the 2018 AGM.
The financial information in this part of the directors remuneration report has been audited where indicated.
Role of remuneration committee The role of the committee is to set the overarching principles of the remuneration Policy and provide oversight on remuneration across the firm.
Details of the committees responsibilities and composition are detailed above.
At the invitation of the committee chairman the chief executive finance director and the head of strategy and organisation development attend some or all of each meeting.
The chief risk officer also advises the committee on matters relating to remuneration and attends meetings as required.
The company secretary acts as secretary and with the chairman agrees the agenda for each meeting.
At the end of each meeting there is an opportunity for private discussion between committee members without the presence of management.
No committee member or attendee is present when matters relating to his or her own remuneration are discussed.
Committee activity in 201718 Below is a summary of the ke y issues that the committee considered at each of its meetings during the year.
February 2017 Review annual risk report on variable pay targets to ensure alignment with the firms risk appetite Assess and approve 2016 EIP award for executive directors and members of the executive committee Review and approve EIP performance measures for 2017 Assess and approve Long Term In centive Plan award for 2016 Review and approve the directors remuneration report for shareholder approval May 2017 Annual review of remuneration for material risk takers across the firm Review and discuss shareholder and proxy agency feedback on the directors remuneration report Review executive directors and members of the executive committees shareholding requirement levels against market practice Review regulatory developments on remuneration and their implications on the firm October 2017 Review remuneration landscape and implications on executive remuneration Review progress against financial and nonfinancial EIP targets for the current year Review and debate potential changes to the remuneration policy and structures Appointment of new remuneration consultants December 2017 Review and approve executive director salaries for 2018 Review progress against financial and nonfinancial EIP targets for 2017 Agree remuneration policy ahead of shareholder consultation Approval of the committees terms of reference January 2018 Consultation with major shareholders and representative bodies on new remuneration policy Finalise remuneration policy following shareholder feedback Review annual risk report on variable pay targets to ensure alignment with the firms risk appetite Assess and approve 2017 EIP award for executive directors and members of the executive committee and approve EIP performance measures for 2018 Review and approve the directorssite Single total figure of remuneration for each executive director audited The table below sets out a single figure for the total remuneration received by each executive director for the year ended 31 December 2017 and the prior year
Taxable benefits and allowances EIP award for the year  cash EIP award for the year unvested deferred shares
LTIP awards
SIP
SAYE
Total
P L Howell 40 4  1104 2016 464 tel40 4  1398 R P Stockton telNotes to the single total figure of remuneration for each director table Executive directors salaries Salaries have not been incr eased since 1 January 2015.
Taxable benefits Taxable benefits are the provision of private medical insurance for executive directors and their dependants and contractual tr avel expenses for the executive directors.
Executive Incentive Plan EIP audited The EIP was approved by shareholders at the 2015 AGM replacing both an annual bonus scheme and a Long Term Incentive Plan whic h fully vested in 2017.
The overall maximum award level achievable under the existing Policy is 200% of base salary with 60% of awards made in deferred shares which must be held for a minimum period of five years.
Executive Incentive Plan award 2017 Performance is assessed using a combination of measures that are detailed below Weight % % of base salary One year financial 25 50 Three year financial 40 80 Nonfinancial strategic 15 30 Personal performance 20 40 Total 100 200 1 One year financial The one year financial performance measures are three key performance indicators used by the business which are closely aligned to strategy.
The one year financial measures and achievement levels are provided below % of base salary
25% of base salary On target 120% of base salary
200% of base salary Actual Weighted payout % of base salary Financial 1 year Annual profit before tax m 16.68% 41.3 45.9 50.5 58.9 16.68% Total net organic growth in funds under management % 16.66% 5.6 6.2 6.8 5.2 0.00% Underlying operating margin % 16.66% 25.5 27.0 28.5 30.6 16.66% 50.00% 33.34% The organic growth in funds under management covers both our Investment Management and Unit Trusts businesses.
Governance Remuneration committee report continued 96 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 Annual report on remuneration continued 2 Three year financial The three year financial performance measures and achievement levels are provided below % of base salary
25% of base salary On target 120% of base salary
200% of base salary Actual Weighted payout % of base salary EPS growth % CAGR 40.00% 6.0 9.0 12.0 0.9 0.00% ROCE average % 40.00% 16.6 18.1 19.6 19.3 36.80% 80.00% 36.80%
130.00% 70.14% 3 Nonfinancial strategic The nonfinancial strategic measures are designed to drive strate gic goals.
Details of the performance measures assessment and outcomes are detailed below
Extent to which objective has been met
Develop the investment process to support investment team decisions and drive positive portfolio outcomes Deliver key projects to better evaluate client attitudes to risk improve communication and manage investment team capacity and efficiency Selectively add complementary service offerings that can help support and grow the core investment service Enhancements to suitability processes were supported by the migration of our client relationship management system and delivery of a client risk assessment tool Plans for a new client relationship management system are well progressed Output from the research team improved as did performance monitoring processes 33 projects were completed during the year.
Complex MiFID II Markets in Financial Instruments Directive changes delivered on time and progress on IT infrastr ucture plans was demonstrated The internal financial planning proposition was launched with adviser recruitment as planned Rathbone Private Office infrastructure was put in place A lot has been achieved in 2017 but technology and process design delays impaired the timing of delivery of some client suitability process enhancements
In addition to the financial targets set for 2017 Achieve budgeted funds under management inflows for Vision Unit Trusts CharitiesGreenbank and the intermediary distribution teams Establish Rathbone Private Office revenues Sublet available space in Curzon Street Charities and Greenbank funds under management grew to 4.7 billion and 1.2 billion respectively Unit Trusts performance continued to be strong Vision funds under management grew higher than expectations to 1.4 billion and other budget growth targets were exceeded Rathbone Private Office sales activity was positive but with lower than expected outcomes Substantial efforts were made to secure prospective tenants in Curzon Street and activity continues into 2018 Strong financial performance but recognising that progress on subletting and Rathbone Private Office was less than expected
Launch performance based remuneration for investment teams to support efficiency Deliver on 2017 learning and development plans Ensure that the London head office move maintains a positive working environment Changes to team remuneration schemes have resulted in positive changes within the business Learning and development plans were delivered The London head office move to Finsbury Circus was completed with minimal disruption with extensive client use of the new facilities Fully achieved
Maintain a proactive and effective relationship with regulators committing to maintain high standards in managing conduct and prudential matters Engagement with regulators was po sitive during the year providing comprehensive responses to three FCA questionnaires with positive engagement on PRA evaluation processes No material issues have been identified by the risk or audit committees during 2017 Investment coverage by the research team has been enhanced A Risk Culture dashboard is in place and was formally presented twice to the board during 2017 Client complaints were promptly investigated and continue to be very small Fully achieved The committee concluded that an overall score for this element of the EIP of 11% out of a maximum of 15% of base salary is merited.
4 Personal performance Personal performance has been as sessed against objectives set at the beginning of 2017 that are appropriate to the directors roles and responsibilities.
The outcomes of this assessment are shown below for each executive director.
Philip Howell 2017 objectives Assessment Oversee the delivery of growth initiative targets for Investment Management Unit Trusts Vision and other services within risk appetite Enhance the quality of research output and portfolio monitoring capabilities Continually review and assess the progress on key business projects particularly ensuring that regulatory project deadlines are met Maintain a robust risk conduct culture fostering effectiv e relationships with PRA and FCA Sponsor the development of senior management team and oversee the delivery of people development plans Total achieved 18% The committees assessment of the 2017 overall performance for Philip Howell was that he had performed well and largely achieved his objectives but some adjustment was necessary to reflect technology and process design delays in delivery of some important process enhancements.
A summary of Philip Howells total award for 2017 is presented below Target Weighting
Financial  1 year total 25% 16.67% Financial  3 year trailing 40% 18.
40% Nonfinancial strategic measures 15% 11.00% Personal performance 20% 18.00% Total award 64.07% Assessment key
Largely achieved Partially achieved Not achieved Paul Stockton 2017 objectives Assessment Respond to changes in financial and regulatory reporting standards to ensure that external and internal financial outputs remain insightful accurate and timely Ensure that the financial outcomes of key 2017 projects are monitored carefully to ensure that underlying operating margin targets are met Upgrade financial performance systems to improve efficiency and transparency and support remuneration changes Ensure that the banking and treasury function operates within risk appetite whilst taking advantage of opportunities to grow the amount lent to clients Closely manage the capital impacts associated with the closure of defined benefit schemes Total achieved 18% The committees assessment wa s that Paul Stocktons performance had largely met his objectives in 2017 but some adjustment was necessary for the technology and process design delays in the delivery of some important process enhancements.
A summary of Paul Stocktons total award for 2017 is presented below Target Weighting
Financial  1 year total 25% 16.67% Financial  3 year trailing 40% 18.40% Nonfinancial strategic measures 15% 11.00% Personal performance 20% 18.00% Total award 64.07%site Governance Remuneration committee report continued 98 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 Annual report on remuneration continued
Philip Howell and Paul Stockton are paid a cash allowance of 8.62% of salary and neither are in receipt of a defined benefit pension.
All executive directors are eligible to participate in the Rathbone 1987 Scheme for death in service benefits.
Share Incentive Plan SIP This benefit is the value of the SIP matching and free share awards made in the year.
Empl oyees may contribute up to 150 per month to buy partnership shares with contributions matched on a oneforone basis by the company.
Free share awards are linked to EPS growth.
Save As You Earn SAYE This benefit is the value of the discount on SAYE options granted during the year.
Remuneration outcomes under different performance scenarios The charts below show the relative split of fixed and variable remuneration showing minimum ontarget and maximum awards.
Directors interests in shares audited The table below sets out details of the directors shareholdings and outstanding share awards that are subject to vesting condi tions Beneficially owned shares Subject to relevant holding period Executive directors Private shares SIP Total EIP Deferred profit scheme SIP not yet beneficially owned SAYE Total P L Howell 20910 31490 12434 438 R P Stockton 59188 2480 61 668 19886 7478 595 79587 2991 82578 51376 19912 1033 SIP matching and free shares held for less than three years may be forfeited in certain circumstances and so are not considered to be beneficially owned Shareholding guidelines In order to align the interests of executive directors and shareh olders with effect from 1 Janu ary 2018 the executive directo rs are required to acquire and retain a holding in shares or rights to shares equivalent to the value of 200% of basic salary within five years of the date of appointment or the date of adoption of the policy.
Shares that count towards these guidelines include shares that are owned ou tright vested and not exercised EIP and SIP awards.
Philip Howell and Pa ul Stockton have both achieved this target.
The chart below co mpares the values of each executive directors shareholding for this purpose as at 31 December 2017 with the shareholding required Value of package 000 Philip Howell Paul Stockton 110telMinimum Target Maximum Actual Share ownership versus policy 0% 100% 400% 200% R P Stockton P L Howell 500% 300% 600% 700% 800% 900% 1000% Benecially owned Conditional 115% 534% Old policy New policy 98 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 Remuneration committee report continued 98 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 Annual report on remuneration continued
Philip Howell and Paul Stockton are paid a cash allowance of 8.62% of salary and neither are in receipt of a defined benefit pension.
All executive directors are eligible to participate in the Rathbone 1987 Scheme for death in service benefits.
Share Incentive Plan SIP This benefit is the value of the SIP matching and free share awards made in the year.
Empl oyees may contribute up to 150 per month to buy partnership shares with contributions matched on a oneforone basis by the company.
Free share awards are linked to EPS growth.
Save As You Earn SAYE This benefit is the value of the discount on SAYE options granted during the year.
Remuneration outcomes under different performance scenarios The charts below show the relative split of fixed and variable remuneration showing minimum ontarget and maximum awards.
Directors interests in shares audited The table below sets out details of the directors shareholdings and outstanding share awards that are subject to vesting condi tions Beneficially owned shares Subject to relevant holding period Executive directors Private shares SIP Total EIP Deferred profit scheme SIP not yet beneficially owned SAYE Total P L Howell 20910 31490 12434 438 R P Stockton 59188 2480 61 668 19886 7478 595 79587 2991 82578 51376 19912 1033 SIP matching and free shares held for less than three years may be forfeited in certain circumstances and so are not considered to be beneficially owned Shareholding guidelines In order to align the interests of executive directors and shareh olders with effect from 1 Janu ary 2018 the executive directo rs are required to acquire and retain a holding in shares or rights to shares equivalent to the value of 200% of basic salary within five years of the date of appointment or the date of adoption of the policy.
Shares that count towards these guidelines include shares that are owned ou tright vested and not exercised EIP and SIP awards.
Philip Howell and Pa ul Stockton have both achieved this target.
The chart below co mpares the values of each executive directors shareholding for this purpose as at 31 December 2017 with the shareholding requiredsite Executive Incentive Plan At 1 January
At 31 December Executive directors Grant date Type of security Face value of award at grant Number of unvested securities
Vested but unexercised subject to sales restriction period
Vested but unexercised subject to sales restriction period Normal exercise date end of sales restriction period P L Howell 22032016 Nil paid options 434670 19491  3898 15593 22032017 Conditional shares 365201  15897  15897 R P Stockton 22032016 Nil paid options 272722 12229  2446 9783 22032017 Conditional shares 232105  10103  10103 Exercise price is nil The number of shares awarded is calculated based on the 20 day average share price on the day prior to grant.
Share price on aw ard was 22.97 Awards vest in five equal tranches 1 2 3 4 and 5 years from grant.
All shares must be held until the fifth anniversary of the grant the normal exercise date.
There are no further performance conditions on these shares Long Term Incentive Plan Number of shares Executive directors Plan cycle Grant date Market value of shares at date of grant
At 1 January
Exercised in
At 31
P L Howell 201416 250314 17.37 311216 250317 19436 1568 R P Stockton 201416 250314 17.37 311216 250317 12352 994 Total 31788 2562 11337 site Governance Remuneration committee report continued 100 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 Annual report on remuneration continued Deferred profit share scheme Number of shares Executive directors At 1 January Vested in
At
31 December P L Howell 12151  283 12151  283 R P Stockton 9654 9654 7308  169 16962 9654 169
29113 9654 452 Share Incentive Plan At 1 January 2017 During 2017 At 31 December Total number of SIP shares
Matching shares acquired
Free shares received Total number of SIP shares P L Howell R P Stockton 2 3075 Total 3 4024 SIP matching and free shares held for less than three years may be forfeited in certain circumstances and so are not considered to be beneficially owned Save As You Earn outstanding options Number of shares Executive directors Grant date
1 January
Exercised in 2017 Lapsed in At 31
Earliest exercise date
Market price on grant
P L Howell 1356 010518 011118 578 010619 011219 365 010620 011220 R P Stockton 867   010617 011217 273 010619 011219 710 010620 011220
867  3site Performance graph unaudited The chart below shows the companys TSR against the FTSE All Share Index for the nine years to 31 December 2017.
TSR is calculated assuming that dividend s are reinvested on receipt.
The FTSE All Share Index has been selected as a comparator as it is a suitably broad market index and has been used as a performance comparator for LTIP plan cycles since 200507.
Chief executive officer single figure unaudited During the nine years to 31 December 2017 Andy Pomfret was chief executive until 28 February 2014 when he was succeeded by Philip Howell.
Year
CEO
CEO single figure of total remuneration EIP award or short term bonus as % of maximum opportunity Long term incentive vesting as % of maximum opportunity Philip Howell Philip Howell 1Philip Howell 1608tel Philip Howell 89 na Andy Pomfret na 96 Andy Pomfret 1204tel Andy Pomfret 1046tel Andy Pomfret Andy Pomfret Percentage change in the remuneration of the chief executive officer and employees unaudited The table below shows the percentage yearonyear change in salary benefits and bonus in 2017 for the chief executive compared with the aver age Rathbones employee.
Salary
Benefits Annual bonus
2% Average pay based on all Rathbones employees 1% 13% 32% Chairman and nonexecutive directors fees audited Fees paid to the nonexecutive directors were not increased in 2017 with no increase for the 2018 financial year.
Any future increases will depend upon a rigorous assessment of the burden of responsibilities and market rates.
Chairman
M P Nicholls 160 160 Nonexecutive directors J W Dean J N Pettigrew 45 S F Gentleman 56 K A Matthews D T D Harrel 26 70 Total 407 400 Nonexecutive directors share interests The interest of the directors in the ordinary shares of the company are set out below
Chairman
M P Nicholls 3000 749 3749 Nonexecutive directors J W Dean 1000  1000 S F Gentleman K A Matthews  1260 1260 J N Pettigrew Total 4000 2009 6009 Performance TSR % change 31 Dec 31 Dec 31 Dec 31 Dec 31 Dec 31 Dec 31 Dec 31 Dec 31 Dec 31 Dec Rathbone Brothers Plc  Total Shareholder Return FTSE All Share site Governance Remuneration committee report continued 102 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 Relative importance of spend on pay The chart below shows the relationship between total employee remuneration profit after tax and dividend distributions for 2017 and 2016.
The reported profit afte r tax has been selected by the directors as a useful indicato r when assessing the relative importance of spend on pay.
Implementation of the remuneration policy in 2018 In 2018 the remuneration policy will be applied in a similar way to 2017 albeit with the changes to reflect the new directors remuneration policy outlined above if approved.
Salary adjustments awarded to executive directors for 2018 are noted below.
Salary
The executive directors salaries for 2018 is noted below.
These are in line with the awards made to the general employee base.
Paul
Stocktons salary increase reflects his performance and contribution to the role.
Salary effective 1 January 2018 Salary effective 1 January 2017 % increase Chief Executive 477920 464000 3% Finance Director 309750 295000 5% Pensions and benefits Pensions and benefits will be delivered in line with the remuneration policy.
Pension benefits for the year will be 12% which is in line with the new maximum opportunity of 12%.
EIP 2018  forward looking targets The 2018 EIP which would be awarded in 2019 subject to performance will be delivered in line with the new remuneration policy which allows for a maximum award level of 300% of base salary.
While the committee is able to make awards up to this new maximum award level actual award levels will continue to be determined by the committee base d on a robust assessment of performance during the 2018 performance year.
Incentive awards under the EIP will continue to be linked to a scorecard of short and longer term financial metrics and annual objectives covering financial and nonfinancial criteria.
Annual targets set for 2018 will take into account the amount of expenditure and investment approv ed by the board in the 2018 budget to develop the business and support its growth initiatives.
The committee will not at this time disclose any of the remaining one year measures on a prospective basis as these are considered commercially sensitive however actual performance against these will be disclosed.
Whilst recognising the potentia l volatility associated with investment markets and its direct impact on the financial outcomes for Rathbones the committee believes earnings per share and underlying ROCE measures continue to be appropriate measures to use when assessing lo nger term performance targets.
Long term targets for the 201820 award period have accordingly been set as outlined in the ta ble below.
When establishing performance ranges for these ta rgets the committee has been particularly mindful of the historic performance of the business in different market conditions the continuing need for investment in the business and the increase in regulatory capital buffers in 2018 and 2019 required by Capital Requ irements Regulations see pages Performance measure Threshold
Three year CAGR EPS 5% 15% Three year underlying average ROCE 14% 20% In respect of the two openaward years to 31 December 2019 the committee has set a threshold and maximum of 4% to 14% respectively for the three year EPS performance measure and 14% to 20% for three year underlying ROCE.
The committee may also make adjustments to performance targets to reflect significant oneoff events e. appropriate and reasonable.
Clear disclosure will be provided in this instance regarding the nature and materiality of any change in the directors remuneration report for the relevant financial year.
Relative importance of spend on pay m Total sta costs Dividends paid Prot after tax 13% 23% 11% athbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 Remuneration committee report continued 102 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 Relative importance of spend on pay The chart below shows the relationship between total employee remuneration profit after tax and dividend distributions for 2017 and 2016.
The reported profit afte r tax has been selected by the directors as a useful indicato r when assessing the relative importance of spend on pay.
Implementation of the remuneration policy in 2018 In 2018 the remuneration policy will be applied in a similar way to 2017 albeit with the changes to reflect the new directors remuneration policy outlined above if approved.
Salary adjustments awarded to executive directors for 2018 are noted below.
Salary
The executive directors salaries for 2018 is noted below.
These are in line with the awards made to the general employee base.
Paul
Stocktons salary increase reflects his performance and contribution to the role.
Salary effective 1 January 2018 Salary effective 1 January 2017 % increase Chief Executive 477920 464000 3% Finance Director 309750 295000 5% Pensions and benefits Pensions and benefits will be delivered in line with the remuneration policy.
Pension benefits for the year will be 12% which is in line with the new maximum opportunity of 12%.
EIP 2018  forward looking targets The 2018 EIP which would be awarded in 2019 subject to performance will be delivered in line with the new remuneration policy which allows for a maximum award level of 300% of base salary.
While the committee is able to make awards up to this new maximum award level actual award levels will continue to be determined by the committee base d on a robust assessment of performance during the 2018 performance year.
Incentive awards under the EIP will continue to be linked to a scorecard of short and longer term financial metrics and annual objectives covering financial and nonfinancial criteria.
Annual targets set for 2018 will take into account the amount of expenditure and investment approv ed by the board in the 2018 budget to develop the business and support its growth initiatives.
The committee will not at this time disclose any of the remaining one year measures on a prospective basis as these are considered commercially sensitive however actual performance against these will be disclosed.
Whilst recognising the potentia l volatility associated with investment markets and its direct impact on the financial outcomes for Rathbones the committee believes earnings per share and underlying ROCE measures continue to be appropriate measures to use when assessing lo nger term performance targets.
Long term targets for the 201820 award period have accordingly been set as outlined in the ta ble below.
When establishing performance ranges for these ta rgets the committee has been particularly mindful of the historic performance of the business in different market conditions the continuing need for investment in the business and the increase in regulatory capital buffers in 2018 and 2019 required by Capital Requ irements Regulations see pages Performance measure Threshold
Three year CAGR EPS 5% 15% Three year underlying average ROCE 14% 20% In respect of the two openaward years to 31 December 2019 the committee has set a threshold and maximum of 4% to 14% respectively for the three year EPS performance measure and 14% to 20% for three year underlying ROCE.
The committee may also make adjustments to performance targets to reflect significant oneoff events e. appropriate and reasonable.
Clear disclosure will be provided in this instance regarding the nature and materiality of any change in the directors remuneration report for the relevant financial year.
Statement of shareholder voting At the 2015 AGM shareholders approved the directors remuneration policy to apply for three years from the date of the AGM.
A t the 2017 AGM shareholders approved the remuneration report that was published in the 2016 Annual Report and the results are detailed be low Annual report on remuneration 2017 AGM Annual report on remuneration 2016 AGM Remuneration policy 2015 AGM Votes cast in favour 96.2% 96.4% 96.8% Votes cast against 3.8% 3.6% 3.2% Total votes cast 79.0% 78.2% 77.7% Votes withheld 1268045 210393 1373106 Advisers to the committee and their fees During the year the remuneration committee reviewed its consultants and received proposals from a number of firms.
After a sel ection process PwC were appointed as advisers to the committee in August 2017.
They are members of the Remuneration Consultants Group and advise the committee on a range of matters including on remu neration package assessments scheme design and reporting best practice.
PwC also provide professi onal services in the ordinary course of business including advisory work to the group.
The committee is of the opinion that the advice received is objective and independ ent.
PwCs fees are charged on a time cost basis and were 71 400 in 2017.
The appointment of advisers is reviewed annually.
Evaluating the performance of the committee The annual evaluation of the committees effectiveness was undertaken as part of the boards external evaluation process.
The f indings were discussed with the committees chairman and additional information can be found in the corporate governance report.
Approval
The remuneration committee report incorporating both the directors remuneration policy and annual report on remuneration has been approved by the board.
Signed on behalf of the board Sarah Gentleman Chairman of the remuneration committee 21 February 2018 Votes on Remuneration 0% 10% 40% 20% Remuneration policy 2015 AGM Annual report on remuneration 2016 AGM Annual report on remuneration 2017 AGM 50% 30% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100%site Governance Directors report 104 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 Group results and company dividends The Rathbone Brothers Plc group profit after taxation for the year ended 31 December 2017 was 46829000 2016 38157000.
The directors recommend the payment of a final dividend of 39.0p 2017 36.0p on 14 May 2018 to shareholders on the register on 20 April 2018.
An interim dividend of 22.0p 2016 21.0p was paid on 3 October 2017 to shareholders on the register on 8 September 2017.
This results in total dividends of 61.0 2016 57.0p per ordinary share for the year.
These dividends amount to 30429000 2016 28267000  see note 12 to the financial statements.
The company operates a generally progressive dividend policy subject to market condit ions.
The aim is to increase the dividend in line with the growth of the busine ss over each econom ic cycle.
This means that there may be periods where the dividend is maintained but not increased and periods wher e profits are retained rather than distributed to maintain re tained reserves and regulatory capital at prudent levels through troughs and peaks in the cycle.
Share capital The companys share capital comprises one class of ordinary shares of 5p each.
At 31 December 2017 51302074 shares were in issue 2016 50682679.
No shares were held in treasury 2016 8979.
Details of the movements during the year are set out in note 28 to the financial statements.
The shares carry no rights to fixed income and each share carries the right to one vote at general meetings.
All shares are fully paid.
There are no specific restrictions on the size of a shareholding or on the transfer of shares which are both covered by the provisions of the Articles of Associatio n and prevailing legislation.
New issues of share capital Under section 551 of the Companies Act 2006 the board currently has the authority to allot 16894680 shares approximately one third of the issued share capital at 31 March 2017.
The existing authorities given to the company at the last annual general meeting AGM to allot shares will expire at the conclusion of the forthcoming AGM.
Details of the resolutions renewing these authorities are included in the Notice of AGM.
Awards under the companys employee share plans are satisfied from a combination of shares held either in treasury or in the employee benefit trust and by ne wly issued shares.
During the year the company transferred 8979 shares out of treasury for a total consideration of 160000 issued 181712 shares to satisfy share awards and issued 437 683 shares to the companys employee benefit trust to satisfy future awards under the groups sharebased payment schemes.
Purchase of own shares Following the 2017 AGM resolution to purchase own shares the board currently has the authority to buy back up to 2500000 shares under certain stringent conditions.
During the year the company did not utilise this authority but the board considers it would be appropriate to renew it.
We intend to seek shareholder approval for the continued authority to purchase own shares at the fo rthcoming AGM in line with current investor sentiment.
Details of the resolution renewing the authority are included in the Notice of AGM.
Corporate governance statement As required by Disclosure and Transparency Rule 7.2 you can find our corporate governance statement in the governance report on pages 58 to 67 and it is incorporated into this directors report by reference.
Appointment and removal of directors Regarding the appointment and replacement of directors the company is governed by the companys Articles of Association the UK Corporate Governance Code the Companies Act 2006 and related legislation.
Employee share trust During the year Accuro Fiduciary Services Jersey Limited formerly Salamanca Trustees Limi ted retired as trustee of the first employee benefit trust.
On 4 April 2017 Equiniti Trust Jersey Limited were appointed as trustee of the second employee benefit trust.
The trust is independent and holds shares for the benefit of employees and former employees of the group.
The trustee has agreed to satisfy awards under the Executive Incentive Plan Share Incentive Plan and the Savings Related Share Option Plan.
As part of these arrangements the company issued shares to the trust to enable the trustee to satisfy these awards.
Further details are set out in note 29 to the financial statements.
During the year the number of shares issued by both trustees to taled 99725 ordinary shares.
In addition under the rules of the Rathbone Share Incentive Plan shares are held in trust for participants by Equiniti Share Plan Trustees Limited the Trustee.
Voting rights are exercised by the Trustee on receipt of the participants instructions.
If no such instruction is received by the Trus tee then no vote is registered.
No person has any special rights of control over the companys share capital and all issued shares are either fully or nil paid.
Directors
All those who served as directors at any time during the year are listed on pages 62 to 63.
The direct ors interests in the share capital of the company at 31 December 2017 are set out on pages 98 to 101 of the remuneration committee report.
Employees
Details of the companys employment practices its policy regarding the employment of disabled persons and its employee involvement practices can be found in the corporate responsibility report on pages 46 to 49.
104 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 105 Corporate responsibility Information about greenhouse gas emissions and our corporate social responsibility are set out in the corporate responsibility report on pages 50 to 53.
Financial instruments and
risk management
The risk management objectives and policies of the group are set out in note 31 to the financial statements.
Insurance and indemnification of directors The company has put in place insurance to cover its directors and officers against the costs of defending themselves in civil legal action taken against them in that capacity and any damages awarded.
The company has granted indemnities which are uncapped to its directors and to the company secretary by way of deed.
Qualifying thirdparty indemnity provisions as defined by Section 234 of the Companies Act 2006 were therefore in place throughout 2017 and remain in force at the date of this report.
Substantial shareholdings As at 31 December 2017 the company had received notifications in accordance with the Financial Conduct Authoritys Disclosure and Transparency Rule 5 of the following interests
Holding at 21 Feb 2018 % held at 21 Feb 2018 Lindsell Train Ltd.
13.84% MFS Investment 8.37% Mawer Investment Management Ltd.
7.84% Aviva Investors 3.73% Troy Asset Management 3.50% Heronbridge Investment Management 3.05% Share price The midmarket price of the compan ys shares at 31 December 2017 was 25.54 2016 19.83 and the range during the year was 19.79 to 28.12 2016 15.90 to 23.59.
Auditor
The audit committee reviews the appointment of the external auditor and their relationship with the group including monitoring the groups use of the auditor for nonaudit services.
Note 7 to the financial statements sets out details of the auditors remuneration.
Having reviewed the independence and effectiveness of the external auditor the audit committee has recommended to the board that the existing auditor KPMG LLP be reappointed and a resolution appointing KPMG LLP as auditor and authorising the directors to set their remuneration will be pr oposed at the 2018 AGM.
The directors in office at the date of signing of this report confirm that so far as they are aware there is no relevant audit information of which the auditor is unaware and that each director has taken all steps that he or she ought to have taken to make him or herselfaware of any relevant audit information and to establish that the auditor is awar e of that information.
Going concern Details of the groups business ac tivities results cash flows and resources together with the risks it faces and other factors likely to affect its future development performance and position are set out in the chairmans statement chief executives review strategic report and group risk committee report.
In addition note 1.5 to the financial statements provides further details.
The group companies are regulated by the PRA and FCA and perform annual capital adequacy assessments which include the modelling of certain extreme st ress scenarios.
The company publishes Pillar 3 disclosures annually on its website which provide detail about its regulatory capital resources and requirements.
In July 2015 Rathbone Investment Management issued 20 million of 10year subo rdinated loan notes to finance future growth.
The group has no other external borrowings.
In 2017 the group has continued to generate organic growth in client funds under management and this is expected to continue.
The directors believe that the comp any is well placed to manage its business risks successfully de spite the continuing uncertain economic and political outlook.
As the directors have a reasonable expectation that the co mpany has adequate resources to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future they continue to adopt the going concern basis of accounting in preparing the annual financial statements.
Political donations No political donations were made during the year 2016 nil.
Postbalance sheet events Details of postbalance sheet events are set out in note 37 to the financial statements.
FCAs Disclosure Guidance and Transparency Rules For the purposes of DTR 4.1.5R 2 and DTR 4.1.8 this directors report and the strategic report comprise the management report.
Annual General Meeting The 2018 AGM will be held on Thursday 10 May 2018 at 12.00 noon at 8 Finsbury Circus London EC2M 7AZ.
Full details of all resolutions and notes ar e set out in the separate Notice of AGM.
By order of the board Ali Johnson Company Secretary 21 February 2018 Registered office 8 Finsbury Circussite Governance Statement of directors responsibilities in respect of the report and accounts Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 The directors are responsible for preparing the report and accounts 2017 and the group and parent company financial statements in accordance with ap plicable law and regulations.
Company law requires the director s to prepare group and parent company financial statements for each financial year. financial statements on the same basis.
Under company law the directors must not approve the financial statements unless they are satisfied that they give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the group and parent company and of their profit or loss for that period.
IFRS as adopted by the EU assess the group and parent compan ys ability to continue as a going concern disclosing as applicable matters related to going concern use the going concern basis of accounting unless they either intend to liquidate the group or the parent company or to cease operations or have no realistic alternative but to do so.
The directors are responsible for keeping adequate accounting records that are sufficient to show and explain the parent companys transactions and disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the financial position of the parent company and enable them to ensure that its financial statements comply with the Companies Act 2006.
They are responsible for such internal control as they determine is necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error and have general responsibility for taking such steps as are reasonably open to them to safeguard the assets of the group and to prevent and detect fraud and other irregularities.
Under applicable law and regulations the directors are also responsible for preparing a strategic report directors report directors remuneration report and corporate governance statement that complies with that law and those regulations.
The directors are responsible for the maintenance and integrity of the corporate and financial information included on the companys website.
Legislation in the UK governing the preparation and dissemination of financial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
Responsibility statement of the directors in respect of the annual financial report We confirm that to the best of our knowledge the financial statements prepared in accordance with the applicable set of accounting standa rds give a true and fair view of the assets liabilities financial position and profit or loss of the company and the undertakings included in the consolidation taken as a whole and the strategic report and directors report includes a fair review of the development and performance of the business and the position of the issuer and the undertakings included in the consolidation taken as a whole together with a description of the principal risks and uncert ainties that they face.
We consider the annual report and accounts taken as a whole is fair balanced and understanda ble and provides the information necessary for shareholders to a ssess the groups position and performance business model and strategy.
Financial statements Independent auditors report to the members of Rathbone Brothers Plc 108 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 1 Our opinion is unmodified We have audited the financial statements of Rathbone Brothers Plc for the year ended 31 December 2017 which comprise the consolidated statement of comprehensive income consolidated statement of changes in equity  consolidated balance sheet consolidated statement of cash flows company statement of changes in equity company balance sheet and company statement of cash flows and the related notes including the accounting policies in note 1 and 39.
In our opinion the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the groups and of the parent companys affairs as at 31 December 2017 and of the groups profit for the year then ended the group financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as adopted by the Eu ropean Union IFRS as adopted by the EU the parent company financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRS as adopted by the EU and as applied in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006 and the financial statements have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006 and as regards the group financial statements Article 4 of the IAS Regulation.
Basis for opinion We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing UK ISAs UK and applicable law.
Our
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is a sufficient and appropriate basis for our opinion.
Our audit opinion is consistent with our report to the audit committee.
We were appointed as auditor by the shareholders on 9 June 2009.
The period of total uninterrupted engagement is for the nine financial years ended 31 December 2017.
We have fulfilled our ethical responsibilities under and we remain independent of the group in accordance with UK ethical requirements including the FRC Ethical Standard as applied to listed public interest entities.
No nonaudit services prohibited by that standard were provided.
2 Key audit matters our assessment of risks of material misstatement Key audit matters are those matters that in our professional judgement were of most significance in the audit of the financial statements and include the most significant assessed risks of material misstatement whether or not due to fraud identified by us including those which had the greatest effect on the overall audit strategy the allocation of resources in the audit and directing the efforts of the engagement team.
We summarise below the key audit matters in decreasing order of audit significance in arriving at our audit opinion above together with our key audit procedures to address those matters and as required for public interest entities our results from those procedures.
These matters were addressed and our results are base d on procedures undertaken in the context of and solely for the purpose of our audit of the financial statements as a whole and in forming our opinion thereon and consequently are incidental to that opinion and we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters.
Recognition and impairment of client relationship intangibles.
Amount capitalised during the year 2743000 2016 7926000 amount expensed as capitalisation criteria not met 5094000 2016 4005000 and carrying balance of client relationship intangible 88511000 2016 97201000 Risk vs 2016 Refer to page 73 audit committee report page 124 accounting policy and pages 126 and 14 0 financial disclosures.
The risk  accounting application in relation to recognition of client relationship intangibles The group has capitalised sign ificant amounts as client relationship intangibles including both those purchased individually initially recognised at cost and those acquired as part of a business combinat ion initially recognised at fair value.
108 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 109 The key judgement areas our audit concentrated on were The group makes contractual payments to its investment managers for introducing new client relationships.
For newly recruited managers the group capitalises payments that are deemed to represent the transfer of existing client relationships already held by the investme nt manager.
The group has determined the appropriate accounting policy is to capitalise payments made to investment managers in respect of previously held client relationships transferred to the group during the 12 month period after the conclusion of any non compete arrangements between an investment manager and their previous employer.
The capitalisation period is extended beyond 12 months in exceptional circumstances where management consider that the investment manager is introducing previously held client relationships beyond that period during the year payments were capitalised outside the 12 month earnout period.
There is a risk that payments are inappropriately capitalised outside of the 12 month period or that they do not relate to client relationships previously held by the investment manager.
The risk  accounting application in relation to impairment of client relationship intangibles For client relationship intangib les the group assesses whether there is an indication of impairment considering a range of impairment triggers.
Where such an indication exists the group considers whether the ongoing benefits offered by the capitalised client relationship intangibles are greater than their carrying value and if not an impairment provision is recorded.
There is a risk that a client relationship intangible was impaired but the group did not record an impairment provision because the impairment trigger remained undetected.
Our response In this area our procedures included Accounting application in relation to recognition of client relationship intangibles Methodology implementation we considered whether the payments capitalised fell within the relevant 12 month period by comparing the dates of client transfer and employment contract of the investment manager.
Tests of details in respect of those instances where payments were capitalised beyond the 12 month period for each significant addition we confirmed whether these relationships were held by the investment manager in a previous employment challenged the group on the nature of the relationship and obtained documentary evidence.
Independent reperformance we performed a recalculation of new client relationship intangibles recognised in the year and assessed whether the amounts capita lised were in line with the contractual agreements with the investment manager.
Tests of details on a sample basis we tested that such costs related to relationships already held by the investment manager by obtaining relevant documentation evidencing previous relationship.
Accounting application in relation to impairment of client relationship intangibles Independent reperformance for the element of the client relationship intangibles previously capitalised under IFRS 3 Business Combinations we have critically assessed the groups own review of the client relationship intangibles against impairment triggers.
Tests of details in considering the adequacy of the impairment assessment performed by the group to support the carrying value of client relationship intangibles previously capitalised we assessed the population for cl osed client accounts or non income generating clients to assess whether they were appropriately derecognised.
Assessing transparency we have also considered the adequacy of the groups disclosure in respect of intangible assets.
Our results  we found the recognition and carrying value of client relationship intangibles to be acceptable.
Valuation of defined benefit pension deficit 15600000 2016 39455000 Refer to page 73 audit committee report page 125 accounting policy and pages 126 143 to 148 financial disclosures.
The risk  subjective valuation The group and parent company has recognised a pension deficit of 15.6 million as at 31 December 2017.
The valuation of the defined benefit pension deficit depends on a number of judgemental assumptions and estimates including the discount rate used to calculate the current value of the future payments the group expects to pay pensioners the rate of inflation that must be incorporated in the estimate of the future pension payments the life expectancy of pension scheme members and the number of members who will transfer out of the schemes.
The valuation is an important judgement as this balance is volatile and impacts the parent companys distributable reserves.
Uncertainty arises as a result of estimates made in respect of long term trends and market conditions to determine the value based on the groups expectations of the future.
As a result the actual surplus or deficit realised by the group may be significantly different to that recognised on the balance sheet since small changes to the assumptions used in the calculation materially affect the valuation.
Consolidated financial statements Independent auditors report to the members of Rathbone Brothers Plc continued Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 2 Key audit matters our assessment of risks of material misstatement continued The plan assets are not subject to significant risk of misstatement but due to their ma teriality in the context of the groups financial statements they are considered to be part of this key audit matter.
Our response  our procedures include Our actuarial expertise we used our own actuarial specialists to challenge key assumptions and estimates used in the calculation of the pension deficit.
The key assumptions and estimates we tested included the number of members who transfer out of the schemes the discount rate RPI inflation and life expectancy that were applied to the valuation.
Benchmarking assumptions we performed a comparison of key assumptions against externally derived data and our benchmark ranges for similar schemes.
Methodology choice we considered the groups judgement in selecting its assumptions and whether there were any indicators of management bias.
Comparing valuations we obtained a breakdown of assets held in both defined benefit pension schemes.
We used our own valuation specialists to independently verify the value of a sample of the assets held within both schemes.
Assessing transparency we considered the adequacy of the groups disclosure in respect of the defined benefit pension deficit and the assumptions used which is set out in note 27 to the financial statements.
Our results  we found the valuation of defined benefit pension deficit to be acceptable.
New Measurement of Onerous Lease Provision 11478000 2016 nil Risk vs 2016 Refer to page 73 audit committee report page 131 accounting policy and pages 126 and 141 to 142 financial disclosures.
The risk  subjective estimate The measurement of the onerous lease provision depends on a number of assumptions and estimates.
In particular the value of the provision is sensitive to the underlying key assumptions around future cash flows and discount rates.
The key assumptions applied by the group are the discount rates applied the estimated period of time the property remains empty void period the period of time a rentfree agreement is offered rentfree period and the level of sublease income and the adjustment made in relation to the risk of uncertainty.
In determining the provision the group obtained advice from independent property specialists.
These are estimates made in respect of current market trends and conditions and the value of the provision is determined by the groups known future costs for the premises and expectations of the potential rental income.
Our response  our procedures included Our property valuation expertise we used our own property specialists to challenge key assumptions and estimates used in the calculation of the onerous lease provision.
This included comparing these assumptions against our specialists own knowledge of property lettings in the industry and assessing the reasonableness of the groups assumptions against their benchmark ranges for similar properties in the area.
Test of details we tested the accura cy and completeness of key data inputs by reviewing documentation in relation to signed lease agreements.
Our sector experience we assessed the reasonability of the discount rate used for both certain and uncertain cash flows.
Methodology choice we considered the groups judgement in selecting its assumptions and whether there were any indicators of management bias.
Assessing transparency we considered the adequacy of the groups disclosure in respect of the onerous lease provision.
Our results  we found the measurem ent of the onerous lease provision to be acceptable.
110 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 111 3 Our application of materiality and an overview of the scope of our audit Materiality for the group financial statements as a whole was set at 3.6 million 2016 2.8 million determined with reference to a benchmark of group profit before tax normalised to exclude the loss on recognition of the onerous lease for the year of 16.1 million as disclosed in note 25 and the credit of 2.0 million in relation to the rentfree accrual as disclosed in note 9 a credit of 5.5 million relating to the plan amendment gain for the defined benefit pension scheme as disclosed in note 27 as well as expense of 4.9 million relating to an aborted acquisition during the year as disclosed in note 8.
These are oneoff expenses and not considered to be part of the normalised profit before tax.
Materiality represents 5% 2016 5% of the normalised group profit before tax.
Materiality for the parent company financial statements as a whole was set at 2.9 million 2016 2.2 million.
This is lower than the materiality we would otherwise have determined by reference to net assets and represents 1.4% of the parent companys net assets 2016 1.2%.
We agreed to report to the audit committee any corrected or uncorrected identified misstatements exceeding 180000 2016 140000 in addition to other identified misstatements that warranted reporting on qualitative grounds.
Of the groups eight 2016 eight reporting components we subjected eight 2016 eight to full scope audits for group purposes.
The audit work for eigh t 2016 six was performed by the group team to materiality levels set individually for each entity which ranged from 0.03 million to 2.9 million 2016 0.2 million to 2.2 million having regard to the mix of size and risk profile of the group across the components.
The group team performed proced ures on the items excluded from normalised group profit before tax.
The components scoped in for group reporting purposes accounted for 100% of total group revenue group profit before tax and total group assets.
4 We have nothing to report on going concern We are required to report to you if we have anything material to add or draw attention to in relation to the directors statement on page 121 of the financial statements on the use of the go ing concern basis of accounting with no material uncertainties that may cast significant doubt over the group and companys use of that basis for a period of at least twelve months from the date of approval of the financial statements or the same statement under the List ing Rules set out on page 105 is materially inconsistent with our audit knowledge.
We have nothing to report in these respects.
5 We have nothing to report on the other information in the Annual Report and Accounts The directors are responsible for the other information presented in the annual report together with the financial statements.
Our
Our responsibility is to read the other information and in doing so consider whether based on our financial statements audit work the information therein is materi ally misstated or inconsistent with the financial statements or our audit knowledge.
Based solely on that work we have not identified material misstatements in the other information.
Strategic report and directors report Based solely on our work on the other information we have not identified material misstatements in the strategic report and the directors report in our opinion the information given in those reports for the financial year is consistent with the financial statements and in our opinion those reports have been prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 2006.
Directors remuneration report In our opinion the part of the directors remuneration report to be audited has been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 2006.
Normalised group prot before tax 72.2m 2016 54.5m Group materiality 2016 2.8m Range of materiality at eight components 0.03m to 2.0m 2016 0.2m to 2.2m Group misstatements reported to the audit committee 2016 0.14msite Consolidated financial statements Independent auditors report to the members of Rathbone Brothers Plc continued Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 5 We have nothing to report on the other information in the annual report and accounts continued Disclosures of principal risks and longerterm viability Based on the knowledge we acquired during our financial statements audit we have noth ing material to add or draw attention to in relation to the directors confirmation wi thin viability statement on page 28 that they have carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the group including those that would threaten its business model future performance solvency and liquidity the risk management disclosure s describing these risks and explaining how they are being managed and mitigated and the directors explanation in the viability statement of how they have assessed the prospects of the group over what period they have done so and why they considered that period to be appropriate and their statement as to whether they have a reasonable expectat ion that the group will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the period of their assessment including any related disclosures drawing attention to any necessary qualifications or assumptions.
Under the Listing Rules we are required to review the viability statement.
We have nothing to report in this respect.
Corporate governance disclosures We are required to report to you if we have identified material inconsistencies between the knowledge we acquired during our financial statements audit and the directors statement that they consider that the annual report and financial statements taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to a ssess the groups position and performance business model and strategy or the section of the annual report describing the work of the audit committee does not a ppropriately address matters communicated by us to the audit committee.
We are required to report to you if the corporate governance report does not properly disclo se a departure from the eleven provisions of the UK Corporate Governance Code specified by the Listing Rules for our review.
We have nothing to report in these respects.
6 We have nothing to report on the other matters on which we are required to report by exception Under the Companies Act 2006 we are required to report to you if in our opinion adequate accounting records have not been kept by the parent company or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or the parent company financial statements and the part of the directors remuneration report to be audited are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns or certain disclosures of directors remuneration specified by law are not made or we have not received all the in formation and explanations we require for our audit.
We have nothing to report in these respects.
7 Respective responsibilities Directors responsibilities As explained more fully in their statement set out on page 106 the directors are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements including being satisfied that they give a true and fair view such internal control as they determine is necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement whether du e to fraud or error assessing the group and parent companys ability to continue as a going concern disclosing as applicable matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless they either intend to liquidate the group or the parent company or to cease operations or have no realistic alternative but to do so.
112 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 113 Auditors responsibilities Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud other irregularities or error and to issue our opinion in an auditors report.
Reasonable assurance is a high level of assura nce but does no t guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance wi th ISAs UK will always detect a material misstatement when it exists.
Misstatements can arise from fraud other irregularities or error and are considered material if individually or in aggregate they could r easonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of the financial statements.
The ri sk of not detecting a material misstatement resulting from fraud or other irregularities is higher than for one resulting from error as they may involve collusion forgery intentional omissions misrepresentations or the override of internal control and may involve any area of law and regulation not just those directly affecting the financial statements.
A fuller description of our responsibilities is provided on the FRCs website at www. rc. iteauditorsresponsibilities.
Irregularities  ability to detect We identified relevant areas of laws and regulations that could have a material effect on the fina ncial statements from our sector experience through discussion with the directors and other management as required by auditing standards and from inspection of the groups regulatory correspondence.
We had regard to laws and regulations in areas that directly affect the financial statements including financial reporting including related company legislation and taxation legislation.
We considered the extent of compliance with those laws and regulations as part of our procedures on the related financial statements items.
In addition we considered the impact of laws and regulations in the specific areas of regulatory capital and liquidity conduct financial crime including money laundering sanctions list and market abuse regulations recognising the financial and regulated nature of the groups activities.
With the exception of any known or possible noncompliance an d as required by auditing standards our work in respect of these was limited to enquiry of the directors and other management and inspection of regulatory correspondence.
We considered the effect of any known or possible noncompliance in these ar eas as part of our procedures on the related financial statements items.
We communicated identified laws and regulations throughout our team and remained alert to an y indications of noncompliance throughout the audit.
As with any audit there remained a higher risk of nondetection of irregularities as these may involv e collusion forgery intentional omissions misrepresentations or the override of internal controls.
8 The purpose of our audit work and to whom we owe our responsibilities This report is made solely to the companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006.
Our audit work has been undertaken so that we might state to the companys members those matters we are required to state to them in an auditors report and for no other purpose.
To the fullest extent permitted by law we do not accept or assume responsibility to anyone ot her than the co mpany and the companys members as a body for our audit work for this report or for the opinions we have formed.
Nicholas Edmonds Senior Statutory Auditor for and on behalf of KPMG LLPsite Consolidated financial statements Consolidated statement of comprehensive income for the year ended 31 December 2017 114 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017
Interest and similar income Interest expense and similar charges 1907 2319 Net interest income 4 11594 Fee and commission income Fee and commission expense 22715 17936 Net fee and commission income 5 269319 Net trading income 6 3071 Gain on plan amendment of defined benefit pension schemes 27 5523 Other operating income 6 2065 Operating income Charges in relation to client relationships and goodwill 7 11716 11735 Acquisitionrelated costs 8 6178 5985 Head office relocation costs 9 16248 7031 Other operating expenses 198529 176403 Operating expenses 7 232671 201154 Profit before tax Taxation 11 12072 11972 Profit after tax Profit for the year attributable to equity holders of the company Other comprehensive income Items that will not be reclassified to profit or loss Net remeasurement of defined benefit liability 27 17288 Deferred tax relating to net remeasurement of defined benefit liability 20 2939 5936 Items that may be reclassified to profit or loss Revaluation of available for sale investment securities net gain from changes in fair value 17 163 net profit on disposal transferred to profit or loss during the year Deferred tax relating to revaluation of available for sale investment securities 20 20 14 Other comprehensive income net of tax Total comprehensive income for the year net of tax attributable to equity holders of the company Dividends paid and proposed for the year per ordinary share Dividends paid and proposed for the year Earnings per share for the year attributable to equity holders of the company 13 basic diluted The accompanying notes form an integral part of the consolidated financial statements.
Note
Share capital
Merger reserve Available for sale reserve
Retained earnings
At 1 January 2016 2407 97643 31835 71 6177 174413 300192 Profit for the year 38157 38157 Net remeasurement of defined benefit liability 27 37318 37318 Net gain on revaluation of available for sale investment securities 17 Deferred tax relating to components of other comprehensive income 20 5936 5922 Other comprehensive income net of tax 31382 31303 Dividends paid 12 26479 26479 Issue of share capital 28 128 42003 Sharebased payments value of employee services 3035 3035 cost of own shares acquired 29 cost of own shares vesting 29 own shares sold 2tel tax on sharebased payments 20 At 1 January 2017 2535 139991 31835 150 6243 156545 324813 Profit for the year 46829 46829 Net remeasurement of defined benefit liability 27 17288 17288 Revaluation of available for sale investment securities net gain from changes in fair value 17 net profit on disposal transferred to profit or loss during the year Deferred tax relating to components of other comprehensive income 20 2939 2959 Other comprehensive income net of tax 14349 14449 Dividends paid 12 29420 29420 Issue of share capital 28 31 3098 Sharebased payments value of employee services 3591 3591 cost of own shares acquired 29 cost of own shares vesting 29 tax on sharebased payments 20 At 31 December 2017 2566 143089 31835 250 4864 190402 363278 The accompanying notes form an integral part of the consolidated financial statements.
Consolidated financial statements Consolidated balance sheet as at 31 December 2017 116 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017
Assets
Cash and balances with central banks 14 1375382 Settlement balances Loans and advances to banks 15 117253 Loans and advances to customers 16 126213 Investment securities available for sale 17 109312 held to maturity 17 701966 Prepayments accrued income and other assets 18 74445 Property plant and equipment 19 16457 Net deferred tax asset 20 9061 Intangible assets 21 161977 Total assets
Deposits by banks 22 1338 Settlement balances Due to customers 23 2170498 Accruals deferred income provisions and other liabilities 24 108391 Current tax liabilities Subordinated loan notes 26 19695 Retirement benefit obligations 27 15600 Total liabilities
Share capital 28 2566 Share premium 28 143089 Merger reserve Available for sale reserve Own shares 29 4864 6243 Retained earnings Total equity Total liabilities and equity The financial statements were approved by the board of directors and authorised for issue on 21 February 2018 and were signed o n their behalf by Philip Howell Chief Executive Paul Stockton Finance Director Company registered number The accompanying notes form an integral part of the consolidated financial statements.
Note
Cash flows from operating activities Profit before tax Net profit on disposal of available for sale investment securities Net interest income 11594 11571 Net impairment charges on impaired loans and advances 16 1 Net charge for provisions 25 16728 Profit on disposal of property plant and equipment Depreciation amortisation and impairment Foreign exchange movements 17 1480 Defined benefit pension scheme charges 27 2948 3058 Defined benefit pension contributions paid 27 3619 5422 Sharebased payment charges 10 3871 Interest paid 1663 2308 Interest received Changes in operating assets and liabilities net increasedecrease in loans and advances to banks and customers 16643 16785 net increase in settlement balance debtors 8997 19839 net increase in prepayments accrued income and other assets 8318 6392 net increase in amounts due to customers and deposits by banks net increase in settlement balance creditors net increase in accruals deferred income provisions and other liabilities Cash generated from operations Tax paid 14087 12025 Net cash inflow from operating activities Cash flows from investing activities Acquisition of subsidiaries net of cash acquired Purchase of property plant equipment and intangible assets 16123 26137 Proceeds from sale of property plant and equipment Purchase of investment securities 17 746566 905701 Proceeds from sale and redemption of investment securities 17 742581 Net cash used in investing activities 20108 21609 Cash flows from financing activities Issue of ordinary shares 36 2688 Dividends paid 12 29420 26479 Net cash used ingenerated from financing activities 26732 13720 Net increase in cash and cash equivalents Cash and cash equivalents at the beginning of the year Cash and cash equivalents at the end of the year 36 1567758 The accompanying notes form an integral part of the consolidated financial statements.
Consolidated financial statements Notes to the consolidated financial statements 118 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 1 Principal accounting policies Rathbone Brothers Plc the company is a public company incorporated and domiciled in England and Wales under the Companies Act 2006.
1.1 Basis of preparation The consolidated and company financial statements have been prepared in accordance with In ternational Financial Reporting Standards IFRS as adopted by the EU.
The company financial statements are presented on pages 114 to 117.
The financial statements have been prepared on the historical cost basis except for certain financial instruments that are measured at fair value notes 1.12 and 1.16.
The principal accounting policies adopted are set out in this note and unless otherwise stated have been applied consistently to all periods presented in the consolidated financial statements.
1.2 Basis of consolidation The consolidated financial statements incorporate the financial statements of the company and entities controlled by the company its subsidiaries together the group made up to 31 December each year.
The group controls an entity when it is exposed to or has rights to variable returns from its involvement with the entity and has the ability to affect those returns through its power over the entity.
Subsidiaries are fully consolidated from the date on which control is obtained and no longer consolidated from the date that control ceases their results are included in the consolidated financial statements up to the date that control ceases.
Intercompany
1.3 Developments in reporting standards and interpretations Standards and interpretations affecting the reported results or the financial position In the current year the group has adopted the amendments to IAS 7 Statement of Cash Flows wh ich improves disclosures on net debt in these financial statements.
The group now provides a reconciliation between the opening and closing balances for liabilities arising from financial activities see note 36.
No other standards or interpretations new or revised have been adopted that have had a significant impact on the amounts reported in the financial statements.
Standards not affecting the reported results or the financial position The following new and revised standards and interpretations have been adopted in the current year .
Their adoption has not had any significant impact on the amounts reported in these financial statements but may impact the accounting for future transactions and arrangements Recognition of Deferred Tax Assets for Unrealised Losses Amendments to IAS 12 Future new standards and interpretations A number of new standards and amendments to standards and interpretations will be effective for future annual periods beginning after 1 January 2017 and therefore have not been applied in preparing these consol idated financial statements.
The effects of IFRS 9 Financial Instruments IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers and IFRS 16 Leases on the consolidated financial statements of the group are discussed below.
IFRS 9 Financial Instruments IFRS 9 is effective for periods commencing on or after 1 January 2018.
The standard was endorsed by the EU during 2016.
The group has not adopted this standard in preparing these consolidated financial statements.
IFRS 9 governs the accounting treatment for the classification and measurement of financial instruments and the timing and extent of credit provisioning.
The standard replaces IAS 39.
Classification of financial assets The basis of classification for financial assets under IFRS 9 is different from that under IAS 39.
Financial assets will be classified into one of three categories amortised cost fair value through profit or loss FVTPL or fair value through other comprehensive income FVOCI.
The held to maturity loans and receivables and available for sale categories available under IAS 39 have been removed.
The classification criteria for allocating financial assets between categories under IFRS 9 requir es the group to document the business models under which its assets are managed distinguishing whether they are heldtocollect both heldtocollect and for sale or another type of business model e. trading.
The group is also required to review contractual terms and conditions to determine whether the cash flows arising on these assets are solely payments of principal and interest.
The group has not iden tified any material differences from the classification of financial assets under the new standard.
Debt securities currently classified as held to maturity will be classified as amortised cost.
Other assets cu rrently carried at amortised cost such as cash with central banks including deposits held with the Bank of England and loans and advances to banks and customers will also continue to be classified as such.
Investments in money market funds which are currently classified as available for sale will be classified as FVTPL as they are equity instruments.
The group does not intend to make the FVOCI election.
Under this classification fair value gains and losses will be recognised in profit or loss.
Impairment of financial assets Under IFRS 9 an expected cred it loss ECL model replaces the incurred loss model meaning there no longer needs to be a triggering event in order to reco gnise impairment losses.
A credit loss provision must be made for the amount of any loss expected to arise whereas under IAS 39 credit losses are recognised when they are incurred.
Under the ECL model a dual measurement approach applies whereby a financial asset will attract a loss allowance equal to either 12 month expected credit losses losses resulting from possible defaults within the next 12 months or lifetime expected credit losses losses resulting from possible defaults over the remaining life of the financial asset.
The latter applies if there has been a significant deterioration in the credit quality of the asset albeit lifetime ECLs will always be recognised for assets without a significant financing component.
The group has developed a detailed model for calculating ECLs on its treasury book and investment management loan book.
This requires considerable judgement in developing different economic scenarios and probability weighting them accordingly.
The economic scenarios in the model are based on the projections of GDP inflation unemployment rates house price indices financial markets and interest ra tes as set out in the banking system stress testing scenario published annually by the PRA.
In addition management prepare better and worse case economic forecasts by adjusting the projections for the economic variables.
Under each resultant scenario an expected credit loss is forecast for each exposure in the treasury book and investment management loan book.
The expected credit loss is calculated based on managements estimate of the probability of default the loss given default and the exposure at default of each exposure taking into account industry credit loss data the groups own credit loss experience the expected repayment profiles of the exposures and the level of collateral held.
Industry credit loss information is drawn from data on credit defaults for different categories of exposure publishe d by the Council of Mortgage Lenders and Standard and Poors.
The model adopts a staging allo cation methodology primarily based on changes in the internal andor external credit rating of exposures to identify significant increases in credit risk since inception of the exposure.
The groups trade receivables i ncluding trust and financial planning debtors are generally short term and do not contain significant financing components.
Therefore the group expects to apply a practical expedient by using a provision matrix to calculate lifetime expected credit losses.
Classification of financial liabilities The basis of classification for financial liabilities under IFRS 9 remains unchanged from that under IAS 39.
The two categories are amortised cost or fair value through profit or loss either designated as such or held for trading.
The group does not curr ently designate any liab ilities as fair value through profit or loss and does no t anticipate doing so.
Therefore under IFRS 9 the group expects to classify all financial liabilities as amortised cost with no material impact on measurement.
Transition
In adopting IFRS 9 the group plans to take advantage of the exemption from having to restate comparative information instead recognising any differences between the previous and the new carrying amounts in opening equity and reserves.
Estimated impact of adoption of IFRS 9 The group has assessed the estimated impact that the initial application of IFRS 9 will have on its consolidated financial statements based on the profile of its financial instruments as at the balance sheet date.
From the work completed to date the group estimates that adoption of IFRS 9 will not result in any material adjustments to opening equity or the carrying amount of financial assets and liabilities recognised on the balance sheet.
Additional expected credit loss provisions recognised under IFRS 9 are expected to be immaterial refl ecting the high cr edit quality of instruments in the treasury book the high level of security held against the investment management loan book and relatively low value of trade receivables.
IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers IFRS 15 is effective for periods commencing on or after 1 January 2018 and replaces existing revenue recognition guidance in particular under IAS 18.
The standard was endorsed by the EU during 2016.
The group has not ad opted this standard early in preparing these consolidated financial statements.
IFRS 15 changes how and when revenue is recognised from contracts with customers and the treatment of the costs of obtaining a contract with a customer.
The standard requires that the recognition of revenue is linked to the fulfilment of identified performance obligations that are enshrined in the customer contract.
It also requires that the incremental cost of obtaining a customer contract should be capitalised if that cost is expected to be recovered.
Consolidated financial statements Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued 120 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 1 Principal accounting policies continued The group has considered the impact of adopting the standard on its existing revenue streams as well as on its policy of capitalising the cost of obtaining customer contracts.
Net fee and commission income Included within net fee and commission income are initial fees charged by a number of group companies in relation to certain business activities.
Under IFRS 15 the group is required to make an assessment as to whether the work performed to earn such fees constitutes the transfer of services and therefore fulfils any performance obligations.
If so then these fees can be recognised when the relevant performance obligation has been satisfied if not then the fees can only be reco gnised in the period the services are provided.
We have not identified any inst ances where the recognition of revenue will change materially from the current treatment in the consolidated financial statements.
Contract costs Under the groups current policy for capitalising contract costs incremental payments that are made to secure investment management contracts are capitalised as client relationship intangibles if they are separable reliably measurable and expected to be recovered.
The period during which such payments are capitalised is typically 12 months as explained in note 2.1.
Under IFRS 15 the scope requirements are broader such that costs to obtain any contract with a customer should be capitalised if those costs are incremental and the entity expects to recover them.
The group has assessed its current policy and expects to remove the 12 month limit on capitalisation of payments to newly recruited investment managers under the new standard.
The policy will be unchanged in all other respects.
The group has also identified a number of other schemes where awards are linked to obtaining client contracts and has considered whether any meet the new criteria for capitalising costs under IFRS 15.
The group does not believe that the adoption of the new standard will result in any awards made under these schemes being capitalised.
Transition
The group plans to adopt IFRS 15 using the cumulative effect method with the effect of initially applying the standard recognised at the date of initial ap plication with no restatement of the comparative period.
Estimated impact of adoption of IFRS 15 The group has assessed the estimated impact that the initial application of IFRS 15 will have on its consolidated financial statements.
From the work completed to date the group estimates that it will recognise a pretax adjustment of approximately 8 million to opening equity with a correspo nding adjustment to client relationship intangibles in respec t of the additional capitalisation of payments made to investment managers.
IFRS 16 Leases IFRS 16 is effective for periods commencing on or after 1 January 2019.
The standard was endorsed by the EU during 2017.
The group has not adopted this standard early.
IFRS 16 eliminates the classificati on of leases as either operating leases or finance leases.
The group will be required to recognise all leases with a term of more than 12 months as a rightofuse lease asset on its balance sheet the grou p will also recognise a financial liability representing its obligation to make future lease payments.
Transition
Definition of a lease On transition to IFRS 16 the group can choose whether to apply the new definition of a lease to all its contracts as if IFRS 16 had always applied or apply a practical expedient and retain its previous assessments of which contracts contain a lease.
The group intends to apply the practical expedient and therefore will not be reassessing those contracts that are not deemed to contain a lease prior to the date of adoption.
Retrospective approach As a lessee the group can either apply the standard using a retrospective approach or modified retrospective approach with optional practical expedients.
The group has assessed the impact of both approaches in relation to its existing lease contracts and plans to apply the modified retrospective approach.
Potential impact The group has conducted an initial quantification of the impact of adopting the standard based on its existing lease contracts.
The groups total assets and total liabilities will be increased by the recognition of lease assets an d liabilities.
The lease assets will be depreciated over the shorter of the expected life of the asset and the lease term.
The lease liability will be reduced by lease payments offset by the unwinding of the liability over the lease term.
The most significant impact is in respect of its London head office premises.
As at 31 December 2017 the groups future minimum lease payments under noncancella ble operating leases amounted to 90602000 on an undiscounted basis of which 75946000 relates to its 8 Finsbury Circus office see note 33.
On the groups statement of comprehensive income the profile of lease costs will be frontloaded at least individually as the interest charge is higher in the early years of a lease term as the discount rate unwinds.
The total cost of the lease over the lease term is expected to be unchanged.
In addition to the above impacts recognition of lease assets will increase the groups regulatory capital requirement.
Lessor accounting The group is not required to make any adjustments for leases in which it is a lessor except where it is an intermediate lessor in a sublease.
The work to quantify the impact of being an intermediate lessor remains ongoing.
1.4 Business combinations Business combinations are accounted for using the acquisition method.
The consideration for each acquisition is measured at the aggregate of the fair values at the date of exchange of assets given liabilities incurred or assumed and equity instruments issued by the group in exchange for control of the acquiree.
Acquisitionrelated costs are recognised in profit or loss as incurred.
Where applicable the consideration for the acquisition includes any asset or liability resulting from a contingent consideration arrangement measured at its acquisition date fair value.
Subsequent changes in such fair values may arise as a result of additional information obtained after this date about facts and circumstances that existed at the acquisition date.
Provided they arise within 12 months of the acquisition date these changes are measurement period adjustments and are reflected against the cost of acquisition.
Changes in the fair value of contingent consideration resulting from events occurring after the acquisition date are charged to profit or lo ss or other comprehensive income except for obligations that are classified as equity which are not remeasured.
Such changes are irresp ective of the 12 month period from acquisition.
1.5 Going concern The directors have at the time of approving the financial statements a reasonable expectation that the company and the group have adequate resources to continue in operational existence.
In forming this view the directors have considered the companys and the groups prospe cts for a period exceeding 12 months.
Thus they continue to adopt the going concern basis of accounting in preparing the financial statements.
1.6 Foreign currencies The functional and presentational currency of the company and its subsidiaries is sterling.
Transactions in currencies other than the relevant group entitys functional currency are recorded at the rates of exchange prevailing on the dates of the transactions.
At each balance sheet date monetary assets and liabilities that are denominated in foreign currencies are retranslated at the rates prevailing on the balance sheet date.
Gains and losses arising on retranslation are included in profit or loss for the year.
1.7 Income Net interest income Interest income or expense from interestbearing financial instruments except those classi fied as held for trading is calculated using the effective interest method and recognised within net interest income.
Dividends received from money market funds are included in net interest income when received.
The effective interest method is the method of calculating the amortised cost of a financial asset or liability or group of assets and liabilities and of allocating the interest income or interest expense over the relevant period.
The effective interest rate is the rate that exactly discounts the expected future cash payments or receipts through the expected life of the financial instrument or when appropriate a shorter period to the net carrying amount of the instrument.
The application of the method has the effect of recognising income or expense receivable or payable on the instrument evenly in proportion to the amount outstanding over the period to maturity or repayment.
In calculating effective interest the group estimates cash flows considering all contractual terms of the financial instrument but excluding the impact of future credit losses.
Net fee and commission income Portfolio or investment management fees commissions receivable or payable and fees from advisory services are recognised on a continuous basis over the period that the related service is provided.
Commission charges for executing transactions on behalf of clients are recognised when the transaction is dealt.
Initial charges receivable from the sale of unit holdings in the groups collective investment schemes and related rebates are recognised at the point of sale.
Dividend income Dividend income from final dividends on equity securities is accounted for on the date the security becomes exdividend.
Interim dividends are recognised when received.
Consolidated financial statements Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued 122 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 1 Principal accounting policies continued 1.8 Operating leases Lease agreements which do not transfer substantially all of the risks and rewards of ownership of the leased assets to the group are classified as operating leases.
Payments made under operating leases are recognised in profit or loss on a straight line basis over the term of the lease.
The impact of any lease incentives is spread over the term of the lease.
1.9 Sharebased payments The group engages in equitysettl ed and cashsettled sharebased payment transactions in respect of services received from its employees.
Equitysettled awards For equitysettled sharebased pa yments the fair value of the award is measured by reference to the fair value of the shares or share options granted on the grant date.
The cost of the employee services received in respect of th e shares or share options granted is recognised in profit or loss over the vesting period with a corresponding credit to equity.
The fair value of the awards or options granted is determined using a binomial pricing model which takes into account the current share price the riskfree interest rate the expected volatility of the companys share price over the life of the option or award any applicable exercise pr ice and other relevant factors.
Only those vesting conditions that include terms related to market conditions are taken into account in estimating fair value.
Non market vesting conditions are taken into account by adjusting the number of shares or share options included in the measurement of the cost of employee services so that ultimately the amount recognised in profit or loss reflec ts the number of vested shares or share options with a corresponding adjustment to equity.
Where vesting conditions are related to market conditions the charges for the services received are recognised regardless of whether or not the marketrelated vesting condition is met provided that any nonmarket vesting conditions are also met.
Shares purchased and issued are charged directly to equity.
Cashsettled awards For cashsettled sharebased paymen ts a liability is recognised for the services received to the balance sheet date measured at the fair value of the liability.
At each subsequent balance sheet date and at the date on which the liability is settled the fair value of the liability is remeasured with any changes in fair value recognised in profit or loss.
1.10 Taxation Current tax Current tax is the expected tax payable or receivable on net taxable income for the year.
Current tax is calculated using tax rates enacted or substantively enacted by the balance sheet date together with any adjustment to tax payable or receivable in respect of previous years.
Deferred tax Deferred tax is accounted for under the balance sheet liability method in respect of temporary differences using tax rates and laws that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the balance sheet date and are expected to apply when the liability is settled or when the asset is realised.
Deferred tax liabilities are recognised for all temporary differences and deferred tax assets are recognised to the extent that it is probable that taxable profits will be available against which deductible temporary differences may be utilised except where the temporary difference arises from the initial recognition of goodwill from the initial recognition of other assets and liabilities in a transaction which affects neither the tax profit nor the accounting profit other than in a business combination or in relation to investments in subsidiaries and associates where the group is able to control the reversal of the temporary difference and it is the groups intention not to reverse the temporary difference in the foreseeable future.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are offset when they relate to income taxes levied by the same taxation authority and the group intends to settle its current tax assets and liabilities on a net basis.
1.11 Cash and cash equivalents Cash comprises cash in hand.
Cash equivalents comprise mo ney market funds which are realisable on demand and loans and advances to banks with a maturity of less than three months from the date of acquisition.
For the purposes of the consolidated statement of cash flows cash and cash equivalents consist of cash and cash equivalents as defined above net of outstanding bank overdrafts.
1.12 Financial assets Initial recognition Financial assets are initially recognised at fair value.
Classification and subsequent valuation Financial assets are classified in the following categories at fair value through profit or loss Financial instruments are classified in this category if they are held for trading or if they are designated in this category by the group.
Financial assets held at fair value through profit or loss are carried at fair value with gains and losses arising from changes in fair value taken directly to profit or loss.
Loans and receivables Loans and receivables are nonderivative financial assets with fixed or determinable payments that are not quoted in an active market.
They arise when the group provides money goods or services to a debtor or purchases a loan or other debtor with no intention of trading the receivable.
Loans and receivables are measured at amortised cost using the effective interest method note 1.7 less any impairment.
If the fair value of the loan on initial recognition is lower than the amount advanced the shortfall is charged to profit or loss.
Held to maturity Held to maturity investments are nonderivative financial assets with fixed or determinable payments and fixed maturities other than those that meet the definition of loans and receivables or that the group has classified as available for sale or fair value through profit or loss that the group has the positive intention and ability to hold to maturity.
Held to maturity investments are measur ed at amortised cost using the effective interest method note 1.7 less any impairment.
Available for sale Available for sale financial assets are nonderivative financial assets that are either designated in this category or not classified in any of the other categories.
Available for sale investments are those intended to be held for an indefinite period of time and which may be sold in response to needs for liquidity or changes in inte rest rates exchange rates or equity prices.
Available for sale financial assets are subsequently carried at fair value.
Gains and losses arising from changes in the fair value of available for sale financial assets are recognised in other comprehensive income and presented in the available for sale reserve in equity.
When the financial asset is sold derecognised or impaired the cumulative gain or loss previously recognised in equity is recycled to profit or loss.
Trade date accounting Financial assets excluding loans and receivables are recognised on trade date being the date on which the group commits to purchase the asset.
Loans and receivables are recognised when cash is advanced to the borrowers.
Financial assets are derecognised when the rights to receive cash flows have expired or the group has transferred substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership.
Fair value measurement The fair values of quoted financial instruments in active markets are based on current bid prices.
If an active market for a financial asset does not exist the group establishes fair value by using valuation techniques.
These include the use of recent arms length transactions discounted cash flow analysis option pricing models and other valuation techniques commonly used by market participants.
The group recognises transfers between levels of the fair value hierarchy at the end of the reporting period during which the change has occurred.
Impairment of financial assets Financial assets carried at amortised cost If there is objective evidence that a financial asset carried at amortised cost or a group of such financial assets has suffered an impairment loss the recovera ble amount of the asset or group of assets is estimated in order to determine the extent of the impairment loss.
The group measures the amount of the impairment loss as the diff erence between the carrying amount of the asset or group of assets and the present value of estimated future cash flows from the asset or group of assets discounted at the effective interest rate of the asset or group of assets at initial recognition.
The present value of estimated future cash flows excludes the impact of future credit losses that have not been incurred.
Any impairment loss is recognised in profit or loss.
All impairment losses are reviewed at least at each reporting date.
If subsequently the amount of the loss decreases as a result of a new event the relevant element of the outstanding impairment loss is reversed through profit or loss.
Interest on impaired financial assets is recognised at the original effective interest rate applied to the carrying amount as reduced by an allowance for impairment.
Financial assets carried at fair value When a decline in the fair value of a financial asset classified as available for sale has been recognised in other comprehensive income and there is objective evidence that the asset is impaired the cumulative loss is removed from equity and recognised in profit or loss.
The loss is measured as the difference between the amortised cost of the financial asset and its current fair value.
Impairment losses on available for sale equity instruments are not re versed through profit or loss but those on available for sale debt instruments are reversed if there is an increase in fair value that is objectively related to a subsequent event.
1.13 Property plant and equipment All property plant and equipment is stated at historical cost which includes directly attributable acquisition costs less accumulated depreciation and impairment losses.
Depreciation is charged so as to write off the cost of assets to their estimated residual value over their estimated useful lives using the straight line method on the following bases leasehold improvements over the lease term and plant equipment and computer hardware over three to 10 years.
The assets residual lives are reviewed and adjusted if appropriate at each balance sheet date.
Gains and losses on disposals are determined by comparing proceeds with the carrying amount and these are included in profit or loss.
Consolidated financial statements Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued 124 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 1 Principal accounting policies continued 1.14 Intangible assets
Goodwill arises through business combinations and represents the excess of the cost of acquisition over the groups interest in the fair value of the identifiable assets liabilities and contingent liabilities of a business at the date of acquisition.
Goodwill is recognised as an asse t and is allocated to groups of cash generating units.
Cash generating units are identified as the smallest identifiable group of a ssets that generates cash inflows that are largely independent of the cash inflows from other assets or groups of assets.
On disposal of a subsidiary the attributed amount of goodwill that has not been subject to impa irment is included in the determination of the profit or loss on disposal.
Goodwill arising on acquisitions before 1 January 2004 being the date of the groups transition to IFRS has been retained at the previous UK GAAP carrying amounts and is tested for impairment annually.
Client relationships Client relationships acquired as part of a business combination are initially recognised at fair value note 1.4.
Determining whether a transaction that involves the purchase of client relationships is treated as a business combinatio n or a separate purchase of intangible assets requires judgement.
The factors that the group takes into consideration in making this judgement are set out in note 2.1.
Individually purchased client relationships are initially recognised at cost.
Where a transaction to acquire client relationship intangibles includes an element of variable deferred consideration an estimate is made of the value of consideration that will ultimately be paid.
The client relationship intangible recognised on the balance sheet is adjusted for any subsequent change in the value of deferred consideration.
Note 2.1 sets out the approach taken by the group where judgement is required to determine whether payments made for the introduction of client relationships should be capitalised as intangible assets or charged to profit or loss.
Client relationships are subsequently carried at the amount initially recognised less accumulated amortisation which is calculated using the straight line method over their estimated useful lives normally 10 to 15 years but not more than 15 years.
Computer software and software development costs Costs incurred to acquire and bring to use computer software licences are capitalised and amortised through profit or loss over their expected useful live s three to four years.
Costs that are directly associated with the production of identifiable and unique software products controlled by the group are recognised as intangible assets when the group is expected to benefit from future use of the software and the costs are reliably measurable.
Other costs of producing software are charged to profit or loss as incurred.
Comp uter software development costs recognised as assets are amortised using the straight line method over their useful lives not exceeding four years.
1.15 Impairment of goodwill and intangible assets At each balance sheet date th e group reviews the carrying amounts of its intangible assets to determine whether there is any indication that those assets have suffered an impairment loss.
If
Where the asset does no t generate cash flows that are independent from other assets the group estimates the recoverable amount of the cash generating unit to which the asset belongs.
The recoverable amount is the higher of fair value less costs to sell and valueinuse.
In assessing valueinuse the estimated future cash flows are discounted to their present value using a pretax discount rate that reflects current market assessments of the time value of money.
Goodwill is tested for impairment at least annually.
For the purposes of impairment testing goodwill is allocated to the groups cash generating units.
The carrying amount of each cash generating unit is compared to its valueinuse calculated using a discounted cash flow method.
If the recoverable amount of the cash generating unit is less than the carrying amount of the unit the impairment loss is allocated first to reduce the carrying amount of the unit and then to the other assets of the unit prorata on the basis of the carrying amount of each asset in the unit.
Client relationship intangibles are tested for impairment by comparing the fair value of funds under management for each individually acquired client relationship or for client relationships acquired with a busine ss combination each acquired portfolio of clients with their associated amortised value.
An example of evidence of impairment would be lost client relationships.
In determining whether a client relationship is lost the group considers factors such as the level of funds withdrawn and the existence of other retained family relationships.
When client relationships are lost the full amount of unamortised cost is recognised immediately in profit or loss and the intangible asset is derecognised.
If the recoverable amount of any asset other than client relationships or goodwill is estimated to be less than its carrying amount the carrying amount of the asset is reduced to its recoverable amount.
Any impairment loss is recognised immediately in profit or loss.
1.16 Financial liabilities Financial liabilities are initially recognised at fair value and classified as fair value through profit or loss if designated as such or if held for trading or at amortised cost.
The group derecognises financial liabilities when its contractual obligations are discharged or cancelled or expire.
The group has not designated any liabilities as fair value through profit or loss and holds no liabilities as held for trading.
Deposits and borrowings After initial recognition deposits and borrowings except deposits on demand are subsequently measured at amortised cost using the effective interest rate method through net interest income note 1.8.
Amortised cost is calculated by taking into account any issue costs and any discounts or premiums on settlement.
Deposits on demand continue to be held at face value.
1.17 Provisions and contingent liabilities Provisions are recognised when the group has a present obligation legal or constructive as a result of a past event and it is probable that an outflow of economic benefits that can be reliably estimated will occur.
Provisions are measured at the present value of the expenditures expected to be required to settle the obligation discounted using a pretax rate that reflects current market assessments of the time value of money and the risks specific to the obligation.
Contingent liabilities are possible obligations that depend on the outcome of uncertain future events or those present obligations where the outflows of resources are uncertain or cannot be measured reliably.
Contingent liabilities are not recognised in the financial statements but are disclosed unless the likelihood of crystallisation is judged to be remote.
1.18 Retirement benefit ob ligations on retirement benefit schemes The groups net liability in respect of defined benefit pension plans is calculated separately for each plan by estimating the amount of future benefit that employees have earned in return for their service in the current and prior years that benefit is discounted to determine its present value and the fair value of any plan assets at bid price are deducted.
An y asset resulting from this calculation is limited to the present value of available refunds and reductions in future contributions to the plan.
The cost of providing benefits under defined benefit plans is determined using the projected unit credit method with actuarial valuations being carried out at each balance sheet date.
Net remeasurements of the defined benefit liability are recognised in full in the period in which they occur in other comprehensive income.
Past service costs or gains are recognised immediately in the period of a plan amendment.
The amount recognised in the balance sheet for death in service benefits represents the present va lue of the estimated obligation reduced by the extent to which any future liabilities will be met by insurance policies.
The company determines the net interest on the net defined benefit liability for the year by applying the discount rate used to measure the defined benefit obligati on at the beginning of the year to the net defined benefit liability.
Contributions to defined contribution retirement benefit schemes are charged to profit or loss as an expense as they fall due.
1.19 Segmental reporting The group determines and presents operating segments based on the information that is provided internally to the group executive committee which is the groups chief operating decision maker.
Operating segments are organised around the services provided to clients a description of the servic es provided by each segment is given in note 3.
No operating segments have been aggregated in the groups financial statements.
Transactions between operating se gments are reported within the income or expenses for those segments intrasegment income and expenditure is eliminated at group level.
Indirect costs are allocated between segments in proportion to the principal cost driver for each category of indirect costs that is generated by each segment.
1.20 Fiduciary activities The group commonly acts as trustee and in other fiduciary capacities that result in the holding or placing of assets on behalf of individuals trusts retirement benefit plans and other institutions.
Such assets and income arising thereon are excluded from these financial statements as they are not assets of the group.
Largely as a result of cash and settlement processing the group holds money on behalf of some clients in accordance with the Client Money Rules of the Financial Conduct Authority the Jersey Financial Services Commission and the Solicitors Accounts Rules issued by the Solicitors Regulation Authority as applicable.
Such monies and the corresponding amounts due to clients are not shown on the face of the balance sheet as the group is not beneficially entitled to them.
1.21 Financial guarantees The group provides a limited nu mber of financial guarantees which are backed by assets in clients portfolios.
Financial guarantees are initially recognised in the balance sheet at fair value.
Guarantees are subsequently measured at the higher of the best estimate of any amount to be paid to settle the guarantee and the amount initially recognised less cumulative amortisation which is recognised over the life of the guarantee.
Consolidated financial statements Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued 126 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 2 Critical accounting judgements and key sources of estimation and uncertainty The group makes estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities within the next financial year.
Estimates and judgements are continually evaluated and are based on historical experience and other factors including expectations of future events that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances.
2.1 Client relationship intangibles note 21 Client relationship intangibles purchased through corporate transactions When the group purchases c lient relationships through transactions with other corporate entities a judgement is made as to whether the transaction should be accounted for as a business combination or as a separate purchase of intangible assets.
In making this judgement the group assesses the assets liabilities operations and processes that were the subject of the transaction against the definition of a business in IFRS 3.
In particular consideration is given to the scale of the operations subject to the transaction whether ownership of a corporate entity has been acquired and to whom any amounts payable under the transaction are payable among other factors.
Payments to newly recruited investment managers The group assesses whether paym ents made to newly recruited investment managers under contractual agreements represent payments for the acquisition of client relationship intangibles or remuneration for ongoing services provided to the group.
If the client relationships introduced are judged to be capable of being sold separately and th e corresponding payments are judged to be reliably measurable and have a high probability of recoverability then they are capitalised as cl ient relationship intangibles.
Otherwise they are judged to be in relation to the provision of ongoing services and are expensed in the period in which they are incurred.
Upfront payments made to investment managers upon joining are expensed as they are not judged to be incremental costs for acquiring the client relationships.
The group determines a suitable period during which awards accruing to new investment managers are capitalised.
Typically this will be for the period ending up to 12 months after the cessation of any noncompete peri od.
After the defined period has elapsed any payments made are charged to profit or loss.
During the year the group capitalised 2743000 of payments made to investment managers and expensed 5094000 2016 7926000 capitalised and 4005000 expensed.
A reduction in the capitalisation period by one month would decrease client relationship inta ngibles by 281000 and decrease profit before tax for the year by 281000 2016 617000 and 617000 respectively.
Amortisation of client relationship intangibles The group makes estimates as to th e expected duration of client relationships to determine the period over which related intangible assets are amortised.
The amortisation period is estimated with reference to historical data on account closure rates and expectations for the fu ture.
During the year client relationship intangible assets were amortised over a 10 to 15 year period.
Amortisation of 11433000 2016 11594000 was charged during the year.
A reduction in the average amortisation period of one year would increase the amortisation charge by approximately 1076000 2016 11 00000.
At 31 December 2017 the carrying value of client relationship intangibles was 88511000 2016 97201000.
2.2 Retirement benefit obligations note 27 The group makes estimates about a range of long term trends and market conditions to determine the value of the surplus or deficit on its retirement benefit sc hemes based on the groups expectations of the future and advice taken from qualified actuaries.
Long term forecasts an d estimates are necessarily highly judgemental and subject to risk that actual events may be significantly different to those forecast.
If actual events deviate from the assumptions made by the group then the reported surplus or deficit in respect of retirement benefit obligations may be materially different.
The principal assumptions underlying the reported deficit of 15600000 2016 39455000 deficit and information on the sensitivity of the retirement benefit obligations to changes in underlying estimates are set out in note 27.
2.3 Head office relocation notes 9 and 25 During the year the group moved its head office to 8 Finsbury Circus vacating 1 Curzon Street but retaining lease commitments until September 2023.
This triggered recognition of a provision for the net cost of the surplus property at 1 Curzon Street until the end of the existing leases.
The value of the onerous lease provision is dependent on assumptions about the amount and timing of the cash flows to be received under any sublet agreement or assignment of the leases.
During the year the group recognised an onerous lease provision including the effect of discounting of 16265000 2016 nil.
At 31 December 2017 the outstanding provision stood at 11478000.
Allowing for alte rnative assumptions about the duration of any void period any rentfree periods offered and any discount on the passing rent the onerous lease provision at 31 December 2017 could reasonably fall within the range of 7600000 to 15100000.
3 Segmental information For management purposes the group is organised into two operating divisions Investment Management and Unit Trusts.
Centrally incurred indirect expenses are allocated to these operating segments on the basis of the cost drivers that generate the expenditure principally the headcount of staff directly involved in providing those services from which the segment earns revenues the value of funds under management and the segments total revenue.
The allocati on of these costs is shown in a separate column in the tabl e below alongside the information presented for internal reporting to the group executive committee which is the groups chief operating decision maker.
31 December 2017
Management
Unit Trusts Indirect expenses
Net investment management fee income 189465 28020 Net commission income 38729 Net interest income 11594 Fees from advisory services and other income 14831 3410 Underlying operating income 254619 31430 Staff costs  fixed 59457 3040 25294 87791 Staff costs  variable 40240 7246 5843 53329 Total staff costs 99697 10286 31137 141120 Other direct expenses 21893 4415 31101 57409 Allocation of indirect expenses 56188 6050 62238 Underlying operating expenses 177778 20751 Underlying profit before tax 76841 10679 Charges in relation to client relationships and goodwill note 21 11716 Acquisitionrelated costs note 8 1273 4905 6178 Segment profit before tax 63852 10679 4905 69626 Gain on plan amendment of defined benefit pension schemes note 27 Head office relocation costs note 9 Profit before tax attributable to equity holders of the company Taxation note 11 Profit for the year attributable to equity holders of the company
Management
Unit Trusts
Segment total assets 2659723 74672 Unallocated assets Total assets 2738site Consolidated financial statements Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued 128 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 3 Segmental information continued 31 December 2016
Management
Unit
Trusts
Indirect
Total
Net investment management fee income 163268 21532 Net commission income 38904 Net interest income 11571 Fees from advisory services and other income 12578 3430 Underlying operating income 226321 24962 Staff costs  fixed 57613 3020 19123 79756 Staff costs  variable 32437 5333 7210 44980 Total staff costs 90050 8353 26333 124736 Other direct expenses 22882 5355 23430 51667 Allocation of indirect expenses 47184 2579 49763 Underlying operating expenses 160116 16287 Underlying profit before tax 66205 8675 Charges in relation to client relationships and goodwill note 21 11735 Acquisitionrelated costs note 8 5985 Segment profit before tax 48485 8675 Head office relocation costs note 9 Profit before tax attributable to equity holders of the company Taxation note 11 Profit for the year attributable to equity holders of the company
Management
Unit
Trusts
Total
Segment total assets 2340973 54912 Unallocated assets Total assets The following table reconciles underlying operating income to operating income Underlying operating income 286049 Gain on plan amendment of defined benefit pension schemes note 27 5523 Operating income 291572 The following table reconciles underlying op erating expenses to operating expenses Underlying operating expenses 198529 Charges in relation to client relationships and goodwill note 21 11716 Acquisitionrelated costs note 8 6178 Head office relocation costs note 9 16248 Operating expenses 232671 201site 129 Geographic analysis The following table pres ents operating income analysed by the geographical location of the group entity providing the service United Kingdom 280892 Jersey 10680 Operating income 291572 The following is an analysis of the carrying amount of noncurrent assets analysed by the geographical location of the assets United Kingdom 173496 Jersey 4938 Noncurrent assets 178434 Major clients The group is not reliant on any one client or grou p of connected clients for generation of revenues.
4 Net interest income Interest income Cash and balances with central banks 3963 Held to maturity investment securities 4242 Available for sale investment securities 808 Loans and advances to banks Loans and advances to customers 3079 Interest expense Banks and customers 631 Subordinated loan notes see note 26 1276 1269 1907 2319 Net interest income 11594 5 Net fee and commission income Fee and commission income Investment Management 256476 Unit Trusts 35558 Fee and commission expense Investment Management 17293 13558 Unit Trusts 5422 4378 22715 17936 Net fee and commission income 269319 235site Consolidated financial statements Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued 130 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 6 Net trading and other operating income Net trading income Net trading income of 3071000 2016 31030 00 comprises Unit Trusts net dealing profits.
Other operating income Other operating income of 2065000 2016 1353000 comprises dividend income from available for sale equity securities re ntal income from subleases on cert ain properties leased by grou p companies and sundry income.
7 Operating expenses Staff costs note 10 141120 Depreciation of property plant and equipment 3619 Amortisation of internally generated intangible assets note 21 492 Amortisation of purchased software note 21 2809 Auditors remuneration see below 857 Net impairment charges on impaired loans and advances note 16 1 Operating lease rentals 8221 Other 41410 Other operating expenses 198529 Charges in relation to client relationships and goodwill note 21 11716 Acquisitionrelated costs note 8 6178 Head office relocation costs note 9 16248 Total operating expenses 232671 A more detailed analysis of auditors remuneration is provided below Fees payable to the companys auditor for the audit of the companys annual financial statements 136 Fees payable to the companys auditor and their associates for other services to the group audit of the companys subsidiaries pursuant to legislation 280 auditrelated assurance services 297 tax compliance services 25 other services 11telOf the above auditrelated services for the year totalled 713000 2016 597000.
Fees payable for the audit of the companys annual financial statements include 39000 2016 62000 relating to prior year audit work.
Fees for auditrelated assurance services include 208000 for th e provision of assurance reports to our regulators and review of the interim statement 2016 111000.
Fees for other services includ e advice in relation to the pension schemes a qualified inte rmediary compliance review and work related to the merger discussions.
8 Acquisitionrelated costs Costs relating to merger discussions with Smith and Williamson The group incurred professi onal services costs of 4905000 in relation to the merger discussions with Smith and Williamson.
On 31 August 2017 the group announced that these discussions had been terminated.
Costs relating to the acquisition of Vision Independent Financial Planning and Castle Investment Solutions The group has incurred the following costs in relation to the 2015 acquisition of Vision Independent Financial Planning and Castle Investment Solutions su mmarised by the classification with the income statement Staff costs 1026 Interest expense 247 Legal and advisory fees Acquisitionrelated costs 1273 Amounts reported in staff costs relate to deferred payments to pr evious owners who remain in empl oyment with the acquired compa nies.
9 Head office relocation On 6 January 2016 the group exchanged contracts for five 17year leases for a total of 75000 sq ft of office space at 8 Finsbury Circus.
The group began recognising costs relating to rent and dilapidation s on the new premises from the date the leases began 13 May 2016.
The move to the 8 Finsbury Circus office concluded on 13 February 2017 which triggered recognition of a provision for the net cost of the surplus property at 1 Curzon Street until the end of the existing lease see note 25.
During the year ended 31 December 2017 incremental costs of 16248000 2016 7031000 were incurred as a result of the de cision to move the head office to 8 Finsbury Circus .
These incremental costs were as follows Rental costs for 8 Finsbury Circus prior to occupancy 536 Accelerated depreciation charge for 1 Curzon Street 779 Provision for dilapidations 248 Charge in relation to onerous lease provision note 25 16265 Release of rent free period and landlord contribution on recognition of the onerous lease provision 2148 Professional and other costs 568 7site Consolidated financial statements Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued 132 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 10 Staff costs Wages and salaries 113719 Social security costs 14695 Equitysettled sharebased payments 4120 Cashsettled sharebased payments 249 Pension costs note 27 defined benefit schemes 2575 defined contribution schemes 6260 The average number of employees on a full time equivalent basis during the year was as follows 2017 2016 Investment Management investment management services 734 advisory services 92 Unit Trusts 28 Shared services 293 11 Income tax expense Current tax charge for the year 13466 adjustments in respect of prior years 303 Deferred tax note 20 credit for the year 1034 233 adjustments in respect of prior years 57 The tax charge is calculated based on our best estimate of the amount payable as at the balance sheet date.
Any subsequent diff erences between these estimates and the actual amounts paid are recorded as adjustments in respect of prior years.
The tax charge on profit for the year is higher 2016 higher than the standard rate of corporation tax in the UK of 19.2% 20 16 20.0%.
The differences are explained below Tax on profit from ordinary activities at the st andard rate of 19.2% 2016 20.0% effects of 11338 disallowable expenses 1045 sharebased payments 79 72 tax on overseas earnings 230 183 adjustments in respect of prior year 360 161 deferred payments to previous owners of acquired companies note 8 247 other 28 63 Effect of change in corporation tax rate on deferred tax 139 11site 133 12 Dividends Amounts recognised as distributions to equity holders in the year final dividend for the year ended 31 December 2016 of 36.0p 2015 34.0p per share 18236 interim dividend for the year ended 31 December 2017 of 22.0p 2016 21.0p per share 11184 Dividends paid in the year of 58.0p 2016 55.0p per share 29420 Proposed final dividend for the year ended 31 December 2017 of 39.0p 2016 36.0p per share 19245 An interim dividend of 22.0p per share was paid on 3 October 2017 to shareholders on the register at the close of business on 8 September 2017 2016 21.0p.
A final dividend declared of 39.0p per share 2016 36.0p is payable on 14 May 2018 to shareholders on the register at the clo se of business on 20 April 2018.
The final dividend is subject to approval by shareholders at the Annual General Meeting on 10 May 2018 and has not been included as a liability in these financial statements.
13 Earnings per share Earnings used to calculate earnings per share on the bases reported in these financial statements were 2017 2016
Taxation
Posttax
Pretax
Taxation
Posttax
Underlying profit attributable to shareholders 87520 17426 70094 15816 59064 Gain on plan amendment of defined benefit pension schemes note 27 5523 1063 4460 Charges in relation to client relationships and goodwill note 21 11716 2255 9461 11735 2347 9388 Acquisitionrelated costs note 8 6178 944 5234 5985 91 5894 Head office relocation costs note 9 16248 3218 13030 7031 1406 5625 Profit attributable to shareholders 58901 12072 46829 11972 38157 Basic earnings per share has been calculated by dividing profit attributable to shareholders by the weighted average number of shares in issue throughout the year excluding own shares of 50493984 2016 48357728.
Diluted earnings per share is the basic earnings per share adjusted for the effect of contingently issuable shares under the E xecutive Incentive Plan employee share options remaining capable of exercise and any dilutive shares to be issued under the Share Incen tive Plan all weighted for the relevant period 2017 2016 Weighted average number of ordinary shares in issue during the year  basic 50493984 Effect of ordinary share optionsSave As You Earn 188549 Effect of dilutive shares issuable under the Share Incentive Plan 59030 Effect of contingently issuable shares under the Executive Incentive Plan 228702 Diluted ordinary shares 50970265 48769tel Underlying earnings per share for the year attributable to equity holders of the company basic 138.8p 122.1p diluted 137.5p 121.
Consolidated financial statements Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued 134 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 14 Cash and balances with central banks Cash in hand Balances with central banks 1375380 The fair value of balances with central banks is not materially different from their carrying amount.
The impact of credit risk is not material.
Repayable on demand 1374002 1 year or less but over 3 months 1380 Amounts include balances with variable interest rates 1374000 noninterestbearing 1382 15 Loans and advances to banks
3 months or less excluding on demand 11183 1 year or less but over 3 months 30244 5 years or less but over 1 year Amounts include loans and advances with variable interest rates 75734 fixed interest rates 41183 noninterestbearing 336 The fair value of loans and advances is not materially different to their carrying amount.
Fair value has been calculated as th e discounted amount of estimated future cash flows expected to be received us ing current market rates.
The impact of credit risk is not material.
Loans and advances to banks included in cash and cash equivalents at 31 December 2017 were 87009000 note 36 2016 83844 000.
The groups exposure to credit risk arising from loans and advances to banks is described in note 31.
16 Loans and advances to customers Overdrafts 4621 Investment management loan book 120509 Trust and financial planning debtors 1048 Other debtors 35 The fair value of loans and advances to customers is not materially different to their carrying amount.
Fair value has been cal culated as the discounted amount of estimated future cash flows expected to be received using curren t market rates.
Debtors arising from the t rust and financial planning businesses are noninterestbearing.
Repayable on demand 4732 3 months or less excluding on demand 13312 1 year or less but over 3 months 42519 5 years or less but over 1 year 65716 greater than 5 years Less allowance for losses on loans and advances see below 66 91 Amounts include loans and advances with variable interest rates 125046 noninterestbearing 1167 No overdrafts or investment management loan book balances were impaired as at 31 December 2017 2016 none impaired.
Allowance for losses.
The groups exposure to credit risk arising from loans and advances to customers is described in note 31.
17 Investment securities Available for sale securities Equity securities  at fair value listed 2565 Money market funds  at fair value unlisted 106747 Held to maturity securities Debt securities  at amortised cost unlisted 701966 All held to maturity debt securities are due to mature within one year 2016 all.
Available for sale securities include money market funds and direct holdings in equity securities.
Equity securities comprises units in Rathbone Unit Trust Management managed funds.
Equity securities do not bear interest.
Money market funds which declare daily dividends that are in the nature of interest at a variable rate and which are realisable on demand have been included within c ash equivalents note 36.
Consolidated financial statements Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued 136 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 17 Investment securities continued The change in the groups holdings of investment securities in the year is summarised below.
Available for sale Held to maturity
At 1 January 2016 53386 707745 Additions 97658 905000 Disposals sales and redemptions 53859 912745 966604 Foreign exchange movements 8143 Gain from changes in fair value 93 At 1 January 2017 105421 700000 Additions 36248 745867 Disposals sales and redemptions 27416 742421 769837 Foreign exchange movements 5104 1480 6584 Gain from changes in fair value 163 At 31 December 2017 109312 701966 Included within available for sale securities are additions of 699000 2016 701000 and 160 000 2016 nil of disposals of financial instruments that are not classified as cash and cash equivalents.
18 Prepayments accrued income and equipment Work in progress 1461 Prepayments and other assets 12396 Accrued income 60588 19 Property plant and equipment Short term leasehold improvements Plant and equipment
Cost
At 1 January 2016 13036 15131 Additions 9729 2446 Disposals  216 216 At 1 January 2017 22765 17361 Additions 1940 2325 Disposals  1970 1970 At 31 December 2017 24705 17716
At 1 January 2016 5991 12170 Charge for the year 3870 1721 Disposals  216 216 At 1 January 2017 9861 13675 Charge for the year 2436 1962 Disposals  1970 1970 At 31 December 2017 12297 13667 Carrying amount at 31 December 2017 12408 4049 Carrying amount at 31 December 2016 12904 3686 Carrying amount at 1 January 2016 7045 2961 10site 137 20 Net deferred tax asset The Finance Bill 2016 contained legislation to reduce the UK co rporation tax rate to 17.0% in April 2020 and was substantively enacted in September 2016.
Deferred income taxes are calculated on all temporary differences under the liability method using the rate exp ected to apply when the relevant timing di fferences are forecast to unwind.
The movement on the deferred tax account is as follows
Pensions
Sharebased payments
Available for sale securities
Total
As at 1 January 2017 1122 6705 1264 2320 30 780 10601 Recognised in profit or loss in respect of current year 38 1264 57 2434 prior year 196   139 change in rate 4 148 4 284 Total 162 1116 53 2011 Recognised in other comprehensive income in respect of current year  3327   23 prior year change in rate  388   3 Total  2939   20 Recognised in equity in respect of current year   318 prior year   10 change in rate Total   328 As at 31 December 2017 1284 2650 1539 4331 50 693 9061
Pensions
Sharebased payments
Available for sale securities
Total
Deferred tax assets 1284 2650 1539 4331 Deferred tax liabilities     50 693 743 As at 31 December 2017 1284 2650 1539 4331 50 693 9site Consolidated financial statements Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued 138 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 20 Net deferred tax asset continued
Pensions
Sharebased payments
Available for sale securities
Total
As at 1 January tel1690 2154 16 969 4577 Recognised in profit or loss in respect of current year 348 473 182 542 prior year 57   73 change in rate 148 389 129 303 Recognised in other comprehensive income in respect of current year  7464   18 prior year change in rate  1528   4 Total  5936   14 Recognised in equity in respect of current year   99 prior year change in rate   16 Total   115 As at 31 December 2016 1122 6705 1264 2320 30 780 10601
Pensions
Sharebased payments
Available for sale securities
Total
Deferred tax assets 1122 6705 1264 2320 Deferred tax liabilities     30 780 810 As at 31 December 2016 1122 6705 1264 2320 30 780 10site 139 21 Intangible assets Goodwill 63182 Other intangible assets 98795
Goodwill acquired in a business combination is allocated at acquisition to the cash generating units CGUs that are expected to benefit from that business combination.
The carrying amount of goodwill has been allocated as follows
Management
Trust and tax Rooper and
Total
Cost
At 1 January 2016 2017 and 31 December 2017 62091 1954
At 1 January 2016 Charge in the year  141 At 1 January 2017 Charge in the year  283 At 31 December 2017  1090 Carrying amount at 31 December 2017 62091 864 Carrying amount at 31 December 2016 62091 1147 Carrying amount at 1 January 2016 62091 1288 The recoverable amounts of the CGUs to which goodwill is allocated are assessed using valueinuse calculations.
The group prep ares cash flow forecasts derived from the most recent financial budgets approved by the board covering the forthcoming and future years.
The key assumptions underlying the budgets are that organic growth rates revenue margins and profit margins are in line with recent hi storical rates and equity markets will not change significantly in the fo rthcoming year.
Budgets are extrapolated for up to 10 years bas ed on annual revenue growth for each CGU see table below as well as the groups expectation of fu ture industry growth rates.
A 10 year ex trapolation period is chosen based on the groups assess ment of the likely associated duration of client relationships.
The group estimates discount rates using pretax rates that reflect current market assessments of the time value of money and the risks specific to the CGUs .
The pretax rate used to discount the forecast cash flows for each CGU is shown in the table below these are based on a riska djusted weighted average cost of capital.
The grou p judges that these discount rates appropri ately reflect the markets in which the CGU s operate and in particular the relatively small size of the trust and tax CGU.
Investment Management Trust and tax Rooper and Whately At 31 Decemberteltel Discount rate 11.1% 9.3% 13.1% 11.3% 11.1% 9.3% Annual revenue growth rate 5.0% 4.0% 1.0% 1.0% 0.0% 0.0% At 30 June 2017 the group recognised an impairment charge of 283000 in relation to goodwill allocated to the trust and tax CGU.
An impairment was recognised as the recove rable amount of the CGU at 30 June 2017 was 864000 which was lower than the carry ing value of 1147000 at 31 December 2016.
The recoverable amount was calculated based on forecast earnings for 2017 extrapolate d over 10 years based on a decrease in revenues of 1.0% per annum.
The pretax rate used to discount the forecast cash flows was 14.0%.
The impairment was recognised in the Investment Management segment in the segmental analysis.
No further impairment was recognised at 31 December 2017.
Based on the assumptions in the table above the calculated recoverable amount of the trust and tax CGU at 31 December 2017 was 1181000 this was higher than its carrying value of 864000.
Reducing the assumed growth rate for income in the trust and t ax CGU by one percentage point would reduce the calculated recoverable amount of the CGU to 828000.
No reasonably foreseeable changes t o the assumptions used in the valueinuse calcul ation for the investment management CGU would result in an impairment of the goodwill allocated to it.
Consolidated financial statements Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued 140 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 21 Intangible assets continued Other intangible assets
Software development costs
Total
Cost
At 1 January 2016 138659 4514 21838 Internally developed in the year  408 Purchased in the year 7926  2530 Disposals 1933 At 1 January 2017 144652 4922 24368 Internally developed in the year  837 Purchased in the year 2743  6222 Disposals 1983 At 31 December 2017 145412 5759 30590
At 1 January 2016 37790 3616 15758 Charge for the year 11594 421 2969 Disposals 1933 At 1 January 2017 47451 4037 18727 Charge for the year 11433 492 2809 Disposals 1983 At 31 December 2017 56901 4529 21536 Carrying amount at 31 December 2017 88511 1230 9054 Carrying amount at 31 December 2016 97201 885 5641 Carrying amount at 1 January 2016 100869 898 6080 Purchases of client relationships in the year relate to payments made to investment managers and third parties for the introduc tion of client relationships.
The total amount charged to profit or loss in the year in relation to goodwill and client relationships was 11716000 2016  11735000.
A further 5094000 2016 4005000 was expensed as staff costs during the year representing amounts due for client relationships introduced more than 12 months after the cessation of noncompete periods note 2.1.
Purchased software with a cost of 18069000 2016 14117000 has been fully amortised but is still in use.
22 Deposits by banks On 31 December 2017 deposits by banks included overnight ca sh book overdraft balances of 1338000 2016 294000.
The fair value of deposits by banks was not materially different to their carrying value.
Fair value has been calculated as the discounted amount of estimated future cash flows expect ed to be paid using current market rates.
23 Due to customers
3 months or less excluding on demand 83425 1 year or less but over 3 months 5285 Amounts include balances with variable interest rates 2060565 fixed interest rates 83908 noninterestbearing 26025 The fair value of amounts due to customers was not materially different from their carrying value.
The estimated fair value of deposits with no stated maturity which include noninterestbearing deposits is the amount at which deposits could be transferred to a third party at the measurement date.
The estimated fair value of fixedinterestbeari ng deposits is based on discou nted cash flows using interest rates for new debts with similar remaining maturity.
24 Accruals deferred income provisions and other liabilities Trade creditors 2259 Other creditors 18294 Accruals and deferred income 64126 Other provisions note 25 23712 25 Other provisions
Deferred and contingent consideration in business combinations Legal and compensation
Total
At 1 January 2016 13392 3908 721 Charged to profit or loss   917 Unused amount credited to profit or loss  79 486 Net charge to profit or loss Other movements 7926 82 Utilisedpaid during the year 11106 2775 554 At 1 January 2017 10212 1136 598 Charged to profit or loss   248 Unused amount credited to profit or loss   54 Net charge to profit or loss Other movements 2743 84 Utilisedpaid during the year 4883  115 5589 10587 At 31 December 2017 8072 1220 677 Payable within 1 year 4769  677 Payable after 1 year 3303 1220 8072 1220 677 23site Consolidated financial statements Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued 142 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 25 Other provisions continued Deferred variable costs to acquire client relationship intangibles Deferred variable costs to acquire client relationship intangible s of 2743000 arose during the year in relation to deferre d payments to investment managers and third parties linked to the value of clie nt funds introduced 2016 78 20000.
These amounts have bee n capitalised see note 21.
Deferred and contingent consideration in business combinations Deferred and contingent consideration of 1220000 2016 1136000 is the present value of amounts payable at the end of 20 19 in respect of the acquisition of Vision Independent Financial Planning and Castle Investment Solutions.
Legal and compensation During the ordinary course of business the group may from timetotime be subject to complaints as well as threatened and ac tual legal proceedings which may include lawsuits brought on behalf of clients or other third parties both in the UK and overseas.
Any s uch material matters are periodically reassessed with the assistance of external professional advisers where appropriate to deter mine the likelihood of the group incurring a liabilit y.
In those instances where it is concluded that it is more likely than not that a payment will be made a provision is established to the grou ps best estimate of the amount required to settle the obligation at the relevant b alance sheet date.
The timing of settlement of provisions for client compensation or litigation is dependent in part on the duration of ne gotiations with third parties.
Propertyrelated
Propertyrelated provisions of 1 3743000 relate to dilapidation and onerous leas e provisions expected to arise on leasehold p remises held by the group 2016 2798000 dilapidations.
The move to the 8 Finsbury Circus office was completed on 13 February 2017 which triggered the recognition of a provision for the net cost of the surplus proper ty at 1 Curzon Street until the end of the existing leases.
The ultimate amount of the provision is d ependent on the timing of any subletting or assignment arrangements and the associated terms negotiated with prospective third parties.
Based on managements expectations of future costs for the premises and potential rental income and timings thereof the group recognis ed a provision of 16265000.
The group utilised 4787000 2016 nil of the onerous lease provision during the year being the payment of rent rates and service charge.
Dilapidation provisions are calculated using a discounted cash flow model during the year ended 31 December 2017 dilapidation provisions decreased by 533000 2016 increased 1003000.
The group utilised 802000 2016 nil of the dilapidations pr ovision held for the surplus property at 1 Curzon Street during the year.
The impact of discounting led to an additional 82000 2016 10 03000 being provided for over the year.
Amounts payable after one year Propertyrelated provisions of 7949000 are expected to be settled within 19 years of the balance sheet date which correspon ds to the longest lease for which a dilapidations provision is being held.
Provisions for deferred and contingent consideration in busine ss combinations of 1220000 are expected to be settled within two years of the balance sheet date.
Remaining provisions payable after one year are expected to be settled within three years of the balance sheet date.
26 Subordinated loan notes Subordinated loan notes face value 20000 carrying value 19695 Subordinated loan notes consist of 10year Tier 2 notes Notes which are repayable in August 2025 with a call option in Au gust 2020 and annually thereafter.
Interest is payable at a fixed rate of 5.856% until the first call option date and at a fixed margin of 4.
375% over 6 month LIBOR thereafter.
An interest expense of 1276000 2016 1269000 was recognised in the year see note 4.
27 Longterm employee benefits The group operates a defined contribution group personal pens ion scheme and contributes to various other personal pension arrangements for certain directors and employees.
The total of contributions made to these schemes during the year was 62130 00 2016 4595000.
The group also operates a defined contribution scheme for overseas employees for which the total contributions we re 47000 2016 40000.
The group operates two defined benefit pension schemes the Rathbone 1987 Scheme and the Laurence Keen Retirement Benefit
The schemes are currently both clients of Rathbone Invest ment Management with investments managed on a discretionary basis in accordance with the statements of investment principles agreed by the trustees.
Scheme assets are held separately fro m those of the group.
The trustees of the schemes are required to act in the best interest of the schemes beneficiaries.
The appointment of trustees is determined by the schemes trust documentation and legislation.
The group has a policy that one third of all trustees should be nominated by members of the schemes.
The Laurence Keen Scheme was closed to new entrants and future accrual with effect from 30 September 1999.
Past service benefit s continue to be calculated by reference to final pensionable salaries.
From 1 October 1999 all the active members of the Lauren ce Keen Scheme were included under the Rathbone 1987 Scheme for accrual of retirement benefits for further service.
The Rathbone 1987 S cheme was closed to new entrants with effect from 31 March 2002.
With effect from 30 June 2017 the link between past service benefit and pensionable salaries was broken for both schemes and t he Rathbone 1987 Scheme was closed to future accrual from this da te.
This resulted in a plan amendment gain of 5523000 being recognised in operating income on that date.
The group provides death in service benefi ts to all employees through the Rathbone 1987 Scheme.
Third party insurance is purcha sed for the benefits where possible and 1167000 of related insurance premiums were expensed to profit or loss in the year 2016 1134000.
The estimated present value of the uninsured death in service benefi ts is included in long term employee benefits liabilities.
The schemes are valued by independent actuaries at least every three years using the projected unit credit method which looks at the value of benefits accruing over the years following the valuation date based on projected salary to the date of termination of services discounted to a present value using a rate that reflects the characteristics of the liability.
The valuations are updated at ea ch balance sheet date in between full valuations.
The latest full actuarial valuations were carried out as at the following dates Rathbone 1987 Scheme 31 December 2013 Laurence Keen Scheme 31 December 2013 During 2017 triennial valuations of both schemes as at 31 Decemb er 2016 were being carried out.
These valuations are yet to be formally finalised.
The assumptions used by the actuaries to estimate the schemes liabilities are the best estimates chosen from a range of possible actuarial assumptions.
Due to the timescale covered by the liability these assumptions may not necessarily be borne out in practice.
Consolidated financial statements Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued 144 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 27 Longterm employee benefits continued The principal actuarial assumptions used which reflect the different membership profiles of the schemes were Laurence Keen Scheme Rathbone 1987 Scheme % unless stated % unless stated % unless stated % unless stated Rate of increase of salaries na 4.50 na 4.50 Rate of increase of pensions in payment 3.60 3.60 3.40 3.40 Rate of increase of deferred pensions 3.50 3.50 3.50 3.50 Discount rate 2.65 2.80 2.65 2.80 Inflation 3.50 3.50 3.50 3.50 Percentage of members transferring out of the schemes per annum 3.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 Average age of members at date of transferring out years 52.5 52.5 52.5 52.5 Inflation assumptions are based on the Retail Price Index Over the year the financial assumptions have been amended to reflect changes in market conditions.
Specifically the discount rate has been decreased by 0.15% to reflect a decrease in the yields available on AArated corporate bonds at a term consistent with the average duration of the liabilities the assumed rate of future inflation is unchanged and reflects expectations of longterm inflation as implied by changes in the fixedinterest and indexlinked gilts market the assumed rates of future increases to pensions in payment are unchanged consistent with the assumed rate of future inflation.
Over the year the demographic assumptions adopted remain unchanged other than updating the CMI model used to project future improvements in mortality from the 2013 version to the 2016 version.
The assumed duration of the liabilities for the Laurence Keen Scheme is 16 years 2016 20 years and the assumed duration for the Rathbone 1987 Scheme is 20 years 2016 24 years.
The normal retirement age for members of the Laurence Keen Scheme is 65 60 for certain former directors.
The normal retiremen t age for members of the Rathbone 1987 Scheme is 60 for service prior to 1 July 2009 and 65 thereafter following the introduction of pension benefits based on Career Average Revalued Earnings CARE from that date.
The assumed life expectancy for the membership of bot h schemes is based on the S2NA actuarial ta bles 2016 S2NA tables.
The assumed life expectations on retirement were 2017 2016 Males Females Males Females Retiring today  aged 60 28.5 30.6 29.3 31.5 Retiring in 20 years The amount included in the balance sheet arising from the groups assets in respect of the schemes is as follows 2017 2016 Laurence Keen
Rathbone
1987 Scheme
Laurence Keen
Rathbone
1987 Scheme
Present value of defined benefit obligations 12980 151133 164113 16203 216238 232441 Fair value of scheme assets 12278 136235 148513 14099 178887 Net defined benefit liability 702 14898 15600 2104 37351 39455site 145 The amounts recognised in profit or loss within operating expenses are as follows 2017 2016 Laurence Keen
Rathbone
1987 Scheme
Laurence Keen
Rathbone
1987 Scheme
Current service cost  1559 1559 Net interest on net liability 59 957 1Gain on plan amendment 305 5218 5523 246 2702 2948 1 Remeasurements of the net defined benefit liability have been re ported in other comprehensive income.
The actual return on sche me assets was a rise in value of 1170000 2016 2018000 rise for the Laurence Keen Scheme and a rise in value of 1355800 0 2016 31353000 rise for the Rathbone 1987 Scheme.
Movements in the present value of define d benefit obligations were as follows 2017 2016 Laurence Keen
Rathbone
1987 Scheme
Laurence Keen
Rathbone
1987 Scheme
At 1 January 16203 216238 232441 14002 Service cost employers part  1559 1559 Interest cost 412 5219 5631 522 Contributions from members  314 314 Actuarial experience gains 214 4489 4703 135 1783 1918 Actuarial gainslosses arising from demographic assumptions 494 7786 8280 519 4379 4898 financial assumptions 369 5439 5808 4262 Gain on plan amendment 305 5218 5523 Benefits paid 2991 60143 63134 1929 16325 18254 At 31 December 12980 151133 164113 16203 Movements in the fair value of sc heme assets were as follows 2017 2016 Laurence Keen
Rathbone
1987 Scheme
Laurence Keen
Rathbone
1987 Scheme
At 1 January 14099 178887 192986 13991 Remeasurement of net defined benefit liability interest income 353 4262 4615 521 return on scheme assets excluding amounts included in interest income 817 9296 10113 1497 Contributions from the sponsoring companies  3619 3619 19 Contributions from scheme members  314 314 Benefits paid 2991 60143 63134 1929 16325 18254 At 31 December 12278 136235 148513 14099 192site Consolidated financial statements Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued 146 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 27 Longterm employee benefits continued The statements of investment principles set by the trustees of both schemes were revised in 2015 .
They require that the assets of the schemes are invested in a diversified portfolio of assets split between return seeking assets primarily equities and safer a ssets gilts indexlinked gilts corporate bonds and other fixed income investme nts with a switch to a greater percentage of safer assets over time as the schemes mature.
In the Rathbone 1987 Scheme the target date for the 100% allocation to safer assets is 31 December 2048.
The scheme also seeks to hedge around 50% of its interest rate an d inflation risk by using Liability Driven Investment LDI strategies.
In the Laurence Keen Scheme the target date for the 100% allocation to safer assets is 31 December 2040.
The expected asset allocations at 31 December 2017 as set out in the statements of investment principles are as follows Target asset allocation at 31 December 2017 Laurence Keen
Rathbone
1987 Scheme %
Return seeking assets 52 40 Growth assets 48 60
Return seeking assets 46  58 32  44 Growth assets 42  54 54  66 The analysis of the scheme assets measured at bid prices at the balance sheet date was as follows Laurence Keen Scheme
Fair value
Current allocation % Equity instruments United Kingdom 3722 4178 Eurozone 409 358 North America 755 921 Other 558 710 5444 6167 45 Debt instruments United Kingdom government bonds 4482 5413 United Kingdom corporate bonds 1686 1918 6168 7331 50 Cash 283 10 2 Other At 31 December 12278 14site 147 Rathbone 1987 Scheme
Fair value
Current allocation % Equity instruments United Kingdom 41736 57134 Eurozone 6016 8807 North America 9422 14486 Other 7168 12384 64342 92811 Debt instruments United Kingdom government bonds 36069 35836 Overseas government bonds 1973 3670 United Kingdom corporate bonds 10100 17505 Overseas corporate bonds  1010 48142 58021
Interest rate swap funds 20222 17365 20222 17365 Cash 3529 9885 Other  805 At 31 December 136235 178887 During 2017 the Rathbone 1987 Scheme held shares in real time inflationlinked interest rate swap funds which had a fair valu e of 20222000 at the year end 2016 17365000.
The value of thes e investments is expected to increase when the value of the s chemes liabilities increase and vice versa.
They therefore act to reduce the groups exposure to changes in net defined benefit pens ion obligations arising from changes in interest rates and inflation.
The funds ar e selected so that their average duration is intended to broa dly align with the duration of the schemes liabilities.
All equity and debt instruments have quoted prices in active markets.
The majority of government bonds are issued by government s of the United Kingdom the United States of America and Germany all of which are rated AAA AA or AA based on credit ratings awa rded by Fitch Ratings Limited Fitch or Moodys Corp oration Moodys as at the balance sheet date.
Other sche me assets comprise commo dities and property funds both of which also have quoted prices in active markets.
The key assumptions affecting the results of the valuation are the discount rate future inflation mortality the rate of memb ers transferring out and the average age at the time of transferring out.
In order to demonstrate the sensitivity of the results to these assump tions the actuary has recalculated the defined benefit obligations for each scheme by varying each of these assumptions in isolation whil st leaving the other assumptions unchanged.
For example in order to demons trate the sensitivity of the results to the discount rate the actuary has recalculated the defined benefit obligations for each scheme using a discount rate that is 0.5% higher than used for calculatin g the disclosed figures.
A similar approach has been taken to demonstr ate the sensitivity of the results to the other key assumptions .
A summary of the sensitivities in respect of the total of the two schemes defined benefit obligations are set out below.
Combined impact on schemes liabilities
Decreaseincrease % 0.5% increase in discount rate 16124 9.8 rate of inflation 7323 1% increase in the rate of members transferring out each year 449 0.3 1 year increase to longevity at 60 6759 average age of members at the time of transferring out 574 ite Consolidated financial statements Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued 148 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 27 Longterm employee benefits continued The total regular contributions made by the group to the Rathbone 1987 Scheme during the year were 856000 2016 2558000 based on 20.3% of pensionable salaries 2016 20.3%.
Additional lump sum contributions of 2838000 were paid in 2017 2016 2917 000.
The group is not committed to making any further deficit reduction contributions as at the year end.
As part of the ongoing trienni al valuation the group has agreed with the trustees of the Rathbone 1987 Scheme to put in place a funding deficit reduction plan which requires annual contributions of 2750000 so long as that scheme remains in defi cit.
The deficit funding plan will be reviewed follow ing the next triennial valuation as at 31 December 2019.
The total contributions made by the group to the Laurence Keen Sc heme during the year were nil 2016 nil.
No additional lum p sum contributions were paid in 2017 2016 nil and the group has no commitment to make further contributions.
Regular contributi ons to the Laurence Keen Scheme stopped with effect from 1 January 2015.
Although the funding valuation for the Laurence Keen Scheme a s at 31 December 2016 has not yet been finalised the group does not expect that material funding deficit contributions will be requ ired.
28 Share capital and share premium The following movements in share capital occurred during the year Number of shares
Share capital
Total
At 1 January 2016 48134286 2407 97643 Shares issued in relation to business combinations note 8 37898 1705.
Own shares sold  1754.0  1949.0  345 At 1 January 2017 50682679 2535 139991 Shares issued to Share Incentive Plan 86671 1784.0  2611.0 4 1725 to Save As You Earn scheme 95041 984.0  1648.0 5 1373 to Employee Benefit Trust 437683 5.0 22 At 31 December 2017 51302074 2566 143089 The total number of issued and fully paid up ordinary shares at 31 December 2017 was 51302074 2016 50682679 with a par v alue of 5p per share.
The holders of ordinary shares are entitled to receive dividends as declared from timetotime and are entitled to one vote pe r share at meetings of the company.
The ordinary shareholders are entitled to any residual assets on the winding up of the company.
29 Own shares The following movements in own shares occurred during the year Number of shares 000 At 1 January 2016 384295 Acquired in the year 81992 Released on vesting 88279 1084 Sold in the year 41021 435 At 1 January 2017 336987 Acquired in the year 461067 Released on vesting 141361 1820 At 31 December 2017 656693 Own shares represent the cost of the compan ys own shares either purchased in the market or issued by the company that are he ld by the company or in an employee benefit trust to satisfy future awards under the groups sharebased payment schemes note 30.
T he company held no own shares as treasury shares at 31 December 2017 2016 8979.
However 382751 shares were held in the Emplo yee Benefit Trust at 31 December 2017 2016 31803 and a further 27 3942 2016 296205 shares were held by the trustees of the Share Incentive Plan but were not unco nditionally gifted to employees.
30 Sharebased payments Share Incentive Plan The group operates a Share Incentive Plan SIP which is available to all employees.
Employees can contribute up to 150 per m onth to acquire partnership shares which are purchased or allotted twice a year at the end of six month accumulation periods.
The grou p currently matches employee contributions on a oneforone basis to acquire matching shares.
The group also provides performancerelated free shares with eligible employees receiving shares valued at the rate of 100 pe r 1% real increase in earnings per share up to a maximum of 3000 per annum.
For UK employees SIP dividends are reinvested and used to purchase di vidend shares whilst for Jersey employees dividends are paid in cash.
As at 31 December 2017 the trustees of the SIP held 1092120 2016 1243979 ordinary shares of 5p each in Rathbone Brother s Plc with a total market value of 28330000 2016 24668000.
Of the to tal number of shares held by the trustees 263165 2016 294680 have been conditionally gifted to employees and 10777 2016 1525 remain unallocated.
Dividends on the unallocated shares have be en waived by the trustees.
Savingsrelated share option or Save As You Earn SAYE plan Under the SAYE plan employees can contribute up to 500 per month to acquire shares at the end of a three or five year savings period.
Options with an aggregate estimated fair value of 625000 determined using a binomial valuation model including expected divi dends were granted on 28 April 2017 to directors and staff under the SAYE plan.
The inputs into the binomial model for options grante d during 2017 as at the date of issue were as follows 2017 2016 Share price 2351p 2033p Exercise price 1899p 1648p Expected volatility 20% 21% Riskfree rate 0.2% 0.7% Expected dividend yield 2.4% 2.7%site Consolidated financial statements Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued 150 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 30 Sharebased payments continued The number of share options outstanding for the SAYE plan at the end of the year the period in which they were granted and the dates on which they may be exercised are given below.
Year of grant
Exercise period
Number of share options 2012 984.0 2017 2013 1106.0 2018 74868 2014 1556.0 2019 59415 2015 1641.0 2018 and 2020 123182 2016 1648.0 2019 and 2021 141034 2017 1899.0 2020 and 2022 127392 At 31 December Movements in the number of share options outsta nding for the SAYE plan were as follows 2017 2016
Weighted average exercise price pence
Weighted average exercise price pence At 1 January 507714 1518.0 484364 1379.0 Granted in the year 130745 1899.0 155334 1648.0 Forfeited in the year 17520 1684.0 15876 1612.0 Exercised in the year 95048 1450.0 116108 1098.0 At 31 December 525891 1620.0 507714 1518.0 The weighted average share price at the dates of exercise for share options exercised during the year was 25.72 2016 20.06 .
The options outstanding at 31 December 2017 had a weighted average contractual life of 2.3 years 2016 2.5 years and a weighted average e xercise price of 16.20 2016 15.18.
Executive Incentive Plan Details of the general terms of this plan are set out in the remuneration committee report on page 86.
Under the remuneration policy 40% of the total award will be given in cash with the remaining 60% of the award granted in shar es.
The group treats the cash element of the award as an employee benefit under IAS 19 and the share element of the award as an equity settled sharebased payment under IFRS 2.
Other schemes The group operates a number of other plans for rewarding employees.
Participants are granted awards under these plans in the fo rm of options which vest automatically on an anniversary of the grant date generally between one and five years.
As the intention is to settle the options in such plans in shares the awards are treated as equitysettled sharebased payments under IFRS 2.
The group recognised total expenses of 3871000 in relation to sharebased payment transactions in 2017 2016 5201000 s ee note 10.
31 Financial risk management The group has identified the financial business and operational risks arising from its activities and has established policies and procedures to manage these items in accordance with its risk appetite as described in the group risk commi ttee report on pages 68 to 69.
The group categorises its financial risks into the following primary areas i credit risk which includes counterparty default risk ii liquidity risk iii market risk which includes fair value interest rate risk cash flow interest rate risk foreign exchange risk and price risk and iv pension risk.
The groups exposures to pension risk are set out in note 27.
The groups financial risk management policies are designed to identify and analyse the financia l risks that the group faces to set appropriate risk tolerances limits and controls and to monitor the financial risks and adherence to limits by means of reliabl e and upto date information systems.
The group regularly reviews its financia l risk management policies and systems to reflect changes in the business counterparties markets and the range of financial instruments that it utilises.
The treasury department reporting through the banking committee has principal responsibility for monitoring exposure to credi t risk liquidity risk and market risk.
Procedures and delegated authorit ies are documented in a group tr easury manual and policy docum ents prescribe the management and monitoring of each type of risk.
Th e primary objective of the groups treasury policy is to manage short term liquidity requirements whilst maintaining an appropriate level of exposure to other financial risks in accordance wi th the groups risk appetite.
The group takes on exposure to credit risk which is the risk that a counterparty will be unable to pay amounts in full when due through its banking treasury trust and financial planning activities.
The principal source of credit risk arises from placing funds in the money market and holding interestbearing securities.
The group also has exposu re to credit risk through its client loan book and guarantees given on clients behalf.
It is the groups policy to place funds generated internally and from deposits by clients with a range of highquality financia l institutions and the Bank of England.
Investments with financial institutions are spread to avoid excessive exposure to any individual count erparty.
Loans made to clients are secured against clients a ssets that are held and managed by group companies.
Exposure to credit risk is managed through setting appropriate ratings requirements and lending limits.
Limits are reviewed reg ularly taking into account the ability of borrowers and potential borrowers to meet repayment obligations.
The group categorises its exposures based on the long term ratings awarded to counterparties by Fitch or Moodys.
Each exposure is assessed individually both at inception and in ongoing monitoring.
In addition to formal external ratings the banking committ ee also utilises market intelligence information to assist its ongoing monitoring.
The groups financial assets are categorised as follows Balances with central banks note 14 The group has exposure to central banks through its deposits held with the Bank of England.
Settlement balances Settlement risk arises in any situation where a payment in cash or transfer of a security is made in the expectation of a corre sponding delivery of a security or receipt of cash.
The majority of transactions are carried out on a delivery versus payment basis whi ch results in securities and cash being exchanged within a very close timeframe.
Settlement balances outside standard terms are monitored on a daily basis.
The Investment Management and Unit Trusts segments have exposure to market counterparties in the settlement of trades.
Settlement balances arising in the Investment Management segment are primarily in relation to client trades and risk of nonset tlement is borne by clients.
Consolidated financial statements Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued 152 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 31 Financial risk management continued Credit risk continued Loans and advances to banks note 15 and debt and other securities note 17 The group has exposures to a wide range of financial institutions through its treasury portfolio which includes bank deposits certificates of deposit money market funds and treasury bills.
These exposures principally arise from the placement of clients cash where it is held under a banking relationship and the groups own reserves.
The groups policy requires that all such exposures are only taken with counterparties that have been awarded a minimum long te rm rating of single A by Fitch or equivalent rating by Moodys.
Co unterparty limits are also in place to limit exposure to an indi vidual counterparty or connected group of counterparties.
Counterparty exposures are monitored on a daily basis by the treasury depart ment and reviewed by the banking committee on a monthly basis or more frequently when necessary.
The banking committee may suspend dealing in a particular counterparty or liquidate specif ic holdings in light of adverse market information.
Loans and advances to customers note 16 The group provides loans to clients through its investment manage ment operations the investment management loan book.
The g roup is also exposed to credit risk on overdrafts on clients investment management accounts trade debtors arising from the trust tax and financial planning businesses trust and financial planning debtors and other debtors.
Overdrafts on clients investment management accounts arise from timetotime due to short term timing differences between the purchase and sale of assets on a clients behalf.
Overdrafts are actively monitored and reported to the banking committee on a monthly basis.
Loans are provided as a service to investment management clients who are generally asset rich but have short to medium term cas h requirements.
Such loans are normally made on a fully secured ba sis against portfolios held in Rathbones nominee name and som e loans may be partially secured by property.
Extensions to the in itial loan period may be granted subject to credit criteria.
At 31 December 2017 the total lending exposure limit for the investment management loan book was 175000000 2016 150000000 of which 120433000 had been advanced 2016 106276000 and a further 30025000 had been committed 2016 31642000.
Trust and financial planning debtors relate to fees which have been invoiced but not yet settled by clients.
The collection and ageing of trust and financial planning debtors are reviewed on a monthly basis by the management committees of the groups trust and fina ncial planning businesses.
Impairment provisions are made for any debts which are considered to be doubtful for collection.
Other loans and advances to customers re late to management fees receivable.
Impairment and provisioning policies Impairment provisions are recognised for financial reporting purposes only for losses that have been incurred at the balance sh eet date based on objective evid ence of impairment.
All credit exposures are reviewed individually at least annually  or more regularly when individual circumstances require.
Imp airment allowances on credit exposures are determined by an evaluation of the incurred loss at the balance sheet date on a case by case basis.
The assessment considers where applicable the value of any security andor collateral held any changes to the external credit ra ting and the anticipated receipts for each individual exposure.
Impairment provisions for credit risk which relate solely to trust and financial planning debtors are set out in note 16.
Maximum exposure to credit risk Credit risk relating to onbalance sheet exposures Cash and balances with central banks 1375380 Settlement balances 46784 Loans and advances to banks 117253 Loans and advances to customers overdrafts 4621 investment management loan book 120509 trust and financial planning debtors 1114 other debtors 35 Investment securities unlisted debt securities and money market funds 808713 Other financial assets 71562 Credit risk relating to offbalance sheet exposures Loan commitments 30025 Financial guarantees 117 The above table represents the groups gross credit risk exposure at 31 December 2017 and 2016 without taking account of any associated collateral held or other credit enhancements.
For onbalance sheet assets the exposures set out above are based on gross carrying amounts.
9.5% of the total maximum exposure is derived from loans and advances to banks and customers 2016 10.1% and 31.4% represents investment securities 2016 36.0%.
The credit risk relating to offbalance sh eet exposures for financial guarantees refl ects the groups gross potential exposure of guarantees held on balance sheet see note 1.21.
Balances with central banks All balances with central banks were neither past due nor impaired .
The credit quality of these balances is analysed below by r eference to the long term credit rating awarded by Fitch or equivalent rating by Moodys as at the balance sheet date.
AA to AA 1375380 Carrying value 1375380 Settlement balances Settlement balances are summarised as follows Neither past due nor impaired 46679 Past due but not impaired  90 days 105 Past due but not impaired  90 days Carrying value 46784 37site Consolidated financial statements Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued 154 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 31 Financial risk management continued i Credit risk continued Loans and advances Loans and advances are summarised as follows 2017 2016 Loans and advances to banks Loans and advances to customers Loans and advances to banks Loans and advances to customers Neither past due nor impaired 117253 125610 114088 Past due but not impaired  601 Impaired  68 Gross carrying value 117253 126279 114088 Less allowance for impairment note 16  66 Net carrying value 117253 126213 114088 No loans and advances have been renegotiated 2016 none.
The credit quality of loans and advances to banks that were ne ither past due nor impaired at 31 December 2017 is analysed below by reference to the long term credit rating awarded by Fitch or equivalent rating by Moodys as at the balance sheet date AA to AA 24538 A to A 90904 Other 1811 Cash held within the Employee Benefit Trust The credit quality of loans and advances to customers that were neither past due nor impaired at 31 December 2017 which are al l externally unrated is analysed between those loans that are subject to standard lending criteria which are described on page 152 and where applicable those loans for which there are no standard lending criteria.
At 31 December 2017 all loans are subject to s tandard lending criteria 2016 all loans.
An exposure is reported as past due when the contractual due date for settlement has passed and the balance has not been repaid except in the case of trust and financial planning debtors where a normal settlement period of up to 30 days is expected.
Loans and advances that are past due are assessed for impairment and provided against where objective evidence of impairment exists.
Trust and financial planning debtors may be outstanding fo r some time before collection but this is not necessarily an indication that the debt will not ultimately be collected.
At 31 December 2017 and 2016 no overdrafts loans and other debtors were past due but not impaired.
The gross amounts of trust and financial planning debtors that were past due but not impaired were At 31 December 90 days overdue 385 90180 days overdue 75 180270 days overdue 53 270365 days overdue 24 site 155 c Impaired Allowance has been made for individually impaired lo ans and advances to custom ers as set out below Movement in impairment provision during the year Trust and financial planning debtors At 1 January 2017 91 Amounts written off 26 Credit to profit or loss 1 At 31 December 2017 66 Gross carrying value of impaired loans and advances to customers At 31 December 2017 68 At 31 December 2016 94 All loans and advances to customers impaired relate to trust and financial planning debtors 2016 all.
There were no other impaired credit exposures at 31 Dece mber 2017 2016 nil.
Investment securities The table below presents an analysis of investment securities by rating agency designation as at 31 December based on Fitch o r Moodys long term rating designation.
Money market funds
Total
Money market funds
Total
AAA 106747  106747 103557 AA to AA  264569 264569 A to A  437397 437397 106747 701966 808713 103557 Concentration of credit risk The group has counterparty credit risk within its treasury assets in that exposure is to a number of similar credit institution s.
The banking committee actively monitors counterparties and may reduce risk by either suspending dealing or liquidating investments in light of adverse market information for example in anticipation of or in response to any formal Fitch or Moodys rating downgrade.
This may happen in relation to specific banks or banks within a particular country or sector.
The following table analyses the groups credit exposures at their carrying amounts by geographical region as at the balance sheet date.
In this analysis exposures are categorised based on the country of domicile of the counterparty.
At 31 December 2017
Kingdom
Eurozone
Rest of the world
Cash and balances with central banks 1375380 Settlement balances 43688 1211 Loans and advances to banks 113225 4028 Loans and advances to customers overdrafts 4295 68 investment management loan book 112286 269 trust and financial planning debtors 1048 other debtors 35 Investment securities unlisted debt securities and money market funds 205000 306751 Other financial assets 63238 1076 1918195 313403 2540site Consolidated financial statements Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued 156 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 31 Financial risk management continued i Credit risk continued Concentration of credit risk continued a Geographical sectors continued At 31 December 2016
Kingdom
Eurozone
Rest of the world
Cash and balances with central banks 1075670 Settlement balances 34005 622 3160 Loans and advances to banks 114088 Loans and advances to customers overdrafts 3171 201 368 investment management loan book 99392 258 6685 trust and financial planning debtors 855 other debtors 21 Investment securities unlisted debt securities and money market funds 195000 223557 385000 Other financial assets 53642 791 2542 1575844 225429 397755 At 31 December 2017 materially all eurozone exposures were to counterparties ba sed in the Netherlands and France 2016 Nether lands and France and all rest of the world exposures were to counterparties based in Switzerland Sweden Canada and Australia 2016 Sw itzerland Sweden Canada and Australia.
At 31 December 2017 the group had no exposure to sovereign debt 2016 no exposure to sovereign debt.
The groups credit exposures at the balance sheet date analysed by the primary industry sectors in which our counterparties op erate were At 31 December 2017
Financial institutions
Total
Cash and balances with central banks 1375380 Settlement balances  46784 Loans and advances to banks  117253 Loans and advances to customers overdrafts   4621 investment management loan book   120509 trust and financial planning debtors   1048 other debtors   35 Investment securities unlisted debt securities and money market funds  808713 Other financial assets 1138 2578 61983 1376518 975328 188196 At 31 December 2016
Financial institutions
Total
Cash and balances with central banks 1075670 Settlement balances  37787 Loans and advances to banks  114088 Loans and advances to customers overdrafts   3740 investment management loan book   106335 trust and financial planning debtors   855 other debtors   21 Investment securities unlisted debt securities and money market funds  803557 Other financial assets 125 3276 53574 1075795 958708 164525 2199site 157 ii Liquidity risk Liquidity risk is the risk that the group will encounter difficulty in meeting obligations associated with financial liabilitie s that are settled by delivering cash or another financial asset.
The primary objective of the groups treasury policy is to manage short to medium term liquidity requirements.
In addition to s etting the treasury policy Rathbone Investment Management the Bank pe rforms an annual assessment of liquidity adequacy in accordance with the regulatory requirements of the Prudential Regulation Authority PRA our Individual Liquidity Adequacy Assessment.
The Ba nk faces two principal risks namely that a significant proportion of client funds are withdrawn over a short period of time reta il funding risk and the risk that marketable assets may not be capable of being realised in the time and at the value required marketable asse ts risk.
Retail funding risks are monitored by daily cash mismatch analyses and Basel Committee ratios using expected cash and asset mat urity profiles and regular forecasting work.
This is supported by stress tests which cover firmspecific idiosyncratic scenarios andor the effects of unforeseen market wide stresses.
Market able assets risk is primarily managed by holding cash and marketable instruments whic h are realisable at short notice.
The group operates strict criteria to ensure that investments are liquid and placed wi th highquality counterparties.
A minimum liquid assets buffer to be held in eligible liquid assets is set by the board at least annually in conjunction with an amount prescribed by the PRA.
Nonderivative cash flows The table below presents the undiscounted cash flows receivable and payable by the group under nonderivative financial assets and liabilities analysed by the remaining contractual maturities at the balance sheet date.
At 31 December 2017
Not more than 3 months After 3 months but not more than 1 year After 1 year but not more than 5 years After 5 years No fixed maturity date
Cash and balances with central banks 1374002 1138 1380 Settlement balances  46785 Loans and advances to banks 75826 11490 30577 Loans and advances to customers 4733 13407 43304 70450 Debt securities and money market funds 106816 263385 442503 Other financial assets 110 60859 640 3435 2819 Cash flows arising from financial assets 1561487 397064 518404 73885 2819 Deposits by banks 1338 Settlement balances  54452 Due to customers 2081805 83469 5306 Subordinated loan notes  586 586 22342 Other financial liabilities 1192 52612 3587 38023 5985 Cash flows arising from financial liabilities 2084335 191119 9479 60365 5985 Net liquidity gap 522848 205945 508925 13520 3166 Cumulative net liquidity gap 522848 316903 192022 205542 202376 Included in Other financial liabilities in the table above ar e cash flows for lease payments under the groups agreement for leased space at 1 Curzon Street.
These contractual payments comprise part of the onerous lease provision for that property see note 25.
Consolidated financial statements Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued 158 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 31 Financial risk management continued ii Liquidity risk continued Nonderivative cash flows continued At 31 December 2016
Not more than 3 months After 3 months but not more than 1 year After 1 year but not more than 5 years After 5 years No fixed maturity date
Cash and balances with central banks 1075003 125 670 Settlement balances  37787 Loans and advances to banks 73844 10215 30505 18 Loans and advances to customers 3822 21271 44678 45233 430 Debt securities and money market funds 103599 251698 453116 Other financial assets 155 52939 335 343 Cash flows arising from financial assets 1256423 374035 529304 45594 430 Deposits by banks 294 Settlement balances  39289 Due to customers 1768215 119460 1246 Subordinated loan notes  98 586 23514 Other financial liabilities 1532 38177 3963 27128 3386 Cash flows arising from financial liabilities 1770041 197024 5795 50642 3386 Net liquidity gap 513618 177011 523509 5048 2956 Cumulative net liquidity gap 513618 336607 186902 181854 178898 Liabilities which do not have a contractual maturity date are categorised as on demand.
Included within the amounts due to cu stomers on demand are balances which historical experience shows are unli kely to be called in the short term.
A prudent level of highly liquid assets is retained to cover reasonably foreseeable short term ch anges in client deposits.
All debt securities are readily marketable and can be realised through disposals.
The group holds 2565000 of equity investments 2016 1864000 which are subject to liquidity risk but are not included in the table above.
These assets are held as available for sale securities and have no fixed maturity date cash flows arise from receipt of dividends or through sale of the assets.
Offbalance sheet items Cash flows arising from the groups offbalance sheet financial liabilities note 33 are summarised in the table below.
The contractual value of the groups commitments to extend credit to clients and maximum potential value of financial guarantee s are analysed by the duration of the commitment.
Future minimum leas e payments under noncancellable operating leases are reported b y their contractual payment dates.
Capital commitments are summarised by the earliest expected date of payment.
At 31 December 2017 Not more than 3 months After 3 months but not more than 1 year After 1 year but not more than 5 years
5 years
Loan commitments 30025 Financial guarantees   117 Operating lease commitments 712 3817 28780 Capital commitments 48 Total offbalance sheet items 30785 3817 28897 At 31 December 2016 Not more than 3 months After 3 months but not more than 1 year After 1 year but not more than 5 years
5 years
Loan commitments 31642 Financial guarantees   117 Operating lease commitments 1481 4530 39336 Capital commitments 4430 Total offbalance sheet items 37553 4530 39453 Total liquidity requirement At 31 December 2017
Not more than 3 months After 3 months but not more than 1 year After 1 year but not more than 5 years
5 years
Cash flows arising from financial liabilities 2084335 191119 9479 60365 Total offbalance sheet items  30785 3817 28897 Total liquidity requirement 2084335 221904 13296 89262 At 31 December 2016
Not more than 3 months After 3 months but not more than 1 year After 1 year but not more than 5 years
5 years
Cash flows arising from financial liabilities 1770041 197024 5795 50642 Total offbalance sheet items  37553 4530 39453 Total liquidity requirement 1770041 234577 10325 90095 2177site Consolidated financial statements Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued 160 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 31 Financial risk management continued iii Market risk Interest rate risk Cash flow interest rate risk is the risk that the future cash flows of a financial instrument will fluctuate because of changes in market interest rates.
Fair value interest rate risk is the risk that the value of a financial instrument will fluctuate because of ch anges in market interest rates.
The groups principal exposure to cash flow interest rate risk arises from the mismatch between the repricing of its financial assets and liabilities.
In particular customer accounts and loan balances are repriced very shortly after changes in base rates whereas the yield on the groups interestbearing assets is correlated to the future expe ctation of base rates and varies depending on the maturity prof ile of the groups treasury portfolio.
The average maturity mismatch is controlled by the banking committee which generally lengthens the mismatch when the yield curve is rising and sh ortens it when the yield curve is falling.
The table below shows the consolidated repricing profile of the groups financial assets and liabilities stated at their carry ing amounts categorised by the earlier of contractual repricing or maturity dates.
At 31 December 2017 Not more than 3 months After 3 months but not more than 6 months After 6 months but not more than 1 year After 1 year but not more than 5 years
5 years
Total
Assets
Cash and balances with central banks 1374000 Settlement balances Loans and advances to banks 86673 244 30000 Loans and advances to customers 125046 Investment securities equity securities unlisted debt securities and money market funds 368708 85005 355000 Other financial assets Total financial assets 1954427 85249 385000
Deposits by banks 1338 Settlement balances Due to customers 2139188 5285 Subordinated loan notes    19695 Other financial liabilities     42 Total financial liabilities 2140526 5285  19695 42 Interest rate repricing gap 186099 79964 385000 19695 42 44238 214site 161 At 31 December 2016 Not more than 3 months After 3 months but not more than 6 months After 6 months but not more than 1 year After 1 year but not more than 5 years
5 years
Total
Assets
Cash and balances with central banks 1075000 673 1075673 Settlement balances 37787 37787 Loans and advances to banks 83766  30000 322 114088 Loans and advances to customers 110051 900 110951 Investment securities equity securities 1864 1864 unlisted debt securities and money market funds 353557 155000 295000 Other financial assets 56975 56975 Total financial assets 1622374 155000 325000 98521 2200895
Deposits by banks 294 Settlement balances 39289 39289 Due to customers 1865389 1242 22264 1888895 Subordinated loan notes    19590 Other financial liabilities 64586 64586 Total financial liabilities 1865683 1242  19590 126139 2012654 Interest rate repricing gap 243309 153758 325000 19590 27618 188241 The banking committee has set an overall pretax interest rate ex posure limit of 6000000 2016 6000000 for the total po tential profit or loss resulting from an unexpected immediat e and sustained 2% movement in sterling interest rates for the Bank the principal operating subsidiary.
The potential total profit or loss is calculated on the basis of the average number of days to repricing of the int erestbearing liabilities compared with the period to repricing on a corresponding amount of interestbearing assets.
At 31 December 2017 the Bank had a net present value sensitivity of 4310000 2016 3696000 for an upward 2% shift in ra tes.
The group held no forward rate agreements at 31 December 2017 2016 none.
Foreign exchange risk The group is exposed to translational foreign exchange risk as it undertakes transactions in foreign currencies and is therefor e exposed to foreign exchange rate fluctuations.
The group monitors its currency exposures that arise in the ordinary course of business on a daily basis and significant exposures are managed through the use of spot cont racts from timetotime so as to reduce any currency exposu re to a minimal amount.
The group has no structural foreign currency exposure.
Consolidated financial statements Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued 162 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 31 Financial risk management continued iii Market risk continued Foreign exchange risk continued The group does not have any material exposure to transactional foreign exchange risk.
The tabl e below summarises the groups ex posure to foreign currency translation risk at 31 December 2017.
Included in the table are the groups financial assets and liabilitie s at carrying amounts categorised by currency.
At 31 December 2017
US dollar
Other
Total
Assets
Cash and balances with central banks 1375382 Settlement balances 46166 465  153 Loans and advances to banks 80727 15363 13946 7217 Loans and advances to customers 118591 4482 3140 Investment securities equity securities 2565 unlisted debt securities and money market funds 720005 88708 Other financial assets 65699 Total financial assets 2408678 109359 17147 7425
Deposits by banks 1338 Settlement balances 5243tel54452 Due to customers 2039156 109453 14773 7116 Subordinated loan notes 19695 Other financial liabilities 81580 26 130 Total financial liabilities 2194200 110429 15861 7229 Net onbalance sheet position 214478 1070 1286 196 Loan commitments 30025 At 31 December 2016
US dollar
Other
Total
Assets
Cash and balances with central banks 1075673 Settlement balances 36787 Loans and advances to banks 74503 21205 12217 6163 Loans and advances to customers 103110 4974 2867 Investment securities equity securities 1864 unlisted debt securities and money market funds 755000 48557 Other financial assets 56975 Total financial assets 2103674 75848 15104 6269
Deposits by banks 294 Settlement balances 37343 1830 116 Due to customers 1796166 72439 14567 5723 Subordinated loan notes 19590 Other financial liabilities 64586 Total financial liabilities 1917860 74300 14727 5767 Net onbalance sheet position 185814 154tel241 Loan commitments 31642 A 10% weakening of the US dollar against sterling occurring on 31 December 2017 would have increased equity and profit after tax by 86000 2016 reduced by 124000.
A 10% weakening of the euro against sterling occurring on 31 December 2017 would have re duced equity and profit after tax by 104000 201 6 reduced by 30000.
A 10% strengthening of the US dollar or euro would have had an equal and opposite effect.
This analysis assume s that all other variables in particular other exchange rates remain constant.
Price risk Price risk is the risk that the fair value or future cash flows of a financial instrument will fluctuate because of changes in market prices other than those arising from interest rate risk or foreign exchange risk.
The group is exposed to price risk through its holdings of equity investment securities which are reported at their fair value note 17.
At 31 December 2017 the fair value of equity securities recognised on the balance sheet was 2565000 2016 1864000.
A 1 0% fall in global equity markets would in isolation result in a pretax decrease to net assets of 133000 2016 110000 there would be no impact on profit after tax.
A 10% rise in global markets would have had an equal and opposite effect.
Fair values The table below analyses financial instruments measured at fair value into a fair value hierarchy based on the valuation techni que used to determine the fair value.
Level 1 quoted prices unadjusted in active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
Level 2 inputs other than quoted prices included within level 1 that are observable for the asset or liability either directl y or indirectly.
Level 3 inputs for the asset or liability that are not based on observable market data.
At 31 December 2017 Level 1 Level 2 Level 3
Assets
Available for sale securities equity securities 2565 money market funds  106747 2565 106747 At 31 December 2016 Level 1 Level 2 Level 3
Assets
Available for sale securities equity securities 1864 money market funds  103557 1864 103557 The group recognises transfers between levels of the fair value hierarchy at the end of the reporting period during which the c hange has occurred.
There have been no transfers between levels during the year 2016 none.
The fair value of listed equity securities is their quoted price.
Money market funds are demand securities and changes to estim ates of interest rates will not affect their fair value.
The fair va lue of money market funds is their daily redemption value.
The fair values of the groups other financial assets and liabilities are not materially different from their carrying values with the exception of the following Held to maturity investment debt securities note 17 comprise bank and building society certific ates of deposit which have fi xed coupons.
The fair value of debt securities at 31 December 2017 was 704002000 2016 704815000 and the carrying value was 701966000 2016 700000000.
Fair value for held to maturity assets is based on market bid prices and hence would be categorised as level 1 within the fair value hierarchy.
Subordinated loan notes note 26 comprise Ti er 2 loan notes.
The fair va lue of the loan notes at 31 December 2017 was 20478 000 2016 19578000 and the carrying value was 19695000 2016 19590000.
Fair value of the loan notes is based on discou nted future cash flows using current market rates for debts with similar remaining maturity and hence would be categorised as level 2 in the fair value hierarchy.
Consolidated financial statements Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued 164 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 32 Capital management Rathbone Brothers Plcs capital is defined for accounting purposes as total equity.
As at 31 December 2017 this totalled 3632 78000 2016 324813000.
Rathbone Investment Management has issued 10 year subordinated Tier 2 loan notes note 26.
As at 31 December 2017 the carryin g value of the notes was 19675000 2016 19590000.
From timetoti me the group also runs small overnight overdraft balances as part of working capital.
The groups objectives when managing capital are to safeguard the groups ability to continue as a going concern so that it can continue to provide returns for shareholders and benefits for other stakeholders maintain a strong capital base in a costefficient manner to be able to support the development of the business when required optimise the distribution of capital across group comp anies reflecting the requirements of each business strive to make capital freely transferable across the group where possible and comply with regulatory requirements at all times.
Rathbones is classified for capital purposes as a banking group an d performs an Internal Capital Adequacy Assessment Process which is presented to the PRA on an annual basis.
Regulatory capital resources for ICAAP purposes are calculated in accordance with published rules.
These require certain adjustments to and certain deductions from accounting capital the latter largely in res pect of intangible assets.
The ICAAP compares regulatory capital resources against regulatory capital requirements derived using the PR As Pillar 1 and Pillar 2 methodology.
The group has adopte d the standardised approach to calculating its Pillar 1 credit risk component and the basic indicator approach to calculating its operational risk component.
Capital management policy and practices are applied at both group and entity level.
At 31 December 2017 the groups regulatory capital resources including retained earnings for 2017 were 216838000 2016 1 74192000.
The increase in reserves during 2017 is du e an increase in the groups retained earnin gs on account of profits generated in the year and the gain on remeasurement of the defined benefit liabilities.
In addition to a variety of stress tests performed as part of the ICAAP process and daily reporting in respect of treasury act ivity capital levels are monitored and forecast on a monthly basis to ensure that dividends and investment requirements are appropriately man aged and appropriate buffers are kept ag ainst adverse business conditions.
No breaches were reported to the PRA during the financial years ended 31 December 2016 and 2017.
33 Contingent liabilities and commitments a Capital expenditure authorised and contracted for at 31 December 2017 but not provided in the financial statements amounted to 48000 2016 4430000.
Guarantees 117 Undrawn commitments to lend of 1 year or less 20985 Undrawn commitments to lend of more than 1 year 9040 The fair value of the guarantees is nil 2016 nil. c The group leases various offices and other assets under noncancellable operating lease agreements.
The leases have varying ter ms and renewal rights.
At 31 December 2017 the groups agreements to lease space at 8 Finsbury Circus had remaining lease terms o f 15 years total payments due over this period are 75946000.
The leases provide for rent reviews every 5 years.
Payments under noncancellable operating leases No later than 1 year 4529 Later than 1 year and no later than 5 years 28780 Later than 5 years 57293 The above table excludes total lease payments of 18124000 at 31 December 2017 under the groups agreement for leased space at 1 Curzon Street as these payments are included as part of the cash flows that comprise the onerous lease provision for that prop erty see note 25.
These cash flows have been included in Other financial liabilities in note 31. in the event of failure of financial institutions has resulted in significant levies on the industry in recent years.
The financial impact of unexpected FSCS levies is largely out of the groups control as they result from other industry failures.
There is uncertainty over the level of future FSCS levies as they depend on the ultimate cost to the FSCS of industry failures.
The group contributes to the deposit class investment fund manageme nt class and investment intermediation levy classes and accrues levy costs for future levy years when the obligation arises.
34 Related party transactions Transactions with key management personnel The remuneration of the key management personnel of the group who are defined as the companys directors and other members of senior management who are responsible for planning directing and controlling the activities of the group is set out below.
Fu rther information about the remuneration of individual directors is provided in the audited part of the directors remuneration repor t on page 95.
Short term employee benefits 10951 Postemployment benefits 327 Other long term benefits 2425 Sharebased payments 2187 Dividends totalling 408000 were paid in the year 2016 302000 in respect of ordinary shares held by key management person nel and their close family members.
As at 31 December 2017 the group had outstanding interestfree season ticket loans of 6000 2016 6000 issued to key management personnel.
At 31 December 2017 key management personnel and their close family members had gross outstanding deposits of 4059000 2016 5464000 and gross outstanding banking loans of 728000 2016 959000 all of which 2016 all were made on normal busi ness terms.
A number of the groups key management personnel and thei r close family members make use of the services provided by companies within the group.
Charges for such services are made at various staff rates.
Consolidated financial statements Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued 166 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 34 Related party transactions continued Other related party transactions The groups transactions with the pension funds are described in note 27.
At 31 December 2017 no amounts were outstanding with either the Laurence Keen Scheme or the Rathbone 1987 Scheme 2016 nil.
One group subsidiary Rathbone Unit Trust Management has authority to manage the investments within a number of unit trusts.
Another group company Rathbone Investment Management International acted as investment manager for a protected cell company offering unitised private client portfolio services.
During 2017 the group managed 25 unit trusts Socits dInvestissement  Capital Variable SICAVs and openended investme nt companies OEICs together collectives 2016 25 unit trusts and OEICs.
The group charges each fund an annual management fee for these services but does not earn any performance fees on the unit trusts.
The management charges are calculated on the bases published in the individual fund prospectuses which also state the terms an d conditions of the management contract with the group.
The following transactions and balances relate to the groups interest in the unit trusts Year ended 31 December Total management fees As at 31 December Management fees owed to the group 3266 Holdings in unit trusts note 17 2565 Total management fees are included within fee and commission income in the consolidated statement of comprehensive income.
Management fees owed to the group are included within accrued income and holdings in unit trus ts are classified as available for sale equity securities in the consolidated balance sheet.
The maximum exposure to loss is limited to the carrying amount on the bal ance sheet as disclosed above.
All amounts outstanding with related parties are unsecured and will be settled in cash.
No guarantees have been given or receiv ed.
No provisions have been made for doubtful debts in respect of the amounts owed by related parties.
35 Interest in unconsolidated structured entities As described in note 34 at 31 December 2017 the group owned un its in collectives managed by Rathbone Unit Trust Management wi th a value of 2565000 2016 1864000 representing 0.05% 2016 0.05% of the total value of the collectives managed by the group.
These assets are held to hedge the groups exposure to de ferred remuneration schemes fo r employees of Unit Trusts.
The groups primary risk associated with its interest in the unit trusts is from changes in fair value of its holdings in the f unds.
The group is not judged to control and therefore does not consol idate the collectives.
Although the fund trustees have limite d rights to remove Rathbone Unit Trust Management as manager the group is exposed to very low variability of returns from its management a nd share of ownership of the funds and is therefore judged to act as an agent rather than having control under IFRS 10.
36 Consolidated statement of cash flows For the purposes of the consolidated statement of cash flows cash and cash equivalents comprise the following balances with le ss than three months until maturity from the date of acquisition Cash and balances at central banks note 14 1374002 Loans and advances to banks note 15 87009 Available for sale investment securities note 17 106747 At 31 December 1567758 Available for sale investment securities are amounts invested in money market funds which are realisable on demand.
Cash flows arising from issuing ordinary shares comprise Share capital issued note 28 31 Share premium on shares issued note 28 3098 Shares issued in relation to sharebased schemes for which no cash consideration was received 441 1631 Shares issued in relation to business combinations note 28 A reconciliation of the movements of liabilities to cash flows arising from financing activities were as follows Liabilities Equity
Share capital premium
Retained earnings
At 1 January 2017 19590 142526 25742 156545 344403 Changes from financing cash flows Proceeds from issue of share capital  3129 Proceeds from sale of treasury shares   1379 1820 441 Dividends paid 29420 29420 Total changes from financing cash flows  3129 1379 31240 26732 The effect of changes in foreign exchange rates Changes in fair value Other changes
Interest expense Interest paid 1171 Total liabilityrelated changes 105 Total equityrelated other changes   100 65097 65197 At 31 December 2017 19695 145655 27221 190402 382973 37 Events after the balance sheet date There have been no material events occurring between the balance sheet date and the date of signing this report ite Consolidated financial statements Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued 168 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 38 Countrybycountry reporting
HM Treasury has transposed the requirements set out under Capi tal Requirements Directive IV CRD IV and issued the Capital Requirements CountrybyCountry Reporting Regulations 2013 effective 1 January 2014.
The legislation requires Rathbone Brother s Plc together with its subsidiaries the group to publish certain additional information on a consolidated basis for the year ended 31 December 2017.
Basis of preparation Country In most cases we have determined the country by reference to the country of tax residence.
Where an entity is not subject to tax e. jurisdiction in which the revenues are generated.
In these cases it is possib le that tax is paid in a different country to the one in wh ich profits are reported.
Nature of activities The nature of activities within the United Kingdom are described within our services on page 2 to 5.
Discretionary investment management is the sole activity which occurs in Jersey.
Turnover Turnover is defined as operating income.
As the cons olidated results are split by country there is an element of double counting when interjurisdictional transactions for example the payment of dividends occur.
The entries to eliminate this double counting are included at the bottom of the table to enable the disclosed figures to agree to the published consolidated accounts of the group.
Profitloss before taxation These are accounting profits.
As with turnover some double counting may arise and again this has been eliminated at the bottom of the table.
The majority of the total relates to the elimination of inter jurisdictional dividends which are reflected as profits in the United Kin gdom.
Tax paid This column reflects corporation tax actually paid in the year.
Note that it is rare that tax paid in any given year relates directly to the profits earned in the same period.
Public subsidies received The group received no public subsidies in the year.
Number of employees The number of employees reported is the average number of full time employees who were permanently employed by the group or one of its subsidia ries during the year.
Contractors are excluded.
Subsidiaries A list of the subsidiaries of the group including their main activity and country of incorporation is shown within note 43.
Country
Turnover
Profitloss before taxation Tax paid Number of employees United Kingdom 284726 56914 13850 Jersey 10831 2493 237 Subtotal 295557 59407 14087 Intergroup eliminations and other entries arising on consolidation 3985 506 Total 291572 58901 14087 1site 169
Share capital Share premium Available for sale reserve Own shares
Total equity At 1 January 2016 2407 97643 71 6177 63981 Profit for the year Net remeasurement of defined benefit liability 49 37318 37318 Net gain on revaluation of available for sale investment securities 17 Deferred tax relating to components of other comprehensive income 46 Other comprehensive income net of tax 31382 31303 Dividends paid 42 26479 26479 Issue of share capital 50 128 42003 Sharebased payments value of employee services cost of own shares acquired 50 cost of own shares vesting 50 own shares sold 5tel tax on sharebased payments 46 At 1 January 2017 2535 139991 150 6243 48906 Profit for the year Net remeasurement of defined benefit liability 49 Revaluation of available for sale investment securities net gain from changes in fair value 17 net profit on disposal transferred to profit or loss during the year Deferred tax relating to components of other comprehensive income 46 2939 2959 Other comprehensive income net of tax Dividends paid 42 29420 29420 Issue of share capital 50 31 3098 Sharebased payments value of employee services cost of own shares acquired 50 cost of own shares vesting 50 tax on sharebased payments 46 At 31 December 2017 2566 143089 250 4864 68548 The accompanying notes form an integral part of the company financial statements.
Company financial statements Company balance sheet as at 31 December 2017 170 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017
Noncurrent assets Investment in subsidiaries 43 180503 Other investments 44 12565 Deferred tax 46 4455 Current assets Trade and other receivables 45 114597 Current tax asset Cash and cash equivalents Total assets Current liabilities Trade and other payables 47 73018 59264 Provisions for liabilities and charges 48 22929 14051 95947 73315 Net current assets Noncurrent liabilities Retirement benefit obligations 49 15600 39455 Total liabilities 111547 112770 Net assets
Share capital 50 2566 Share premium 50 143089 Available for sale reserve Own shares 50 4864 6243 Retained earnings Equity shareholders funds The financial statements were approved by the board of directors and authorised for issue on 21 February 2018 and were signed o n their behalf by Philip Howell Chief Executive Paul Stockton Finance Director Company registered number The accompanying notes form an integral part of the company financial statements.
Note
Cash flows from operating activities Profit before tax Net profit on disposal of available for sale investment securities Net interest and dividends receivable 47576 48772 Net charge for provisions 48 16523 Defined benefit pension scheme charges 49 2948 3058 Defined benefit pension scheme contributions paid 49 3619 5422 Sharebased payment charges 50 3871 3402 4016 Changes in operating assets and liabilities net decrease in trade debtors net decreaseincrease in prepayments accrued income and other assets net increase in accruals deferred income provisions and other liabilities Cash used ingenerated from operations Tax received Net cash inflowoutflow from operating activities Cash flows from investing activities Interest received Interest paid Intercompany dividends received Acquisition of subsidiaries Investment in subsidiaries 43 40000 11725 Repayment of subordinated loans by group undertakings Purchase of other investments Proceeds from sale of investments Net cash generated from investing activities Cash flows from financing activities Issue of ordinary shares 50 2688 Dividends paid 42 29420 26479 Net cash used ingenerated from financing activities 26732 13720 Net increase in cash and cash equivalents Cash and cash equivalents at the beginning of the year Cash and cash equivalents at the end of the year 55 7156 The accompanying notes form an integral part of the company financial statements.
Company financial statements Notes to the company financial statements 172 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 39 Significant accounting policies Statement of compliance The separate financial statements of the company are presented as required by the Companies Act 2006 and have been prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards I FRS as adopted by the European Union and IAS 27 Separate Financial Statements.
On publishing the parent company financial statements here together with the group financial statements the company is taking advantage of the exemption in Section 408 of the Companies Act 2006 not to present its individual statement of comprehensive in come and related notes that form a part of these approved financial statements.
Developments in reporting standards and interpretations Developments in reporting standards and interpretations are set out in note 1.3 to the consolidated financial statements.
Principal accounting policies The financial statements have been prepared on the historical cost basis except for the revaluation of certain financial instr uments.
The principal accounting policies adopted are as set out below.
Investments in subsidiaries Investments in subsidiaries are st ated at cost less where approp riate provision for impairment.
Management charges Intragroup management charges arise in relation to staff costs and other administrative expenses that are initia lly borne by t he company and then recharged to other group companies when incurred.
Accounting policies in relation to impairment interest income  dividend income operating leases foreign currency retirement benefit obligations taxation cash and cash equivalents and sharebased payments are set out in note 1 to the consolidated financial s tatements.
40 Critical accounting judgements and key sources of estimation and uncertainty The critical accounting judgement and key sources of estimation and uncertainty arise from the companys defined benefit pensio n schemes and the onerous lease provision in relation to surplus property at the companys previous head office at 1 Curzon Street.
These are described in note 2 to the co nsolidated financial statements.
41 Profit for the year As permitted by Section 408 of the Companies Act 2006 the company has elected not to present its own statement of comprehensive income for the year.
Rathbone Brothers Plc reported a profit afte r tax for the financial year ended 31 December 2017 of 32614 000 2016 40950000.
Auditors remuneration for audit and other services to the company are set out in note 7 to the financial statements.
The average number of employees on a full time equivalent basis during the year was as follows 2017 2016 Investment Management investment management services 715 advisory services 92 Unit Trusts 28 Shared services 293 1site 173 42 Dividends Details of the companys dividends paid and proposed for approval at th e Annual General Meeting are set out in note 12 to the consolidated financial statements.
The companys dividend policy is described in the directors report on page 104.
Reserves available for distribution as at 31 December were comprised as follows Net assets 209589
Distributable reserves 63934 Movements in reserves available for distribution were as follows As at 1 January 42813 Profit for the year 32614 Net remeasurement of defined benefit liability 14349 Net gain on revaluation of available for sale investment securities 100 Dividends paid 29420 26479 Other movements 3478 As at 31 December 63934 43 Investment in subsidiaries
Subordinated loans to group undertakings
At 1 January 2016 128857 Additions 11725 Disposals 79 1750 1829 At 1 January 2017 140503 Additions 40000
At 31 December 2017 180503 180site Company financial statements Notes to the company financial statements continued 174 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 43 Investment in subsidiaries continued
On 11 December 2017 445000 ordinary shares of 1 each in Rathbone Investment Management were issued to the company at a price of 90 per share for cash consideration.
At 31 December 2017 the companys subsidiary undertakings were as follows Subsidiary undertaking Activity and operation Rathbone Investment Management Limited Investment management and banking services Rathbone Investment Management International Limited Investment management Rathbone Trust Company Limited Trust and tax services Rathbone Unit Trust Management Limited Unit trust management Arcticstar Limited Introducer of private clients Vision Independent Financial Planning Limited Financial planning services Castle Investment Solutions Limited Investment support services Rathbone Trust Legal Services Limited Trust and legal services Laurence Keen Holdings Limited Intermediate holding company Rathbone Directors Limited Corporate director services Rathbone Secretaries Limited Corporate secretarial services Laurence Keen Nominees Limited Corporate nominee Neilson Cobbold Client Nominees Limited Corporate nominee Rathbone Nominees Limited Corporate nominee Citywall Nominees Limited Corporate nominee Penchart Nominees Limited Corporate nominee Rathbone Pension and Advisory Services Limited Nontrading Rathbone Stockbrokers Limited Nontrading Dean River Asset Management Limited Nontrading
Walkden and Co.
Limited Nontrading Held by subsidiary undertaking The registered office for all subsidiary undertakings is 8 Finsbury Circus London EC2M 7AZ except for the following Subsidiary undertaking Registered office Rathbone Investment Management Limited Port of Liverpool Building Pier Head Liverpool L3 1NW Rathbone Investment Management International Limited 26 Esplanade St Helier Jersey JE1 2RB Vision Independent Financial Planning Limited Vision House Unit 6A Falmouth Business Park Bickland Water Road Falmouth Cornwall TR11 4SZ Castle Investment Solutions Limited Vision House Unit 6A Falmouth Business Park Bickland Water Road Falmouth Cornwall TR11 4SZ The company owns directly or indirectly 100% of the ordinary share capital of all subsidiary undertakings.
On 1 January 2018 17645 ordinary shares of 5p each in Vision Independent Financial Planning Limited were issued to the compan y at a price of 295 per share in exchange for the companys equity holding in Castle Investment Solutions.
This transaction is not re flected in the above disclosure.
44 Other investments Available for sale securities Equity securities  at fair value listed 2565 Money market funds  at fair value unlisted 10000 11site 175 45 Trade and other receivables Prepayments and other receivables 4403 Amounts owed by group undertakings 110194
Noncurrent
46 Deferred tax The Finance Bill 2016 contained legislation to reduce the UK co rporation tax rate to 17.0% in April 2020 and was substantively enacted in September 2016.
Deferred income taxes are calculated on all temporary differences under the liability method using the rate exp ected to apply when the relevant timing di fferences are forecast to unwind.
The movement on the deferred tax account is as follows
Sharebased payments
Available for sale securities
As at 1 January 2017 6705 1264 189 30 8128 Recognised in profit or loss in respect of current year 1264 57 144 prior year change in rate 148 4 17 Total recognised in profit or loss 1116 53 127 Recognised in other comprehensive income in respect of current year 3327 23 3350 prior year change in rate 388 Total recognised in other comprehensive income 2939 20 2959 Recognised in equity in respect of current year  318 prior year  10 change in rate Total recognised in equity  328 As at 31 December 2017 2650 1539 316 50 4455
Sharebased payments
Available for sale securities
Deferred tax assets 2650 1539 316 Deferred tax liabilities As at 31 December 2017 2650 1539 316 50 4site Company financial statements Notes to the company financial statements continued 176 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 46 Deferred tax continued
Sharebased payments
Available for sale securities
As at 1 January 2016 853 1690 37 16 2564 Recognised in profit or loss in respect of current year 473 182 137 prior year   44 change in rate 389 129 29 Total recognised in profit or loss 84 311 152 Recognised in other comprehensive income in respect of current year 7464   18 7446 prior year change in rate 1528   4 Total recognised in other comprehensive income 5936   14 5922 Recognised in equity in respect of current year  99 prior year change in rate  16 Total recognised in equity  115 As at 31 December 2016 6705 1264 189 30 8128
Sharebased payments
Available for sale securities
Deferred tax assets 6705 1264 189 Deferred tax liabilities    30 30 As at 31 December 2016 6705 1264 189 30 8128 47 Trade and other payables Trade creditors 355 Accruals deferred income and other creditors 64672 Amounts owed to group undertakings 230 Other taxes and social security costs 7761 The fair value of trade and other payables is not materially different from their carrying amount.
48 Provisions for liabilities and charges
Deferred and contingent consideration in business combinations
Total
As at 1 January 2016 9001 3908 Charged to profit or loss Other movements 7820 3 Utilisedpaid during the year 6611 2775 As at 31 December 2016 10210 1136 Charged to profit or loss Other movements 2743 84 Utilisedpaid during the year 4883 5589 10472 As at 31 December 2017 8070 1220 Payable within 1 year 4768 Payable after 1 year 3302 1220 8070 1220 Deferred variable costs to acquire client relationship intangible s of 2743000 arose during the year in relation to deferre d payments to investment managers and third parties linked to the value of client funds introduced 2016 7820000.
Deferred and contingent consideration of 1220000 2016 1136000 is the present value of amounts payable at the end of 20 19 in respect of the acquisition of Vision Independent Financial Planning and Castle Investment Solutions.
Propertyrelated provisions of 1 3639000 relate to dila pidation and onerous lease provisions expected to arise on leasehold p remises held by the company 2016 2705000.
Dilapidation provisions are calculated using a discounted cash flow model during the year provisions have decreased by 544000 2016 increased by 964000 due to the utilisation of the dilapidation provision held for surplus property at 1 Curzon Street during the year.
Provisions payable after one year are expect ed to be settled within two years of the balance sheet date 2016 three years except for the propertyrelated provisions of 7845000 2016 1413000.
These are expected to be settled within 19 years of the balance s heet date 2016 20 years.
49 Longterm employee benefits Details of the defined benefit pension schemes operated by the co mpany are provided in note 27 to the consolidated financial st atements.
50 Share capital own shares and sharebased payments Details of the share capital of the company and ordinary shares held by the company together with changes thereto are provided in notes 28 and 29 to the consolidated financial statements.
Details of options on the companys shares and sharebased payments are set out in note 30 to the consolidated financial statements.
Company financial statements Notes to the company financial statements continued 178 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 51 Financial instruments The companys risk management policies and procedures are integrated with the wider Rathbones groups risk management process.
The
Rathbones group has identified the risks arising from all of its activities including those of the company and has established policies and procedures to manage these items in accordance with its risk appetite.
The company categorises its financial risks into the following primary areas i credit risk ii liquidity risk iii market risk which includes fair value interest rate risk cash flow interest rate risk foreign exchange risk and price risk and iv pension risk.
The companys exposures to pension risk are set out in note 27 to the consolidated financial statements.
The sections below outline the group risk appetite as applicable to the company and explain how the company defines and manag es each category of financial risk.
The companys financial risk management policies are designed to identify and analyse the financial risks that the company face s to set appropriate risk tolerances limits and controls and to monitor the financial risks and adherence to limits by means of reliabl e and upto date information systems.
The company regularly reviews its financ ial risk management policies an d systems to reflect changes i n the business and the wider industry.
The companys overall strategy and policies for monitoring and management of financial risk are set by the board of directors  the board.
The board has embedded risk management within the business through the executive committee and senior management.
The company takes on exposure to credit risk which is the risk that a counterparty will be unable to pay amounts in full when due through its trading activities.
The principal sources of credit risk arise from depositing funds with banks and through providi ng long term and working capital financing for subsidiaries.
The companys financial assets are categorised as follows Trade and other receivables Trade and other receivables relate to amounts placed with subsid iaries loans provided to subsidiaries and derivative financial instruments.
The collection and ageing of trade and other receivables are reviewed on a periodic basis by management.
Impairment provisions are made for any debts which are consider ed to be doubtful for collection.
The company places surplus funds with its banking subsidiary which operates under the groups credit risk management policies.
Group policy requires that funds are placed with a range of highquality financial institutions.
Investments are spread to avoid exce ssive exposure to any individual counterparty.
For the purposes of financial reporting the company categorises it s exposures based on the long term ratings awarded to counter parties by Fitch or Moodys.
Cash and cash equivalents balances at banks The company has exposure to financial institutions through its bank deposits reported within cash equivalents.
Impairment and provisioning policies Impairment provisions are recognised for financial reporting purposes only for losses that have been incurred at the balance sh eet date based on objective evid ence of impairment.
All credit exposures are reviewed individually at least annually or more regularly when individual circumstances require.
Impairment
No impairment losses arose during the year or in 2016.
Maximum exposure to credit risk Other investments money market funds 10002 Trade and other receivables amounts owed by group undertakings 110194 other financial assets 7500 Balances at banks The above table represents the gross credit risk exposure of the company at 31 December 2017 and 2016 without taking account o f any collateral held or other credit enhancements attached.
Amounts owed by group undertakings do not have specific repayment dates and are paid down periodically as trading requires.
Trade and other receivables Trade and other receivables are summarised as follows Neither past due nor impaired 110194
Gross carrying value 110194 Less allowance for impairment Net carrying value 110194 Balances at banks All balances at banks were neither past due nor impaired.
The credit quality of these balances is analysed below by reference t o the long term credit rating awarded by Fitch or equivalent rating by Moodys as at the balance sheet date.
A 5733 Other 1667 Cash held within the Employee Benefit Trust Debt securities The table below presents an analysis of debt securities by rating agency designation as at 31 December 2017 based on Fitch o r Moodys long term rating designation.
2017 2016
Total
Money market funds
AAA 10000 10000 10site Company financial statements Notes to the company financial statements continued 180 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 51 Financial instruments continued i Credit risk continued Concentration of credit risk The company has counterparty credit risk within its balances at banks in that the principal exposure is to its banking subsidia ry.
The board sets and monitors the group policy for the management of group funds which include the placement of funds with a range of high quality financial institutions.
The following table analyses the companys credit exposures at their carrying amounts by geographical region as at the balanc e sheet date.
In this analysis exposures are categorised base d on the country of domicile of the counterparty.
At 31 December 2017
Kingdom
Rest of the world
Other investments money market funds 10000 Trade and other receivables amounts owed by group undertakings 109906 288 other financial assets 1196 439 Balances at banks 128502 727 At 31 December 2016
Kingdom
Rest of the world
Other investments money market funds 10000 Trade and other receivables amounts owed by group undertakings 127236 238 other financial assets 658 443 Balances at banks 144106 681 At 31 December 2017 all rest of the world exposures were to counterparties based in Jersey and the United States of America 2016 Jersey and the United States of America.
At 31 December 2017 the company had no exposure to sovereign debt 2016 none .
The companys credit exposures at the balance sheet date analysed by the primary industry sectors in which our counterparties operate were At 31 December 2017
Clients and other corporates
Other investments money market funds 10000 Trade and other receivables amounts owed by group undertakings 82131 28063 other financial assets 2 1633 Balances at banks 99533 29696 At 31 December 2016
Clients and other corporates
Other investments money market funds 10000 Trade and other receivables amounts owed by group undertakings 103126 24348 other financial assets 2 1099 Balances at banks 119340 25447 144site 181 ii Liquidity risk Liquidity risk is the risk that the company will encounter difficulty in meeting obligations associated with financial liabilit ies that are settled by delivering cash or another financial asset.
The company places its funds in short term or demand facilities with financial i nstitutions to ensure liquidity.
The company has no bank loans 2016 nil  and does not rely on extern al funding for its activities.
Nonderivative cash flows The table below presents the undiscounted cash flows receivable and payable by the company on its nonderivative financial asse ts and liabilities by remaining contractual ma turities at the balance sheet date.
At 31 December 2017
Not more than 3 months After 3 months but not more than 1 year After 1 year but not more than 5 years After 5 years No fixed maturity date
Other investments money market funds 10002 Trade and other receivables amounts owed by group undertakings 110194 other financial assets 7 600 639 3435 2819 Balances at banks Cash flows arising from financial assets 127359 600 883 3435 2819 Trade and other payables amounts owed to group undertakings 230 other financial liabilities 244 42858 3404 37746 5873 Cash flows arising from financial liabilities 474 42858 3404 37746 5873 Net liquidity gap 126885 42258 2521 34311 3054 Cumulative net liquidity gap 126885 84627 82106 47795 44741 44site Company financial statements Notes to the company financial statements continued 182 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 51 Financial instruments continued ii Liquidity risk continued Nonderivative cash flows continued At 31 December 2016
Not more than 3 months After 3 months but not more than 1 year After 1 year but not more than 5 years After 5 years No fixed maturity date
Other investments money market funds 10002 Trade and other receivables amounts owed by group undertakings 127474 other financial assets tel Balances at banks Cash flows arising from financial assets 14345tel Trade and other payables other financial liabilities 226 29794 3722 26718 3364 Cash flows arising from financial liabilities 226 29794 3722 26718 3364 Net liquidity gap 143226 29365 3161 26357 3364 Cumulative net liquidity gap 143226 113861 110700 84343 80979 80979 Included within trade and other pa yables disclosed above are balances that are repayable on demand or that do not have a contractual maturity date which historical experience shows are unlikely to be called in the short term.
Included within other financial liabilities disclosed above are cash flows for lease payments under the companys agreement for leased space at 1 Curzon Street.
These contractual payments comprise part of the onerous lease provision for that property see note 2 5.
The company holds 2565000 of equity inve stments 2016 1864000 which are subject to liquidity risk but are not included in the table above.
These assets are held as available for sale securities and have no fixed maturity date cash flows arise from receipt of dividends or through sale of the assets.
Offbalance sheet items Cash flows arising from the companys offbalance sheet financial liabilities arise solely from operating leases note 53 and are summarised in the table below.
Future minimum lease payments under noncancellable operating leases are reported by their contractual payment dates.
Operating lease commitments Not more than 3 months After 3 months but not more than 1 year After 1 year but not more than 5 years After 5 years
At 31 December 2017 658 3651 27973 57002 At 31 December 2016 1426 4362 38487 68681 112site 183 Total liquidity requirement At 31 December 2017
Not more than 3 months After 3 months but not more than 1 year After 1 year but not more than 5 years After 5 years
Cash flows arising from financial liabilities 474 42858 3404 37746 Total offbalance sheet items  658 3651 27973 Total liquidity requirement 474 43516 7055 65719 At 31 December 2016
Not more than 3 months After 3 months but not more than 1 year After 1 year but not more than 5 years After 5 years
Cash flows arising from financial liabilities 226 29794 3722 26718 Total offbalance sheet items  1426 4362 38487 Total liquidity requirement 226 31220 8084 65205 iii Market risk Interest rate risk Cash flow interest rate risk is the risk that the future cash flows of a financial instrument will fluctuate because of changes in market interest rates.
Fair value interest rate risk is the risk that the value of a financial instrument will fluctuate because of ch anges in market interest rates.
The companys principal exposure to cash fl ow interest rate risk arises from the mismatch between the repricing of its financia l assets and liabilities.
The table below shows the repricing profile of the companys financial assets and liabilities stated at their carrying amounts  categorised by the earlier of contractual repricing or maturity dates.
At 31 December 2017 Not more than 3 months After 3 months but not more than 6 months After 6 months but not more than 1 year After 1 year but not more than 5 years
5 years
Total
Assets
Other investments equity securities money market funds 10000 Trade and other receivables amounts owed by group undertakings other financial assets Balances at banks Total financial assets 17150
Trade and other payables amounts owed to group undertakings other financial liabilities Total financial liabilities Interest rate repricing gap 17150 61site Company financial statements Notes to the company financial statements continued 184 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 51 Financial instruments continued iii.
Market risk continued Interest rate risk continued At 31 December 2016 Not more than 3 months After 3 months but not more than 6 months After 6 months but not more than 1 year After 1 year but not more than 5 years
5 years
Total
Assets
Other investments equity securities money market funds 10000 Trade and other receivables amounts owed by group undertakings other financial assets Balances at banks Total financial assets 16206
Trade and other payables other financial liabilities Total financial liabilities Interest rate repricing gap 16206 A 1% parallel increasedecrease in the sterli ng yield curve would have no impact on profit after tax or equity 2016 no impact .
Foreign exchange risk The company does not have any material exposure to transactional foreign exchange risk.
The tabl e below summarises the company s exposure to foreign currency translation risk at 31 December 2017.
Included in the table are the companys financial assets and liabilities at carrying amounts ca tegorised by currency.
At 31 December 2017
US dollar
Total
Assets
Other investments equity securities 2565 money market funds 10000 Trade and other receivables amounts owed by group undertakings 110194 other financial assets 1383 252 Balances at banks Total financial assets 131542 252
Trade and other payables amounts owed to group undertakings 230 other financial liabilities 70520 Total financial liabilities 70750 Net onbalance sheet position 60792 252 61site 185 At 31 December 2016
US dollar
Total
Assets
Other investments equity securities 1864 money market funds 10000 Trade and other receivables amounts owed by group undertakings 127474 other financial assets 841 260 Balances at banks Total financial assets 146391 260
Trade and other payables other financial liabilities 54224 Total financial liabilities 54224 Net onbalance sheet position 92167 260 A 10% weakening of the US dollar against sterling occurring on 31 December 2017 would have reduced equity and profit after ta x by 20000 2016 21000.
A 10% strengthening of the US dollar woul d have had an equal and opposite effect.
This analysis assume s that all other variables in particular other exchange rates remain constant.
Price risk The groups exposure to price risk all of which is through the companys holdings of equity in vestment securities is describe d in note 31.
Fair values The table below analyses financial instruments measured at fair value into a fair value hierarchy based on the valuation techni que used to determine the fair value.
Level 1 quoted prices unadjusted in active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
Level 2 inputs other than quoted prices included within level 1 that are observable for the asset or liability either directl y or indirectly.
Level 3 inputs for the asset or liability that are not based on observable market data.
At 31 December 2017 Level 1 Level 2 Level 3
Assets
Available for sale securities equity securities 2565 money market funds  10000 2565 10000 At 31 December 2016 Level 1 Level 2 Level 3
Assets
Available for sale securities equity securities 1864 money market funds  10000 1864 10000 The company recognises transfers between levels of the fair value hierarchy at the end of the reporting period during which the change has occurred.
There have been no transfers between levels during the year 2016 none.
Details of the methods and assumptions used to determine the fair values of the financial assets in the above table along with how reasonably possible changes to the assumptions affect these fair values are provided in note 31 to the consolidated financial statements.
The fair values of the companys financial assets and liabilities are not materially different from their carrying values with the exception of equity investments in subsidiaries which are carried at historical cost note 43.
Company financial statements Notes to the company financial statements continued 186 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 52 Capital management The companys objectives when managing capital are to safeguard the companys ability to continue as a going concern so that it can continue to provide returns for shareholders and benefits for other stakeholders and maintain a strong capital base to support the developmen t of its business.
For monitoring purposes the company defines capital as distributa ble reserves see note 42.
The company monitors the level of distributable reserves on a monthl y basis and compares this to forecast dividends.
Capital is distributed to the company from operating subsidiaries on a timely basis to ensure sufficient capital is maintained.
The board of directors considers the level of capital held in relation to forecast performance dividend payments and wider plans for the business although formal quantitative targets are not set.
There were no changes in the companys approach to capital management during the year.
53 Contingent liabilities and commitments The group leases various offices and other assets under noncancellable operating lease agreements.
The leases have varying ter ms and renewal rights.
At 31 December 2017 the companys agreements to lease space at 8 Finsbury Circus had remaining lease terms of 15 years total payments due over this period are 75946000.
The leases provide for rent reviews every five years.
Payments under noncancellable operating leases No later than 1 year 4310 Later than 1 year and no later than 5 years 27973 Later than 5 years 57002 The above table excludes total lease payments of 18124000 at 31 December 2017 under the companys agreement for leased spac e at 1 Curzon Street as these payments are included as part of the cash flows that comprise the oner ous lease provision for that property see note 25.
These cash flows have been included in Other financial liabilities in note 51.
54 Related party transactions Transactions with key management personnel The remuneration of the key management personnel of the company who are defined as the companys directors and other members o f senior management who are responsible for planning directing and controlling the activities of the company is set out below.
Short term employee benefits 1569 Postemployment benefits Sharebased payments 602 Dividends totalling 408000 were paid in the year 2016 302000 in respect of ordinary shares held by key management person nel and their close family members.
All amounts outstanding with related parties are unsecured and will be settled in cash.
No guarantees have been given or receiv ed.
No provisions have been made for doubtful debts in respect of the amounts owed by related parties.
Other related party transactions During the year the company entered into the following transactions with its subsidiaries 2017 2016
Payable
Receivable
Payable
Interest
Charges for management services 152708 Dividends received 48000 The companys balances with fellow group companies at 31 December 2017 are set out in notes 45 and 47.
The companys transactions with the pension funds are described in note 49.
At 31 December 2017 no amounts were due from the pension schemes 2016 nil.
All transactions and outstanding balances with fellow group companies are priced on an arms length basis and are to be settled in cash.
None of the balances are secured and no provisions have been made for doubtful debts for any amounts due from fellow group companies.
55 Cash and cash equivalents For the purposes of the company statement of cash flows cash and cash equivalents comprise the following balances with less th an three months until maturity from the date of acquisition Cash at bank excluding amounts held at employee benefit trust A reconciliation of the movements of liabilities to cash flows arising from financing activities is provided in note 36 to the consolidated financial statements.
56 Events after the balance sheet date On 1 January 2018 the company transferred 100% of its equity holding in Castle Investment Solutions to Vision Independent Fina ncial Planning a 100% owned subsidiary undertaking in a shareforshare exchange see note 43.
Company financial statements Further information 188 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 Five year record Underlying operating income 286049 251283 229178 200803 176409 Underlying profit before tax 87520 74880 70365 61556 50510 Profit before tax 58901 50129 58632 45710 44204 Profit after tax 46829 38157 46371 35678 34751 Equity dividends paid and proposed 30429 28267 26305 24863 22645 Basic earnings per share 92.7p 78.9p 97.4p 76.0p 76.1p Diluted earnings per share 91.9p 78.2p 96.6p 75.4p 75.6p Underlying earnings per share 138.8p 122.1p 117.0p 102.4p 86.7p Dividends per ordinary share 61.0p 57.0p 55.0p 52.0p 49.0p Equity shareholders funds 363278 324813 300192 271271 251000 Total funds under management 39.1bn 34.2bn 29.2bn 27.2bn 22.0bn Corporate information Investment Management Unit Trusts Principal trading names Rathbone Investment Management Rathbone Investment Management International Rathbone Greenbank Investments Rathbone Trust Company Rathbone Trust Legal Services Vision Independent Financial Planning Castle Investment Solutions Rathbone Unit Trust Management Direct employees 826 28 Offices 16 1 Websites site site site site site Company secretary and registered office Registrars and transfer office A Johnson Rathbone Brothers Plc 8 Finsbury Circus
EC2M 7AZ
Aspect House Spencer Road
West Sussex BN99 6DA Company No. ali.
188 Rathbone Brothers Plc Report and accounts 2017 Our offices It is important to us that all materials used in the production of this document are environmentally sustainable.
The paper is FSC certified and contains 75% recycled fibre and 25% virgin fibre from sustainable sources.
Once you have finished with this report please recycle it.
Head office 8 Finsbury Circus
EC2M 7AZtelInvestment
8 Finsbury Circus
EC2M 7AZtel1 Albert Street
AB25 1XX 44 0telTemple Point 1 Temple Row
B2 5LG 44 0tel 10 Queen Square
BS1 4NT 44 0tel North Wing City House 126  130 Hills Road
CB2 1RE 44 0tel1 Northgate
West Sussex PO19 1AT 44 0tel28 St Andrew Square
EH2 1AF 44 0tel The Senate Southernhay Gardens
EX1 1UG 44 0telVision House Unit 6A Falmouth Business Park Bickland Water Road
Cornwall
TR11 4SZtel The Athenaeum 8 Nelson Mandela Place
G2 1BT 44 0tel 26 Esplanade St Helier
JE1 2RB Channel Islandstel The Stables Levens Hall
Cumbria
LA8 0PB 44 0telPort of Liverpool Building Pier Head
L3 1NW 44 0tel 48 High Street
SO41 9AG 44 0telEarl Grey House 75  85 Grey Street Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 6EF 44 0tel Fiennes House 32 Southgate Street
SO23 9EH 44 0telUnit Trusts 8 Finsbury Circus
