APGAR1728.03.18COVERARTWORK APGAR1728.03.18COVERARTWORK THE GLOBAL NATURAL RESOURCES ROYALT Y COMPANY 2017 ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS Anglo Pacific Group PLC THE GLOBAL NATURAL RESOURCES ROYALTY COMPANY A N N U A L R E P O R T and A C C O U N T S Anglo Pacific Group PLC A N G L O P A C I F I C G R O U P P L C 1 Savile Row London W1S 3JR United Kingdom email site APGAR1728.03.18COVERARTWORK APGAR1728.03.18COVERARTWORK Printed in the UK by CPI Colour on Amadeus Primo Silk FSC certified paper.
Amadeus Primo Silk is certified FSC is made using ECF pulp and manufactured according to ISO 9001 and ISO 14001.
Designed and produced by Boone site C O NTE NT S 01 GROUP OVERVIEW A n g l o P a c i fi c a t g l a n c e M i n i n g r o y a l t i e s e x p l a i n e d O ur por t f o li o C h air m ans s t a t e m e n t 08 STRATEGIC REPORT C h i e f E x e c u t i v e O ffi c e r s s t a t e m e n t M a r k e t o v e r v i e w O u r b u s i n e s s m o d e l O u r s t r a t e g y N e w r o y a l t y a c q u i s i t i o n P r in c ip al r i s k s and un c e r t ain t ie s Ke y pe r f or m an c e indic a tor s B u s i n e s s r e v i e w F i n a n c i a l r e v i e w C or por a t e s oc i al r e s pon s ib ili t y 44 GOVERNANCE C or por a t e g o v e r n an c e r e por t T h e B o a r d N omin a t i on C om mi t t e e A udi t C om mi t t e e R e m un e r a t i on C om mi t t e e D ir e c tor s  r e m un e r a t i on r e por t D ir e c tor s  r e por t S t a t e m e n t o f D ir e c tor s  r e s pon s ib ili t ie s 69 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS I nd e pe nd e n t audi tor s r e por t C o n s o l i d a t e d i n c o m e s t a t e m e n t C o n s o l i d a t e d s t a t e m e n t o f c o m p r e h e n s i v e i n c o m e C o n s o l i d a t e d a n d C o m p a n y b a l a n c e s h e e t s C o n s o l i d a t e d s t a t e m e n t o f c h a n g e s i n e q u i t y C o m p a n y s t a t e m e n t o f c h a n g e s i n e q u i t y C o n s o l i d a t e d s t a t e m e n t o f c a s h fl o w s a n d C o m p a n y s t a t e m e n t o f c a s h fl o w s N o t e s t o t h e c o n s o l i d a t e d fi n a n c i a l s t a t e m e n t s 11 9 O TH E R I NF O R M A TIO N Sh a r eh o l der s t a t i s t i c s C or por a t e d e t ail s For war d  l o ok in g s t a t e m e n t s Throughout this report a number of financial measures are used to assess the Groups performance.
The measures are defined as follows Operating profitloss O perat ing profi t   los s repre s ent s t he G roup s under l y ing operat ing per f or mance f rom it s royalt y int ere s t s .
O perat ing pr ofit   lo ss is r oyalt y income less amor tisation o f r oyalties and operat ing ex pens e s and exclude s impair ment s revaluat ions an d g a i n   lo s s o n dis po s als .
O pe r at i ng pr ofit   lo s s r e co ncil e s t o operat ing profi t   los s bef ore impair ment s revaluat ions and gain   los s e s on dis pos als on t he income s t at ement .
Adjusted earnings per share Adjus t ed earnings r epr esen t s the Gr oup s underlying operating p e r fo r m a n c e f ro m co re a c t i v i t i e s .
A d j us te d e a r n i n g s is t h e p rofi t   l os s at t r i b u t a b l e t o e q u i t y h o l d e r s l e s s a l l v a l u at i o n movement s and non  c as h impair ment s amor t is at ion charge s s hare base d pay ment s fi nance cos t s any as sociat e d defer re d t a x and any profi t or los s on non  core as s et dis pos als .
Adjus t e d ear nings di v ide d by t he weight e d average number of s hare s in is sue gi ve s adjus t e d ear nings per s hare .
Refer t o note 11 to t he fi nancial s t at ement s f or adjus t e d ear nings   los s per s hare .
Dividend cover D i v idend cover is c alculat e d as t he number of t ime s adjus t e d ear nings per s hare exce e ds t he di v idend per s hare .
Refer t o note 12 t o t he fi nancial s t at ement s f or di v idend cover .
Free cash flow per share F re e c as h fl ow p e r s h a re is c a l c u l ate d by d i v i d i n g n et c as h ge n e r ate d f ro m o p e r at i n g a c t i v i t i e s p l us p ro c e e ds f ro m t h e dis pos al of non  core as s et s and any c as h considere d as repay ment of pr incipal le s s fi nance cos t s by t he weight e d average number of s hare s in is sue .
Refer t o note 33 t o t he fi nancial s t at ement s f or f re e c as h flow per s hare .
PERF ORMANCE ME ASURES FOR MORE INFO V ISIT site Anglo Pacific Group PLC Anglo Pacific the Company or the Group is the only listed company on the London Stock Exchange focused on royalties connected with the mining of natural resources.
Our strategy is to build a diversified portfolio of royalties and metal streams focusing on accelerating income growth through acquiring royalties in cash or nearterm cash producing assets.
It is an objective of the Company to pay a substantial portion of these royalties and metal streams to shareholders as dividends.
GR O U P O V E RV I E W OUR AIM IS TO DEVELOP AS THE LEADING INTERNATIONAL DIVERSIFIED ROYALTY COMPANY WITH A PORTFOLIO CENTRED ON BASE METALS AND BULK MATERIALS HOW W E A RE ACHIEV ING OUR STR ATEGY  PAGES 14 TO 17 FOR MOR E INFO V ISIT site GROUP OVERVIEW STRATEGIC REPORT
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION 01 ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 APGAR1728.03.18FRONTARTWORK GR O U P O V E RV I E W ANGLO PACIFIC AT A GLANCE SHAREHOLDER RE T URNS KE Y HIGHLIGHT S 20 17 Dividend per share p Primary listing London Stock Exchange Secondary listing Toronto Stock Exchange Assets in production by value Over 89% of our portfolio by value across 5 commodities is in production Production potential Significant organic growth in the current portfolio from Kestrel Narrabri and
Global royalty assets 12 principal royalty and streaming related assets across 5 continents MORE DETA ILS ON PAGE 24 KP Is Royalty assets acquired m Adjusted earnings per share p Royalty income m Dividend cover x 90% ROYALTY INCOME INCREASED 90% IN THE YEAR NET ASSETS AT DECEMBER 31 2017 PROFIT AFTER TAX FOR THE YEARtelteltelteltel Free cash flow per share p elteltel 2014 2013 eltel FTSE 350 Mining Index vs.
Anglo Pacific Group 20132017 Rebased to 100 F T S E 3 5 0 Min in g In de x Anglo Pacific Group NGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 APGAR1728.03.18FRONTARTWORK Commodity exposure by asset value at December 31 2017 Reduction in coking coal exposure with 51.2% of the portfolio now noncoking coal Geographic exposure by asset value at December 31 2017 98.4% of the portfolio is in established natural resources jurisdictions Stage of production by asset value at December 31 2017 89.3% of the portfolio is producing royalties A mining royalty is a nonoperating interest in a mining project that provides the royalty holder with the right to a proportion of revenue profit or production.
Historically royalties originated as a result of the sale of a mineral property allowing the seller to retain some ongoing economic participation in the property.
However an increasing number of royalties are now created directly by operators and developers as a source of finance.
A royalty holder is not generally obligated to contribute towards operating or capital costs nor environmental or reclamation liabilities.
TYPES OF ROYALTIES The Groups royalties are mostly revenue or productionbased royalties.
Typically these royalties are either Gross Revenue royalties or Net Smelter Return royalties each of which can be described as follows GRR  GROSS REVENUE ROYALTY A GRR entitles the royalty holder to a fixed portion of the gross revenues generated from the sales of mineral production from a property.
In calculating a GRR payment deductions if any applied by the property owner to reduce the royalty payment are usually minimal and GRRs are therefore the simplest form of royalty to account for and implement.
NSR  NET SMELTER RETURN ROYALTY An NSR entitles the royalty holder to a fixed portion of the net revenues received from a smelter or refinery from the sales of mineral production from a property after the deduction of certain offsite realisation costs.
Typical realisation costs include those related to transportation insurance smelting and refining.
These deductions are generally higher in base metals mines due to the semifinished product such as concentrate often being produced at the mine site when compared to precious metals mines which produce a nearlyfinished product on site.
PRIMARY VERSUS SECONDARY
Primary royalties are entered into between a royalty company and the property owner directly where the property owner grants a royalty to the royalty company in return for one or more upfront cash payments from the royalty company.
In contrast secondary royalties are existing royalties that are acquired from a third party with no payment made to the owner of the underlying property.
METAL STREAMS A metal stream is an agreement that provides in exchange for an upfront payment the right to purchase all or a portion of one or more metals produced from a mine at a price determined for the life of the stream.
Streams whilst providing similar outcomes for Anglo Pacific are not royalties because they do not constitute an interest in land and there is an ongoing cash payment required to purchase the physical metal.
However a stream holder is not ordinarily required to contribute towards operating or capital costs nor environmental or reclamation liabilities.
MINING ROYALTIES E XPL AINED DIVERSIFIED POR TF OLIO OF ROYALTIES SEE THE GROUPS PORTFOLIO OF ASSETS PAGES 04 A ND 05 Coking coal 48.8% Thermal coal 20.8% Iron ore 5.3% Vanadium 6.3%
3.5%
12.6%
2.7%
75.5% Brazil 7.1% Spain 3.0% Canada 12.8%
1.6%
89.3% Development 1.8% Earlystage 8.9% 89.3% 89.3% OF THE PORTFOLIO IS PRODUCING ROYALTIES 51.2% 51.2% OF THE PORTFOLIO IS NOW NONCOKING COAL 98.4% 98.4% OF THE PORTFOLIO IS IN ESTABLISHED NATURAL RESOURCES JURISDICTIONS GROUP OVERVIEW STRATEGIC REPORT
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION 03 ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 APGAR1728.03.18FRONTARTWORK GR O U P O V E RV I E W OUR PORTFOLIO
DEVELOPMENT
EARLYSTAGE
PRINCIPAL ROYALTY AND STREAMING RELATED ASSETS OVER FIVE CONTINENTS
COMMODITY EXPOSURE Coking coal Thermal coal
Gold
Uranium
Anthracite
NickelCobalt
Chromite
Iron ore 89.3% 89.3% OF THE PORTFOLIO IS PRODUCING 98.4% 98.4% OF THE PORTFOLIO IS IN ESTABLISHED NATURAL RESOURCES JURISDICTIONS 04 ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 APGAR1728.03.18FRONTARTWORK PRODUCING ROYALTIES ROYA LT Y COMMODIT Y OPER ATOR LOC ATION ROYA LT Y R ATE BA L A NCE SHEET AND TYPE CLASSIFICATION
Coking coal Rio Tinto Australia 7  15% GRR
Narrabri Thermal and Whitehaven Australia 1% GRR Royalty PCI coal Coal intangible McClean Uranium Denison Mines Inc.
Canada Tolling revenue Loan and royalty Lake Mill AREVA  Cameco financial instrument Maracs Vanadium Largo Brazil 2% NSR Royalty
Resources intangible El Valle Gold copper
Spain 2.5  3% NSR
BoinsCarls and silver Minerals financial
Four Mile Uranium Quasar Australia 1% NSR Royalty
DE VELOPMENT ROYALTIES Salamanca Uranium Berkeley Spain 1% NSR Royalty
Groundhog Anthracite Atrum Coal Canada 1% GRR or Royalty US1.00t intangible
Nickel and Cobalt Brazilian Nickel Brazil 1% GRR
E ARLYS TAGE ROYALTIES Pilbara Iron ore BHP Billiton Australia 1.5% GRR Royalty intangible Ring of Fire Chromite Noront Resources Canada 1% NSR Royalty intangible Dugbe 1 Gold Hummingbird Liberia 2  2.5% NSR
Resources financial instrument Kestrel 7% of the value up to A100tonne 12.5% of the value over A100tonne and up to A150tonne 15% thereafter.
EVBC 2.5% escalates to 3% when the gold price is over US1100 per ounce.
Dugbe 1 2% except where both the average gold price is above US1800 per ounce and sales of gold are less than 50000 ounces in which case it increases to 2.5% in respect of that quarter.
HOW A RE OUR ASSETS PERFOR MING SEE PAGES 2536 PRINCIPAL AS SE T S % of portfolio by asset value at December 31 2017
0.3% Ring of Fire 1.7%
1.1%
1.9% Dugbe 1 1.6% Maracs Menchen 6.3%
5.3%
48.8%
20.8% Four Mile 0.7% McClean Lake Mill 10.8%
0.7% GROUP OVERVIEW STRATEGIC REPORT
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION 05 ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 APGAR1728.03.18FRONTARTWORK WE ENTER 2018 IN A STRONG FINANCIAL POSITION AND WITH AN EXCITING PIPELINE FOR GROWTH GR O U P O V E RV I E W
CHAIRMANS STATEMENT
120% OPERATING PROFIT INCREASED FROM 12.7m TO 28.4m 90% OUR ROYALTY INCOME INCREASED BY 90% FROM 19.7m TO 37.4m ADJUSTED EARNINGS PER SHARE 16.82p 2016 9.76p FREE CASH FLOW PER SHARE 23.2P 2016 7.9p BASIC AND DILUTED EARNINGS PER SHARE 5.88p 2016 15.60p 235% CASH FLOW FROM OPERATIONS This is my first report as Chairman having assumed the role after the 2017 AGM.
Undoubtedly 2017 has been a year of considerable progress for Anglo Pacific with record royalty revenue two successful transactions and an increase in the dividend whilst repaying our borrowings in full.
We enter 2018 in a strong financial position and with an exciting pipeline for growth which is the clear focus for the year ahead.
KE Y RESULT S 06 ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 APGAR1728.03.18FRONTARTWORK PERFORMANCE IN 2017 Our royalty income in 2017 increased by 90% from 19.7m to 37.4m continuing the trend of recent years and representing a record year for the Company.
This was primarily due to a significant increase in volumes from Kestrel being subject to the Groups royalty 93% in 2017 vs 67% in 2016 in addition to higher coal prices.
Commodity prices exceeded most commentators expectations at the beginning of 2017 with the average price achieved at Kestrel being some 30% higher than the previous year.
Thermal coal and vanadium prices were also strong which contributed to the Groups record performance.
We have also enjoyed income from the Denison investment for the first time.
The higher commodity prices and revenues during 2017 translated directly into higher profits and cash generation.
Operating profit increased to 28.4m from 12.7m in 2016.
Operating costs also increased in the period due to a combination of higher staff costs and a greater level of investment in business development as we target a higher rate of growth in the coming year.
Our results were as usual impacted by a number of revaluation adjustments which led to overall profit before tax being 11.8m compared to 28.3m in 2016 the decline being driven in the main by the valuation of the Kestrel royalty.
Basic and diluted earnings per share were 5.88p compared with 15.60p in 2016.
Stripping out these noncash items we present an adjusted earnings measure refer to note 11 to the accounts which we believe more closely reflects the performance within managements control.
On this basis adjusted earnings per share were 16.82p 2016 9.76p.
DIVIDENDS
In light of the strong results in 2017 and the strength of our dividend cover the Board has recommended that the final dividend be increased by 1p per share subject to approval by shareholders at the 2018 AGM which will result in an overall dividend for the year of 7p per share.
We have also increased the level of the interim dividend payments from 1.5p to 1.625p which will be reflected in the Q1 2018 dividend.
We believe that these levels strike the right balance between offering shareholders an attractive dividend yield and retaining sufficient resources to drive the growth strategy.
FOCUS FOR 2018 Given the strong financial position that we now enjoy and the positive outlook for the sector we are focused on accelerating the growth of our asset base in the coming years.
We wish to increase the diversity of our portfolio such that it includes a wider range of commodities and assets thereby reducing the percentage of our income coming from coal and Kestrel in particular.
We have also announced a desire to build a meaningful presence in commodities which are focused on the growing electric vehicle market where we see great potential.
Our investment in 2017 in the Piau nickel project is an example of this focus combined with our strategy of looking to add preproduction royalties which will offer high return potential over the years.
Our principal objective however remains the acquisition of producing or near production royalty and streaming assets.
The team continues to be very disciplined in ensuring that acquisitions are of the highest quality in terms of project characteristics both technically and commercially and that we design transaction structures to optimise risk management.
CORPORATE CULTURE AND GOVERNANCE Anglo Pacific seeks to maintain the highest standards in all areas of its business.
I believe this starts at the top.
We broadened the agenda at our annual strategy day in 2017 to include sessions on strategy including corporate social responsibility risk and board effectiveness.
These sessions were primarily facilitated by industry experts who brought an objective and impartial insight as to how the Board approaches these areas in executing its strategy.
Whilst we acknowledge that we are not directly responsible for the operation of many of the underlying assets in our portfolio we are committed to making the pursuit of best practice in environmental social and community human rights health and safety and diversity matters a high priority.
BOARD
We were disappointed to announce in February 2018 that Rachel Rhodes had decided not to put herself forward for reelection at the forthcoming AGM due to the everincreasing time commitments of her other roles.
Rachel has played an enormous part in the success of the Company over the past few years and we will miss her valuable sector insights and views.
We have commenced the process to find a suitable replacement.
Mike Blyth has assumed the role of chair of the audit committee.
Since taking over from Mike Blyth as Chairman at the 2017 AGM I have been actively seeking to help drive the growth of the business on which the whole team is focused.
The other Directors bring different skills to the table and I believe enable the Board to operate effectively with appropriate diversity of approach whilst operating the various Board Committees with the independence expected of us as a listed company on the London Stock Exchange.
I am indebted to Mike Blyth for his efforts during his tenure as Chairman to ensure we have robust corporate governance structures and culture in place.
I am delighted that he has agreed to continue as a Director such that we may still benefit from his wise counsel.
OUR STRATEGIC REPORT Our 2017 Strategic Report from pages 08 to 43 was reviewed and approved by the Board on March 27 2018.
OUTLOOK
2018 should be a year of continued growth for Anglo Pacific as production at our key assets continues to demonstrate strength and as new assets make their contribution.
Much however will depend on how prices move during the year.
In addition as confidence returns to the mining sector fresh opportunities will arise.
We have shown our ability to be innovative and imaginative in our approach to the Denison and Piaui opportunities and believe that such an approach will continue to bear fruit in the year ahead.
In conclusion I should like to thank all Directors and the entire executive team led by Julian Treger for their continued diligence and hard work during the year.
On behalf of the Board
MEIER
Chairman
March 27 2018 HOW W E A RE ACHIEV ING OUR STR ATEGY  PAGES 14 TO 17 GROUP OVERVIEW STRATEGIC REPORT
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION 07 ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 APGAR1728.03.18FRONTARTWORK S TR A TE G I C R E P O R T CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICERS STATEMENT The business review on pages 25 to 36 and the finance review on pages 37 to 41 will provide the detail behind the significant increase in our KPIs during the year and a review of the performance and progress at the underlying operations over which we have royalties.
As such the following is my summary on the market our focus for the year and some comments on the dividend.
MARKET OUTLOOK The recovery of the mining sector has continued over the past year with prices generally rising.
Despite being clearly in the upward phase of the cycle there is still a good window for Anglo Pacific to make investments which will provide good returns in the coming years and we intend to take advantage of this opportunity.
Fortunately our area of focus is also one of the most promising for commodity investment.
The world is finally for the first time in a decade in a moment of coordinated global growth.
The beneficiary of this will be the base and bulk materials which we specialise in and where demand is driven by GDP growth.
Even more positively the developments in new technologies such as electric vehicles and improved battery storage should create significant incremental demand for associated materials.
In contrast to this positive demand picture the supply side can be expected to be constrained for a number of years first by the general lack of investment in new mines over the past five years but also by the continued relative scarcity of finance for new projects even today.
The result should be an extenuated cycle longer than the previous one where Anglo Pacific as a supplier of scarce capital to the sector should be able to capture enhanced returns.
Within this context we will continue to focus on base commodities like copper nickel and zinc where we see visible industrial demand and deficits which could be increased by new technologies.
We will also focus on alloys which can be used for light weighting and more specialised commodities such as vanadium which we already have exposure to and where we believe demand will outstrip supply.
Opportunistically we will look at bulks where we believe the price and risk equation is attractive.
In contrast we believe many commodities are already in the upper range of their pricing and have more downside risk than upside and we will be avoiding them.
This includes gold which though a beneficiary of inflation may underperform in a situation where cryptocurrency alternative abounds and interest rates increase holding costs.
In addition materials such as lithium are temporarily in short supply but we will need to model opportunities very conservatively for longer term investment given longerterm supply prospects.
THE FOCUS FOR THE YEAR AHEAD IS FIRMLY ON GROWING AND DIVERSIFYING THE
Anglo Pacific delivered on its guidance during the year.
Including the cash received from our Denison investment our income more than doubled the third consecutive year in which it has done so.
With less organic revenue growth expected in 2018 the focus for the year ahead is firmly on growing and diversifying the portfolio.
With a strong balance sheet and improved market fundamentals we believe we are well placed to deliver innovative and accretive transactions in the year ahead.
HOW A RE OUR ASSETS PER FOR MING SEE PAGES 2536
08 ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 COAL OUTLOOK The continuing strength of coal pricing has surprised many particularly in the U. ex growth.
In fact coal consumption continues to increase in absolute terms though coals share of the global energy mix is slowly declining.
Demand for energy coal particularly in the East is being fuelled by higher demand for grid power from new sources like electric vehicles.
At the same time supply is being squeezed first by the Chinese restrictions on low quality product which seem to be a permanent feature of the market but also because of continued depletion of mines without any sizable investment in bringing on new capacity.
As a result we expect coal prices to be higher for longer than the market consensus which is rising already.
Within the coal complex we have always argued for longer term exposure to the higher quality less polluting material which we believe will serve to reduce pollution quicker than the impact which the gradual introduction of clean technology will achieve in the medium term.
The Chinese policy is supportive of this trend and in the market we have observed higher discounts or premia being applied to lower or higher quality products.
We are pleased that our exposure is to premium cleaner product and are comfortable with our ongoing strategy of reducing exposure to this commodity.
STR ATEGY Consistent with the above market view and our enhanced balance sheet we intend to accelerate our rate of growth in transforming Anglo Pacific into the preferred royalty vehicle for twenty first century commodities.
There is a gap in the market to be a derisked mode of providing exposure to the raw material for new technologies and Anglo Pacific as the only truly global nonprecious metals royalty company is well placed to occupy this niche.
We believe that as we continue to execute on this pivot the rating of the Company should increase.
Given our confident outlook we are also prepared at this stage of the cycle to take slightly more risk and also to invest more in growth.
We announced last year a new strategy to include development royalties as a new minor focus for our investments.
We are pleased to have executed one of these and would hope for more in the current year.
These investments should be largely funded through cash on hand.
We have also decided to consider exposure to new geographies such as South America Africa and Eastern
However we are unlikely to compound risk by investing in development opportunities in these countries instead we will focus on operating assets.
From a financing perspective with a strong balance sheet and income we will seek to fund transactions by using our cash and by leveraging our balance sheet in the first instance.
We have an undrawn revolving credit facility and believe this can be comfortably expanded whilst retaining low borrowing metrics.
Should we come across larger transformative deals we will consider other sources of finance.
DIVIDEND
Although our focus is on investing in growth at this stage of the cycle and shareholders should thus expect ongoing higher due diligence costs we will seek to balance this with continuing to pay a proportion of this growth to our shareholders in the form of progressive dividends.
We announced an overhaul in our dividend structure during 2017 which created quarterly payments reduced the period between announcement and payment by almost three months and created a flexible final quarter dividend.
This was well received by shareholders.
We put this policy into action with the recommendation subject to shareholder approval of a final dividend for the year of 2.5p per share which increased the level of total dividends for the year from 6p in 2016 to 7p for the year just gone.
We have also reset the level of the quarterly interim dividends from 1.5p to 1.625p per share meaning that the run rate for 2018 has increased from 6p to 6.5p per share with any overall increase for 2018 being reserved for the final quarter.
As such and on a cash basis shareholders will actually receive 7.375p per share in the next 12 months.
We believe this dividend policy strikes the right balance at this stage of the cycle between returns to shareholders and investing in growth.
OUTLOOK
We enter 2018 in a position of strength having enjoyed a record 2017.
Strong earnings have translated directly into cash flow we are debt free and see many opportunities in what is still a capital constrained sector.
We expect to generate significant cash as commodity prices continue to remain at much higher levels than anticipated even just 12 months ago.
With less organic revenue growth anticipated in 2018 our focus is to accelerate the growth of our asset base by acquiring royalties which provide immediate cash flow or the potential to deliver significant growth over the longer term.
J.
TREGER
Chief Executive Officer
March 27 2018
GROUP OVERVIEW STRATEGIC REPORT
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION 09 ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 2017 was a year of continued improvement of performance and sentiment in the mining sector.
This trend is forecast to carry through to 2018 with miners having returned to financial stability and regained a positive growth outlook.
Additionally battery related materials particularly vanadium cobalt lithium nickel and graphite were amongst the top performing commodities during 2017 due to expectations of strong energy storage and electric vehicle demand growth in the coming years.
2017 WAS A YEAR OF CONTINUED IMPROVEMENT OF PERFORMANCE AND SENTIMENT IN THE MINING SECTOR S TR A TE G I C R E P O R T MARKET OVERVIEW COMMODIT Y PRICES at December 31 2017 Coking coal USt Dec 16 Apr 17 Aug 17 Dec 17 Dec 16 Apr 17 Aug 17 Dec 17 Gold USozteltel Dec 16 Apr 17 Aug 17 Dec 17 Vanadium USkg Thermal coal USt Dec 16 Apr 17 Aug 17 Dec 1tel500 Dec 16 Apr 17 Aug 17 Dec 17 Cobalt USt Dec 16 Apr 17 Aug 17 Dec 17 Copper USt
10 ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 On the demand side better than expected economic activity in China combined with Chinese Government environmental initiatives which resulted in cutbacks in domestic Chinese processing and mining output were prominent drivers of underlying commodity prices in 2017.
Closures in iron ore mining and anticipated higher vanadium requirements in Chinese reinforcement steel were key factors behind the 75% YoY increase in the price of vanadium over the course of 2017.
Supply side constraints also played a role in dictating commodity pricing dynamics in particular coal where lower Chinese production and logistical disruptions arising from seasonal factors in particular Cyclone Debbie in April which sent coking coal prices to a year high of US314t.
Such supply side constraints were a key feature for many other commodities in 2017 including zinc which hit its highest level in a decade 32% YoY aluminium 34% YoY and lead which rose to a six year high 29% YoY.
A further theme that has supported underlying prices in certain commodities is speculation over future electric vehicle EV demand.
Copper in particular hit a threeyear high 33% YoY off the back of net long positioning in the futures market as well as supply side disruptions Escondida Grasberg and strong Chinese demand.
Cobalt also saw significant price gains 130% YoY from a combination of EV demand and long expected structural supply issues.
Stronger commodity pricing has helped strengthen balance sheets in 2017 with many of the majors choosing to increase capital return to shareholders via share buybacks and dividends.
Capital discipline remained intact across the sector as companies focused on controlling capital expenditure and minimising operational costs.
Companies largely opted to delever with an estimated 15% reduction in net debt across the sector.
MandA deal value in the sector rose to US51bn in 2017 15% YoY its highest level since 2013 despite the number of transactions falling by 6% YoY.
However portfolio realignment was a key driver of MandA related activity as diversified producers looked to divest noncore assets in favour of leaner more consolidated portfolios.
This divestment trend opened up opportunities for financial investors who were responsible for 22% of deal activity in 2017.
Private equity investors showed a preference for copper which saw 70% of investment with Africa being the most popular jurisdiction seeing 13 deals totalling US1036m 45% 2017.
The strong performances of coking and thermal coal in 2016 similarly led to large increases in deal flow with coal acquisitions growing 156% YoY and steel transactions doubling in value to US3.8bn.
Deal activity in the exploration space was also significantly more popular in 2017 with a total of 31 transactions up from six in 2016.
China continued to be a key driver of MandA activity at 28%  of value closely followed by North America which captured 25%  of deal volume and led by number of transactions.
Rising commodity prices have also had an impact on equity valuations.
In 2017 IPO and secondary market activity rose to its highest level in six years with US2.8bn and US30.7bn raised respectively.
Demand for debt instruments remained relatively unchanged despite the easing of credit conditions with US218bn raised similar to the US219bn recorded in 2016.
Convertible bonds remained less prevalent accounting for 1%  of new capital.
Alternative financing options such as mineral royalties and metal streams continue to be a popular and well supported form of raising capital especially in the mid to junior end of the mining sector.
Our view is that the availability of traditional financing such as equity for development projects or debt will remain constrained in the near term.
Anglo Pacific Group through its current focus on bulks base metal and battery material royalties and streams enjoys a financing space which is far less crowded than its precious metals focused peers and we continue to see a considerable number of new opportunities.
Looking towards 2018 we expect a continuation of the battery materials theme to drive an increasing proportion of MandA in mining and capital markets activity.
Demand for these materials is predicted by some analysts to grow exponentially due to government commitments to shift to electric vehicles and carmakers looking to lockin longerterm access to materials supply.
Whilst some investors remain wary on battery materials given price volatility lithium assets in lower political risk regions such as South America and Australia should see growing interest whilst cobalt assets outside of the Democratic Republic of Congo are likely to be of interest given the challenges posed in that country.
The DRCs heightened risk profile is driven in part by the recently revised mining code which includes increases in mining royalties the government free carry and also an excessprofits tax in addition to the redesignation of cobalt as a strategic metal.
The mining market outlook for 2018 remains broadly positive as commentators expect underlying commodity prices to remain strong balance sheets to continue improving and equity valuations to tend towards midcycle multiples.
A major driver for 2018 will be continued supplyside constraints driven in part by Chinese environmental reform initiatives which should continue to negatively impact supply.
The political backdrop in key producing and trading countries will also increasingly impact sentiment towards the sector especially as a potential trade war emerges between the US and China.
Overall volatility in 2018 should help surface attractive growth opportunities for Anglo Pacific.
EY Report Mergers acquisitions and capital raising in mining and metals  2018 Outlook
GROUP OVERVIEW STRATEGIC REPORT
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION 11 ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 S TR A TE G I C R E P O R T OUR BUSINESS MODEL CREATING VALUE FOR OUR S H AR EHOLDER S CREATING VALUE FOR OUR COUN T ER PA R T IE S Lower risk through topline revenue participation in mining companies Lower volatility through commodity and geographic diversification Exposure to increases in mineral reserves and production Exposure to commodity price upside An alternative form of financing to conventional equity which can be an expensive form of finance PRIMARY ROYALTIES Alternative form of finance to conventional debt providing greater flexibility and which does not impact on credit ratings SECONDARY ROYALTIES Source of liquidity for holders of existing royalties G E N E R A T I N G L O N G  T E R M C A SH R E T U R N S W E S E R V E A S A P A R T N E R T O T H E M I N E O P E R A T O R 12 ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 APGAR1728.03.18FRONTARTWORK HOW WE CREATE VALUE FOR OUR SHAREHOLDERS Our most recent investments Narrabri Maracs Menchen the Denison financing arrangement and Piau demonstrate by adhering to exacting investment criteria and conducting rigorous due diligence how management has created value for shareholders to date.
We will look to leverage this experience and our reputation in the market to execute our strategy over the coming years.
Generating longterm cash returns The Group is seeking to grow its portfolio of cashgenerative royalties and streams by investing in producing or nearterm producing assets with long mine lives.
Given the relatively low overhead requirements of the business the Group believes cash flow to shareholders can be maximised through economies of scale which would allow for growth in the portfolio without significantly increasing our cost base.
Lower risk through topline revenue participation in mining companies Revenuebased royalties limit the Groups direct exposure to operating or capital cost inflation of the underlying mine operations as there is no ongoing requirement for the Group to contribute to capital exploration environmental or other operating costs at mine sites.
Lower volatility through commodity and geographic diversification The Group is seeking to build a diversified portfolio of royalties across a variety of different commodities and geographic locations.
Investing in royalties across a wide spectrum of commodities and jurisdictions reduces the dependency on any one asset or location and any corresponding cyclicality.
A fully diversified portfolio can help to reduce the level of income volatility stabilising cash flows which contribute towards investment and dividend payments.
Exposure to increases in mineral reserves and production Royalty holders generally benefit from improvements made to the scale of a mining operation.
Exploration success or lower cutoff grades as a result of rising commodity prices can serve to increase economic reserves and resources.
Increased reserves will extend a mines life or facilitate an expansion of the existing operations.
Any subsequent increases in production will generally result in higher royalty payments without the requirement of the royalty holder to contribute to the cost of expanding or optimising the operation.
Exposure to commodity price upside Royalties and streams provide exposure to underlying commodity prices.
The Group expects to benefit from a rising commodity price environment with the upside feeding through to increased royalty receipts.
HOW WE CREATE VALUE FOR OUR COUNTERPARTIES An investment by Anglo Pacific after conducting thorough due diligence is seen as an endorsement of the project which can provide other stakeholders with greater confidence and possibly result in a rerating for the operator.
We serve as a partner to the mine operator Royalties and streams reduce the upfront capital required to fund the development of a project.
These are generally structured as asset or even byproduct specific often leaving the remaining assets of the operator unencumbered for raising additional finance.
An alternative form of financing to conventional equity which can be an expensive form of finance Compared to the issuance of new equity royalties and streams do not depend on the prevailing state of the capital markets but are rather the result of bilateral negotiations.
The issuance of new equity can also serve to dilute existing shareholders particularly during periods of depressed share prices.
Furthermore as royalties and streams are asset specific the reduction in the upside for existing shareholders can be limited to a certain mine or product.
PRIMARY ROYALTIES Alternative form of finance to conventional debt providing greater flexibility and which does not impact on credit ratings Royalties and streams do not typically levy interest nor do they typically require principal repayments or have a maturity date.
More importantly unlike conventional debt arrangements where interest payments tend to start immediately or are capitalised until cash payments can be made from a projects cash flow most royalties are payable only once the project comes into production and is generating sales.
In addition many forms of debt such as project finance include restrictive covenants and may require commodity price hedges to be put in place.
These are not only typically costly in terms of fees but can also limit the miners exposure to upside in the prices of their core commodities.
SECONDARY ROYALTIES Source of liquidity for holders of existing royalties The value of a royalty is realised over the duration of the mine life.
Often royalty owners may have a need to free up cash in order to recycle capital.
There is a limited secondary market for royalties and Anglo Pacific can be a source of valuable liquidity for private royalty holders.
APGAR1728.03.18FRONTARTWORK
GROUP OVERVIEW STRATEGIC REPORT
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION 13 ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 S TR A TE G I C R E P O R T OUR STRATEGY
Safe jurisdiction Longlife assets Highquality and lowcost assets Strong operational management team Diversification of royalty portfolio Production and exploration upside potential Higher returns
ROYALTIES
Nearterm production Cashflow accretive
ROYALTIES
STRATEGY
Achieving our objective through the acquisition of both primary and secondary royalties streams
Continue to develop as the leading international diversified royalty company with a strong portfolio of producing and development assets Our strategy is to accelerate our rate of growth by acquiring new royalties and metal streams in base metals and bulk materials focusing on commodities important for new technologies.
Utilising our balance sheet to finance growth replenishing the income from our existing portfolio whilst allowing us to pay shareholders a meaningful and progressive dividend.
APGAR1728.03.18FRONTARTWORK
14 ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 CASE S TUDY PIAU NICKELCOBALT
TRANSACTION CONSISTENT WITH ANGLO PACIFICS GROWTH STRATEGY This transaction illustrates and ticks all of the boxes for Anglo Pacifics strategy to invest a modest amount of capital into development assets with future upside potential
Executing the strategy will result in additional cash producing royalties and a stronger portfolio with longterm upside potential and dividends to our shareholders HOW W E A RE ACHIEV ING OUR STR ATEGY  PAGES 16 A ND 17 GROUP OVERVIEW STRATEGIC REPORT
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION 15 ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 APGAR1728.03.18FRONTARTWORK PIAU NICKELCOBALT PROJECT TRANSACTION CONSISTENT WITH ANGLO PACIFICS GROWTH STRATEGY S TR A TE G I C R E P O R T OUR STRATEGY IN ACTION This transaction illustrates and ticks all of the boxes for Anglo Pacifics strategy to invest a modest amount of capital into development assets with future upside potential.
DEMONSTRATION PLANT TEST HEAPS AND OTHER INFR ASTRUCTURE NICKEL MIXED HYDROXIDE PRODUCT MHP CRUSHING CIRCUIT Brazilian Nickel STAGE DEVELOPMENT COMMODITY NICKEL and COBALT OPERATOR BRAZILIAN NICKEL
LOCATION BRAZIL ROYALTY RATE and TYPE 1% GRR BALANCE SHEET
CLASSIFICATION FINANCIAL
Current royalty exposure by asset value at December 31 2017 Coking coal 48.8% Thermal coal 20.8% Iron ore 5.3% Vanadium 6.3%
3.5%
12.6%
2.7% Illustrative diversification All Piau Tranches Coking coal 39.2% Thermal coal 16.7% Iron ore 4.2% Vanadium 5.1%
2.8%
10.2% Nickel and Cobalt 20.1%
1.7% Adjusted for book value of Piau tranche 2 and 3 considerations US70m or 52.9m.
Anglo Pacific has the right to acquire tranche 2 and tranche 3 royalties upon the achievement of certain Piau development milestones subject to final Anglo Pacific board approval
Pi
Meaningful potential exposure to energy storage related commodities Nickel and Cobalt ALL PIAU TRANCHES DIVERSIFIED POR TF OLIO OF ROYALTIES 16 ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 APGAR1728.03.18FRONTARTWORK TRANSACTION HIGHLIGHTS Anglo Pacific Group entered into a royalty agreement with Brazilian Nickel Ltd Brazilian Nickel to acquire an initial 1% gross revenue royalty GRR over the Piau nickelcobalt project Piau or the Project for a US2m 1.6m cash payment The initial US2m consideration part funded further project assessment and the expansion of the existing nickelcobalt demonstration plant to a nameplate production capacity of 1000 tonnes of nickel per annum Once the process is proven at the 1000 tonnes of nickel per annum level Brazilian Nickel intends to rampup production to 24000 tonnes or alternatively Brazilian Nickel may pursue a lowercapex staged development first rampingup to 10000 tonnes and then to 24000 tonnes of nickel per annum Upon the achievement of certain Piau development milestones and Anglo Pacific board approval for each tranche the Company has the right to invest up to a total of US70m 51.9m in additional GRRs with proceeds restricted to funding inpart the construction or expansion of a processing facility Under the staged rampup development scenario US20m for an incremental 2.0% GRR when plans for the construction of a processing plant with a nameplate capacity of 10000 tonnes of nickel per annum are implemented and US50m for an incremental 2.5% GRR when plans to rampup to 24000 tonnes of nickel per annum are implemented OR US70m for an incremental 3.0% GRR at the point when plans for the construction of a processing plant with a nameplate capacity of 24000 tonnes of nickel per annum are implemented The staged consideration approach allows for flexibility with regards to potential Piau development scenarios as well as for the Project to be derisked prior to Anglo Pacific proceeding with additional tranches The transaction is inline with the Companys strategy to invest in development opportunities with significant growth potential to complement its existing portfolio of income producing assets.
GROWTH STRATEGY Enhances Anglo Pacific exposure to energy storage and electric vehicle related commodities High purity nickel and cobalt hydroxide products expected to be used for lithium ion batteries and in traditional markets Further diversifies the Anglo Pacific royalty portfolio in addition to existing vanadium royalty.
Future growth potential Potential for attractive returns once Project is ramped up with ability to increase exposure as and when Piau is derisked Lowcost operation Operating costs expected to be less than US 3.00lb of nickel after refining charges and cobalt credits Established mining jurisdiction Located in an area of Brazil with nearby water power and transport infrastructure in place Partnering with an experienced management team Established track record in mining and nickel heap leach operations Detailed due diligence process Review of technical and other not publicly available information Brazilian Nickel disclosure GROUP OVERVIEW STRATEGIC REPORT
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION 17 ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 APGAR1728.03.18FRONTARTWORK BACKGROUND Risk is integral to every aspect of the Groups business model and how it executes on its strategy.
We ensure that our investors understand our business model and how an investment in Anglo Pacific is different to investing in an operating company albeit we address operating risk closely through our due diligence procedures.
The Board is responsible for identifying understanding and managing these risks.
The Audit Committee is then tasked with overseeing how risk is being managed on a regular basis.
RISK APPETITE AND VIABILITY The Company is once again voluntarily complying with provision C2.2 of the 2014 Combined Code which requires a statement on viability to be made in this report including the determination and consideration of stress tested severe but plausible scenarios.
This analysis was performed for a threeyear period consistent with the Groups mediumterm planning horizon and the term of its borrowing facility.
The viability statement and underlying supporting papers are intended to intertwine risk disclosure and going concern into a more meaningful discussion about the financial impact of principal risks.
Risk can never be fully eliminated but can be mitigated to a level which the Directors are prepared to accept as necessary to execute the Groups strategy.
Although the ultimate success of Anglo Pacific will depend on its ability to continue to add value enhancing royalties and streams to its portfolio the focus of the viability statement is on the existing business of the Group and the ability of the current royalty portfolio to generate sufficient cash to meet the Groups outgoings including the dividend.
Under our severe but plausible case this results in the Group drawing down on its borrowing facilities as income reduces.
The Directors risk appetite is therefore capped with reference to an acceptable and supportable level of borrowings relative to the Groups income profile over the next three years on a severe but plausible basis.
INTERACTION WITH STRATEGY Risk is often perceived purely as a negative and associated with loss or prevention.
In fact for Anglo Pacific the acceptance of a certain level of risk is part and parcel of its business model and is necessary in order to generate investment returns and can often present opportunities for growth.
It is the point at which the Board determines to accept a higher or lower appetite for risk that is important in the context of the Groups risk framework i.
Board should anticipate or acknowledge that an event has occurred which has altered the previously held position on risk.
We have seen this recently at Anglo Pacific when the Board relaxed its investment criteria at the beginning of 2017 to include nonproducing royalties.
This was a function of the impact that the sudden recovery in commodity prices at the end of 2016 had on the Groups cash position which enabled the Board to determine that it was prepared to accept more risk when investing modest amounts of surplus cash into royalties which have the potential to deliver superior returns over a longer time horizon whilst still sticking to strict investment criteria as outlined on page 14.
Key to this was the view of the Board that the outlook for commodity prices was favourable particularly in the commodities from which the Group currently derives most of its income.
The Board also reexamined country risk in light of any developments observed over the course of the last 12 months.
It was decided that there are some countries or regions which have made considerable progress of late and which the Group could now consider investing in.
This included certain countries in South America Eastern Europe and Africa although it is unlikely that the Group will compound risk by investing in nonincome producing royalties in such jurisdictions.
The Groups risk framework is designed to identify instances such as these when the risk environment changes and there could be an impact on the Groups business model or strategy in addition to providing the basis for continuous and robust monitoring and management of risk.
ACTIVITY DURING 2017 The Board was keen to reexamine risk during 2017 and made this a focal point of its annual strategy day led by the Chairman.
Keen to encourage an open dialogue and to avoid groupthink the session was facilitated by a risk expert from outside of the mining industry who was able to bring an impartial perspective to the debate.
The Board and senior management were asked to list their top three principal risks in relation to the business model or strategy.
From this list the facilitator asked the Chairman and Company Secretary to compile a list of the top ten risks which resulted from this exercise.
The following table summarises the top ten risks in terms of impact on viability not likelihood as identified and agreed by the Board.
S TR A TE G I C R E P O R T PRINCIPAL RISKS AND UNCERTAINTIES Examples Risk
Risk
Catastrophic event Demand for royalties Investment approval Operational management Operator dependence Management performance Pipeline  supply Increased competition Financing capability Stakeholder support Prolonged disruption to mining at key royalties Material change in mining legislation  nationalisation Continued price recovery followed by equity demand Incorrect valuation judgement on jurisdiction  commodity  price counterparty  tax Monitoring performance of portfolio Internal controls  cost control  FX Honouring royalty obligations Remaining focused on maximising the returns of the project Focused and motivated to deliver strategy Lack of suitable opportunities Ineffective marketing Recovery in price outlook triggers increased competition Ability to finance acquisitions
Loss of support from shareholders  lending banks  brokers analysts  employees
Market
Strategic
Operational
Financial
Operational
Strategic
Strategic
Financial
Operational
NEW
NEW
NEW
APGAR1728.03.18FRONTARTWORK
18 ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 Having agreed on the principal risks the Board wanted to ensure that it was addressing each risk appropriately and actively managing any risk exposure that is within the Boards control.
In order to do this a mapping exercise was undertaken assisted by the facilitator.
Given the bespoke nature of the Groups business model and being one step removed from being in control of how the mines are operated it became apparent that conventional mapping tools did not really apply to the Group.
As such the matrix opposite was agreed upon as the most appropriate.
The template focuses on a prediction vs control concept.
This acknowledges that the impact of market events in the top right box on the Groups prospects both pre and post acquisition are both difficult to predict and once occurred are difficult to control.
It is risks that fall into this category which are primarily outside of managements ability to either manage or mitigate other than by monitoring.
Some risks which are easier to predict i. can be more effectively managed.
The table opposite demonstrates how there will always be a level of risk tolerated by the Board in executing the Groups strategy.
It also identifies techniques which management should be looking to implement when addressing risks which have some element to either control or predict.
CONCLUSION
Monitoring risk is an ongoing process and not an annual exercise.
In order to better govern this the Board determined it appropriate that the risk matrix above be reviewed by the Board on a quarterly basis with a more fulsome discussion on strategy and risk to occur twice a year.
This it is intended should allow reporting against the green and amber risks along with a discussion where there have been changes in the market circumstances in the red box.
Taking into account the quantitative analysis performed around each risk identified above and having tested these scenarios under a severe but plausible set of criteria the Directors conclude that they have a reasonable expectation that the Group will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the period of their assessment.
Characteristics Management  mitigation 2018 Action points Difficult to predict outside of the short term Tend to be driven by market forces or extreme localised events Limited ability to manage or mitigate other than through ongoing monitoring
Easier to predict through regular cash flow projections pipeline review and operator updates Harder to control as dependent on counterparties Increasing control is important with regular dialogue with lenders and shareholders both existing and potential considered important in anticipating the availability of finance.
Dialogue with counterparties is also equally important to discover any early warning signs of underperformance.
Continue to focus on operator performance and promote the business with potential new debt equity investors and seek alternative means of financing Easier to control as the Board can influence strategic direction based on market conditions Dealflow is harder to predict Increasing prediction of strategic risks dealflow is a core focus.
The Group increased its marketing initiatives significantly in 2017.
Use the Groups strong balance sheet to considerably increase dealflow during 2018 Risks for which good governance and internal controls should limit any financial or reputational loss Board Committees along with the internal controls are designed to mitigate and prevent loss due to operational events or mismanagement.
Zerotolerance for escalation i. green box.
Risk
MARKE T AND E VENT F I NAN C IAL S T R AT E GI C O P E R AT I ON A L F I NAN C IAL O P E R AT I ON A L M A R K E T AND E VENT S T R AT E GI C E ASY T O CONTROL HARD T O CONTROL E ASY T O PREDIC T HARD T O PREDIC T
DEPENDENCE
CATASTROPHIC
EVENT
ROYALTY
DEMAND
STAKEHOLDER
SUPPORT
OPERATIONAL
MANAGEMENT
PIPELINE
INCREASED
COMPETITION
INVESTMENT
APPROVAL
MANAGEMENT
PERFORMANCE
FINANCING
CAPABILITY
APGAR1728.03.18FRONTARTWORK
GROUP OVERVIEW STRATEGIC REPORT
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION 19 ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 S TR A TE G I C R E P O R T PRINCIPAL RISKS AND UNCERTAINTIES continued Risk Possible cause Mitigation Management comment and actions CATASTROPHIC EVENT IMPACT  HIGH A significant event which causes revenue to halt from one of the Groups key income producing royalties would have a profound impact on the Groups prospects.
LACK OF DEMAND FOR ROYALTIES IMPACT  HIGH In order to execute its strategy the Group needs to acquire further royalties to ultimately replace the income from Kestrel.
Demand for royalties can change depending on macroeconomic conditions at any point in the cycle.
Mine collapse Natural disaster Destruction of infrastructure Resource nationalisation Resource contamination Failure by royalty counterparty to make payments Improvement in commodity prices Inflows into mining funds Availability of debt Demand for commodities Global GDP growth
These risks by their nature are difficult to predict or influence.
The Board monitors its royalty portfolio and underlying performance regularly.
Monitor
The Group monitors the market closely and pays close attention to trends and commentary.
Secondary royalties are less sensitive to market conditions and are generally available through the cycle.
LIKELIHOOD  REMOTE By continuing to focus on investing in wellestablished mining jurisdictions with stable political and geological history along with investing in good operations and management the Group can reduce the likelihood of the occurrence of this risk.
LIKELIHOOD  MEDIUM
Demand for royalties can never be predicted but demand is usually greater when the underlying market conditions are challenging for smallmidsized operators.
We continue to see good demand for royalties and our pipeline is significantly developed for growth during 2018.
INVESTMENT APPROVAL IMPACT  MEDIUM Anglo Pacifics success will depend on the performance of the royalties acquired matching or exceeding expectations at the point of acquisition.
The governance and due diligence process adopted by the Group when looking at each unique investment is key to reduce the risk of making a bad investment.
Misjudging
Geology and technical process Longterm commodity price assumption Country risk Time to production Counterparty covenant Economic viability project or counterparty Tax regime Thorough due diligence The Group has considerable inhouse technical financial and tax expertise to identify potential fatal flaws and uses consultants to assist with due diligence.
The Board also has significant mining experience and constructively challenges management on the due diligence process.
LIKELIHOOD  MEDIUM
The current management team has demonstrated a track record of successful investments to date.
Anglo Pacific has strict and exacting investment criteria and avoids overly competitive bidding processes where these could result in suboptimal outcomes.
PIPELINE  SUPPLY IMPACT  HIGH The Group needs to be working several potential deals at any one point which requires constant replenishment of opportunities in its deal pipeline.
Ineffective marketing
Insufficiently networked Size  financing credibility Increase dealflow The Group devotes a considerable amount of management time to marketing and attending trade shows and conferences with a view to identifying royalty opportunities.
LIKELIHOOD  MEDIUM
The Group has a significant global network of brokers advisors and consultants who constantly bring dealflow.
In addition our significant management and Board industry expertise enables us to identify opportunities internally.
The Group is confident that it has not lost out on any material deals during 2017 and is invited to participate in bidding processes on a regular basis.
MARKE T AND E VENT S T R AT E GI C
20 ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 Risk Possible cause Mitigation Management comment and actions Risk Possible cause Mitigation Management comment
COMPETITION
IMPACT  MEDIUM Anglo Pacific does not compete with the well established precious metals royalty companies instead focusing on the base and bulk sector.
Competition can always arise and Anglo Pacific is not complacent in driving the growth of its business.
Recovery in the mining sector Inflows into private equity funds Low bond yields entice life assurance  pension funds Change of focus from precious metal peers Continue to scale Anglo Pacific has considerable first mover advantage in a capitalintensive business model with a highly cash generative portfolio to leverage and facilitate growth.
It also has considerable contacts throughout the sector to generate dealflow along with expertise in terms of appraising and valuing royalty transactions.
LIKELIHOOD  MEDIUM
Some direct competition exists but this has not had a material impact on our growth hitherto.
With a focus on nonprecious metals and being a permanent capital vehicle management considers itself well placed to be an attractive partner for smallmediumsized operators.
S T R AT E GI C O P E R AT I ON A L
PERFORMANCE
IMPACT  LOW Ensuring that management is performing to the standards expected of them for the benefit of all stakeholders.
Underperformance
Unmotivated
Uncommitted
Lack of focus Performance review The Remuneration Committee undertakes a thorough review of performance each year with any rewards being strictly granted upon demonstrated meeting of preagreed objectives.
In addition the Board regularly undertakes an annual selfassessment which was performed by a consultant during 2017 to identify any skills gaps or the way in which the Board works together.
LIKELIHOOD  LOW Anglo Pacific is a small organisation in terms of headcount where everybody has to perform to the highest standards.
Any underperformance would be readily evident and dealt with by the CEO and Board promptly.
OPERATIONAL
MANAGEMENT
IMPACT  LOW Inadequate attention to detail in managing the business.
Monitoring accuracy of royalty payments Monitoring newsflow impacting counter parties Lax cost control Managing risky investment processes Appropriateness and functioning of internal controls
Maintaining high standards The Group undertakes a thorough budgeting process each year which highlights the reasons for variances.
Costs are reported against budget on a monthly basis to identify timely instances of any unexpected expenditure.
Management performance is monitored by the Board.
LIKELIHOOD  LOW Management are committed to the highest standards of internal control in running the Company to the standards which would be expected of a FTSE listed organisation in order to maximise shareholder returns.
APGAR1728.03.18FRONTARTWORK
GROUP OVERVIEW STRATEGIC REPORT
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION 21 ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 S TR A TE G I C R E P O R T PRINCIPAL RISKS AND UNCERTAINTIES continued O P E R AT I ON A L F I NAN C IAL
DEPENDENCE
IMPACT  MEDIUM The Group is dependent on the operators of the mines over which it has royalties to continue to honour royalty contracts and make timely and accurate royalty payments and to continue to operate and finance their business in a sensible and responsible manner.
Market conditions Poor CSRenvironmental record
Inaccurate royalty calculation
Diversify dependence The best way the Group can mitigate dependence on any one operator is to continue to expand and diversify its royalty portfolio to ensure that it has a wellbalanced source of income.
APG has audit rights which it generally exercises on the identification of any unexpected royalty outcome.
The Group tries to insert change of control clauses into its new royalty agreements to ensure its exposure is to counterparties of good reputation.
LIKELIHOOD  MEDIUM The Group has a good relationship with most of the underlying operators and aims to visit site at least once every second year.
FINANCING
CAPABILITY
IMPACT  MEDIUM  HIGH The Group is dependant on access to capital in order to finance its growth ambitions.
Sudden adverse change in equity market conditions The Groups cost of capital makes executing accretive deals more challenging Production issues or significant price volatility could adversely impact on the Groups borrowing capacity Execution risk through inadequate immediate access to finance High quality dealflow It is managements view that high quality accretive deals should always be capable of being financed.
We regularly meet with advisors shareholders and lenders to discuss the types of deals we are looking at to gauge their support.
We will look to finance nonincome producing royalties primarily from our internal resources.
LIKELIHOOD  MEDIUM Our record income year in 2017 along with being debt free and cash generative naturally increases the financing capability of the Group.
Given the strength of the balance sheet and the outlook for 2018 we believe we have higher debt capacity and will look to use internal resources before needing to rely on equity markets to finance opportunities.
Risk Possible cause Mitigation Management comment STAKEHOLDER SUPPORT IMPACT  MEDIUMLOW Anglo Pacific needs to be well supported by all stakeholders including
Lending banks
Analysts
Employees
Media
Underperformance
Deviating from strategy Alterations to dividend Excessive risktaking Poor communications Close dialogue with stakeholders Anglo Pacific keeps in close contact with all stakeholders.
We spend a considerable amount of time working with our bankers brokers and analysts explaining our strategy progress and development plans which gives us a gauge for what the likely market reaction to our plans will be.
We remain close to lenders and brokers to anticipate demand for any increase in debtequity capacity.
LIKELIHOOD  MEDIUM
We regularly conduct roadshows to see major shareholders engage with retail investors through private client broker networks and often visit potential new investors both in Europe and North America.
We actively encourage participation at our AGM which gives shareholders of all sizes the opportunity to ask questions to our entire Board and management.
We regularly meet and discuss investment opportunities.
APGAR1728.03.18FRONTARTWORK
22 ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 F I NAN C IAL CREDIT RISK IMPACT  LOW That there is a risk of default by those owing the Group money or those institutions holding the Groups cash reserves.
FOREIGN EXCHANGE
IMPACT  MEDIUMLOW That foreign exchange movements adversely impact on the Groups cash flow projections.
INTEREST RATE
IMPACT  LOW That an increase in interest rates could adversely impact on the Groups prospects.
COMMODITY AND OTHER PRICING RISK IMPACT  HIGH The Groups results are determined by other pricing inputs which could result in unrealised losses at each reporting date.
Royalty payment default Bank collapse Cash flow risk associated with dollar derived income and costs including dividend largely payable in pounds Translation risk of having a presentational currency in GBP but assets denominated in A Financing risk when raising equity in GBP to fund dollar denominated acquisitions The Group is exposed to the US and UK LIBOR rate as part of its bank facility The Groups asset values are underpinned by the forward commodity price outlook at each reporting date.
A decline in these prices could result in further impairment or revaluation charges The Group has a portfolio of certain publicly quoted equity investments which are marked to market at each reporting date The Group operates controlled treasury policies which spreads the concentration of the Groups cash balances amongst separate financial institutions with sufficiently high credit ratings.
The Board approved a currency hedging policy which looks to protect a significant amount of the Groups next 12 month expected royalty income.
Under the policy the Group can hedge up to 70% of the next quarters income 60% of the second quarter followed by 30% and 25% thereafter.
The Group has a relatively low level of borrowings and as such interest rate risk is not considered material when assessing the Groups longerterm prospects.
The Group uses independent third party consensus prices at each reporting date in assessing for impairment.
The Groups equity portfolio has largely been divested meaning any future impairment should be much less material to the Group.
LIKELIHOOD  LOW The risk of counterparty default is assessed when entering into new royalty agreements.
The
Directors are confident that the royalties which represent the majority of the Groups receivables are at relatively low risk of default due to the nature of the operators involved.
LIKELIHOOD  MEDIUM Management engaged with a specialist consultant during the year to review foreign exchange risk.
The review concluded that the Groups policy is by and large sufficient.
Commodity price risk is the primary risk and the objective is to keep foreign exchange as a secondary risk.
LIKELIHOOD  LOW Interest rates currently remain at low levels although they have been rising recently.
This could impact on the cost of the Groups capital when acquiring future royalties.
LIKELIHOOD  HIGH The Group is exposed to commodity prices and a significant decrease in commodity prices is likely to result in further impairment charges.
At this stage the Board does not hedge against specific commodity risk and will continue to review this position in light of commodity prices.
Risk Possible cause Mitigation Management comment
GROUP OVERVIEW STRATEGIC REPORT
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION 23 ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 193% 50% 90% 72% ROYALT Y AS SE T S A C QU I RE D m S TR A TE G I C R E P O R T MEASURING OUR PROGRESS KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS AD JUS TED E ARNINGS PER SHARE p ROYALT Y INCOME   m DIVIDEND COVER x FREE CASH FLOW PER SHARE p It is a policy of the Group to pay a significant portion of its royalty income as dividends.
Just as important as maintaining the dividend is maintaining the quality of the dividend.
Dividend cover is calculated as the number of times adjusted earnings per share exceeds the dividend per share.
In any period where there is an adjusted loss the dividend cover will be reported as nil.
The structure of a number of the Groups royalty financing arrangements such as the Denison transaction completed in February 2017 result in a significant amount of cash flow being reported as principal repayments which are not included in the income statement.
As the Group considers dividend cover based on the free cash flow generated by its assets management has determined that free cash flow per share is a key performance indicator going forward.
Free cash flow per share is calculated by dividing net cash generated from operating activities plus proceeds from the disposal of noncore assets and any cash considered as repayment of principal less finance costs by the weighted average number of shares in issue.
The Groups strategy is to acquire royalties which will be accretive and in turn enable dividend growth.
The chart shows how much the Group invested in royalty acquisitions in each period.
Royalty income reflects the revenue from the Groups underlying royalty and streaming assets on an accruals basis.
Adjusted earnings per share excludes any noncash valuation movements impairments amortisation and sharebased payment expenses.
It also adjusts for any profits or losses which are realised from the sale of equity instruments within the mining and exploration interests.
Valuation and other noncash movements such as these are not considered by management in assessing the level of profit and cash generation available for distribution to shareholders.
As such an adjusted earnings measure is used which reflects the underlying contribution from the Groups royalties during the year.
Adjusted earnings divided by the weighted average number of shares in issue gives adjusted earnings per share.
37.4tel 2014 2013 eltel 2.4tel 2014 2013 29.4tel 2014 2013 eltel
24 ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 S TR A TE G I C R E P O R T
BUSINESS REVIEW
48.8% EXPOSURE TO COKING COAL NOW LESS THAN 50%
Au
GOLD
VANADIUM
THERMAL COAL COKING COAL
PRODUCING
ROYALTIES
KESTREL NARRABRI
MENCHEN
EL VALLEBOINS CARLS EVBC FOUR MILE McCLEAN LAKE
89.3% 89.3% OF THE PORTFOLIO IS PRODUCING
GROUP OVERVIEW STRATEGIC REPORT
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION 25 ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 APGAR1728.03.18FRONTARTWORK WHAT WE OWN Kestrel is an underground coal mine located in the Bowen Basin Queensland
It is operated by Rio Tinto Limited Rio Tinto.
The Group owns 50% of certain substratum lands which under Queensland law entitle it to coal royalty receipts from the Kestrel mine.
The royalty rate to which the Group is presently entitled is prescribed by the Queensland Mineral Resources
These regulations currently stipulate that the basis of calculation is a threetiered fixed percentage of the invoiced value of the coal as follows Average price per tonne for period Rate UP TO AND INCLUDING A100 7% OVER A100 AND UP TO AND INCLUDING A150 FIRST A100 7%
12.5% MORE THAN A150 FIRST A100 7% NEXT A50 12.5%
15%
The Group received royalty income of 28.7m from Kestrel during 2017 an increase of 119% compared to 13.1m in 2016 and 3.6m in 2015.
The significant increase in royalty income in 2017 was due to a combination of higher overall tons sold a much higher portion of these sales from production within the Groups private royalty land see below higher average realised prices and a favourable exchange gain on translating the Australian dollar income into pounds average rate in 2017 1.6811 2016 1.8252.
OUTLOOK
In accordance with Anglo Pacifics Kestrel information rights the Group estimates that 90% of mining at Kestrel will be within our royalty lands during 2018 2017 93% 2016 67%.
Overall production from Kestrel in 2017 was 5.1mt which was slightly ahead of the 4.9mt produced in the previous year.
With life of mine ROM guidance of 5.7mt per annum there remains some growth to come in terms of volumes from Kestrel.
VALUATION
The Kestrel royalty was independently valued at A180.2m 104.3m and accounts for 41% of the Groups total assets as at December 31 2017 2016 A200.3m 116.9m 46%.
Having generated 28.7m of income from Kestrel during the year the decrease in valuation of 12.6m means that resource depletion has been offset somewhat by a revision to forward price assumptions with the consensus view showing that the longterm price for coal has increased by 6% compared to the end of 2016.
The decrease in the valuation of Kestrel resulted in a loss of 11.9m 2016 gain 17.9m on the income statement together with a foreign currency translation loss of 0.7m 2016 gain The value of the land is calculated by reference to the discounted expected royalty income from mining activity as described in note 14.
The independent valuation has been undertaken by a Competent Person in accordance with the Valmin Code AusIMM 2005 which provides guidelines for the preparation of independent expert valuation reports.
The Group monitors the accuracy of this valuation by comparing the actual cash received to that forecasted.
As the asset has a nominal cost base the carrying value virtually represents the valuation surplus.
The Group recognises a deferred tax provision against the valuation surplus and as such the net value on the balance sheet is 75.1m 2016 82.4m.
KESTREL
STAGE PRODUCING COMMODITY COKING COAL OPERATOR RIO TINTO LOCATION AUSTRALIA ROYALTY RATE and TYPE 7  15% GRR BALANCE SHEET
CLASSIFICATION PROPERTY KESTREL MINE PLAN SHOWING DIRECTION OF MINING COMPARED TO PRIVATE LAND BOUNDARY Royalty area KES T REL SOU T H current mine KES T REL NOR T H historic mine Area being mined as of Q4 2017 Area already mined
S TR A TE G I C R E P O R T
BUSINESS REVIEW
Coal royalty income m 9.9tel 2014 2013 Coal royalty valuation m 131.4tel 2014 2013
26 ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 THE NARRABRI MINE HAS SCOPE TO MATERIALLY INCREASE PRODUCTION OVER THE SHORT AND MEDIUM TERM WHAT WE OWN In March 2015 the Group acquired a royalty interest in the Narrabri coal project a low cost thermal coal and pulverised coal injection PCI coal mine located in New South Wales Australia operated by ASXlisted Whitehaven Coal Limited Whitehaven.
The Narrabri royalty entitles the Group to royalty payments equal to 1% of gross revenue on all coal produced from within the area covered by the Narrabri royalty.
The
Narrabri royalty includes the Narrabri mine and the Narrabri South project.
The Narrabri mine has scope to increase production over the short and medium term following Whitehavens approval to expand production to 11Mt per annum.
Whitehaven estimates Narrabri to have a reserve based mine life of 25 years and the potential to extend production thereafter with the development of Narrabri South.
PERFORMANCE
Production continues to be impacted by a fault which runs through a portion of the deposit as announced by Whitehaven at the start of 2017.
They are also experiencing changing roof conditions in certain parts of the longwall which is also slowing down production rates.
As such Whitehaven revised its guidance for FY 2017 12 months ended June 30 2017 downwards by 0.5mt.
Actual ROM produced was just below guidance.
Bringing these numbers into a calendar year and translating to sales Narrabri posted sales of 6.7mt in 2017 which was down on 7.8mt in 2016.
Importantly for Anglo Pacific the pricing environment was favourable over this period such that price more than compensated for the reduced volumes allowing Anglo Pacific to show an increase in royalty income of 17%.
Whitehaven noted an increase in demand for higher quality thermal coal along with some supply disruptions in South East Asia combined to support a higher price for seaborne Australian thermal coal over the past 12 months.
Whitehaven considers the outlook for thermal coal in the short to medium term to be favourable.
OUTLOOK
Whitehaven has reduced its guidance for FY 2018 from 8.08.4mt to 6.06.5mt reflecting the geotechnical issues noted above.
It has guided production levels of 7.7mt for FY 2019 and 7.0mt for FY 2020.
Whitehaven is a supplier of some of the highest quality coal globally.
Many of its customers operate high efficiency low emission HELE technologies particularly in South East Asia.
Combining high quality coal with HELE technology Whitehaven believes will have a positive impact on air pollution.
It sees considerable growth in this technology which should ensure good demand for their products in the longer term.
Source Whitehaven 2017 Annual Report pages 2023
The Narrabri royalty is classified as a royalty intangible asset on the balance sheet.
As such this asset is carried at cost less amortisation and impairments and does not benefit from any valuation uplift resulting from the positive developments in the year as described above.
Its carrying value does however reflect the impact of translation from Australian dollars to pounds which at the yearend resulted in a favourable uplift.
Royalty intangible assets are amortised when commercial production commences on a straightline basis over the expected life of the mine.
NARRABRI
STAGE PRODUCING COMMODITY THERMAL and PCI COAL OPERATOR WHITEHAVEN COAL LOCATION AUSTRALIA ROYALTY RATE and TYPE 1% GRR BALANCE SHEET
CLASSIFICATION INTANGIBLE
Sydney
NARRABRI MINE PLAN SHOWING SOUTH POTENTIAL EXPANSION AREA
Area currently being mined NAR R A B R I NOR T H L ONG W A L L S
SOUTH
POTENTIAL
EXPANSION
AREA
Narrabri royalty income m 3.2tel Narrabri ROM production 201417
GROUP OVERVIEW STRATEGIC REPORT
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION 27 ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 S TR A TE G I C R E P O R T
BUSINESS REVIEW
WHAT WE OWN The Group has a 2% NSR royalty on all mineral products sold from the area of the Maracs Menchen project to which the royalty interest relates.
The project is located 250km southwest of the city of Salvador the capital of Bahia State Brazil and covers an area in excess of the current permits which offers the Group the potential for some exploration upside.
Maracs Menchen is 99.97% owned and operated by TSX listed Largo Resources Limited Largo.
PERFORMANCE
Largo has had a very strong year regularly posting record levels of monthly production at Maracs Menchen.
This has coincided with a notable recovery in the price of vanadium pentoxide V during 2017.
As a result the Groups revenue increased from 0.8m in 2016 to 2.0m in 2017 a 155% increase.
Largo announced a record quarter of production for Q4 2017 of 2539 tonnes which was 5.8% above the nameplate capacity of the plant.
Total production for 2017 was 9297 tonnes a 17% increase from the previous year.
The chart left shows the progress Largo has made since they commenced commercial production at the beginning of 2015.
Largo has been achieving steady production since Q2 2016 with a slight reduction at the start of 2017 reflecting a planned 20 day shut down of the plant to perform improvement works.
The chart also shows the strong recovery in vanadium prices over the past 18 months or so.
Largo one of the lowest cost global pure play producers of vanadium has at the same time managed to considerably reduce its costs meaning at current prices it is highly profitable at operating level. levels in 2018.
The strength of production at Maracs Menchen during the year resulted in the first US1.5m tranche of the deferred consideration becoming due and payable in November 2017.
This amount had been expected to become payable for some time and was fully provided for at December 31 2016.
A further payment of US1.5m would be payable if production reaches an annualised rate over a quarter of 12000t.
Based on the current guidance however the Directors do not consider this probable and as such no liability has been recognised.
VANADIUM PRICING AND OUTLOOK The vanadium market is relatively small and pricing opaque.
That said the fundamentals behind pricing both in terms of supply and demand currently look favourable. steel manufacturers.
On the supply side a lot was taken out of the market when lower quality Chinese iron ore mines were forced to shut over the last 12 months.
Vanadium is often a byproduct of iron ore with 70% of the global supply coming from slag generated in Russia and China.
A significant amount of supply came off the market with the Highveld operation in South Africa Atlantic Vanadium and MVPL going into administration in 2015 although the fall in prices around that time was in our view most likely down to product being dumped onto the market following the closure of mines.
As a result the supply side pressure has come out of the market somewhat over the past few years.
On the demand side the Chinese environmental closures coincided with relatively low stock levels prompting a price spike.
In addition in the second half of 2017 it appeared that there was a shift in demand for higher rebar quality steel in China following the collapse of buildings constructed using weaker steel in recent earthquakes.
This was confirmed by Largo on February 9 2018 which it expected to result in higher demand for high strength low alloy vanadium steel.
Longer term vanadium has also been proven to be highly efficient in the manufacture and performance of large battery storage technology.
This could provide a very significant secondary use for vanadium and alter the supply demand profile even more favourably towards producers in what is already a tight market for steel demand.
VALUATION
The Maracs Menchen royalty is classified as a royalty intangible asset on the balance sheet.
As such this asset is carried at cost less amortisation and impairments.
Royalty intangible assets are amortised when commercial production commences on a straightline basis over the expected life of the mine.
MARACS MENCHEN STAGE PRODUCING COMMODITY VANADIUM OPERATOR LARGO RESOURCES LOCATION BRAZIL ROYALTY RATE and TYPE 2% NSR BALANCE SHEET
CLASSIFICATION INTANGIBLE
THE PROJECT IS LOCATED 250KM SOUTHWEST OF THE CITY OF SALVADOR THE CAPITAL OF BAHIA STATE BRAZIL
0.6tel Maracs royalty income m Maracs production 201517
Cost USlb
APGAR1728.03.18FRONTARTWORK
28 ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 WHAT WE OWN The Group has a 2.5% life of mine NSR royalty on the EVBC gold copper and silver mine owned by TSXlisted Orvana Minerals Corp Orvana.
EVBC is located in the Rio Narcea Gold Belt of northern Spain and was previously mined from 1997 to 2006 by Rio Narcea Gold Mines.
The royalty rate increases to 3% when the gold price is over US1100 per ounce.
PERFORMANCE
The Group received royalty income of 1.7m from EVBC during the past year.
This compares to 1.2m received in 2016.
Orvana achieved a much better outcome in 2017 with gold production up 24% and copper production up 44%.
The production increases achieved during 2017 followed investment by Orvana in infrastructure and equipment over the course of the last 18 months.
Increased
Orvana are focused on increasing the proportion of high grade ore being fed to the process plant during FY 2018.
Orvana sustained a mill throughput rate of over 2 000t per day in the second half of their FY 2017 matching those reported in December 2016.
OUTLOOK
Using a midpoint range Orvana is guiding gold production of 68500oz for FY 2018 to September 30 2018 which would represent an increase of 32.9% on FY 2017.
Orvana is also targeting near mine exploration at the Carles Mine with 2700m of infill drilling undertaken during FY 2017 along with 23000m at El Valle.
It is also continuing to explore greenfield expansion on the investigation permits which are located adjacent to the EVBC mine.
As such we remain of the view that there is a good prospect of mine life extension at EVBC.
Anglo Pacific earns a royalty over all throughput from the EVBC process plant and is not restricted to licence geographic boundaries.
VALUATION
The EVBC royalty is classified as an availableforsale equity financial asset within royalty financial instruments on the balance sheet.
As such the asset is carried at fair value by reference to the discounted expected future cash flows over the life of the mine.
WHAT WE OWN The Group has a 1% life of mine NSR royalty on the Four Mile uranium mine in South Australia.
Four Mile is operated by Quasar Resources Pty Ltd Quasar.
PERFORMANCE
The Group did not receive any income from its Four Mile royalty in 2017 compared to the 0.3m it received during 2016.
This is due to the ongoing dispute with the operator over how the royalty should be calculated.
Quasar continues to treat the contract in our view as akin to a profit interest whereas the Group remain of the view that this is an NSR and that refining or processing costs should not be taken into account.
We have engaged with senior counsel lawyers and experts in Australia to build a case file and once complete we will be seeking to escalate the matter through the judicial system in South Australia.
We remain confident of being successful in this process.
VALUATION
The Four Mile royalty is classified as a royalty intangible asset on the balance sheet.
As such this asset is carried at cost less amortisation and impairments.
Royalty intangible assets are amortised when commercial production commences on a straightline basis over the expected life of the mine.
EL VALLEBOINSCARLS
STAGE PRODUCING COMMODITY GOLD COPPER and SILVER OPERATOR ORVANA MINERALS LOCATION SPAIN ROYALTY RATE and TYPE 2.5  3% NSR BALANCE SHEET ROYALTY FINANCIAL CLASSIFICATION INSTRUMENT FOUR MILE STAGE PRODUCING COMMODITY URANIUM OPERATOR QUASAR RESOURCES LOCATION AUSTRALIA ROYALTY RATE and TYPE 1% NSR BALANCE SHEET
CLASSIFICATION INTANGIBLE
Bilbao
Ev
Adelaide
Sydney
Fm
EVBC royalty income m 4.0tel 2014 2013
GROUP OVERVIEW STRATEGIC REPORT
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION 29 ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 WHAT WE OWN Anglo Pacific provided Denison Mines Inc Denison with a C40.8m 13year loan bearing interest at a rate of 10%pa.
The interest payments are payable from the cash flows which Denison receives from the toll revenue generated from its 22.5% interest in the McClean Lake mill operated by Orano Group previously
The mill processes all ore currently produced from the nearby world class Cigar Lake uranium mine operated by Cameco and pays a lb toll rate for use of the mill.
In any period where the cash flow from the toll revenue exceeds the interest payment the balance is received by Anglo Pacific as a repayment of principal.
In any period where the cash flows are less than the interest the interest will capitalise and be repaid out of cash flows in the following period.
Any amounts outstanding at maturity are due and payable regardless of the cash generated from the toll.
In addition to the loan the Group also entered into a financial transaction with Denison to purchase the entire share of their toll receipts received from Cigar Lake for C2.7m.
This allows for potential mine life extension at Cigar Lake.
PERFORMANCE
The Cigar Lake mine produced 18Mlbs of uranium during 2017 meeting Camecos production guidance and our expectations.
The cash flow received by Denison under the toll arrangement should produce a regular and predictable flow of cash owing to the world class deposit and bluechip operator supplying the mill.
The cash received of 5.0m during 2017 included an amount of 1.8m relating to H2 2016.
As such the remaining 3.2m generated represents the level of run rate we would expect to see on an annual basis.
The income from the toll revenue is not sensitive to movements in the uranium price which continues to be depressed.
As such the Groups cash flows will not alter with uranium price fluctuations.
The risk to the Groups cash flow from this asset could arise if uranium prices fall to a level where the operation providing the throughput to the mill became uneconomic and shutdown.
The Group considers this unlikely in the case of Cigar Lake.
VALUATION
The loan instrument is accounted for as a receivable and carried at amortised cost.
The stream is considered a financial instrument in accordance with the Groups accounting policies and is therefore carried at fair value.
S TR A TE G I C R E P O R T
BUSINESS REVIEW
McCLEAN LAKE MILL STAGE PRODUCING COMMODITY URANIUM OPERATOR DENISON MINES INC.
AREVA  CAMECO LOCATION CANADA ROYALTY RATE and TYPE TOLLING REVENUE BALANCE SHEET LOAN and ROYALTY CLASSIFICATION FINANCIAL
THE MCCLEAN LAKE MILL IS SPECIALLY DESIGNED AND CONSTRUCTED TO PROCESS HIGH GRADE URANIUM ORES IN A SAFE AND ENVIRONMENTALLY RESPONSIBLE MANNER THE MILL PROCESSES ALL ORE CURRENTLY PRODUCED FROM THE NEARBY WORLD CLASS CIGAR LAKE MINE Denison Mines LOCATED WEST OF WOLLASTON LAKE ON THE EASTERN EDGE OF THE ATHABASCA BASIN IN NORTHERN SASK ATCHEWAN CANADA APPROXIMATELY 750 KILOMETRES NORTH OF SASK ATOON
Saskatoon
Mc
APGAR1728.03.18FRONTARTWORK
30 ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 U
Ni
NICKELCOBALT
ANTHRACITE
DEVELOPMENT
ROYALTIES
1.8% 1.8% OF THE PORTFOLIO IS DEVELOPMENT
COMMODITIES
GROUNDHOG SALAMANCA PIAUI pages 15 to 17 GROUP OVERVIEW STRATEGIC REPORT
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION 31 ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 APGAR1728.03.18FRONTARTWORK BERKELEY EXPECT CONSTRUCTION TO BE LARGELY COMPLETED BY THE END OF 2018 WITH PRODUCTION COMMENCING SHORTLY THEREAFTER WHAT WE OWN The Group has a 1% life of mine NSR royalty on the Salamanca uranium project located in Spain and operated by ASXlisted Berkeley Energia Limited
The project consists of four main deposits Retortillo Alameda Zona 7 and Gambuta and is located in the Salamanca Province Spain approximately 250km west of Madrid.
PERFORMANCE
Berkeley had another eventful and successful year.
Berkeley began the year by announcing an offtake agreement with Curzon Resources under which it will provide 2Mlbs of uranium per annum over five years at US43lb a significant commercial milestone.
Berkeley announced in December that it has now contracted uranium for 2.75Mlbs for the first six years and has granted the Oman sovereign wealth fund the right to match any future longterm offtake agreements.
A large focus for the year was on raising finance to fund the construction of the mine.
To that extent and undoubtedly the highlight of the year for Berkeley was the agreement entered into with the sovereign wealth fund of the Sultanate of Oman to invest up to 120m into the project.
The first 65m was received in November 2017.
This is in addition to Berkeleys 30.0m equity raise in H1 2017.
These fundraising initiatives largely remove the financing risk associated with construction of the mine.
Progress is continuing at site with the delivery to site of the primary crusher in July 2017.
Berkeley continues to explore for additional deposits similar to that of Zona 7.
Berkeley expect construction to be largely completed by the end of 2018 with production commencing shortly thereafter.
VALUATION
The Salamanca royalty is classified as a royalty intangible asset on the balance sheet.
As such this asset is carried at cost less amortisation and impairments.
Royalty intangible assets are amortised when commercial production commences on a straightline basis over the expected life of the mine.
In 2016 we noted that Resource Capital Funds acquired a separate royalty over the project.
This royalty was on identical terms to Anglo Pacifics and on a prorate basis would value the Groups royalty at US13.3m compared to its carrying cost of A4.1m US3.2m.
SALAMANCA
STAGE DEVELOPMENT COMMODITY URANIUM OPERATOR BERKELEY ENERGIA LOCATION SPAIN ROYALTY RATE and TYPE 1% NSR BALANCE SHEET
CLASSIFICATION INTANGIBLE THE SALAMANCA PROJECT IS BEING DEVELOPED IN AN HISTORIC URANIUM MINING AREA IN WESTERN SPAIN ABOUT 250KM WEST OF MADRID
Berkeley Energia
S TR A TE G I C R E P O R T
BUSINESS REVIEW
APGAR1728.03.18FRONTARTWORK
32 ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 THE GROUNDHOG ANTHRACITE PROJECT IS LOCATED IN NORTHWEST BRITISH COLUMBIA CANADA AN UNDERGROUND PROJECT CAPABLE OF PRODUCING 880KTPA OF ULTRAHIGH GRADE ANTHRACITE OVER A MINE LIFE OF 28 YRS WHAT WE OWN The Group retained a royalty on the Groundhog anthracite project located in northwest British Columbia Canada following its disposal of the related mining licences in 2014 to the projects operator ASXlisted Atrum Coal Limited
The royalty entitled the Group to the higher of 1% of gross revenue on a mine gate basis or US1.00t from coal sales derived from the Panorama licences.
Following a series of discussions during 2016 an agreement was reached to settle amounts outstanding under a promissory note in return for additional royalties as follows 0.5% GRR covering all production within Atrums Groundhog Anthracite Project Groundhog tenements from first production until ten years from the date that Atrum declares commercial production on the project and subsequently 0.1% GRR from production within the Groundhog North Mining Complex project area.
PERFORMANCE
There was limited progress by Atrum in relation to Groundhog during the year as it focused its efforts on acquiring outright the Elan hard coking coal project in Alberta.
Atrum is continuing discussions with potential partners to help advance the project.
Atrum is currently awaiting the results of drilling undertaken on the Panorama North deposits and will announce these results as soon as they are signed off.
VALUATION
The Groundhog royalty is classified as a royalty intangible asset on the balance sheet.
As such this asset is carried at cost less amortisation and impairments.
Royalty intangible assets are amortised when commercial production commences on a straightline basis over the expected life of the mine.
GROUNDHOG
STAGE DEVELOPMENT COMMODITY ANTHRACITE OPERATOR ATRUM COAL LOCATION CANADA ROYALTY RATE and TYPE 1% GRR OR
BALANCE SHEET
CLASSIFICATION INTANGIBLE
Vancouver
APGAR1728.03.18FRONTARTWORK
GROUP OVERVIEW STRATEGIC REPORT
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION 33 ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 RING OF FIRE 8.9% 8.9% OF THE PORTFOLIO IS EARLYSTAGE
PILBARA DUGBE 1
ROYALTIES
Cr
CHROMITE
Au
GOLD
Fe
IRON ORE
S TR A TE G I C R E P O R T
BUSINESS REVIEW
34 ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 APGAR1728.03.18FRONTARTWORK WHAT WE OWN The Group has a 1% life of mine NSR royalty over a number of claims on the Black Thor Black Label and Big Daddy chromite deposits owned by TSXlisted Noront Resources Limited.
Noront in the Ring of Fire region of Northern Ontario Canada.
PERFORMANCE
There was limited progress reported by Noront in the year.
Noront has several projects in the region and it is currently appraising sites for the location of its proposed ferrochrome production facility.
In its AGM presentation published on June 7 2017 Noront indicated that the Eagles Nest project is currently within the feasibility stage while preliminary economic analysis is being undertaken in respect of the Blackbird and Black Thor projects with the latter being subject to the Groups Ring of Fire royalty.
VALUATION
The Ring of Fire royalty is classified as a royalty intangible asset on the balance sheet.
As such this asset is carried at cost less amortisation and impairments.
Royalty intangible assets are amortised when commercial production commences on a straightline basis over the expected life of the mine.
Perth
Pi
THE GROUP HAS THREE EXPLORATION TENEMENTS IN THE CENTRAL PILBARA REGION OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA Thunder Bay RING OF FIRE STAGE EARLYSTAGE COMMODITY CHROMITE OPERATOR NORONT
LOCATION CANADA ROYALTY RATE and TYPE 1% NSR BALANCE SHEET
CLASSIFICATION INTANGIBLE WHAT WE OWN The Group has a 1.5% life of mine GRR over three exploration tenements in the central Pilbara region of Western Australia owned by a whollyowned subsidiary of BHP Billiton Limited BHP Billiton which is duallisted on the LSE and ASX.
The tenements covering 263km host a number of known iron occurrences including the Railway deposit.
The tenements are supported by extensive rail infrastructure including the rail lines from Rio Tintos West Angeles and Yandicoogina mines and BHP Billitons rail line serving its current operations at Mining Area C which lie immediately to the east of the Railway deposit.
PERFORMANCE
The Pilbara royalties are over undeveloped tenements of BHP Billitons iron ore operations in Western Australia.
The Group was encouraged that BHP approached the Company in 2016 to seek certain consents to advance the tenements towards planning an indication that BHP is moving this asset towards production.
We were further encouraged by BHPs announcement on June 26 2017 that they were approving capex of 184m to commence funding its South Flank project.
Although this does not bring mining within the Groups royalty licences it does indicate that BHP are now moving in this direction.
The expansion will leverage the existing infrastructure around Mining Area C.
VALUATION
The Pilbara royalty is classified as a royalty intangible asset on the balance sheet.
As such this asset is carried at cost less amortisation and impairments.
Royalty intangible assets are amortised when commercial production commences on a straightline basis over the expected life of the mine.
PILBARA
STAGE EARLYSTAGE COMMODITY IRON ORE OPERATOR BHP BILLITON LOCATION AUSTRALIA ROYALTY RATE and TYPE 1.5% GRR BALANCE SHEET
CLASSIFICATION INTANGIBLE THE GROUP HAS CLAIMS ON THE BLACK THOR BLACK LABEL AND BIG DADDY CHROMITE DEPOSITS IN THE RING OF FIRE REGION OF NORTHERN ONTARIO
FIRST DEVELOPMENT WILL BE EAGLES NEST FOLLOWED BY BLACKBIRD
OPTIONS
PRELIMINARY
ECONOMIC ANALYSIS
MINE DEVELOPMENT STR ATEGY
McFAULDS
THUNDER
BIRD
AT12
KYLE
McFADYEN
JJJ
BLACK
LABEL
BLACK THOR
BIG DADDY
NEST
APGAR1728.03.18FRONTARTWORK
GROUP OVERVIEW STRATEGIC REPORT
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION 35 ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 S TR A TE G I C R E P O R T
BUSINESS REVIEW
WHAT WE OWN The Group entered into a royalty financing agreement with AIMlisted Hummingbird Resources PLC Hummingbird in December 2012 in relation to its Dugbe 1 gold project in Liberia.
In exchange for US15.0m payable in three tranches of US5.0m the Group is entitled to a 2% life of mine NSR royalty from any sales of gold mined within a 20km radius of a specified point in the Dugbe 1 Resource.
PERFORMANCE
There has been limited progress in the year to advance the Dugbe 1 project.
Although the Mineral Development Agreement has been signed by the Government it has yet to be passed into law.
Until such time as this is done it is unlikely that any meaningful investment will be made.
In the meantime Hummingbird are making considerable progress in bringing their Yanfolila gold mine in Mali into production which achieved first gold pour on December 19 2017.
Hummingbirds management team has done a great job in bringing a project to production and this experience should stand it in good stead when it turns its attention to Dugbe 1.
VALUATION
The Dugbe 1 royalty is classified as an availableforsale debt financial asset within royalty financial instruments on the balance sheet.
As such the asset is carried at fair value by reference to the discounted expected future cash flows over the life of the mine.
There are certain provisions within the contract which would entitle Anglo Pacific to seek its capital to be returned however at present the prospect of these being triggered seems remote.
DUGBE 1 STAGE EARLYSTAGE COMMODITY GOLD OPERATOR HUMMINGBIRD
LOCATION LIBERIA ROYALTY RATE and TYPE 2  2.5% NSR BALANCE SHEET ROYALTY FINANCIAL CLASSIFICATION INSTRUMENT
Liberia
Du
WHAT WE OWN The Group has a 1% life of mine NSR royalty on the Jogjakarta iron sands project operated by ASXlisted Indo Mines Limited Indo Mines.
Until the project reaches commercial product the Group receives 8% interest on the initial advance of US4.0m in perpetuity.
Upon entering commercial production the NSR royalty is calculated at 2% until the initial advance of U4.0m is repaid.
The NSR royalty remains at 2% where the pig iron price is more than US700t.
PERFORMANCE
The Group fully provided for the remaining carrying value of its Indo Mines debenture at June 30 2017.
Since then Indo Mines main shareholder the Rajawali Group has launched a takeover approach for the company having invested considerable amounts of capital over the past few years.
The takeover is intended to cover both debt and equity.
Anglo Pacific agreed to settle the remaining outstanding debt of US4.0m at 50c in the dollar and for full recovery of interest both capitalised and accruing up until the date of the completion of the takeover currently expected to be March 28 2018.
Importantly the debt settlement is not conditional on a successful takeover outcome but is contractually payable ten business days after the close of the takeover period.
As such the Group can expect to receive US2.3m around the middle of April 2018.
This receivable has not been included on the balance sheet.
VALUATION
The Jogjakarta royalty interest is accounted for as an availableforsale debt instrument at fair value currently deemed to be nil.
JOGJAKARTA
STAGE EARLYSTAGE COMMODITY IRON SAND OPERATOR INDO MINES LOCATION INDONESIA ROYALTY RATE and TYPE 1  2% NSR BALANCE SHEET ROYALTY FINANCIAL CLASSIFICATION INSTRUMENT
Java
Jo
APGAR1728.03.18FRONTARTWORK
36 ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 FINANCIAL REVIEW 2017 was another year of significant growth for Anglo Pacific.
Royalty income increased by 90% to a record 37.4m the third year of posting a significant increase in revenue.
The increase in the current year was due to a combination of increased commodity prices across the portfolio along with a significant increase in mining within the Groups private royalty land at Kestrel compared to 2016.
This record level of royalty revenue led to significant cash being generated during 2017 which when including the 5.0m receipts from the Denison financing arrangement and 2.4m from noncore assets resulted in free cash flow of 41.5m 2016 13.4m.
This cash was used to invest 16.4m into the portfolio pay 15.9m to shareholders as dividends and repay our borrowings in full.
There is some organic growth expected from the portfolio during 2018 but this is not expected to result in a material increase in revenue as has been the case in the past three years.
As such the focus for 2018 is to leverage our unencumbered balance sheet and strong cash flow to add further royalties to our portfolio.
2018 will also see the introduction of IFRS9 which will have an impact on how our results are presented.
Income from EVBC will no longer be shown as royalty income on the face of the Income Statement.
Instead the royalty will appear as a debt like asset with the cash being split between a deemed effective interest and principal element.
Its revaluation at each reporting date previously recognised in other comprehensive income will now be recognised in the income statement along with any deferred tax.
Had this been adopted in 2017 reported royalty income would have been 1.7m lower.
It is for this reason along with the completion of the Denison financing arrangement in February 2017 that we introduced a cash based key performance indicator in 2016 which is designed to show the cash generated by the portfolio and against which the dividend cover can be assessed.
The full impact of IFRS9 is discussed in note 3.1.2.
INCOME STATEMENT Overall the Group reported a profit after tax for the year of 10.5m compared to 26.4m in 2016.
This resulted in basic earnings per share of 5.88p compared to 15.60p in the prior year.
Our Income Statement includes a number of valuation items which account for significant volatility and in our view does not present the true underlying performance during the year.
The largest variance is in relation to the valuation of Kestrel an investment property.
This showed a surplus of 17.9m in 2016 only to reverse to a deficit of 11.9m in 2017 a swing of 29.8m.
Also included is the fair value movement on our royalty assets which are accounted for as IAS 39 debt instruments.
In the current period the 6.3m deficit includes the full provision for the Jogjakarta debenture and a 3.3m fair value charge against the Groups Dugbe 1 royalty.
There were no impairment charges in relation to the Groups royalty intangible assets in the period.
These valuation movements also result in a corresponding but opposite deferred tax adjustment.
Royalty income 37382 90% 19705 Operating expenses  excluding share based payments 4716 42% 3327 Finance costs 795 27% 1086 Finance income 1198 49% 2347 Other lossesincome 42 309 Tax 2934 102% 1454 Adjusted earnings 30093 82% 16494 Weighted average number of shares 000 178895 169016 16.82p 72% 9.76p Adjusted earnings increased by 72% during the year to 30.1m from 16.5m in 2016.
This increase is primarily attributable to the 90% increase in royalty income despite receiving no income from the Four Mile royalty as the dispute continues.
This has been offset somewhat by a 42% increase in overheads to 4.7m due to higher staff costs and a greater investment by the Company in pursuing growth.
Elsewhere finance income includes the 1.9m portion of the 5.0m Denison cash flows treated as interest.
This also includes the impact of foreign exchange on the Groups monetary assets which had a much higher impact in 2016 post the result of the EU referendum and associated impact on the value of the pound.
The pound has been much more stable during 2017.
Finance costs are lower reflecting lower financing activities during the year.
The tax charge doubled in the period to reflect a higher level of profit in the Group and higher withholding tax on royalties.
In addition 2016 benefitted from tax recoveries.
Overall adjusted earnings per share were 16.8p in 2017 a 72% increase on the 9.76p earned in 2016.
This results in dividend cover of 2.4x in 2017 compared to 1.6x in 2016.
ROYALTY INCOME Kestrel 28746 119% 13134 263% 3614 Narrabri 4946 17% 4243 32% 3217 EVBC 1689 38% 1223 2% 1246 Maracs Menchen 2001 153% 791 31% 606 Four Mile  314 Royalty income 37382 90% 19705 127% 8683
37 ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 GROUP OVERVIEW STRATEGIC REPORT
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
OTHER INFORMATION FINANCIAL REVIEW
Royalty income increased by 90% during the year to 37.4m which represents a record year of royalty revenue for Anglo Pacific.
The Groups income continues to be heavily weighted towards Kestrel which contributed 28.7m 76.9% of the total.
Elsewhere there was a record contribution of 2.0m from Maracs Menchen more than two and a half times of that in the previous year.
Frustratingly we did not receive any royalty income from Four Mile where our dispute over the basis for calculating the royalty continues along the path towards judicial review.
Kestrel
Income from Kestrel increased by 119% in the year.
This was mainly a function of a significant increase in the portion of mining at Kestrel being within the Groups private royalty land 92% in 2017 vs 67% in 2016 and much higher coal prices.
The increase in volumes from the Groups land was largely anticipated at the beginning of the year and can be seen clearly on the chart on page 26.
We now expect to receive 90% of the royalties from Kestrel in the mediumterm.
Overall production from Kestrel remained relatively static during 2017 at 5mt.
We anticipate some organic growth in these volumes as the stated ROM is 5.7mtpa.
In addition to volume the Group benefitted from significantly higher coal prices throughout 2017 compared to what most forecasters had anticipated at the beginning of the year.
The average price realised at Kestrel was some 30% higher in 2017.
This not only impacts on the headline royalty rate it also serves to increase the weighted average royalty rate due to the ratchetbased calculation.
As such the weighted average royalty rate increased from 8.8% in 2016 to 10.5% in 2017.
Finally the average GBPAUD exchange rate in 2017 was 1.6811 compared to 1.8252 the latter was higher as the impact of Brexit was only in H2 2016.
As such converting the Australian dollar income into sterling resulted in a favourable variance in 2017 compared to 2016 of 2.3m.
All of this combined to produce overall royalty revenue of 28.7m in 2017 2016 13.1m a record year of income from the Kestrel royalty.
Narrabri
Narrabri had a mixed year.
The higher thermal coal price compensated for an overall reduction in sales volumes.
Volumes at Narrabri continue to be impacted by a fault which is currently being experienced in part of the longwall panels resulting in a step around being required which is impacting on production levels.
Whitehaven are also experiencing changing roof conditions earlier than expected which has slowed down the pace of mining.
As such they twice reduced their guidance for FY 2017 and achieved sales of 6.7mt in calendar year 2017 compared to 7.8mt in 2016.
They expect the fault to persist for the next three years and have reduced their guidance accordingly.
The lower volumes in 2017 were compensated for by higher coal prices.
Thermal coal prices were very resilient during 2017 and remained at levels well in advance of most commentators expectations.
Coal prices were on average 31% higher during 2017 which more than compensated for the 16% lower volume.
The outlook for thermal coal certainly in the short term remains relatively favourable as discussed on page 27.
Maracs Menchen Royalty income increased by more than two and a half times in 2017 to 2.0m a record contribution from this royalty which was acquired in 2014.
This reflected an increase in both volume and pricing.
In terms of volume Largo achieved a record year of production at Maracs Menchen.
Total production in 2017 was 9297 tonnes a 17% increase on the previous year and all the more impressive considering the 20day planned shut down in Q1 2017 for minor modifications.
Largo achieved regular monthly records during the course of 2017 culminating in a quarterly record of 2539 tonnes in Q4 2017.
These productions levels resulted in the first deferred consideration payment of US1.5m becoming due and payable in November 2017.
In addition to strong underlying production the vanadium price recovered significantly in 2017 with average prices almost double those of 2016.
Spot prices to date in 2018 are at levels considerably higher than the average for 2017.
EVBC
Income from EVBC also showed a meaningful increase of 38% in 2017 contributing 1.7m.
This is as a result of a 24% increase in gold production over the calendar year and a 44% increase in copper production.
The copper price has also produced significant gains during the course of 2017.
The increase in production levels follows capital investments made by Orvana over the past 18 months or so.
Orvana continue to examine the potential for mine life extension at EVBC.
Four Mile The Group continues to be frustrated by the lack of income from Four Mile during 2017 owing to a dispute with the operator as to what costs are allowable deductions in accordance with the royalty agreement.
At present the operator is treating the royalty in our view akin to a profit share.
The Group disagrees with this and considers this contract to be a net smelter return royalty.
We have engaged legal and technical experts to assist us in compiling a file at which point we will commence formal proceedings through the Australian judicial system.
We are confident in the outcome of this process and will update the market when we have further clarity.
OPERATING EXPENSES Operating expenses increased by 42% in the period to 5.9m compared to 4.1m in 2016.
Excluding the noncash sharebased payment provision underlying costs increased from 3.4m in 2016 to 4.7m in 2017.
Staff costs 2528 1746 Professional fees 1073 626 Other costs 1115 955 Operating expenses  excluding share based payments 4716 41.7% 3327 Share based payments  including NI 1174 803 Total operating expenses per the income statement 5890 4130 S TR A TE G I C R E P O R T
38 ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 The main increase is in relation to staff costs which increased by 45% to 2.5m.
Part of the reason for the increase was that 2016 was lower than usual due to an overprovision for bonus payments of 0.2m in 2015 which unwound in 2016.
Secondly the bonus period was altered in 2016 to be rebased to a calendar year.
As such there was a oneoff top up of 0.3m in 2017 to reflect the under provision at the end of 2016.
Finally salaries increased by 0.2m in 2017 which when combined with a higher level of bonus provision resulted in an additional 0.3m in the year.
Elsewhere other noticeable differences include a large increase in listing costs.
This is due to listing costs being a function of market capitalisation which increased during the year.
In addition there are now a greater number of shares in issue post the Denison equity raise.
The investment costs more than doubled in the period which reflects a provision for legal costs incurred to date in resolving the Four Mile dispute along with some additional costs incurred in pursuing growth opportunities.
We expect to incur additional costs in 2018 in searching and appraising potential royalty acquisitions.
Although costs increased during the period management believe that a runrate of below 5m is not excessive and our internal controls are focused on disciplined procurement around due diligence and avoiding unnecessary costs.
FINANCE INCOME AND COSTS Interest expense on borrowing facility 188 278 Nonutilisation fee on undrawn borrowings 185 132 Aborted transaction costs  professional fees 422 676 Finance costs 795 26.7% 1086 Bank interest 19 56 Interest on other investments 1926 26 Realised foreign exchange gains 747 2265 Finance income 1198 49.0% 2347 Finance income includes the exchange differences realised during the year and the exchange effect on monetary assets which includes the Denison loan.
The gain booked in 2016 was largely as a result of devaluation of the pound following the EU referendum in Q2 2016.
The sterling has been less volatile in 2017 but a loss of 0.7m is being reported in 2017 which reflects the exchange difference on the Denison receivable.
Finance income also includes the interest income on the Denison loan which accrues interest at the rate of 10% pa.
Finance costs reduced by 0.3m in 2017.
This largely reflects lower costs associated with raising finance during the year compared to 2016.
The 2016 costs included aborted deal costs which did not repeat in 2017.
OTHER INCOMELOSSES Other income has reduced by 1.2m in 2017.
This is mainly due to a reversal in the fair value of the forward hedges entered into during the year which showed a small deficit at December 31 2017.
Effective interest 258 246 Other 300 63 Included in adjusted earnings 42 309 Mark to market of currency hedges 188 664 Other lossesincome 230 973 Included within other income is the effective interest on the Groups Jogjakarta debenture instrument.
This was fully impaired at June 30 2017 and a full provision was raised against the accrued interest.
As part of the ongoing takeover process of Indo Mines Limited by its majority shareholder the Group has reached a settlement in relation to its debenture instrument.
As part of this settlement the Group will receive 50c in the dollar on its US4m debenture and full payment of interest both capitalised and accrued up to the date of the takeover.
This is expected to conclude in April 2018 in the meantime we have continued to provide for the interest in full.
TA X The current tax charge for the year is 1.9m which is 1.4m higher than that of 2016.
The charge for 2016 was reduced by the receipt of 0.8m of tax rebates which had not been provided for.
Elsewhere the increase is primarily attributable to withholding tax on a higher level of royalty income during 2017.
United Kingdom corporation tax 3 0 Overseas taxes 1231 1403 Adjustments in respect of prior years 763 809 1997 594 Deduction claimed for amortisation 935 860 Tax per adjusted earnings 2932 1454
39 ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 GROUP OVERVIEW STRATEGIC REPORT
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION BALANCE SHEET Net assets increased from 210.1m at the beginning of 2017 to 218.9m at the end of the year.
Taking into account the shares issued as part of the Denison transaction in February 2017 the closing net assets per share remained broadly flat at 121p per share 2016 124p.
Net assets reconciliation m The adjusted earnings less dividends added 14m during 2017.
The dividend payment above reflects three payments due to the change in dividend policy in Q3 2017 which effectively brought forward the payment of the interim dividend for the year into 2017.
The ongoing annual dividend based on 7p is expected to be 13m rather than the 16m included in the above table.
The addition for the Denison financing arrangement includes only the portion which was financed from the issuance of equity the remaining portion was financed from internal resources.
The royalty portfolio reduced in value by 18m during 2017.
13m of this relates to the fair value of the Kestrel royalty a further 7m relates to the fair value movement of the Groups Dugbe 1 and Jogjakarta royalty financial instruments and 3m relates to an amortisation charge on the Groups intangible assets mainly Narrabri Maracs Menchen and Four Mile.
Despite income from Kestrel of 29m the overall decline in the Kestrel valuation after tax was only 7m.
This is due to an upward revision to longterm coal prices somewhat offsetting the impact of depletion.
The following table illustrates the pretax valuation movement of the Kestrel royalty.
Kestrel  reconciliation CASH FLOW AND BORROWINGS The Group generated considerable cash during 2017.
Net cash generated from operating activities more than trebled to 34.6m compared to 10.3m in 2016.
Management consider this number to understate the true cash flow within their control as it does not include the cash received from Denison treated as principal nor does it include the cash generated from the disposal of noncore equity investments which is within managements control.
Including these amounts the free cash flow generated i. was 41.5m in 2017 compared to 13.4m in 2016.
This equates to free cash flow per share of 23.2p in 2017 compared to 7.93p in 2016.
The following table reconciles the opening cash balance at the beginning of the year to the closing cash balance of 8.1m.
25telm January 1 Kestrel net of tax
Denison equity raise Amortisation MtM royalties
Other Dividend December 31 January 1 Yields Depletion Product mix Coal price Deductions Translation December 31
FINANCIAL REVIEW
S TR A TE G I C R E P O R T
40 ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 2017 cash flow sources and usage The 44.4m royalty income includes the cash flow from the Denison financing arrangement of 5.0m.
Of this amount 1.8m relates to the back dating of cash flows for H2 2016.
The royalty cash flow in 2017 benefitted from the transition to monthly payments from the Kestrel royalty following a change to the Queensland tax regime in Q2 2017.
As such the Group received an additional 4m of income in 2017 than it would have otherwise expected.
This accounted for 2.23p of the increase in adjusted earnings per share noted above.
In total the Group allocated capital in the following way 16.4m in royalty acquisitions 15.9m in dividends and 6.2m repaying all outstanding borrowings.
The strength of the cash generated in 2017 meant that the Group repaid all of its outstanding borrowings and ended the year debt free with 8.1m in cash.
We triggered the US10m accordion option on our borrowing facility in Q4 2017 which means we now have full access to a US40m borrowing facility.
This along with US10m of cash on hand gives us ready access to US50m.
With a wellcovered dividend this liquidity is intended to be put towards royalty acquisitions during 2018.
DIVIDEND
As mentioned previously the Group revised its dividend policy in H2 2017 to move towards quarterly dividend payments.
This was largely due to much smoother and regular sales volumes expectation from Kestrel now that production is largely within the Groups private land.
As part of this transition the Board also determined to narrow the time gap between declaring a dividend and the date on which this dividend is paid.
This resulted in the 2017 interim dividend being paid in November 2017 whereas previously this would not have been paid until February 2018.
Consequently in 2017 total dividends of 9p per share or 15.9m were paid as illustrated in the following tabletel FY Earnings NTM Interim dividend 3 Final dividend 3 6 Interim dividend 3 Q3 Interim dividend 1.5 Final dividend 2.5 7 Q1 Interim dividend 1.625 Q2 Interim dividend 1.625 7.375 Q3 Interim dividend 1.625 Q4 Interim dividend 1.625 6.5 Q4 FY adjustment  xp  xp Cash flow 7.25 9 The Directors are proposing an increase in the final dividend for 2017 of 1p per share meaning that the total dividend for 2017 will be 7p rather than the 6p paid in respect of 2016 subject to shareholder approval at the 2018 AGM.
In addition the level of the quarterly interim dividends has been increased from 1.5p to 1.625p effective from the first interim dividend of 2018.
This means that the total cash dividends received by shareholders over the next 12 months will be 7.375p.
We will once again adjust the final dividend in 2018 to reflect the overall dividend level for 2018.
January 1 Noncore sales
Finance Admin Tax FX and other
Lake
Brazilian
Nickel
Maracs
Menchen
Dividends Borrowings Other December Free cash flows
41 ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 GROUP OVERVIEW STRATEGIC REPORT
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY Following the completion of due diligence if management proposes to proceed with a transaction in excess of a threshold amount it must first seek Board approval.
Below this threshold amount management has discretion to proceed with an investment but must report the transaction to the Board in order to refresh its executive authority before being able to proceed with another investment.
The due diligence process will vary in each case as Anglo Pacific deems necessary or appropriate in the circumstances all applied on a riskadjusted basis.
For instance the purchase of newly created royalties or streams requiring the negotiation of a binding agreement with the operator of a project will typically permit more comprehensive due diligence than the acquisition of existing royalties where Anglo Pacific is acquiring royalty interests often within a royalty portfolio on an asis whereis basis from a third party rather than the operator.
In such cases Anglo Pacific must rely on the limited information provided by the third party as well as any publicly available information with respect to the operator and the project.
The due diligence process will also vary based on the jurisdiction type of mineral and whether the project is an exploration development or producing project among other things.
INTEGRIT Y Anglo Pacific is committed to maintaining the highest standards of integrity in all areas of its business and to maintaining its reputation for fair dealing.
The Group does not offer give or receive bribes or inducements whether directly or through a third party.
The Group has policies and procedures in place to ensure that all Directors officers employees consultants advisors business partners and anyone else who may be acting on its behalf are aware of their responsibilities in this area.
The Group actively promotes a transparent approach to all of its business dealings and expects employees to adopt a zerotolerance attitude to corruption.
Employees are encouraged to report any potential or apparent misconduct in accordance with the Groups internal whistleblowing policy and any employee that refuses to pay bribes or raises any issues honestly and in good faith will be supported by the Group.
The Group chooses business partners and counterparties carefully based on merit and reputation and only works with persons of known integrity who it believes will act consistently with its own standards.
The Group does not make facilitation payments.
Where business is conducted in countries with laws that are less restrictive than the Groups policies and procedures it will seek to follow its own policies and procedures promoting its standard of integrity wherever possible.
Anglo Pacific Group PLC is committed to responsible mining extraction in all aspects of its investments including with respect to environmental social and governance issues.
Anglo Pacifics core business is investing in the business of others and Anglo Pacific does not directly operate any of its assets and hence does not control or influence the operations of any of the properties over which it has an interest.
The projects on which the Company has royalties and streams are owned and operated by independent mining companies which are typically publicly listed.
We are nevertheless committed to responsible mining extraction and seek to address environmental social and governance issues through a combination of the following Our policies which guide investment decisions Our due diligence process for new investments Our contractual rights in our royalty and stream agreements Monitoring investments for their adherence to adequate standards The approach taken by Anglo Pacific has generated value for shareholders and has allowed Anglo Pacific to acquire royalties and streams on projects operated by some of the best operators in the industry.
Anglo Pacific is committed to considering potential partnerships with its operators to support appropriate environmental and social initiatives in the communities associated with its producing assets.
In terms of Anglo Pacifics own environmental impact the Companys carbon footprint is very small.
Anglo Pacific operates solely within one office environment with a small workforce.
The
Company has 10 employees located at its head office in London.
DUE DILIGENCE PROCESS IN NEW ACQUISITIONS When conducting due diligence environmental social and governance issues are considered as these are critical to the longterm success of a project and the industry generally which in turn is key to Anglo Pacifics success.
Anglo Pacific will typically assess the following as part of its due diligence community initiatives and engagement with indigenous peoples safety records whether the operator is committed to the principles of the International Council on Mining and Metals or other relevant standards water management and reduction plans other environmental programmes and initiatives put in place by the operator including carbon reduction and biodiversity protection operating plans and closure plans workplace standards protections and policies S TR A TE G I C R E P O R T
42 ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 ENVIRONMENT Anglo Pacific is committed to an environmental policy of collaborating fully with statutory authorities local communities and other interested parties in order to limit any potential adverse impacts of its activities on the natural and human environments associated with its operations.
The nature of the Groups royalty investments is such that it does not operate any of the properties underlying its royalty portfolio and consequently it does not always have the ability to influence the manner in which the operations are carried out.
Nevertheless a responsible approach to a projects environmental impact and its sustainability management is essential to the success of the project over its life.
As part of the Groups investment decision process careful consideration is given to the environmental aspects of any potential asset purchase during the due diligence phase.
In particular the Group typically engages with consultants who have the requisite expertise to ensure that it can consider and if necessary mitigate any risks in this regard to a properly maintainable level.
In 2017 as part of the Brazilian Nickel agreement Anglo Pacific engaged an independent consultant to conduct an environmental review relating to the project.
No breaches were identified as part of this process.
The Group expects employees to address environmental and sustainability responsibilities within the framework of normal operating procedures and to look to minimise waste as much as economically practicable.
The Audit Committee is responsible for periodically reviewing the Groups environmental practices and for monitoring their effectiveness.
SOCIAL AND COMMUNITY ISSUES Anglo Pacific acknowledges that whilst its activities have little direct contact with communities it can positively influence the social practices and policies of companies it conducts business with.
Positive social and community relationships are essential to profitable and successful mining activities.
The Group endeavours to ensure that companies it works with have appropriate procedures in place to facilitate this.
More specifically Anglo Pacifics investment decision process for potential asset purchases involves due diligence relating to the full range of CSR issues including the social and community aspects of the project.
As part of its Brazilian Nickel agreement Anglo Pacific reviewed the social and community factors associated with the Piau Project.
No issues were identified as part of this process.
DIVERSIT Y The Groups employees are instrumental to its success and it respects and values the individuality and diversity that every employee brings to the business.
As at December 31 2017 50% of the Groups employees were female as the Group had 10 employees five of whom were female.
In terms of the Companys Board of Directors there were six Directors five of whom were male and one of whom was female.
Prior to any appointment to the Board the Nomination Committee gives due regard to diversity and gender with a view to appointing the best placed individual for the role.
The Group recognises that it has more to do in encouraging and supporting diversity and hopes to be able to identify and develop talent at all levels in the organisation as the Group continues to grow.
More information on the Nomination Committees approach to diversity can be found on page 48.
HUMAN RIGHTS The debate on the role of business and human rights has gained increasing prominence in recent years.
Anglo Pacific welcomes this focus as respect for human rights is implicit across the Groups employment practices.
Further a commitment to human rights is an important part of any successful organisation.
As part of the Groups investment decision process if necessary consultants with the requisite expertise are engaged to assist in identifying and mitigating any such risks.
HEALTH AND SAFETY The health and safety of the Groups employees is of fundamental importance and is a responsibility it takes seriously.
The Groups small size allows the daytoday responsibility to remain at Board level being monitored by the Chief Executive Officer.
The Group has both a health and safety policy and office risk assessments in place which are reviewed on an annual basis.
Furthermore a commitment to health and safety is a fundamental component of any mining project and as part of the Groups investment decision process consultants with the requisite expertise are engaged to assist in identifying and mitigating any such risks.
GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS The UK Government requires that UK listed companies should report their global levels of greenhouse gas emissions in their Annual Report.
Anglo Pacific is a relatively small organisation with 10 employees which means that any emission sources within its operational and financial control such as business travel purchase of electricity heat or cooling by the Group are not material in their impact.
As the management and operation of the underlying mines generating the Groups royalty and stream income is outside its control it is unable to report on these emissions.
The information on pages 08 to 43 represents the Groups Strategic Report and has been approved by the board.
J.
Treger
Chief Executive Officer
March 27 2018
43 ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 GROUP OVERVIEW STRATEGIC REPORT
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION CORPORATE GOVERNANCE REPORT Our approach towards corporate governance As a standard listed company on the London Stock Exchange the Company is required to comply with the minimum regulatory requirements imposed by the EU that apply to all securities admitted to trading on EU regulated markets.
Accordingly the Company is subject to the relevant Listing Rules the Disclosure and Transparency Rules of the UK Corporate Governance Code and the Prospectus Rules.
However it is not required to comply with the superequivalent provisions of the Listing Rules which apply to companies with a premium listing.
The Company is however complying on a voluntary basis with related party requirements that are substantially equivalent to those set out in Chapter 11 of the Listing Rules.
The Board remains committed to high standards of corporate governance and considers all NonExecutive Directors to be independent.
Board and Committee structure The Board is collectively responsible for approving the Groups longterm objectives and strategy and for reviewing performance against them.
The Board is also responsible for the general oversight of the Groups operations and management.
At the conclusion of the 2017 AGM in May 2017 Patrick Meier assumed the role of NonExecutive Chairman from Mike Blyth and is responsible for the leadership and effectiveness of the Board.
The time commitment expected of the NonExecutive Chairman is around six days per month.
Mr.
Meiers other commitments are shown on page 45 none of which is considered to be significant.
The daytoday management of the Group is delegated to the Chief Executive Officer CEO save for certain matters reserved for consideration by the Board.
The Chairman and CEO have distinct roles which have been defined in writing and agreed by the Board.
The CEO is supported by the Chief Financial Officer and Company Secretary and the Head of Investments who meet as an Executive
The Executive Committee is no longer a formal Board Committee because it is not currently comprised of a majority of Executive Directors.
Other responsibilities are devolved to the Nomination Remuneration and Audit Committees their members are all NonExecutive Directors and their work is described more fully below.
The terms of reference of each Committee and the matters reserved to the Board are available on the Groups website.
David Archer is Anglo Pacifics Senior Independent Director SID.
The role of the SID is to be available to shareholders to discuss any concerns they may have about the running of Anglo Pacific where the normal channels of communication are not appropriate.
The SID is not required to seek meetings with shareholders however is available to do so if required in order to understand shareholder concerns and take them to the Board for discussion.
The SID is also required to lead discussions at meetings of NonExecutive Directors without the Chairman present at least annually to appraise the chairmans performance and on such other occasions as are deemed appropriate.
APGAR1704.04.18MIDDLEAMENDS
44 ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 G OV E R N A N C E THE BOARD
N.
Meier
68 was appointed NonExecutive Director in April 2015 and assumed the role of NonExecutive Chairman at the conclusion of the 2017 AGM in May 2017.
Mr.
Meier has over 30 years of experience in investment banking with specialist knowledge of the mining sector.
He has an MA in Natural Sciences from Cambridge University.
Most recently Mr.
Meier headed up the investment banking activities for RBC Capital Markets in Europe and Asia and drove a major expansion of RBCs European presence.
Prior to this role he headed up RBCs activities in the Metals and Mining sector in Europe Africa and Asia for many years and continues to enjoy strong relationships within the sector.
Mr.
Meier also served as a Director on the Board of RBCs main operating subsidiary in Europe.
In addition to his role at Anglo Pacific Mr.
Meier acts as a Senior Adviser to Bacchus Capital Advisers an advisory boutique and in various other advisory roles from time to time.
Committee Chair Nomination Committee
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER
J.
Treger
55 joined the Group as Chief Executive Officer and Executive Director on October 21 2013.
He has an MBA from Harvard Business School and a BA from Harvard University.
He began his career working for Lord Rothschild as an inhouse corporate financier managing a portfolio of public and private equity investments before cofounding Active Value Advisors Ltd.
US900.0m of funds over a 12year period.
He currently serves as NonExecutive Chairman of Audley Capital Advisors LLP an investment advisory firm which he cofounded in 2005 which specialises in managing valueorientated special situations investment strategies through hedge fund and coinvestment vehicles with a principal focus on the natural resources sector.
Mr.
Treger holds external NonExecutive Directorships with Mantos Copper S.
EBT Digital Communications Retail Group Broadwell Capital and Ilari Exploration OY for which he earned fees during the year.
These directorships do not affect Mr.
Tregers ability to perform his role as CEO of the Company as they form part of his 10% time commitment outside Anglo Pacific.
SENIOR INDEPENDENT DIRECTOR
Archer
61 was appointed NonExecutive Director in October 2014.
He is also the Groups Senior Independent Director.
He has over 34 years international resources industry experience in the Americas Asia Australia and the Middle East.
He is the Chief Executive Officer of AIMlisted Savannah Resources PLC which owns majority stakes in a mineral sands project in Mozambique and a copper project in Oman.
He was previously the Managing Director of ASXlisted company Hillgrove Resources Limited where he was responsible for growing the company into a significant dividend paying mineral explorer and copper producer with assets in Australia and Indonesia.
Mr.
Archer was the founder and Deputy Chairman of Savage Resources Limited a coal copper and zinc producer and the founder and Executive Chairman of PowerTel Limited.
He is also a barrister nonpractising of the Supreme Court of New South Wales.
Committee member Remuneration Committee Nomination
NONEXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
Blyth
67 was appointed Director in March 2013 and became Non Executive Chairman on April 1 2014 until stepping down from this role at the conclusion of the 2017 AGM in May 2017.
He has a BSc from St Andrews University and is a Chartered Accountant.
He was until his retirement in 2011 a partner for 30 years in RSM previously Baker Tilly specialising in providing audit and related services to AIM and full list clients.
During his career he held a number of senior management positions with the firm including a period on its National Executive Committee.
In addition to his directorship of Anglo Pacific Mr.
Blyth is a board member of Wheatley Housing Group and director of Haldane Property Company Ltd and Glasgow and Suburban Property Company Ltd.
Mr.
Blyth also acts as trustee for a number of small charities.
Committee Chair Audit Committee Remuneration Committee Committee member Nomination Committee
Rhodes
46 was appointed NonExecutive Director in May 2014.
She has an MA in Economics from the University of Cambridge and is a member of the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales having qualified with Coopers and Lybrand in London in 1997.
She has over 15 years of experience in the mining industry including with Anglo American PLC until August 2008 and London Mining PLC until November 2013 and is now CFO of Alufer Mining Limited.
Ms.
Rhodes also serves on the boards of Alufer Mining Services Limited and Bel Air Mining SA and has played a leading role in listing companies on LSE AIM and JSE in raising significant project and corporate finance and in negotiating mining licences and fiscal platforms.
Due to her ever increasing executive responsibilities Ms Rhodes has decided not to put herself forward for reelection at the 2018 AGM.
Committee member Audit Committee Nomination Committee
Stan
64 was appointed NonExecutive Director in February 2014.
He has over 34 years of experience in the mining industry.
He has held several senior positions with Fording Coal Limited Westar Mining Ltd and TECK Corporation before becoming a founding shareholder and director of publicly quoted Grande Cache Coal Corporation GCC an Albertabased metallurgical coal mining company in 2000.
At GCC he served as President CEO and Director from 2001 to 2012 when the company was sold for US1.0b to Winsway Coking Coal and Marubeni Corp an Asianbacked strategic investor consortium.
He has served as Chairman of the Coal Association of Canada Board of Directors and has acted as a board member of the International Energy Agencys Coal Industry Advisory Board.
He currently serves on the board of several private companies including Quantex Resources Limited Lighthouse Resources Inc and Spruce Bluff Resources Limited and formerly served on the board of publicly listed Whetstone Minerals Limited.
Committee member Audit Committee Nomination Committee Remuneration Committee
45 ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 GROUP OVERVIEW STRATEGIC REPORT
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION THE BOARD continued BOARD EVOLUTION There have been no appointments to the Board during 2017 however Mr.
Blyth having overseen revisions to the Groups internal governance and investment process stepped down as Chairman at the conclusion of the 2017 AGM and was succeeded by Mr.
Meier.
In February 2018 Rachel Rhodes announced her intention to step down as a NonExecutive Director at the conclusion of the 2018 AGM in order to focus on her other professional commitments.
The
Board is in the process of seeking to appoint a further NonExecutive
APPOINTMENT DEVELOPMENT AND ASSESSMENT OF DIRECTORS All Directors are subject to election by shareholders at the first opportunity after their appointment.
Under the terms of the Companys Articles of Association all Directors are required to retire and seek reappointment by shareholders at an AGM on the third anniversary of their appointment.
All current NonExecutive Directors were appointed for an initial threeyear term renewable at the Boards discretion for up to two further threeyear periods thereafter and the Board intends that all future NonExecutive Director appointments will be on similar terms.
Notwithstanding this it is the Boards intention that all Directors including the Non Executive Directors shall be subject to reelection at each AGM.
Each Director is required to disclose to the Board their other significant commitments prior to appointment and when there is any significant change.
The Board considers that all of the Directors allocate sufficient time to the Company to discharge their responsibilities effectively.
The Companys Directors have a wide range of skills as well as updating their knowledge and capabilities.
The Chairman regularly reviews the Directors training needs and where appropriate the Group provides the resources to meet the Directors requirements.
The Board has in place a formal induction process for new Directors on joining the Board which is tailored to the needs of the individual.
FUNCTIONING OF THE BOARD The Chairman in conjunction with the Company Secretary is responsible for setting the Boards agenda and for ensuring that the Board receives accurate timely and clear information.
The agenda includes regular reports from the executive management and from the Boards Committees on all matters relating to the running of the Group.
The Chairman is also responsible for ensuring that adequate time is available for discussion of all agenda items and in particular strategic issues.
As part of the Board effectiveness review in the current year the Chairman asked the facilitator to review the Board packs which the Directors receive and provide any recommendations if any as to how these could be improved.
There was a particular focus on the adhoc reports which the Directors receive in relation to potential investments as this is an area where the Board spends considerable time challenging management decisions and judgements.
The Groups Company Secretary is responsible for advising the Board through the Chairman on all governance matters.
A large area of focus in the current year was in relation to risk and risk management which is the responsibility of the Board.
There were a number of action points raised as part of this review to ensure that there is a more formal and regular monitoring of risk at Board meetings.
This process is discussed in more detail on pages 18 and 19.
All of the Directors have access to the Company Secretarys services and advice.
All of the Directors may also seek independent professional advice in the performance of their duties at the Groups expense.
Directors attendance at Board and Committee meetings which they were eligible to attend during 2017 was as follows Full Board Audit Remuneration Nomination Total meetings held Attendance
Archer 11  3 2
Blyth N.
Meier
R.
Rhodes 11 5  2
Stan J.
Treger 11
Meier stood down from the Remuneration Committee on May 10 2017.
BOARD EVALUATION Every year the Board undertakes an evaluation of its own performance and that of the Board Committees and individual Directors including the Chairman.
This year we commissioned an external review from Clare Chalmers Limited to examine the effectiveness of the Board and its Committees as well as to make recommendations as to where the effectiveness could be enhanced.
The review included interviews with all the directors the Chief Financial Officer and Company Secretary and senior management as well as a desktop review of Board materials and corporate governance documentation.
In addition the review team attended certain Board and Committee meetings.
The findings of this review along with recommendations for improvement were presented by Clare Chalmers Limited and discussed at a meeting of the Board in November and a number of actions to further improve Board performance were agreed.
Overall the review concluded that the Board is performing effectively with the following key points noted The Board comprised a wide range of skills and experience with a spirit of openness combined with a robust degree of challenge.
Leadership of the Board is effective and a high level of integrity exists throughout the organisation beginning at the Board.
The Board governance and Committee structure is effective.
Detailed discussion around material matters impacting the Company takes place including risk management which was the focus of a dedicated session with external professional input at a Strategy Away Day in November 2017.
The areas for focus and continuous improvement are Board papers  need to rationalise and improve use of executive summaries to aid readability of the papers Timing of meetings  monitor the timing of Board and Board Committee meetings to make sure that there remains sufficient time to address all the relevant issues in particular strategic matters Increase frequency of meetings of NonExecutive Directors and Development of a skills matrix to identify skills needed to optimise the composition of the Board.
The Board is committed to making improvements in these areas highlighted in the Board evaluation.
APGAR1704.04.18MIDDLEAMENDS
46 ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 G OV E R N A N C E The key elements of the control system in operation are The Board meets regularly with a formal schedule of matters reserved to it for decision and has put in place an organisational structure with clear lines of responsibility and appropriate delegation of authority.
There are established procedures for planning and approving investments and information systems for monitoring the Groups financial performance against budgets and forecasts.
The Chief Financial Officer is required to undertake an annual assessment process to identify and quantify the risks that face the Groups businesses and functions and to assess the adequacy of the prevention monitoring and mitigation practices in place for those risks.
This process covers all material controls including financial operational and compliance controls.
The Board is responsible for reviewing the risk assessment and risk management processes for completeness and accuracy.
In addition to its work on the above the Audit Committee also receives reports about significant risks and associated control and monitoring procedures.
The Groups internal controls and procedures documentation are regular agenda items for the
The Committee also receives regular reports from the external auditors.
The Audit Committee reports regularly to the Board on these matters so as to enable the Directors to review the effectiveness of the system of internal control.
The Board also receives regular reports or updates from its other Committees and directly from management in addition to carefully considering the Groups risk register at regular intervals.
The system accords with the Financial Reporting Councils Internal Control Revised Guidance for Directors on the Combined Code.
There are no significant issues disclosed in the report and financial statements for the year ended December 31 2017 and up to the date of approval of the report and financial statements that have required the Board to deal with any related material internal control issues.
The Directors confirm that the Board has reviewed the effectiveness of the system of internal control during the period and concluded that the controls and procedures are adequate.
The Board will continue to review the adequacy of the Companys internal controls and will test the controls and procedures again during 2017.
RELATIONS WITH SHAREHOLDERS The Group is the only major natural resources royalty company listed on the LSE and recognises the importance of developing a fuller understanding of its business model and risks amongst investors and an effective twoway communication with fund managers institutional investors and analysts.
Management undertake regular meetings with shareholders following results or investment announcements.
The Chairman and SID also meet with major shareholders a range of fund managers and institutions on a regular basis.
There are over 2000 private investors in the Group.
The Board was pleased by the attendance at the 2017 AGM and the active engagement of investors to further their understanding of the current business activity.
The Company has three joint brokers BMO Capital Markets Cannacord Genuity and Peel Hunt and the Board remains satisfied that the UK Europe and Canada which are the jurisdictions likely to make up most of our shareholder base are well covered by brokers with significant local expertise.
At the same time the Board continues to receive regular investor relations reports including commentary on the perception of the Company views expressed by the investment community media reports share price performance and analysis so as to ensure that all Directors are made aware of the major shareholders issues and concerns.
RISK MANAGEMENT AND INTERNAL CONTROL The Board retains overall responsibility for the Groups system of internal control and risk management and determines the nature and extent of the significant risks it is willing to take in achieving its strategic objectives.
As discussed above the Board has recognised the importance of increased focus on risk and risk management and has agreed to extend the remit of the Audit Committee to monitor the effectiveness of the Companys risk management processes on behalf of the Board.
The Board supported by executive management will also enhance the review and monitoring of the Groups principal risks.
As discussed in the principal risk section on pages 18 and 19 risk was a significant focus during the year and the Group engaged with a consultant to assist the Board in taking a fresh look at our approach to risk.
A statement of Directors responsibilities in respect of the financial statements is set out on page 68.
The Groups system of internal control is designed to provide the Directors with reasonable but not absolute assurance that the Group will not be hindered in achieving its business objectives or in the orderly and legitimate conduct of its business by circumstances that may reasonably be foreseen.
However no system of internal control can eliminate the possibility of poor judgement in decision making human error fraud or other unlawful behaviour management overriding controls or the occurrence of unforeseeable circumstances and the resulting potential for material misstatement or loss.
APGAR1704.04.18MIDDLEAMENDS
47 ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 GROUP OVERVIEW STRATEGIC REPORT
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION NOMINATION COMMITTEE MAIN ACTIVITIES COVERED DURING 2017 The Nomination Committee was actively involved during 2017 in reviewing the structure size and composition of the Board in light of the need to maintain a balance of appropriate skills and accepted best corporate governance practice.
The Committee approved the appointment of Mr.
Meier as Chairman in succession to Mr.
Blyth and the continuing appointment of Mr.
Blyth as a NonExecutive Director.
It concluded that no other changes were required during the year.
Subsequent to the year end the announced intention by Ms.
Rhodes to step down has led to the Committee initiating a search for a suitably qualified replacement who can also contribute to the diversity of the Board.
The Committee has reviewed the Companys Succession Planning Policy for Executive Directors and senior staff members and the policy to govern any future changes to executive management.
N.
Meier
Chairman of the Nomination Committee March 27 2018
Compliant with the Code
P.
H.
Meier  Chairman
Blyth
D.
Archer
R.
Rhodes
R.
Stan
ROLE AND RESPONSIBILITIES The primary responsibilities of the Nomination Committee are to Set guidelines with the approval of the Board for the types of skills experience and diversity being sought when making a search for new directors.
With the assistance of external consultants identifying and reviewing in detail each potential candidate available in the market and agreeing a long list of candidates for each directorship.
Following further discussions and research deciding upon a shortlist of candidates for interview.
Interview of shortlisted candidates by the Committee members who then convene to discuss their impressions and conclusions culminating in a recommendation to the Board.
Make recommendations as to the composition of the Board and its Committees and the balance between Executive Directors and NonExecutive Directors with the aim of cultivating a board with the appropriate mix of skills experience independence and knowledge of the Company.
Ensure that the succession plans for Directors and senior management are regularly reviewed for subsequent debate with the NonExecutive Directors and Chief Executive Officer.
The Committees terms of reference can be found on the Groups website.
DIVERSITY POLICY To increase diversity in particular the representation of women and ethnicity on the Board.
The Board recognises the benefits of diversity and that its current composition is still deficient in several respects.
The announced intention by Ms.
Rhodes to step down as a NonExecutive Director is a step backwards in addressing this.
The Company will ensure that the search for a replacement NonExecutive Director is focused on reestablishing diversity to the Board and will maintain a policy to appoint positions on merit and the needs of the Group at any one time.
The opportunities for developing and appointing women to Executive Directorships will be kept under review.
APGAR1704.04.18MIDDLEAMENDS
48 ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 G OV E R N A N C E AUDIT COMMITTEE MAIN ACTIVITIES COVERED DURING 2017 In 2017 the Committees activities focused on reviewing asset carrying values and other material accounting matters reviewing the accounting classification and treatment of potential acquisitions considering the impact of new standards specifically IFRS 9 and IFRIC 23 on the Groups financial statements monitoring legal and tax exposures and reviewing associated accounting provisions and considering the requirement for the Annual Report and Accounts taken as a whole to be fair balanced and understandable.
SIGNIFICANT ISSUES RELATING TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS The significant issues considered by the Committee in relation to the financial statements are set out in the table below together with a summary of how the issue was addressed by the Committee.
In addition the Committee and the external auditors have discussed the significant issues addressed by the Committee during the year and the areas of particular audit focus as described in the Independent Auditors Report on pages 69 to 74 .
COMPOSITION
Compliant with the Code
Blyth  Chairman from February 16 2018
Rhodes  Chairman until February 16 2018
Stan
The Committee members have a wide range of financial and commercial expertise which the Board considers appropriate to fulfil the Committees duties.
Biographies of the Committee members are set out on page 45.
ROLE AND RESPONSIBILITIES The objective of the Audit Committee is to assist the Board in monitoring decisions and processes designed to ensure the integrity of financial reporting to establish sound systems of internal control and to facilitate robust risk management processes.
The Committees terms of reference set out its main responsibilities and are available on the Groups website.
The Committee is responsible for monitoring the integrity of the Companys annual and interim financial statements the accompanying reports to the shareholders and corporate governance statements making recommendations to the Board concerning the adoption of the annual and interim financial statements reviewing and challenging the consistency of and any changes to accounting policies methods and standards overseeing the Groups relations with the external auditors including the assessment of their independence and their effectiveness making recommendations to the Board on the appointment retention and removal of the external auditors and the tendering of external audit services advising the Board on the external auditors remuneration for both audit and any nonaudit work reviewing and monitoring the reports from management on the principal risks of the Group outlined on pages 18 to 23 and the management of those risks monitoring and reviewing the adequacy and effectiveness of the Companys internal financial controls considering the need for and managing the effectiveness of the Companys approach to internal audit and reviewing and monitoring the environmental and social impact of the Companys activities the Companys whistleblowing procedure and the Companys systems and controls for the prevention of bribery.
The Committees terms of reference can be found on the Groups website.
APGAR1704.04.18MIDDLEAMENDS
49 ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 GROUP OVERVIEW STRATEGIC REPORT
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION AUDIT COMMITTEE continued Significant issues considered by the Committee in relation to the financial statements How the issue was addressed by the Committee Review of carrying values of royalties held at amortised cost along with the investment portfolio and resulting impairment charges The Committee reviewed and interrogated managements key assumptions including production profiles forecast commodity prices and discount rates used to estimate the recoverable amount of each royalty and compared this to the respective carrying value.
The
Committee reviewed the disclosures related to the Groups impairment policy outlined in note 2.
The Committee is satisfied with the conclusion that there is no impairment charge for the year ended December 31 2017.
The Committee reviewed managements application of the Groups impairment policy in relation to availableforsale equity investments outlined in note 3.9 together with the disclosures related to the impairment charge described in note 17 for the year ended December 31 2017.
The Committee is satisfied with managements assessment that there are no further impairments at December 31 2017.
Review of the carrying value of royalties held at fair value The Committee reviewed and interrogated managements key assumptions including production profiles forecast commodity prices and discount rates used to determine the carrying value of those royalties held at fair value.
The Committee reviewed the disclosures related to the revaluation deficit of 11.9m in relation to coal royalties together with the revaluation charge of 6.3m in relation to royalty financial instruments described in notes 14 and 15 respectively for the year ended December 31 2017.
Particular focus was given to the Groups Dugbe 1 royalty and the changes to the assumptions regarding discount rate and start date given public announcements or lack thereof by the operator which resulted in a valuation deficit of 3.4m.
The Committee concluded that the fair value has been calculated in accordance with the Groups accounting policy outlined in note 2 is appropriate as at December 31 2017 and is adequately disclosed.
Adoption of new accounting standards IFRS 9 IFRIC 23 The Committee considered the impact on the Groups financial statements on the imminent introduction of new accounting standards particularly IFRS 9 and IFRIC 23.
The Committee noted that the material impact on the Groups financial statements will be that the EVBC royalty income will no longer be presented as such rather it will be disclosed with the fair value movement on the face of the income statement.
The Committee also considered IFRIC 23 in the context of uncertain tax provisions which requires a weighted average approach.
The potential impact of this on any tax matters arising during 2019 will be carefully monitored by the Committee.
Group tax exposures The Committee considered the Groups material accumulated tax losses and managements assessment of any tax exposures whether included in current tax provisions or deferred tax assets.
The
Committee challenged management and its professional advisors on tax positions taken where there is no precedent or guidance in the public domain and concluded that the disclosures contained in note 2 are sufficient and that no additional provision or derecognition of deferred tax assets is appropriate.
APGAR1704.04.18MIDDLEAMENDS
50 ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 G OV E R N A N C E There are no significant issues disclosed in the report and financial statements for the year ended December 31 2017 and up to the date of approval of the report and financial statements that have required the Board to deal with any related material internal control issues.
The Directors confirm that there have been no significant changes to the system of internal controls nor have there been any significant breaches reported during the year.
As a result the Board has concluded that the controls and procedures are adequate.
The Committee also considers on an annual basis whether an internal audit function is required.
Its present view is that one is not yet justified given the compact size of the Group and the Directors involvement with individual transactions.
EXTERNAL AUDIT To safeguard the objectivity and independence of the external audit process it remains the Committees policy to review and approve all fees related to nonaudit services.
The policy prohibits the auditors from providing certain services such as accounting or valuation services.
Details of the auditors remuneration are disclosed in note 5b.
The Committee will continue to review its activities in light of any regulatory developments going forward.
The Committee has satisfied itself that the external auditors independence was not impaired.
The Committee held meetings with the external auditors without the presence of management on three occasions and the Chairman of the Committee held regular meetings with the lead audit engagement partner during the year.
The Committees assessment of the external auditors performance and independence underpins its recommendation to the Board to propose to shareholders the reappointment of Deloitte LLP as auditors until the conclusion of the AGM in 2018.
Resolutions to authorise the Board to reappoint and determine the remuneration of Deloitte LLP will be proposed at the AGM on May 10 2018.
W.
Blyth
Chairman of the Audit Committee March 27 2018 FAIR BALANCED AND UNDERSTANDABLE A key requirement of the Groups Annual Report and Accounts is that it be fair balanced and understandable.
The Audit Committee and the Board are satisfied that the Annual Report and Accounts meet this requirement as appropriate weight has been given to both positive and negative developments in the year.
In justifying this statement the Audit Committee has considered the robust process which operates in creating the Annual Report and Accounts including the thorough process of review evaluation and verification by senior management which considered and drew on best practice for the creation of the Annual Report and Accounts a meeting of the Audit Committee held to review and consider the draft Annual Report and Accounts in advance of the final signoff and final signoff provided by the Board.
INTERNAL CONTROL AND RISK MANAGEMENT The Committee is responsible for the oversight of internal control and risk management systems across the Group.
In carrying out its role the Committee reviews the following Regular updates of key internal control matters in respect of the Group financial reporting processes such as financial reporting systems and controls.
Procedures developed by management to identify and evaluate key business financial and operational risks and the effectiveness of the responses being implemented to mitigate the potential impacts.
Policies and procedures in place to detect monitor and investigate activity in respect of antifraud bribery and corruption such as the Group whistleblowing facilities.
The key elements of the control system in operation are The Board meets regularly with a formal schedule of matters reserved to it for decision and has put in place an organisational structure with clear lines of responsibility and appropriate delegation of authority.
There are established procedures for planning and approving investments and information systems for monitoring the Groups financial performance against budgets and forecasts.
The Chief Financial Officer is required to undertake an annual assessment process to identify and quantify the risks that face the Groups businesses and functions and to assess the adequacy of the prevention monitoring and mitigation practices in place for those risks.
This process covers all material controls including financial operational and compliance controls.
The process undertaken during the year is discussed in more detail within the Principal Risks and Uncertainties section on pages 18 to 23.
The Audit Committee is responsible for reviewing the risk assessment process for completeness and accuracy.
In addition to its work on the above the Audit Committee also receives regular reports about significant risks and associated control and monitoring procedures.
The Groups risk register and internal controls and procedures documentation are regular agenda items for the Committee.
The Committee also receives regular reports from the external auditors.
The Audit Committee reports to the Board on these matters so as to enable the Directors to review the effectiveness of the system of internal control.
The Board also receives reports from its other Committees and directly from management.
The system accords with the Financial Reporting Councils Internal Control Revised Guidance for Directors on the Combined Code.
APGAR1704.04.18MIDDLEAMENDS
51 ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 GROUP OVERVIEW STRATEGIC REPORT
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION REMUNERATION COMMITTEE MAIN ACTIVITIES COVERED DURING 2017 The Remuneration Committees activities focused on designing the CEOs 2017 bonus framework and the associated performance scorecard criteria providing guidance to the CEO on salaries and bonuses to be awarded to his direct reports and approving salaries and bonuses paid and reviewing the levels of Company pension contributions and other benefits.
COMPOSITION
Compliant with the Code
Blyth  Chairman from May 10 2017
Archer  Chairman until May 10 2017
Meier  stood down from the Remuneration Committee on May 10 2017
Stan
ROLE AND RESPONSIBILITIES The primary responsibilities of the Remuneration Committee are to establish and develop the Groups general policy on executive and senior management remuneration determine specific remuneration packages for the Chairman and Executive Directors and design the Companys share incentive schemes.
The Remuneration Committees terms of reference can be found on the Groups website.
EXTERNAL ADVISORS The Remuneration Committee has access to the advice of independent remuneration consultants when required.
During 2017 the Remuneration Committee received advice from New Bridge Street NBS.
NBS was first appointed by the Remuneration Committee on January 20 2014.
NBS is a signatory to the Remuneration Consultants Code of Conduct and has no other connection with the Company.
The Remuneration Committee is satisfied that the advice that it receives from NBS is objective and independent.
Total fees paid to NBS in respect of its services were 31494.
APGAR1704.04.18MIDDLEAMENDS
52 ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 G OV E R N A N C E Dear Shareholder Our remuneration report is as last year in two parts a statement of the Companys policy on Directors remuneration and an Annual Remuneration Report which describes how the policy was implemented during 2017.
There have been no changes to the policy in the current year and as such the format for the forthcoming AGM vote will be advisory rather than of formal approval.
This report is set against a background of continued strong Company performance during 2017 which generated total shareholder returns TSR of 24.7% in the period.
The main focus for the Committee this year was in relation to the setting of bonus matrices Director fees and salary benchmarking.
The salary of the
Chief Executive Officer CEO was comprehensively benchmarked
The Committee concluded that a 5% increase to the basic salary of the CEO was appropriate at this stage and will continue to conduct this exercise on a regular basis in order to ensure that the Company is paying market rates that attract and retain key personnel.
The Company contributes to money purchase pension arrangements on behalf of staff on a matched basis subject to an overall cap.
This cap has been increased for 2018 to 11% 2017 10% for the CEO and 7% 2017 5% for all other staff.
In addition the Company has introduced a private health insurance scheme on behalf of all staff.
The fees for the Chairman and the NonExecutive Directors were reassessed at the beginning of 2017 and will remain unchanged.
They will be reviewed again with effect from January 1 2019.
In terms of shortterm incentives the CEO and the CEOs direct senior reports have individually crafted bonus objectives which were agreed for the 2017 financial year.
The bonus award criteria relate to a series of agreed corporate and personal performance targets which are scored out of a total of 100 points.
The criteria have been amended from those of 2016 both in recognition of the changed circumstances of the Company and to introduce more precision to the link between the real stretchperformance targets and favourable outcomes for the Company.
This score is then applied to a maximum bonus calculated as a percentage of total salary as outlined on page 60.
The CEO was awarded a bonus of 256680 under the bonus criteria matrix or 71.3% of the total potential award.
The Value Creation Plan VCP is a major plank in our overall remuneration strategy and is a longterm incentive plan which provides awards of shares in the form of nil cost share options at the end of five years to the CEO and to senior executives for increases in TSR at rates above 7% per annum.
The VCP is designed to support the Companys growth strategy by providing incentives aligned with shareholder interests.
The changes made to the VCP at the 2016 AGM extended the term of the plan such that there are still four years remaining before managements performance will be assessed against TSR.
The Committee continues to believe this is an effective plan to incentivise its participants and to encourage the retention of key employees by giving them an opportunity to share in the growth of the Company over the long term.
The 2016 awards which were also approved at the 2016 AGM were granted in the year following the end of a closed period.
Further details can be found in the Remuneration Policy part of this report.
The Unapproved Share Option Plan USOP approved by shareholders at the 2016 AGM was established to provide the Group additional scope to incentivise employees particularly those who do not participate in the VCP over and above the limit of the Company Share Ownership Plan.
The first grant of awards under the USOP occurred during the year and did not include any participation by the Executive or NonExecutive Directors.
Further details can be found in note 28.
The main objectives for the Remuneration Committee in 2018 will be to Review and further tailor the senior executive bonus criteria for the 2018 financial year and Maintain an ongoing review of and determine the most appropriate balance between salary and bonus for the senior executive.
More detail is provided in the body of the Remuneration Report and the Remuneration Committee trusts you will endorse the resolution to approve this report at the forthcoming AGM.
Yours sincerely
Blyth
Chairman of the Remuneration Committee March 27 2018
DIRECTORS REMUNERATION REPORT
APGAR1704.04.18MIDDLEAMENDS
53 ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 GROUP OVERVIEW STRATEGIC REPORT
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION The remuneration report is in two parts.
The first part constitutes the Remuneration Policy Report and sets out the remuneration strategy that the Company has applied following its approval by shareholders at the 2016 AGM.
The approved policy can be found in the Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2015 which can accessed via the Groups website site The Policy is set out below for information only the VCP Principal Terms and Conditions section has been updated to provide an overview of the key features of the plan.
Other minor changes to the text of the Policy have been made to reflect the fact that it has previously been approved by shareholders.
It is structured in the following sections
Strategic overview and policy drivers
How the views of shareholders and employees have been taken into account
The remuneration policy for Executive Directors
Annual bonus  Choice of performance measures and approach to targetsetting
VCP  Principal Terms and Conditions and Reward Scenarios
Reward scenarios
Determinations to be made by and discretions available to the
H.
Differences in remuneration policy for Executive Directors compared to other employees
Approach towards appointment of new Executive Directors
Service contracts and payments for loss of office
NonExecutive Directors and
Legacy arrangements The second part the Annual Remuneration Report for 2017 details the remuneration paid to Directors during 2017 with a comparison to the previous year.
It will be put to an advisory shareholder vote at the 2018 AGM.
It is structured as follows
Single figure total remuneration
Annual bonus for the year ended December 31 2017
Vesting of longterm incentive awards
Directors shareholding and share interests
Total pension entitlements
Loss of office payments
Percentage increase in the remuneration of the CEO
Total shareholder return
Total remuneration for the CEO over time
Relative importance of spend on pay
External directorships
2018 salary review
Fees for the Chairman and NonExecutive Directors
Performance targets for the annual bonus and VCP awards granted in 2014 and beyond
Statement of shareholder voting The information in sections A to G and I to M has been audited the remaining sections are unaudited.
REMUNERATION POLICY REPORT
A.
Strategic overview and policy drivers The foundations for our remuneration strategy were first enumerated in the 2013 Annual Report and Accounts and largely continue to apply today.
The strategy was historically based on the following Company specific elements which continue to form the backdrop to the overall remuneration strategy Long investment horizons often there can be an interval of between two and 10 years before a royalty comes on stream and the royalty may continue to flow for 20 years or more.
As business development is now focused on royalty acquisitions incentives are heavily weighted towards longerterm performance.
No comparable peer group certainly in the UK for the purposes of benchmarking Director performance.
As a result our incentive plans have been based on absolute performance rather than performance relative to other companies.
A relative measure in relation to the VCP whereby the rewards for the holders of 2016 awards granted in 2017 will only be earned should the Companys share price performance match or exceed the performance of the FTSE 350 All Mining Index.
A relatively high ratio between its market capitalisation 276m at December 31 2017 and the number of its employees 11 as at December 31 2017 of whom one is an Executive Director.
The investment team is relatively small and much of the Companys royalty knowhow rests with them.
The risk to the business of losing these and other key employees is correspondingly significant and we have traditionally regarded retention as an important objective of our remuneration strategy.
B.
How the views of shareholders and employees have been taken into account The Remuneration Committee has a policy of active engagement with shareholders on remuneration matters.
The Remuneration Committee also considers shareholder feedback received in relation to the AGM each year.
Details of votes cast for and against the resolution to approve last years remuneration report are provided in
the Annual Remuneration Report.
This feedback plus any additional feedback received during any meetings from time to time is then considered as part of the Companys annual review of remuneration policy.
NonBoard employees are consulted individually on the executive remuneration policy to the extent that it impacts upon the structure and level of their own pay and bonuses.
DIRECTORS REMUNERATION REPORT
APGAR1704.04.18MIDDLEAMENDS
54 ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 G OV E R N A N C E C.
The remuneration policy for Executive Directors The policy approved by shareholders at the 2016 AGM covers the three years 20162019 and was effective from May 10 2016.
The VCP which was initially approved at the 2014 AGM and amended following shareholder approval at the 2016 AGM remains in place.
The Committees specific policy for each element of remuneration is as follows Element purpose and link to strategy Operation Maximum
To recruit retain and reward executives of a suitable calibre for the roles and duties required Salaries are set with reference to individual performance experience and responsibilities to reflect the market rate for the individual and their role determined with reference to remuneration levels in companies of similar size and complexity taking into account pay levels within the Company in general.
Salaries are reviewed annually.
Increases for Executive Directors will normally be in line with those for the general workforce except where there is a change of role or responsibilities or in other exceptional circumstances.
There is no prescribed maximum annual increase.
Pension and benefits To provide market competitive benefits A Company contribution to a money purchase pension scheme or a cash allowance in lieu of pension at the request of the individual.
In addition to a death in service policy which the Company subscribes to a private medical insurance scheme has now been introduced for all staff.
Executive Directors are entitled to 30 days leave.
Pension 11% 2017 10% of salary.
Death in service policy five times salary.
Annual bonus To encourage and reward delivery of the Companys operational objectives The annual bonus will be paid wholly in cash with no deferred component but with a provision for clawback.
Bonus payments are determined based on the achievement of a combination of corporate and personal performance targets.
Both are expected to form a substantial part of the scorecard.
Corporate performance targets are agreed by the Board at the beginning of the year.
Personal performance targets are agreed with the Chairman and the
The Committee will use a balanced scorecard approach to assess performance against targets at the end of the year.
The targets are discussed more fully in section D overleaf.
The maximum annual bonus opportunity is 100% of salary.
Longterm incentives To encourage and reward delivery of the Companys strategic objectives and provide alignment with shareholders through the use of shares and incentivise retention of key personnel The LTIP takes the form of a Value Creation Plan VCP with a performance period to June 16 2021.
Awards that were granted in 2014 were amended in 2016 with a performance period of seven years to June 16 2021 and are subject to the following performance condition Minimum growth in TSR of 7% per annum with growth measured over the sevenyear period 2016 awards granted in 2017 have a performance period to June 16 2021 and will be subject to two TSR performance conditions Minimum growth in TSR of 7% per annum with growth measured from a premium to the market capitalisation based on the net asset value per share as at December 31 2015.
A relative measure of TSR which requires median performance compared to a comparator group For participants with 2014 and 2016 awards the 2016 awards will accrue at a lower level once the 2014 awards reach the threshold growth of 7% per annum.
The detailed design is discussed in section E overleaf.
The maximum number of shares that can be awarded under the option grants equates to 7.5% of the Companys issued share capital as at the end of the measurement period.
In 2016 the Committee allocated the pool as follows and granted to participants in CEO 20.0% NonBoard senior managers 4.0% Unallocated reserve 13.1% In 2014 the Committee allocated the pool as follows CEO 56.0% NonBoard senior managers 6.9% The potential rewards achievable by Executive Directors under the remuneration policy are illustrated at section F.
The policy in respect of any future Director appointments is discussed at section I below.
D.
Annual bonus  Choice of performance measures and approach to target setting Annual bonuses are based on a scorecard of performance during the calendar year.
The scorecard sets challenging targets for triggering bonus and for rewarding outperformance on a sliding scale.
The scorecard will be split between corporate objectives and personal objectives both of which are expected to form a substantial part of the scorecard.
APGAR1704.04.18MIDDLEAMENDS
55 ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 GROUP OVERVIEW STRATEGIC REPORT
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION The corporate objectives are agreed by the Board at the beginning of each year together with an assessment of the potential for outperformance and the risk of shortfall.
This covers such areas as business performance finance relationships and reputation.
This constitutes the criteria for triggering a bonus and for assessing the levels of challenge and outperformance that would warrant higher levels of bonus.
The CEOs personal objectives for the year are agreed at the beginning of the year by the Chairman of the Board in conjunction with the Committee.
The personal objectives focus on the required contribution of the individual Executive Director to the achievement of the Companys objectives for the year but also on important but less measurable aspects such as leadership building personal and team relationships and the extent to which they personally have gone the extra mile.
The CEOs performance against corporate and personal objectives is assessed by the Chairman and the Committee at the beginning of the following year and bonus is awarded on the basis of the agreed criteria.
E.
LTIP  Principal terms and conditions and reward scenarios The LTIP takes the form of a Value Creation Plan VCP.
The key features of the VCP are as follows Key features Eligibility  All employees are eligible to participate in the VCP although participation has been limited to the Executive Directors together with other nonBoard members of the senior management team at the discretion of the Committee acting in consultation with the CEO.
Alignment with Shareholders  No value accrues under the VCP to its participants unless growth in the Companys TSR over the performance period is at least equal to 7% growth per annum.
Reward pool cap  The maximum number of shares to be awarded under the VCP option grants will not be capable of exceeding such number equating to 7.5% of the Companys issued share capital as at the end of the measurement period.
This provides an effective cap of total growth in TSR above 300%.
Two sets of awards have been made under the VCP 2014 awards which were modified in 2016 and 2016 awards which used the units from the unallocated pool and were granted in 2017.
Both the modification of the 2014 awards and the new 2016 awards were approved by shareholders at the 2016 AGM.
2014 Awards 2016 Awards
Sevenyear performance period ending on June 16 2021.
Performance is measured from the net asset value as at December 31 2015 to June 16 2021.
Allocation of the pool CEO 56% NonBoard Senior Managers 6.9% Total Allocated 62.9% CEO 20% NonBoard Senior Managers 4.0% Total Allocated 24.0% Operation Subject to threshold growth of 7% per annum participants become entitled to receive nil or nominal cost options over ordinary shares in the capital of the Company subject to the cap.
The number of options is set by reference to a share of a pool value equal to 10% of the growth in the Companys TSR over the sevenyear period or if less 50% of the growth in the Companys TSR over the sevenyear period in excess of the threshold growth.
This will mean that if the total growth in TSR over the sevenyear period is below approximately 61% no value accrues between approximately 61% and 76% the value that accrues is equal to 50% of the growth in the Companys TSR over the sevenyear period in excess of the threshold growth and between 76% and the 300% effective cap the value that accrues is equal to 10% of the growth in the Companys TSR over a sevenyear period.
This pool value is adjusted to reflect the percentage of the pool allocated to these awards 62.9% of the total.
Subject to a threshold growth of 7% per annum over 161.3m participants become entitled to receive nil or nominal cost options over ordinary shares in the capital of the Company subject to the cap.
161.3m was the net asset value at December 31 2015 and a premium of approximately 61% to the market capitalisation on the same date.
The number of options is set by reference to a share of a pool value equal to 10% of the growth in the Companys TSR over the fiveyear period.
There is no catchup once the threshold growth is achieved.
This means that if the total growth in TSR is below approximately 40% no value accrues above approximately 40% the value that accrues is equal to 10% of the growth in the Companys TSR over 94.9p per share over the performance period.
This pool value is adjusted to reflect the percentage of the pool allocated to these awards 37.1% of the total when including the unallocated reserve.
In addition a relative measure of TSR ensures it is at least equal to the movement in the index of the FTSE 350 Mining Index.
In the event that the increase in TSR does not equal or exceed the aforementioned index no value will accrue to the new awards.
Payouts to the CEO and other participants who have 2014 awards will accrue at a lower level based on the outcome of the awards currently allocated.
Once the share price reaches the threshold at which value accrues under the 2014 awards value accrues on only half of the units under the 2017 awards held by the CEO and any nonBoard members of the senior management team who have an existing award.
DIRECTORS REMUNERATION REPORT
APGAR1704.04.18MIDDLEAMENDS
56 ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 G OV E R N A N C E Vesting Options to which participants become entitled at the end of the relevant performance period ending on June 16 2021 will become exercisable as follows Onethird immediately Onethird after 12 months Onethird after 24 months
The maximum value that can accrue for the full award pool which includes both the 2014 and the 2017 awards is capped at 7.5% of the Companys issued share capital as at the end of the measurement period.
Unallocated reserve 13.1% Illustrative returns The following table illustrates the potential return for the CEO and other participants and shareholders for various levels of growth in TSR over the performance period to June 16 2021 Benefit assuming total growth in TSR from an illustrative starting market capitalisation plus capital inflows of 262.1m over a sevenyear period of
CEO  2014 award 56% 0.0m 10.6m 13.9m 20.8m CEO  2016 award 20% 2.3m 3.2m 3.8m 5.0m CEO Total 76% 2.3m 13.8m 17.7m 25.8m Others  2014 award 6.9% 0.0m 1.3m 1.7m 2.6m Others  2016 award 4% 0.5m 0.7m 0.9m 1.3m Unallocated 13.1% 1.5m 2.3m 3m 4.4m Overall Total 100% 4.27m 18.07m 23.24m 34.14m Shareholders 119.73m 170.91m 224.76m 337.86m Approximately 76% growth in TSR over the sevenyear period results in a total pool equal to 9.3% of the growth.
This reflects a pool equal to 10% for the original awards and a pool for the new awards which reflects the reduction in the value that accrues for participants with original awards once the threshold growth of 7% per annum is met.
At the effective cap of total growth in TSR of 300% over the period the benefit to shareholders would be 677.20m and total participant awards would be 66.80m of which the CEO would receive 41.7m under the 2014 award and 8.7m under the 2016 award.
TSR performance must match or exceed the performance of the FTSE 350 All Mining Index for new awards to payout.
Awards in the table are calculated from the respective starting market capitalisations Illustrative starting market capitalisation of 248.0m for original awards and 161.3m for new awards based on the net asset value as at December 31 .
F.
Reward scenarios The Companys policy results in a significant portion of remuneration received by the CEO being dependent on Company performance.
The chart below illustrates how the total pay opportunity for the CEO varies under three different performance scenarios below target fixed pay only ontarget and maximum.
This chart is indicative as share price movement and dividend accrual have been excluded.
All assumptions made are noted below the chart.
Below target and ontarget do not include any VCP vesting and simply allow for salary and pension for the below target level with a bonus award included at the ontarget level.
The maximum level includes the fair value of the VCP assuming outperformance of the FTSE 350 Mining Index is achieved.
To aid comparability with standard LTIP structures the chart reflects the total pay opportunity if the VCP both the 2014 awards and the 2016 awards is included on an annualised basis.
0 200000 400000 600000 800000 1000teltel000 100% 69% 44% 31% 40% 16%
Target
OnTarget
Maximum
Fixed Pay Annual Bonus LTIP
57 ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 GROUP OVERVIEW STRATEGIC REPORT
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Assumptions Below Target  fixed pay only salary  benefits  pension Ontarget  fixed pay 50% vesting of the annual bonus and 0% of the VCP awards i.
Maximum 2014 and 2016 VCP awards included on an annualised basis  fixed pay and 100% vesting of the annual bonus and annualised 2014 and 2016 VCP awards granted in 2017.
The annualised value reflects a sevenyear performance period of the 2014 award and fiveyear performance period of the 2016 award Salary levels on which other elements of the package are calculated are based on those which apply from January 1 2018.
Salary for the CEO is 90% of his full time equivalent salary.
The CEO does not receive any taxable benefits and The fair value of the VCP has been calculated using a stochastic model as at the date of grant or in the case of the 2014 awards the date of modification.
The model projects the share price of Anglo Pacific using the historical volatility of the Company whilst past behaviour is not always a good indicator of movements in the future it is difficult to determine a more accurate method.
For each simulation the resulting share price and thus payout is determined.
The fair value is the average of 100000 possible simulations.
G.
Determinations to be made by and discretions available to the
The Committee operates the Groups variable incentive plans according to their respective rules and in accordance with HMRC rules where relevant.
To ensure the efficient administration of these plans the Committee will be required to make determinations and apply certain operational discretions.
These include the following selecting the participants in the plans on an annual basis determining the timing of grants of awards andor payment adjusting basic salaries for changes in time commitment within the fulltime equivalent levels set out in this policy determining the quantum of awards andor payments within the limits set out in the policy table above determining the extent of vesting based on the assessment of performance making the appropriate adjustments required in certain circumstances e. yeartoyear.
If an event occurs which results in the annual bonus plan or longterm incentive performance conditions andor targets being deemed no longer appropriate e. less difficult to satisfy.
H.
Differences in remuneration policy for Executive Directors compared to other employees The Committee aims to ensure over time a proper differential between the level of the remuneration of Executive Directors and other employees but also appropriate differences in the structure of remuneration to reflect different levels of responsibility and planning horizons of employees across the Company.
The remuneration framework of nonBoard employees was reviewed during 2017 and will continue to be reviewed going forward.
There are currently three main differences to the remuneration framework the Committee will continue to reserve access to the VCP to the most senior executives who have the greatest potential to influence the Companys longterm performance and the Executive Directors will receive any annual bonus wholly in cash because of the large potential shareholding offered by the VCP but in order to encourage employees without access or with less access to the VCP to build up a shareholding in the Company consideration will be given to either including a share component in any annual bonuses awarded to nonBoard employees and continuing to offer them options pursuant to the CSOP or the USOP or a combination of the two.
I.
Approach to appointment of new Executive Directors The remuneration package for a new Executive Director would be set in accordance with the terms of the Companys approved remuneration policy in force at the time of appointment.
Currently for an Executive Director this would include a potential annual bonus of no more than 100%.
There is also provision within the VCP arrangements for the Committee to dilute the pool by an additional 10% for new appointees.
The salary for a new Executive Director may be set below the normal market rate with phased increases following an initial probationary period and over the first few years as the executive gains experience in their new role.
The Committee may offer new appointees additional cash andor sharebased elements when it considers these to be in the best interests of the Company and its shareholders including the use of awards made under 9.4.2 of the Listing Rules.
Such payments would take account of remuneration relinquished when leaving the former employer and would reflect as far as practicable the nature and time horizons attaching to that remuneration and the impact of any performance conditions.
Shareholders will be informed of any such payments at the time of appointment.
For an internal Executive Director appointment any variable pay element awarded in respect of the prior role will be allowed to pay out according to its terms adjusted as relevant to take into account the appointment.
In addition any other ongoing remuneration obligations existing prior to appointment may continue provided that they are put to shareholders for approval at the earliest opportunity.
For external Executive Director appointments the Committee may agree that the Company will meet certain relocation expenses as appropriate.
For the appointment of a new Chairman or NonExecutive Director the fee arrangement would be set in accordance with the approved remuneration policy in force at that time.
DIRECTORS REMUNERATION REPORT
APGAR1704.04.18MIDDLEAMENDS
58 ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 G OV E R N A N C E J.
Service contracts and payments for loss of office The Committee together with the Nomination Committee reviews the contractual terms for new Executive Directors to ensure that these reflect best practice.
The current Executive Directors service contract is for an indefinite term and contains a notice period of six months which is in line with the Companys continuing policy that service contracts should not have a notice period of more than one year.
The service contracts contain provision for early termination.
A Directors service contract may be terminated without notice and without any further payment or compensation except for sums accrued up to the date of termination on the occurrence of certain events such as gross misconduct.
If the employing company terminates the employment of an Executive Director in other circumstances compensation is limited to salary due for any unexpired notice period and any amount assessed by the Committee as representing the value of other contractual benefits including pension which would have been received during the period.
Payments in lieu of notice are not pensionable.
The service contract of Mr.
Treger provides for a sixmonth notice period and an additional termination payment equivalent to six months basic salary.
In the event of a change of control of the Company there is no enhancement to contractual terms.
The service contract of the Executive Director is available for inspection at the Companys registered office.
In summary the contractual provisions for Executive Directors are as follows Provision Detailed terms Notice period One year or less.
Termination payment Basic salary plus benefits including pension paid monthly and subject to mitigation.
In addition any statutory entitlements or sums to settle or compromise claims in connection with the termination would be paid as necessary.
Additional termination payment to bring the total payment to the equivalent of 12 months basic salary.
Remuneration entitlements A prorata bonus may also become payable for the period of active service along with vesting for outstanding share awards in certain circumstances  see below.
In all cases performance targets would apply.
Change of control There are no enhanced terms in relation to a change of control.
Any sharebased entitlements granted to an Executive Director under the VCP will be determined based on the plan rules.
The default treatment is that any outstanding unvested awards lapse on cessation of employment.
However in certain prescribed circumstances such as death disability retirement or other circumstances at the discretion of the Committee taking into account the individuals performance and the reasons for their departure good leaver status can be applied.
For good leavers the unvested awards remain subject to performance conditions measured over the original time period and are reduced prorata in size to reflect the proportion of the performance period actually served.
The Committee has the discretion to disapply time prorating if it considers it appropriate to do so.
In determining whether an executive should be treated as a good leaver or not the Committee will take into account the performance of the individual and the reasons for their departure.
K.
NonExecutive Directors The Company aims to attract and retain a highcalibre NonExecutive Chairman and NonExecutive Directors by offering a market competitive fee level.
The Committees specific policy is as follows Element purpose and link to strategy Operation Maximum Board fees Attract retain and fairly reward high calibre individuals Fees are currently paid in cash.
NonExecutive Directors are not eligible to participate in the Companys annual performance related incentive schemes share option schemes or pension scheme.
The Chairman is paid a single fee for all his responsibilities.
The NonExecutive Directors are paid a basic fee.
Additional fees are paid to Chairmen and members of the main Board Committees and to the SID to reflect their extra responsibilities.
Fees are reviewed by the Board taking into account individual responsibilities factors such as Committee Chairmanships time commitment other pay increases being made to employees in the Company and fees payable for the equivalent role in comparable companies.
Normally fees are reviewed biennially and fee increases are generally effective from annual reelection after the AGM.
The Board may adjust the fees for an individual NonExecutive Director during the intervening period if there is a significant change in their responsibilities andor time commitments.
Current fee levels are set out in the
Annual Report on Remuneration.
Overall fee limit will be within the 600000 limit set out in the Companys Articles of Association.
Mr.
Meier Mr.
Archer Mr.
Blyth Ms.
Rhodes and Mr.
Stan were appointed for an initial threeyear term renewable at the Boards discretion for up to two further threeyear periods thereafter and the Board intends that all future NonExecutive Directors appointments will be on similar terms.
None of the letters of appointment have provisions that relate to a change of control of the Company.
APGAR1704.04.18MIDDLEAMENDS
59 ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 GROUP OVERVIEW STRATEGIC REPORT
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION The details of the NonExecutive Directors letters of appointment are as follows NonExecutive Date of appointment Notice period
Meier April 30 2015 One month
Archer October 15 2014 One month
Blyth March 20 2013 One month
Rhodes May 8 2014 One month
Stan February 19 2014 One month
Legacy arrangements In approving this Policy Report authority is given to the Company to honour any commitments entered into with current or former Directors such as the payment of a pension or the unwinding of legacy share schemes that have been disclosed to shareholders in previous remuneration reports.
Details of any payments to former Directors will be set out in the Annual Remuneration Report as they arise.
ANNUAL REMUNERATION REPORT FOR 2017 This part of the report details the remuneration paid to Directors during 2017 with a comparison to the previous year.
It will be put to an advisory shareholder vote at the 2018 AGM.
The information in sections A to G and I to M has been audited the remaining sections are unaudited.
A.
Single figure for total remuneration
Benefits
Total bonus
Other
Total remuneration Executive Directors
Treger
NonExecutive Directors
Meier
2017 90     90 2016 40     40
Archer 2017 56     56 2016 48     48
Blyth
2017 74     74 2016 95     95
Rhodes 2017 51     51 2016 43     43
Stan 2017 46     46 2016 40     40
Treger agreed to receive 90% of his contractual salary for both 2016 and 2017 as outlined in section K below.
W. lyth was NonExecutive Chairman until May 10 2017.
N.
Meier became NonExecutive Chairman on May 10 2017.
DIRECTORS REMUNERATION REPORT
APGAR1704.04.18MIDDLEAMENDS
60 ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 G OV E R N A N C E B.
Annual bonus for the year ending December 31 2017 A set of individually crafted corporate and personal bonus criteria were agreed with the CEO for the 2017 financial year which took into account the evolving corporate and financial priorities of the Group.
The Remuneration Committee was conscious of the need to sense check the bonus arrangements for the CEO both for major negative external influences and for truly outstanding performance.
As a result the bonus criteria and calculations were made subject to two major caveats That the Company had not suffered an exceptional negative event in the bonus year or in the lead up to the determination of the quantum of the bonus and The Remuneration Committee may look at overriding some or all of the bonus criteria should the CEOs efforts in the 2017 financial year result in a major transformational outcome that demonstrably benefits shareholders is reflected in a material share price increase and would not otherwise be adequately captured in the bonus matrix.
In addition many of the bonus criteria are referenced to the achievement of hurdle performance that is either superior or exceptional.
No bonus is earned for poor or merely adequate performance.
The main bonus categories which total 100% are Growth 40% Financial Performance 25% Financial Control 10% Relationships Reputation and Business Development 10% and finally Professionalism 15%.
The largest factor in the CEOs bonus matrix at 40% of the total bonus payable relates to growth and securing new royalty opportunities.
Growth The main acquisition during the year was the transaction with Denison in February.
In addition a development royalty Brazilian Nickel was acquired in September 2017.
Growth bonus in relation to these transactions was 10%.
An element of the growth bonus was in respect of the performance of 2017 acquisitions which earned a score of 5.3%.
A further part of the growth bonus related to the performance of investments in 2015 and 2016 meeting modelled returns.
The returns as modelled gave an overall score of 3%.
Total overall score of 18.3% out of a possible 40%.
Financial Performance Adjusted earnings of 30.1m was 1.5x the budgeted amount of 19.4m and earned the maximum bonus of 10%.
Capital of 13m was raised in 2017 in relation to the Denison transaction.
The bonus earned in relation to this metric was 9%.
As at year end the share price was 1.525 versus NAV per share of 1.210 and hence exceeded the hurdle of 1 and earned the full bonus allocation of 5%.
Total overall score of 24% out of a possible 25%.
Financial Control The currency management plan implemented in 2016 resulted in the Group effectively hedging its Australian dollar denominated royalty income against the pound.
A longerterm currency hedging strategy is currently under consideration.
This area earned a bonus allocation of 3.5%.
Budgeting and financial reporting continued to be very effectively carried out and met the hurdle bonus level of superior to earn a score of 4%.
Total overall score of 7.5 % out of a possible 10%.
Relationships Reputation and Business Development The investor relations plan implemented in 2017 was vigorously followed and a very active programme of engagement with equity providers was undertaken both during and subsequent to the Denison capital raise.
Continued high calibre engagement was both maintained and developed with royalty sourcing networks.
Superior hurdles were met in each of the three metrics.
Total overall score of 9% out of a possible 10%.
Professionalism Under the guidance of the CEO the senior management team whilst small continued to develop its capability and maintained a high tempo of activity in 2017 in terms of developing the pipeline of new prospects and evaluating a number of significant new business opportunities.
Focus was applied to the development of a collaborative goal oriented ethical company with harmonious working relationships.
Superior hurdles were met in each of the two metrics.
The CEOs personal contribution was evidenced by his championing the evolving strategy regarding development royalties and also the evolving jurisdictional criteria.
The legacy share portfolio continued to be realised under his direction.
He helped increase the proceeds from the disposal of a noncore royalty.
He marketed the Company increasingly in multiple jurisdictions and increased our Canadian profile.
And finally he professionally guided the Companys evolving commodity bias towards electric vehicle and battery materials.
An overall score of 12.5 % out of a possible 15%.
The overall bonus score was agreed at 71.3% under the bonus scoring matrix for a total award of 256680 71.3% x 400000 x 90%.
The overall aggregate bonus of 256680 bonus falls within the 100% bonus limit set out in the policy table.
The CEOs direct senior reports none of whom are Executive Directors have individually crafted bonus objectives which were agreed for the 2017 financial year.
The bonus award criteria relate to a series of agreed corporate and personal performance criteria which are scored out of a total of 100 points.
This score is then applied to a maximum bonus calculated as a percentage of total salary.
The percentages range up to 100% of salary depending on the executives position and their level of individual participation in the VCP.
Bonus criteria will be further tailored for the 2018 year to ensure that these closely match key performance metrics and at the same time provide real stretchperformance targets.
The bonus matrix for the CEO for 2017 is detailed below.
Specific measures are excluded due to commercial sensitivity.
APGAR1704.04.18MIDDLEAMENDS
61 ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 GROUP OVERVIEW STRATEGIC REPORT
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION 2017 CEO Scorecard
Maximum award % Actual outcome % CORPORATE PERFORMANCE CRITERIA
Growth 40 18.3 Measures for assessment included Acquisition of producing andor near producing royalties transformational and mediumsized Acquisition of development royalties Previous acquisitions meeting targeted returns Royalty accretiveness to earnings
Financial Performance 25 24 Measures for assessment included Net profit after tax Capital raisings Pricenet asset value
Financial Control 10 7.5 Measures for assessment included Risk and currency management plan and implementation Budgeting and financial reporting PERSONAL PERFORMANCE CRITERIA
Relationships Reputation and Business Development 10 9 Implementation of IR plan Engagement with debt and equity providers Engagement with and development of royalty sourcing network
Leadership 15 12.5 Senior management development and succession Development of a collaborative goaloriented ethical company with harmonious working relationships Personal contribution Total 100 71.3
Vesting of longterm incentive awards No awards vested in 2017.
Longterm incentive awards made during the year There were no awards granted to Executive Directors under the JSOP the CSOP or USOP in 2017.
As highlighted in last years report the allocations determined under the VCP made in 2016 were not allocated in 2016 as the Company was in a closed period.
During 2017 these allocations under the VCP were made as outlined in the 2015 remuneration report and as approved by shareholders at the 2016 AGM.
The CEOs allocation of units under the VCP out of the pool to Executive Directors has therefore increased from 56000 units or 56% of the total number of units to 76000 units or 76% of the total number of units.
As at the date of this report there are a total of 86880 units issued out of a total pool of 100000 units including the awards for nonBoard senior managers 2016 66880 units.
Outstanding share awards There are currently no awards to Executive Directors outstanding under the JSOP the CSOP or the USOP.
DIRECTORS REMUNERATION REPORT
APGAR1704.04.18MIDDLEAMENDS
62 ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 G OV E R N A N C E D.
Directors shareholding and share interests The Committee encourages the Executive Directors to build up a shareholding in the Company so as to ensure the alignment of their interest with those of shareholders but there is no formal shareholding guideline.
In addition the VCP is designed to increase this alignment.
The Chairman and NonExecutive Directors are also encouraged to hold shares in the Company although the Chairman and independent NonExecutive Directors are expected to ensure that the level of their individual shareholdings is not significant and thereby call into question their continuing independence.
Details of the Directors interests in shares are shown in the table below.
Not subject to performance conditions Subject to performance conditions
March 27
December 31 2017 LTIP
Deferred bonus shares Executive Directors
Treger 5626454 5626454 NonExecutive Directors
Meier 195878 195878
Archer 20000 20000
Blyth 137590 137590
Rhodes 22500 22500
Stan 170540 170540 None of the Directors hold their shares in hedging arrangements or as collateral for loans.
Such an arrangement would require the express permission of the Board.
E.
Total pension entitlements The Company makes contributions to employees pensions and has designated the National Employment Savings Trust NEST as its stakeholder pension provider.
The Committee is prepared to pay additional basic salary or fees in lieu of part or all of a Directors pension contribution.
F.
Loss of office payments There were no loss of office payments made to Directors in 2017 2016 nil.
G.
Percentage increase in the remuneration of the CEO CEO tel % change salary full time equivalent basis 400 400 benefits 36 36 bonus 257 167 54% Average per employee 000 salary 99 81 22% benefits 8 8 bonus 49 49 The table above shows the movement in the salary benefits and annual bonus for the CEO between the current and previous financial year compared to that for the average UK employee.
The Committee has chosen this comparator and it feels that it provides a more appropriate reflection of the earnings of the average worker than the movement in the Groups total wage bill which is distorted by movements in the number of employees.
For the benefits and bonus per employee this is based on those employees eligible to participate in such schemes.
APGAR1704.04.18MIDDLEAMENDS
63 ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 GROUP OVERVIEW STRATEGIC REPORT
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION H.
Total shareholder return The performance of the Companys ordinary shares compared with the FTSE 350 Mining Index for the fiveyear period ended on December 31 2017 is shown in the graph opposite.
Both have been rebased at the start of the period in order to provide a graphical measure of comparative performance.
The Company has chosen the FTSE 350 Mining Index as a comparator for historical reporting purposes as it believes it to be the nearest relevant index appropriate to the Group.
The middle market price of an ordinary share on December 31 2017 was 152.50p.
During the year the share price ranged from a low of 103.00p to a high of 158.00p.
I.
Total remuneration for the CEO over timeteltel 2016 2017
Theobald
J.
Treger
Total remuneration 000 tel653 Bonus outturn % 37%    64%  47% 71% LTIP vesting %
Theobald was appointed CEO on October 6 2010.
J.
Treger was appointed CEO on October 21 2013.
J.
Theobald also received 63333 as payment in lieu of notice 95000 termination payment paid in January 2014 and 2400 for legal advice.
The table above shows the total remuneration for the CEO during each of the financial years.
The total remuneration figure includes the annual bonus.
No LTIP awards vested.
The bonus outturn percentage is expressed as a percentage of the cap where applicable for the period in question.
As there were no caps on bonus in 2010 the actual bonus payable based on performance in those years has been included for information in the table.
J.
Relative importance of spend on pay m 2017 2016 % decrease increase Staff costs 3.79 2.55 45% Dividends 15.87 11.83 34%
External directorships
Treger holds an external nonexecutive directorship with Mantos Copper S. for which he earned fees during the year.
This directorship does not affect Mr.
Tregers ability to perform his role as CEO of the Company as this directorship forms part of his 10%time commitment aside from Anglo Pacific see The Board section of the Governance Report.
As a result Mr.
Treger is paid 90% of his full time equivalent salary of 400000.
FTSE 350 Mining Index vs.
Anglo Pacific Group 20132017 Rebased to 100 FTSE 350 Mining Index Anglo Pacific Group
DIRECTORS REMUNERATION REPORT
APGAR1704.04.18MIDDLEAMENDS
64 ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 G OV E R N A N C E L.
2018 salary review The Executive Directors full time equivalent FTE salaries were reviewed in January 2018 and the current salaries on a FTE basis are as follows Current salaries for the Executive Directors
FTE Salary as at January 1 2018 FTE Salary as at January 1 2017 Increase
Treger 420000 400000 5%
Fees for the Chairman and NonExecutive Directors As detailed in the Remuneration Policy the Companys approach to setting NonExecutive Directors remuneration is with reference to market levels in similar companies levels of responsibility and time commitments.
A summary of current fees is as follows 2018 2017 % Increase Chairman 115000 115000 Committee member 46000 46000 Base fee 40000 40000
Senior Independent Director 10000 10000 Committee Chairmanship 5000 5000 The Chairmans fee of 115000 was set with effect from January 1 2017 for a twoyear period.
Members of the main Board Committees are paid an additional amount currently 6000 per annum to reflect extra commitments with a Committee Chair receiving a further 5000.
The SID also receives a further additional fee currently 10000 per annum reducing to 6000 when a committee chairmanship is held to reflect his extra duties.
N.
Performance targets for the annual bonus and LTIP awards to be granted in 2018 and beyond Annual bonuses for 2017 were made in accordance with the policy approved by shareholders in 2015.
The CEO was awarded a bonus of 256680 which reflects his performance against his scorecard being assessed as 71.3%.
The 2017 scorecard for the CEO is detailed on page 62.
A similar scorecard approach will continue in 2018.
The scorecard will set challenging targets for triggering bonus and for rewarding outperformance on a sliding scale.
The scorecard will be a combination of corporate objectives and personal objectives.
Corporate objectives for 2018 will cover areas such as business performance funding and finance relationships and reputation.
Due to the commercially sensitive nature of the Groups corporate objectives further details of the 2018 scorecard will be provided in the 2018 Directors Remuneration Report.
No longterm incentive awards are due to be made in 2018.
Details of the awards made in 2014 and 2017 under the VCP can be found in the notes of the policy table on page 56.
O.
Statement of shareholder voting At last years AGM held on May 10 2017 the Directors remuneration report was approved by shareholders on a show of hands.
Details of the valid proxy votes received for the resolution are detailed below Votes Percentage Votes cast in favour including proxy appointments that gave discretion to the Chairman 92143925 99.82% Votes cast against 105139 0.11% Total votes cast excluding votes directed to be withheld 92249064 100.00% Votes withheld 28556 The Directors remuneration policy was last put to shareholders at the AGM held on May 10 2016 Votes Percentage Votes cast in favour including proxy appointments that gave discretion to the Chairman 72615262 93.36% Votes cast against 5166921 6.64% Total votes cast excluding votes directed to be withheld 77782183 100.00% Votes withheld 119824
This report was approved by the Board on March 27 2017 and signed on its behalf by
M.
Blyth
Chairman of the Remuneration Committee
65 ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 GROUP OVERVIEW STRATEGIC REPORT
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION DIRECTORS REPORT The Directors present their report and audited consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31 2017.
PRINCIPAL ACTIVITIES The Groups principal royalty activities are set out in the Strategic Report on pages 25 and 36.
GOING CONCERN The financial position of the Group and its cash flows are set out on pages 77 and 80.
The directors have considered the principal risks of the company which are set out on pages 18 and 23 and considered key sensitivities which could impact on the level of available borrowings.
As at December 31 2017 the Group had cash and cash equivalents of 8.1m as set out in note 22 and subject to continued covenant compliance has access to 29.6m through its undrawn secured US40.0m revolving credit facility.
The Directors have considered the Groups cash flow forecasts for the period to the end of March 2019.
The Board is satisfied that the Groups forecasts and projections taking into account reasonably possible changes in trading performance and other uncertainties together with the Groups cash position and access to the undrawn revolving credit facility show that the Group will be able to operate within the level of its current facilities for the foreseeable future.
For this reason the Group continues to adopt the going concern basis in preparing its financial statements.
RESULTS AND DIVIDENDS The consolidated income statement is set out on page 75 of the financial statements.
The Group reported a profit after tax of 10.5m 2016 26.4m.
Total dividends for 2017 will amount to 7.00p per share 2016 6.00p per share combining the recommended final dividend of 2.50p per share for the year ended December 31 2017 with the interim dividends of 3.00p per share paid on November 15 2017 and 1.50p per share paid on February 15 2018.
The final dividend for the year ended December 31 2017 is subject to shareholder approval at the 2018 AGM.
The Board proposes to pay the final dividend on May 31 2018 to shareholders on the Companys share register at the close of business on May 18 2018.
The shares will be quoted exdividend on the London and Toronto Stock Exchanges on May 17 2018.
OUTLOOK
The outlook for and likely future developments of the Group are described within the Chairmans Statement on pages 06 and 07 together with the Chief Executive Officers Statement on pages 08 and 09 and the Groups Strategic Report on pages 08 to 43.
DIRECTORS
The names of the Directors in office on the date of approval of these financial statements together with their biographical details and other information are shown on page 45.
All Directors will stand for election or reelection at the 2018 AGM with the exception of R.
Rhodes who announced her intention to step down from the Board following the 2018 AGM.
A table of Directors attendance at Board and Committee meetings during 2017 is on page 46.
DIRECTORS DISCLOSURES With regard to the appointment and replacement of Directors the Company is governed by its Articles of Association the Companies Act 2006 and related legislation.
At the next AGM all of the Companys Directors will be offering themselves for election or reelection.
The Directors may exercise all the powers of the Company subject to applicable legislation and regulation and the Articles of Association of the Company.
The Companys Articles of Association may be amended by special resolution of the shareholders.
At the 2017 AGM held on May 10 2017 the Directors were given the power to issue new shares up to an aggregate nominal amount of 1206013.
This power will expire at the earlier of the conclusion of the 2018 AGM or June 30 2018.
Further the Directors were given the power to make market purchases of ordinary shares up to a maximum number of 18090203.
This power will expire at the earlier of the conclusion of the 2018 AGM or June 30 2018.
At the AGM held on May 10 2017 the Directors were given the power to allot equity shares or sell treasury shares for cash other than prorata to existing shareholders.
This power was limited to 5% of the Companys issued ordinary share capital other than in connection with a rights or other similar issue and will expire at the earlier of the conclusion of the 2018 AGM or June 30 2018.
The Group maintains insurance for its Directors and officers against certain liabilities in relation to the Group.
The Group has entered into qualifying third party indemnity arrangements for the benefit of all its Directors in a form and scope which comply with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006.
CAPITAL STRUCTURE The structure of the Companys ordinary share capital at March 21 2018 was as follows Issued No.
Nominal value per share Total % of total capital
CHANGE OF CONTROL There are a number of agreements that terminate upon a change of control of the Company such as certain commercial contracts and the revolving credit facility.
None of these are considered significant in terms of the business as a whole.
There is no change of control provision in any of the Directors contracts.
RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS
The 0.02 ordinary shares carry the right to dividends determined at the discretion of the Board.
Voting rights The 0.02 ordinary shares carry the right to one vote per share.
Restrictions on transfer of holdings There are no specific restrictions on the size of a holding nor on the transfer of the Companys shares which are both governed by the general provisions of the Articles of Association of the Company and prevailing legislation.
There are no known agreements between holders of the Companys shares that may result in restrictions on the transfer of shares or voting rights.
Special control rights The Companys ordinary shares are subject to transfer restrictions and forced transfer provisions that are intended to prevent among other things the assets of the Company from being deemed to be plan assets under US Employment Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 ERISA.
For more information refer to the important notices section.
Employee share schemes Details of employee share schemes are set out on page 56 below and in note 28 to the financial statements.
APGAR1704.04.18MIDDLEAMENDS
66 ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 G OV E R N A N C E Treasury The Company holds 925933 0.02 ordinary shares in treasury for the purposes of settling the Groups sharebased compensation plans as described in note 27.
Warrants
On May 22 2014 the Company resolved to create 500000 warrants to be issued pursuant to a warrant instrument dated June 10 2014.
These warrants entitle the warrant holders to subscribe in cash for ordinary shares at the subscription price of 2.50 per ordinary share subject to any adjustment events in accordance with the warrant instrument.
The rights to subscribe for ordinary shares conferred by the warrants may only be exercised within five years from the date of the grant of the warrants and in accordance with the warrant instrument.
On January 18 2017 the Company resolved to create 294695 warrants to be issued pursuant to a warrant instrument dated February 10 2017 with Investec Bank PLC as part of the refinancing of the Groups revolving credit facility refer to note 24.
These warrants entitle the warrant holders to subscribe in cash for ordinary shares at the subscription price of 1.58 per ordinary share subject to any adjustment events in accordance with the warrant instrument.
The rights to subscribe for ordinary shares conferred by the warrants may only be exercised within three years from the date of the grant of the warrants and in accordance with the warrant instrument.
Allotment of ordinary shares On February 6 2017 the Company issued 10960000 new Ordinary Shares at a price of 125p per share amounting to an aggregate nominal value of 219200 and aggregate consideration of 13700000 as part of a firm placing announced on February 1 2017.
The issue price was fixed on February 1 2017 and represented a discount of approximately 5.1% to the closing middle market price on the London Stock Exchange of 131.75p per share on January 31 2017.
The net proceeds were used to provide the majority of funding for the Denison financing and streaming agreements further details of which are set out in note 27 to the financial statements.
As a result of the preceding issuance the Company has issued 10960000 new Ordinary Shares other than as part of a preemptive offer in the 12 months preceding the date of this Annual Report and Accounts representing approximately 6% of the Companys share capital as at the date of this Annual Report.
The Company has issued a further 39468814 new Ordinary Shares other than as part of a pre emptive offer in the three years preceding the date of this Annual Report and Accounts representing an aggregate of approximately 22% of the Companys share capital as at the date of this Annual
SUBSTANTIAL SHAREHOLDINGS The Company has been notified aside from the interests of the Directors of the following interests of 3% or more in the share capital of the Company at March 21 2018.
Ordinary Shares of 2p each Representing Liontrust Investment Partners LLP 17952410 9.92% Aberforth Partners LLP 17044444 9.42% Schroders PLC 12210712 6.75% Canacoord Genuity Group Inc 11077308 6.12% Miton Group PLC 9287252 5.13% Ransomes Dock Limited 7489360 4.14% AXA Investment Managers UK Framlington 5494332 3.04% See page 63 for a list of Directors interests in shares.
STATEMENT AS TO DISCLOSURE OF INFORMATION TO AUDITORS The Directors who were in office on the date of approval of these financial statements have confirmed that as far as they are aware there is no relevant audit information of which the auditors are unaware.
Each of the Directors has confirmed that they have taken all the steps that they ought to have taken as Directors in order to make themselves aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that it has been communicated to the auditors.
OTHER STATUTORY AND REGULATORY INFORMATION Information in relation to the Groups payment policy can be found in note 26 and a statement on Going Concern is provided in note 3.1.1.
AUDITORS
Deloitte LLP have expressed willingness to continue in office.
In accordance with section  of the Companies Act 2006 a resolution to appoint auditors will be proposed at the 2018 AGM.
DESIGNATED FOREIGN ISSUER STATUS The Company continues to be listed on the TSX and to be a reporting issuer in the Province of Ontario Canada.
The Company also continues to be a designated foreign issuer as defined in National Instrument 71102  Continuous Disclosure and Other Exemptions Relating to Foreign Issuers of the Canadian Securities
As such the Company is not subject to the same ongoing reporting requirements as most other reporting issuers in
Generally the Company will be in compliance with Canadian ongoing reporting requirements if it complies with the UK Financial Conduct Authority in its capacity as the competent authority for the purposes of Part VI of the Financial Services and Markets Act 2000 United Kingdom as amended from time to time and the applicable laws of England and Wales the UK Rules and files on its SEDAR profile at site any documents required to be filed or furnished pursuant to the UK Rules.
By Order of the Board
Flynn
Company Secretary March 27 2018 Registered office 1 Savile Row
W1S 3JR
67 ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 GROUP OVERVIEW STRATEGIC REPORT
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION STATEMENT OF DIRECTORS RESPONSIBILITIES The Directors are responsible for preparing the Annual Report and Accounts the Directors Remuneration Report and the financial statements in accordance with applicable law and regulations.
Company law requires the Directors to prepare financial statements for each financial year.
Under that law the Directors have elected to prepare the Group and parent Company financial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union EU.
Under company law the Directors must not approve the financial statements unless they are satisfied that they give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Group and the Company and of the profit or loss of the Group and the Company for that period.
In preparing these financial statements International Accounting Standard 1 requires that concern.
The Directors are responsible for keeping adequate accounting records that are sufficient to show and explain the Companys transactions and disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the financial position of the Company and the Group and enable them to ensure that the financial statements and the Directors Remuneration Report comply with the Companies Act 2006 United Kingdom and as regards the Group financial statements Article 4 of the IAS Regulation.
They are also responsible for safeguarding the assets of the Company and the Group and hence for taking reasonable steps for the prevention and detection of fraud and other irregularities.
The Directors who were in office at the date of this statement confirm that so far as they are each aware there is no relevant audit information of which the Companys auditors are unaware and the Directors have taken all steps that they ought to have taken to make themselves aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that the auditors are aware of that information.
DIRECTORS STATEMENT PURSUANT TO THE DISCLOSURE AND TRANSPARENCY RULES We confirm that to the best of our knowledge the financial statements prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the EU give a true and fair view of the assets liabilities financial position and profit or loss of the Company and the undertakings included in the consolidation taken as a whole the Strategic Report includes a fair review of the development and performance of the business and the position of the Company and the undertakings included in the consolidation taken as a whole together with a description of the principal risks and uncertainties that they face and the Annual Report and financial statements taken as a whole are fair balanced and understandable and provide the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Companys performance business model and strategy.
The Directors are responsible for the maintenance and integrity of the corporate and financial information included on the Groups website site Legislation in the United Kingdom governing the preparation and dissemination of financial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
The Directors consider that the Annual Report and Accounts taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Companys performance business model and strategy.
By Order of the Board
Meier
Chairman
March 27 2018
68 ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 G OV E R N A N C E INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT TO THE MEMBERS OF ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC
In our opinion the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the Groups and of the Parent Companys affairs as at 31 December 2017 and of the Groups profit for the year then ended the Group financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union the Parent Company financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and as applied in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006 and the financial statements have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006 and as regards the Group financial statements Article 4 of the IAS Regulation.
We have audited the financial statements of Anglo Pacific Group plc the Parent Company and its subsidiaries the Group which comprise the consolidated income statement the consolidated statement of comprehensive income the consolidated balance sheet and Company balance sheet the consolidated and Company statement of changes in equity the consolidated and Parent Company statements of cash flows and the related notes 1 to 35.
The financial reporting framework that has been applied in their preparation is applicable law and IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and as regards the Parent Company financial statements as applied in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006.
BASIS FOR OPINION We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing UK ISAs UK and applicable law.
Our responsibilities under those standards are further described in the auditors responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements section of our report.
We are independent of the Group and the Parent Company in accordance with the ethical requirements that are relevant to our audit of the financial statements in the UK including the FRCs Ethical Standard as applied to listed public interest entities and we have fulfilled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with these requirements.
We confirm that the nonaudit services prohibited by the FRCs Ethical Standard were not provided to the Group or the Parent Company.
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion.
SUMMARY OF OUR AUDIT APPROACH Key audit matters The key audit matters that we identified in the current year were Valuation of the Kestrel royalties Impairment assessment of the royalties intangibles portfolio Accounting for the Denison transaction Accounting for deferred and current tax Within this report any new key audit matters are identified with  and any key audit matters which are the same as the prior year are identified with  .
Materiality The materiality that we used for the Group financial statements was 4.3m which was determined on the basis of 2% on net assets.
Scoping Consistent with how the Group is managed we consider the Group to be one component.
Consequently all assets liabilities income and expenses are subject to a full scope audit.
Significant changes in our approach We have not included the Dugbe valuation as a key audit matter for 2017.
In 2016 the royalty was converted from being held at cost on the balance sheet to fair value which meant there was the potential for a significant change in carrying value.
Having audited the fair value methodology and sources of assumptions during 2016 the potential for a material misstatement this year is considered significantly lower.
We have included a new key audit matter for the accounting for the Denison transaction because of the complexity of the accounting and the valuation of the loan and streaming royalty that was measured in February 2017.
We have included a new key audit matter in respect of the uncertainty around the tax treatment of the intercompany loan between two subsidiary entities.
APGAR1704.04.18MIDDLEAMENDS
69 ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 GROUP OVERVIEW STRATEGIC REPORT
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION FI N A N C I A L S T A T EM E N T S CONCLUSIONS RELATING TO GOING CONCERN PRINCIPAL RISKS AND VIABILITY STATEMENT Going concern We have reviewed the directors statement in note 3.1.1 to the financial statements about whether they considered it appropriate to adopt the going concern basis of accounting in preparing them and their identification of any material uncertainties to the Groups and Companys ability to continue to do so over a period of at least 12 months from the date of approval of the financial statements.
We are required to state whether we have anything material to add or draw attention to in relation to that statement required by Listing Rule 9.8.6R3 and report if the statement is materially inconsistent with our knowledge obtained in the audit.
We confirm that we have nothing material to report add or draw attention to in respect of these matters.
Principal risks and viability statement Based solely on reading the directors statements and considering whether they were consistent with the knowledge we obtained in the course of the audit including the knowledge obtained in the evaluation of the directors assessment of the Groups and the Companys ability to continue as a going concern we are required to state whether we have anything material to add or draw attention to in relation to the disclosures on pages 1823 that describe the principal risks and explain how they are being managed or mitigated the directors confirmation on page 18 that they have carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Group including those that would threaten its business model future performance solvency or liquidity or the directors explanation on page 18 as to how they have assessed the prospects of the Group over what period they have done so and why they consider that period to be appropriate and their statement as to whether they have a reasonable expectation that the Group will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the period of their assessment including any related disclosures drawing attention to any necessary qualifications or assumptions.
We are also required to report whether the directors statement relating to the prospects of the Group required by Listing Rule 9.8.6R3 is materially inconsistent with our knowledge obtained in the audit.
We confirm that we have nothing material to report add or draw attention to in respect of these matters.
KEY AUDIT MATTERS Key audit matters are those matters that in our professional judgement were of most significance in our audit of the financial statements of the current period and include the most significant assessed risks of material misstatement whether or not due to fraud that we identified.
These matters included those which had the greatest effect on the overall audit strategy the allocation of resources in the audit and directing the efforts of the engagement team.
These matters were addressed in the context of our audit of the financial statements as a whole and in forming our opinion thereon and we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters.
VALUATION OF THE KESTREL ROYALTY Key audit matter description Royalties arrangements held at fair value have a value of 115.0m as at 31 December 2017 2016 130.4m.
The Kestrel royalty comprises 104.3m 2016 116.9m of the total and management engaged an independent valuation specialist to perform an independent valuation of the royalty asset.
The valuation of the Kestrel royalty is subjective and contains significant levels of judgement in relation to the discount rate used the forecast commodity prices and the expected production profile.
In addition the heightened coal price volatility during the year has widened the range of analyst forecasts and increased the subjectivity in the valuation.
Due to the high level of judgements involved we have determined that there was a potential for fraud through possible manipulation of this balance.
The price and discount rate assumptions are set out in note 14 along with the related sensitivity analysis.
The Group discloses this risk as a critical accounting judgement in note 2.
Refer to the Audit Committee report where this matter is considered by the Audit Committee as a significant issue Review of the carrying value of royalties held at fair value on page 50.
How the scope of our audit responded to the key audit matter We obtained the valuation model used by managements independent specialist to determine the fair value of the Kestrel royalty.
We challenged the assumptions adopted by managements independent specialist by comparison to recent third party forecast commodity price data reference to third party documentation and the relevant reserves and resources reports.
To challenge the discount rates we prepared independent discount rates and compared those to the rates adopted by management.
We evaluated the independence objectivity and competence of managements independent specialist.
We challenged the valuation assumptions adopted in line with the above methodology by directly reviewing their reporting and speaking directly with the specialist.
In doing so we assessed the extent to which management may have influenced the key assumptions in the valuation model to address the risk of any possible management bias.
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT TO THE MEMBERS OF ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC continued
70 ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 FI N A N C I A L S T A T EM E N T S Key observations We concur that the fair value of the Kestrel royalty is within an acceptable range.
IMPAIRMENT ASSESSMENT OF THE ROYALTY INTANGIBLES PORTFOLIO Key audit matter description Royalty arrangements held as intangibles have a gross carrying amount of 115.8m at 31 December 2017 2016 115.7m and a net carrying amount of 77.4m 2016 80.0m.
As a consequence of the volatility in current commodity prices the assessment of whether impairmentreversal indicators exist and estimating the recoverable amount of royalty arrangements accounted for as intangible assets where necessary require management to adopt key judgements in relation to the discount rates used the forecast commodity prices the expected production profiles and where relevant the probability of production commencing.
Impairment indicators were identified for Four Mile and Pilbara with carrying amounts of 1.5m 2016 1.7m and 11.2m 2016 11.3m respectively.
Indicators of impairment reversal were also identified for Ring of Fire which has a carrying amount of 3.7m 2016 3.8m.
No impairment or impairment reversal was recognised for 2017.
In 2016 an impairment of 2.1m was recognised at Amap see note 16.
The Group discloses this risk as a critical accounting judgement in note 2.
Refer to the Audit Committee report where this matter is considered by the Audit Committee as part of the significant issue Review of the carrying values of royalties held at amortised cost along with the investment portfolio and resulting impairment charges on page 50.
How the scope of our audit responded to the key audit matter We challenged managements assessment as to whether indicators of impairment exist for specific royalty arrangements through evaluation of changes in production and pricing forecasts and a review of publically available information.
Where such indicators were identified we obtained copies of the valuation models and challenged the assumptions adopted by management by comparison to third party forecast commodity price data reference to third party documentation and the relevant reserves and resources reports.
To challenge the discount rates we prepared independent discount rates and compared those to the rates adopted by management.
We reviewed and challenged managements assessment of whether projects still in the development phase would reach commercial production through an independent assessment based on third party data available from asset operators.
Where there were indicators of impairment reversal for royalty assets we evaluated whether it was appropriate to reverse previous impairments.
Key observations We concur with managements impairment assessment in respect of the intangible assets where indicators of impairment were identified we found that the assumptions used were within a reasonable range and had been determined and applied on a consistent basis across the Group.
ACCOUNTING FOR THE DENISON TRANSACTION Key audit matter description During 2017 the Group entered into two new contracts known together as the Denison Financing Agreement.
As at 31 December 2017 management has accounted for the transaction as two separate financial instruments as follows A 21.3m 13year secured loan held as a financial liability at amortised cost.
The asset was designated as a loan measured at amortised cost due to the mandatory repayment term the intention of management to hold the asset in order to collect the interest payments and principal repayments associated with the contract and the instrument being unquoted in an active market.
See note 20 for further details A 1.9 million availableforsale debt financial instrument relating to an entitlement to a percentage of the future McClean Lake Mill revenue earned by Denison excluding that revenue earned in relation to the first 215mlbs of throughput.
The contract meets the definition of an availableforsale debt as it provides a contractual right to receive cash it has no maturity date and the cash flows are not fixed and determinable.
See note 15 for further details.
The Group discloses this risk as a critical accounting judgement in note 2.
Refer to the Audit Committee report where this matter is considered by the Audit Committee as a significant issue Review of the carrying values of royalties held at amortised cost along with the investment portfolio and resulting impairment charges and Review of the carrying value of royalties held at fair value on page 50.
APGAR1704.04.18MIDDLEAMENDS
71 ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 GROUP OVERVIEW STRATEGIC REPORT
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION How the scope of our audit responded to the key audit matter We challenged managements assessment as to whether this transaction is appropriately accounted for as two separate financial instruments through our consideration of the key terms in the contracts.
We have reviewed the contracts and assessed whether the two instruments are separate due to different contractual rights to cash and ability to sell separately the royalty from the loan or vice versa.
We have reviewed the contracts and assessed whether the appropriate accounting treatment was applied to the financial instruments under IAS39.
We have engaged our valuation specialists in order to challenge whether the fair value of the loan on day one is appropriate through recalculation of loans initial value.
We obtained the availableforsale debt valuation model and challenged the key assumptions adopted by management in relation to this model by comparison to third party forecast commodity price data reference to third party documentation and the relevant reserves and resources reports.
To challenge the discount rates for the availableforsale debt and effective interest rate for the loan we prepared independent rates and compared those to the rates adopted by management.
Key observations We concur that the accounting treatment and valuation of the transactions appear reasonable.
ACCOUNTING FOR DEFERRED AND CURRENT TAX Key audit matter description The Group undertook a restructuring of certain loss making entities during the year.
The Group obtained advice from professional advisors in respect of these transactions.
The tax treatment in relation to the restructure is uncertain given the lack of precedence and guidance from the tax authorities.
In the event this aspect was successfully challenged by the tax authorities possibly through litigation this would result in a reduction in the deferred tax asset of 3.3m and the recognition of current tax liability of 3.6m as at December 31 2017 with a 6.9 million corresponding income statement tax charge for 2017.
Management disclosed this as an uncertain tax position in note 10 to the financial statements.
The Group discloses this risk as a critical accounting judgement in note 2.
Refer to the Audit Committee report where this matter is considered by the Audit Committee as part of the significant issue Group tax exposures on page 50.
How the scope of our audit responded to the key audit matter We reviewed the papers prepared by managements independent tax expert.
We utilised our specialists to review managements tax advice and position papers and consider the appropriateness of the position for the purposes of the audit this involved reviewing the tax legislation and case law applied to determine if the tax treatment was reasonable.
We held a meeting with management to discuss our concern that there is no clear precedence or guidance on this matter and as such this results in an uncertain tax position.
We recalculated managements analysis of the accounting impact detailed above if the nontaxable treatment was successfully challenged by the tax authorities in order to assess whether it is reasonable.
Key observations Given the uncertainty related to the tax accounting treatment we concurred with managements conclusion to disclose this as an uncertain tax position.
OUR APPLICATION OF MATERIALITY We define materiality as the magnitude of misstatement in the financial statements that makes it probable that the economic decisions of a reasonably knowledgeable person would be changed or influenced.
We use materiality both in planning the scope of our audit work and in evaluating the results of our work.
Based on our professional judgement we determined materiality for the financial statements as a whole as follows Group financial statements Parent Company financial statements Materiality 4.3m 2016 4.0m 2.7 2016 2.5m Basis for determining materiality 2% of net assets 2016 2% 2% of net assets 2016 2% Rationale for the benchmark applied Net assets was considered a more stable base than profits due to the effect of unrealised fair value gainslosses in each financial year.
The longterm value for shareholders is also in the asset base as the Group generates its wealth through royalties acquired.
Considering that these are often bought in the development phase of an assets life a significant portion of the Companys value at this moment is not reflected in the income statement.
Net assets was considered a more stable base than profits due to the effect of unrealised fair value gainslosses in each financial year.
The longterm value for shareholders is also in the asset base as the Company generates its wealth through royalties acquired.
Considering that these are often bought in the development phase of an assets life a significant portion of the Companys value at this moment is not reflected in the income statement.
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT TO THE MEMBERS OF ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC continued
72 ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 FI N A N C I A L S T A T EM E N T S We agreed with the Audit Committee that we would report to the Committee all audit differences in excess of 86000 2016 80000 for the Group as well as differences below that threshold that in our view warranted reporting on qualitative grounds.
We also report to the Audit Committee on disclosure matters that we identified when assessing the overall presentation of the financial statements.
AN OVERVIEW OF THE SCOPE OF OUR AUDIT Consistent with how the Group is managed we consider the Group to be one component.
Consequently all assets liabilities income and expenses are subject to full scope audit.
There were no changes to the overall scope of the audit compared to the prior year.
OTHER INFORMATION The Directors are responsible for the other information.
The other information comprises the information included in the Annual Report other than the financial statements and our auditors report thereon.
Our opinion on the financial statements does not cover the other information and except to the extent otherwise explicitly stated in our report we do not express any form of assurance conclusion thereon.
In connection with our audit of the financial statements our responsibility is to read the other information and in doing so consider whether the other information is materially inconsistent with the financial statements or our knowledge obtained in the audit or otherwise appears to be materially misstated.
If we identify such material inconsistencies or apparent material misstatements we are required to determine whether there is a material misstatement in the financial statements or a material misstatement of the other information.
If based on the work we have performed we conclude that there is a material misstatement of this other information we are required to report that fact.
In this context matters that we are specifically required to report to you as uncorrected material misstatements of the other information include where we conclude that Fair balanced and understandable  the statement given by the Directors that they consider the Annual Report and financial statements taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Groups position and performance business model and strategy is materially inconsistent with our knowledge obtained in the audit or Audit Committee reporting  the section describing the work of the Audit Committee does not appropriately address matters communicated by us to the Audit Committee or Directors statement of compliance with the UK Corporate Governance Code  the parts of the Directors statement required under the Listing Rules relating to the Companys compliance with the UK Corporate Governance Code containing provisions specified for review by the auditor in accordance with Listing Rule 9.8.10R2 do not properly disclose a departure from a relevant provision of the UK Corporate Governance Code.
We have nothing to report in respect of these matters.
RESPONSIBILITIES OF DIRECTORS As explained more fully in the statement of Directors responsibilities the Directors are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements and for being satisfied that they give a true and fair view and for such internal control as the Directors determine is necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error.
In preparing the financial statements the Directors are responsible for assessing the Groups and the Parent Companys ability to continue as a going concern disclosing as applicable matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless the Directors either intend to liquidate the Group or the Parent Company or to cease operations or have no realistic alternative but to do so.
Net assets
Audit Committee reporting threshold
73 ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 GROUP OVERVIEW STRATEGIC REPORT
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION AUDITORS RESPONSIBILITIES FOR THE AUDIT OF THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error and to issue an auditors report that includes our opinion.
Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with ISAs UK will always detect a material misstatement when it exists.
Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if individually or in the aggregate they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these financial statements.
A further description of our responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements is located on the Financial Reporting Councils website at www. rc. iteauditorsresponsibilities.
This description forms part of our auditors report.
USE OF OUR REPORT This report is made solely to the Companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006.
Our
To the fullest extent permitted by law we do not accept or assume responsibility to anyone other than the Company and the Companys members as a body for our audit work for this report or for the opinions we have formed.
REPORT ON OTHER LEGAL AND REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS Opinions on other matters prescribed by the Companies Act 2006 In our opinion the part of the Directors Remuneration Report to be audited has been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 2006.
In our opinion based on the work undertaken in the course of the audit the information given in the Strategic Report and the Directors Report for the financial year for which the financial statements are prepared is consistent with the financial statements and the Strategic Report and the Directors Report have been prepared in accordance with applicable legal requirements.
In the light of the knowledge and understanding of the Group and the Parent Company and their environment obtained in the course of the audit we have not identified any material misstatements in the Strategic Report or the Directors Report.
MATTERS ON WHICH WE ARE REQUIRED TO REPORT BY EXCEPTION Adequacy of explanations received and accounting records Under the Companies Act 2006 we are required to report to you if in our opinion we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit or adequate accounting records have not been kept by the Parent Company or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or the Parent Company financial statements are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns.
We have nothing to report in respect of these matters.
Directors remuneration Under the Companies Act 2006 we are also required to report if in our opinion certain disclosures of Directors remuneration have not been made or the part of the Directors Remuneration Report to be audited is not in agreement with the accounting records and returns.
We have nothing to report in respect of these matters.
OTHER MATTERS Auditor tenure Following the recommendation of the Audit Committee we were appointed by shareholders at the AGM on June 11 2014 to audit the financial statements for the year ending December 31 2014 and subsequent financial periods.
The period of total uninterrupted engagement including previous renewals and reappointments of the firm is four years covering the years ending December 31 2014 to December 31 2017.
Consistency of the audit report with the additional report to the Audit Committee Our audit opinion is consistent with the additional report to the Audit Committee we are required to provide in accordance with ISAs UK.
Christopher Thomas ACA Senior statutory auditor for and on behalf of Deloitte LLP Statutory Auditor London United Kingdom 27 March 2018 INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT TO THE MEMBERS OF ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC continued
74 ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 FI N A N C I A L S T A T EM E N T S Notes Royalty income 4 37382 19705 Amortisation of royalties 16 3116 2869 Operating expenses 5a 5890 4130 Operating profit before impairments revaluations and gains on disposals 28376 12706 Gain on sale of mining and exploration interests 17 1774 2449 Impairment of mining and exploration interests 17 219 29 Impairment of royalty and exploration intangible assets 16  2009 Revaluation and impairment of royalty financial instruments 15 6324 4939 Revaluation of coal royalties Kestrel 14 11933 17900 Finance income 7 1198 2347 Finance costs 8 795 1086 Other lossesincome 9 230 973 Profit before tax 11847 28312 Current income tax charge 10 1997 594 Deferred income tax creditcharge 10 677 1356 Profit attributable to equity holders 10527 26362 Total and continuing earnings per share Basic and diluted earnings per share 11 5.88p 15.60p The notes on pages 81 to 1 18 are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
APGAR1728.03.18BACKARTWORK
ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 75 GROUP OVERVIEW STRATEGIC REPORT
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION CONSOLIDATED INCOME STATEMENT for the year ended December 31 2017 Notes Profit attributable to equity holders 10527 26362 Items that will not be reclassified to profit or loss Items that have been or may be subsequently reclassified to profit or loss Availableforsale investments Revaluation of availableforsale investments 15 17 2233 9184 Reclassification to income statement on disposal of availableforsale investments 1774 2449 Reclassification to income statement on impairment 219 29 Deferred tax relating to items that have been or may be reclassified 341 27 Net exchange lossgain on translation of foreign operations 25 883 26125 Other comprehensive lossprofit for the year net of tax 136 32916 Total comprehensive profit for the year 10663 59278 The notes on pages 81 to 1 18 are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
FI N A N C I A L S T A T EM E N T S
ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 76 CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME for the year ended December 31 2017 Group Company
Noncurrent assets Property plant and equipment Coal royalties Kestrel 14 104266 116885 Royalty financial instruments 15 10867 13556 3979 6724 Royalty and exploration intangible assets 16 77421 80047 2349 2349 Mining and exploration interests 17 16431 17062 13273 13861 Deferred costs 18 689 1370 449 155 Investments in subsidiaries 19   70207 56543 Other receivables 20 21259  56862 39303 Deferred tax 25 5484 9126 236461 238123 147163 119012 Current assets Trade and other receivables 20 8702 12090 427 8551 Derivative financial instruments 21 100 711 Cash and cash equivalents 22 8099 5331 1349 924 16901 18132 1776 9475 Total assets 253362 256255 148939 128487 Noncurrent liabilities Borrowings 24  6167  3100 Other payables 26 418 1491 419 276 Deferred tax 25 31507 36637 676 662 31925 44295 1095 4038 Current liabilities Income tax liabilities Trade and other payables 26 2495 1357 12715 1090 2500 1822 12720 1555 Total liabilities 34425 46117 13815 5593 Net assets 218937 210138 135124 122894 Capital and reserves attributable to shareholders Share capital 27 3618 3399 3618 3399 Share premium 27 61966 49211 61966 49211 Other reserves 64752 63600 42495 40923 Retained earnings 88601 93928 27045 29361 Total equity 218937 210138 135124 122894 The notes on pages 81 to 1 18 are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
The Company has elected to take the exemption under section 408 of the Companies Act 2006 United Kingdom not to present the parent company profit and loss account.
The profit for the Parent Company for the year was 13538000 2016 7892000.
The financial statements of Anglo Pacific Group PLC registered number  on pages 69 to 1 18 were approved by the Board and authorised for issue on March 27 2018 and are signed on its behalf by
Meier
J.
Treger
Chairman Chief Executive Officer
APGAR1728.03.18BACKARTWORK
ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 77 GROUP OVERVIEW STRATEGIC REPORT
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEET AND COMPANY BALANCE SHEET as at December 31 2017 Other reserves
Share capital
Merger reserve
Investment
Share based payment reserve
Special reserve
Retained earnings
Balance at January 1 2016 3399 49211 29134 143 3917 1308 2557 632 2601 79397 161983 Profit for the year          26362 26362 Other comprehensive income
Valuation movement taken to equity     9184  57    9241 Transferred to income statement on disposal     2449      2449 Transferred to income statement on impairment     29      29 Deferred tax 25     27  1    28 Foreign currency translation       26067    26067 Total comprehensive profit     6791  26125   26362 59278 Dividends 12          11831 11831 Issue of ordinary shares 27 Value of employee services 28      708     708 Total transactions with owners of the company      708    11831 11123 Balance at December 31 2016 3399 49211 29134 143 10708 2016 23568 632 2601 93928 210138 Balance at January 1 2017 3399 49211 29134 143 10708 2016 23568 632 2601 93928 210138 Profit for the year          10527 10527 Other comprehensive income
Valuation movement taken to equity     2233  8    2241 Transferred to income statement on disposal     1774      1774 Transferred to income statement on impairment     219      219 Deferred tax 25     341  1    342 Foreign currency translation       892    892 Total comprehensive profit     1019  883   10527 10663 Dividends 12          15869 15869 Issue of ordinary shares 27 219 12755         12974 Value of employee services 28      1016    15 1031 Total transactions with owners of the company 219 12755    1016    15854 1864 Balance at December 31 2017 3618 61966 29134 143 11727 3032 22685 632 2601 88601 218937 The notes on pages 81 to 1 18 are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
FI N A N C I A L S T A T EM E N T S
ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 78 CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY for the year ended December 31 2017 Other reserves
Share capital
Merger reserve
Investment
Share based payment reserve
Special reserve
Total equity Balance at January 1 2016 3399 49211 29134 143 2613 1308 82 632 33300 119822 Changes in equity for 2016 Availableforsale investments Valuation movement taken to equity     8578     8578 Transferred to income statement on disposal     2406     2406 Transferred to income statement on impairment     26     26 Deferred tax on valuation     105     105 Net income recognised direct into equity     6303     6303 Profit for the period         7892 7892 Total recognised income and expenses     6303    7892 14195 Dividends 12         11831 11831 Issue of ordinary shares 27 Value of employee services 28      708    708 Balance at December 31 2016 3399 49211 29134 143 8916 2016 82 632 29361 122894 Balance at January 1 2017 3399 49211 29134 143 8916 2016 82 632 29361 122894 Changes in equity for 2017 Availableforsale investments Valuation movement taken to equity     2331     2331 Transferred to income statement on disposal     1774     1774 Transferred to income statement on impairment     13     13 Deferred tax on valuation     14     14 Net income recognised direct into equity     556     556 Profit for the period         13538 13538 Total recognised income and expenses     556    13538 14094 Dividends 12         15869 15869 Issue of ordinary shares 27 219 12755        12974 Value of employee services 28      1016   15 1031 Balance at December 31 2017 3618 61966 29134 143 9472 3032 82 632 27045 135124 The notes on pages 81 to 1 18 are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
APGAR1728.03.18BACKARTWORK
ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 79 GROUP OVERVIEW STRATEGIC REPORT
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION COMPANY STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY for the year ended December 31 2017 Group Company
Cash flows from operating activities Profit before taxation 11847 28312 13725 7324 Adjustments for Finance income  excluding foreign exchange gainslosses 7 1945 82 1927 Finance costs 8 795 1086 335 560 Other income 9 230 973 35 246 Gain on disposal of mining and exploration interests 17 1774 2449 1774 2406 Impairment of mining and exploration interests Impairment of royalty and exploration intangible assets 16  2009 Revaluation of royalty financial instruments 15 6324 4939 3076 Impairment of investment in subsidiaries 19   1467 50 Revaluation of coal royalties Kestrel 14 11933 17900 Depreciation of property plant and equipment Amortisation of royalty intangible assets 16 3116 2869 Share based payment 6a 1174 708 1174 708 Forgiveness of loan to subsidiary undertaking   6483 6956 Intercompany dividends   11399 10387 31952 18584 1795 2621 DecreaseIncrease in trade and other receivables 3402 8613 86 231 IncreaseDecrease in trade and other payables 113telCash generated fromused in operations 36492 10253 809 2556 Income taxes paidrefunded 10 1863 63 321 897 Net cash generated fromused in operating activities 34629 10316 1130 3453 Cash flows from investing activities Proceeds on disposal of mining and exploration interests 17 2424 3431 2424 3326 Purchases of royalty and exploration intangible assets 16 1125 Proceeds from royalty financial instruments tel246 Purchases of royalty financial instruments 15 3323 Advances under commodity related financing agreements 20 24990  24990 Repayments under commodity related financing agreements 20 3051  3051 Other royalty related repaymentsadvances 20  352 Prepaid acquisition costs 18 224 155 224 155 Sundry income 9  63 209 185 Finance income 7 1945 82 1927 Investment in subsidiaries 19   4084 Return of capital from subsidiaries 19    2 Intercompany dividends   11399 Loans granted to subsidiary undertakings 31   2374 258 Loan repayments from subsidiary undertakings 31   405 2788 Net cash used ingenerated from investing activities 21984 4019 11999 6134 Cash flows from financing activities Drawdown of revolving credit facility 23 24 7498 8000 7498 3600 Repayment of revolving credit facility 23 24 13651 9256 10451 500 Loans from subsidiary undertakings   18764 Proceeds from issue of share capital 27 13700  13700 Transaction costs of share issue 726  726 Dividends paid 12 15869 11831 15869 11831 Finance costs  excluding foreign exchange gainslosses 8 795 1086 335 560 Net cash used ingenerated from financing activities 9843 14173 12581 9291 Net increasedecrease in cash and cash equivalents 2802 162 548 296 Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of period 5331 5708 924 410 Unrealised foreign currency gainloss 34 539 973 218 Cash and cash equivalents at end of period 8099 5331 1349 924 The notes on pages 81 to 1 18 are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
FI N A N C I A L S T A T EM E N T S
ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 80 CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS AND COMPANY STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS for the year ended December 31 2017 1 GENERAL INFORMATION Anglo Pacific Group PLC the Company and its subsidiaries together the Group secure natural resources royalties and streams by creating new royalties directly with operators or by acquiring existing royalties.
The Group has royalties and investments in mining and exploration interests primarily in Australia North and South America and Europe with a diversified exposure to commodities represented by coal vanadium uranium gold and iron ore.
The Company is a public limited company which is listed on the London Stock Exchange and Toronto Stock Exchange and incorporated and domiciled in the United Kingdom.
The address of its registered office is 1 Savile Row London W1S 3JR United Kingdom registered number .
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING JUDGEMENTS AND KEY SOURCES OF ESTIMATION UNCERTAINT Y In the application of the Groups accounting policies the Directors are required to make judgements and estimates that can have a significant impact on the financial statements.
Estimates and judgements are regularly evaluated and are based on historical experience and other factors including expectations of future events that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances.
The most critical accounting judgement relates to the classification of royalty arrangements and the key sources of estimation uncertainty relate to the calculation of the fair value of certain royalty arrangements and the key assumption used when assessing impairment of property plant and equipment and intangible assets.
The use of inaccurate or unreasonable assumptions in assessments made for any of these estimates could result in a significant impact on the financial results.
Critical accounting judgements Classification of royalty arrangements initial recognition and subsequent measurement The Directors must decide whether the Groups royalty arrangements should be classified as Intangible Assets in accordance with IAS 38 Intangible assets Financial Assets in accordance with IAS 32 Financial Instruments Presentation and IAS 39 Financial Instruments Recognition and Measurement or Investment properties in accordance with IAS 40 Investment Property.
The Directors use the following selection criteria to identify the characteristics which determine which accounting standard to apply to each royalty arrangement Type 1  Intangible assets vanilla royalties Royalties in their simplest form are classified as intangible assets by the Group.
The Group considers the substance of a simple vanilla royalty to be economically similar to holding a direct interest in the underlying mineral asset.
Existence risk the commodity physically existing in the quantity demonstrated production risk that the operator can achieve production and operate a commercially viable project timing risk commencement and quantity produced determined by the operator and price risk returns vary depending on the future commodity price driven by future supply and demand are all risks which the Group participates in on a similar basis to an owner of the underlying mineral licence.
Furthermore in a vanilla royalty there is only a right to receive cash to the extent there is production and there are no interest payments minimum payment obligations or means to enforce production or guarantee repayment.
These are accounted for as intangible assets under IAS 38.
Type 2  Financial assets royalties with additional financial protection In certain circumstances where the vanilla risk is considered too high but the Group still fundamentally believes in the quality or potential of the underlying resource the Group will look to introduce additional protective measures.
This has typically taken the form of performance milestone penalties usually resulting in the receipt of cash or cash equivalent minimum payment terms and interest provisions or mechanisms to convert the initial outlay into the equity instruments of the operator in the event of project deferral.
Once an operation is in production these mechanisms generally fall away such that the royalty will display identical characteristics and risk profile to the vanilla royalties however it is the contractual right to enforce the receipt of cash through to production which results in these royalties being treated as financial assets in accordance with IAS 32 and IAS 39.
Type 3  Investment property Royalties which are derived from the ownership of substratum land are accounted for as investment properties under IAS 40 even though the substance of their commercial terms is identical to vanilla royalties.
The Group does not expect to obtain royalties in this manner going forward as it is unusual for substratum minerals not to be the property of the state.
APGAR1728.03.18BACKARTWORK
ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 81 GROUP OVERVIEW STRATEGIC REPORT
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS for the year ended December 31 2017 A summary of the Groups accounting approach is set out below Accounting classification Substance of contractual terms Accounting treatment Examples Intangible assets  Simple royalty with no right to receive cash other than through a royalty related to production Investment is presented as an intangible asset and carried at cost less accumulated amortisation and any impairment provision Royalty income is recognised as revenue in the income statement Intangible asset is amortised on a systematic basis Intangible asset is assessed for indicators of impairment at each period end
Maracs Menchen Four Mile
Pilbara
Ring of Fire Availableforsale debt financial asset Royalty arrangement with a contractual right to receive cash e.
Financial asset is recognised at fair value on the balance sheet Changes in fair value due to changes in expected future cash flows are recognised within the income statement with other valuation changes taken to reserves Fixed effective interest income recognised in the income statement Royalty receipts reduce the assets carrying value
Dugbe 1 McClean Lake
Availableforsale equity financial assets Similar in contractual terms to an intangible asset However includes a right to convert into equity noting that for EVBC this right was subsequently extinguished Financial asset is carried at fair value with fair value movements recognised in reserves Royalty income is recognised as revenue in the income statement Asset is assessed for impairment at each reporting period end
Investment property  Direct ownership of substratum land Returns based on royalty related production Investment property is carried at fair value on the balance sheet Movements in fair value recognised in income statement Royalty income is recognised as revenue in the income statement
Crinum
Due to having one or more embedded options that are not closely related the Group has decided to evoke the fair value option for Piau.
We note that on transition to IFRS 9 all royalties currently accounted for under IAS 39 will be accounted for as FVTPL under IFRS 9.
The Group considers that the application of the above accounting standards and the resulting accounting classification and financial impact of each in the financial statements most appropriately reflects the substance of the underlying commercial terms of each royalty arrangement.
The application of each standard to the underlying royalty arrangement rather than electing to apply IAS 32 and IAS 39 to all royalties is consistent currently with the Groups international peer group and as such enables its stakeholders to make informed investment decisions.
Key sources of estimation uncertainty Assessment of fair value of royalty arrangements held at fair value A number of the Groups royalty arrangements are held at fair value.
Fair value is determined based on discounted cash flow models and other valuation techniques using assumptions considered to be reasonable and consistent with those that would be applied by a market participant.
The determination of assumptions used in assessing fair values is subjective and the use of different valuation assumptions could have a significant impact on financial results.
In particular expected future cash flows which are used in discounted cash flows models are inherently uncertain and could materially change over time.
They are significantly affected by a number of factors including reserves and resources and timinglikelihood of mines entering production together with economic factors such as commodity prices discount rates and exchange rates.
The Groups most significant royalty arrangement held at fair value is Kestrel for which the key assumptions and sensitivity analysis are set out in note 14.
FI N A N C I A L S T A T EM E N T S
ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 82 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS for the year ended December 31 2017 Impairment review of intangible assets Intangible assets are assessed for indicators of impairment at each reporting date with the assessment considering variables such as the production profiles production commissioning dates where applicable forecast commodity prices and guidance from the mine operators.
Where indicators are identified the starting point for the impairment review will be to measure the expected future cash flows expected from the royalty arrangement should the project continuecome into production.
A pretax nominal discount rate of between 6.50% and 18.00% is applied to the future cash flows.
The discount rate of each royalty arrangement is derived using a capital asset pricing model specific to the underlying project making reference to the risk free rate of return expected on an investment with the same time horizon as the expected mine life together with the country risk associated with the location of the operation.
Changes in discount rate are most sensitive to changes in the risk free rate and the expected mine life.
The outcome of this net present value calculation is then risk weighted to reflect managements current assessment of the overall likelihood and timing of each project coming into production and royalty income arising.
This assessment is impacted by news flow relating to the underlying operation in the period in conjunction with managements assessment of the economic viability of the project based on commodity price projections.
Uncertain tax provisions The Group has incurred significant losses and impairment charges over the last four years.
These losses have resulted in some instances in capital restructuring involving related Group entities for which the Group obtained advice from professional advisors.
This advice involved the interpretation of certain tax legislation for which there is no clear precedent or guidance.
Absent clear guidance from relevant tax authorities there is the possibility that those tax authorities could interpret the legislation in a different way from the Group which could result in a material reduction in the deferred tax asset and the recognition of a material current tax provision at December 31 2017.
These amounts are estimated at 3.3m and 3.6m respectively.
See note 10 for further details.
3 SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES The principal accounting policies applied in the preparation of these consolidated financial statements are set out below.
These policies have been consistently applied to all the years presented unless otherwise stated.
3.1 Basis of preparation The financial statements have been prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs.
The financial statements have also been prepared in accordance with IFRSs adopted by the European Union and therefore the Group financial statements comply with Article 4 of the EU IAS Regulation.
The financial statements have been prepared on the historical costs basis as modified by the revaluation of coal royalties investment property and certain financial instruments.
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with IFRS requires the use of certain critical accounting estimates.
It also requires management to exercise its judgement in the process of applying the Groups accounting policies.
The areas involving a higher degree of judgement or complexity or areas where assumptions and estimates are significant to the consolidated financial statements are disclosed in note 2.
We highlight on the face of the income statement the following material balances which have been separated to assist users understand the performance of the Group GainLoss on sale of mining and exploration interests refer to note 17 Impairment of mining and exploration interests refer to note 17 Impairment of royalty and exploration intangible assets refer to note 16 Revaluation of royalty financial instruments refer to note 15 Revaluation of coal royalties  Kestrel refer to note 14 3.1.1 Going concern The financial position of the Group and its cash flows are set out on pages 77 and 80.
The Directors have considered the principal risks of the Company which are set out on page 18 to 23 as well as access to funding as set out in our borrowings note 24 and considered key sensitivities which could impact on the level of available borrowings.
As at December 31 2017 the Group had cash and cash equivalents of 8.1m and subject to continued covenant compliance has access to 29.6m through its undrawn secured US40.0m revolving credit facility.
The Directors have considered the Groups cash flow forecasts for the period to the end of March 2019.
The Board is satisfied that the Groups forecasts and projections taking into account reasonably possible changes in trading performance and other uncertainties together with the Groups cash position and access to the undrawn revolving credit facility show that the Group will be able to operate within the level of its current facilities for the foreseeable future.
For this reason the Group continues to adopt the going basis in preparing its financial statements.
3.1.2 Changes in accounting policies and disclosures a Amendments to IFRSs that are mandatorily effective for the current year In the current year the Group has applied a number of amendments to IFRSs issued by the International Accounting Standards Board IASB that are mandatorily effective for an accounting period that begins on or after January 1 2017 Annual Improvements to IFRSs 20142016 cycle IFRS 12 Disclosure of Interests in Other Entities Amendments to IAS 7 Statement of Cash Flows Disclosure Initiative Amendments to IAS 12 Income Taxes Recognition of Deferred Tax Assets for Unrealised Losses
ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 83 GROUP OVERVIEW STRATEGIC REPORT
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION The adoption of these amendments has not had a significant impact on the accounting policies methods of computation or presentation applied by the Group.
The Group has not early adopted any other amendment standard or interpretation that has been issued but is not yet effective.
It is expected that where applicable these standards and amendments will be adopted on each respective effective date.
At the date of authorisation of these financial statements the Group has not applied the following new and revised IFRSs that have been issued but are not yet effective and in some cases had not yet been adopted by the EU IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers The Groups royalty income is derived from three sources assets accounted for as investment property Kestrel under IAS 40 assets at fair value EVBC accounted for under IAS 39 and assets accounted for as intangibles Narrabri Maracs Menchen and Four Mile under IAS 38.
The royalty income derived from investment properties will continue to be accounted for in accordance with IAS 40 while the royalty income derived from assets at fair value will be accounted for under IFRS 9 following its adoption.
The royalty income derived from assets classified as intangibles will be accounted for in accordance with IFRS 15 which the Directors do not believe will have a material impact on the recognition and disclosure of revenue.
IFRS 9 Financial Instruments The impact of adopting IFRS 9 on the Groups results for the year ended December 31 2017 would have been as follows Classification and measurement The measurement and accounting treatment of the Groups financial assets impacted by the application of IFRS 9 are outlined in the table below Assets IFRS 9 Classification IFRS 9 Accounting Treatment Royalty Financial Instruments McClean Lake Dugbe 1
EVBC
Jogjakarta
Fair value through profit or loss
Held at fair value on the balance sheet with fair value movements taken through the income statement.
Royalty income is not recognised as revenue in the income statement and instead reduces the fair value of the asset.
Other noncurrent receivables McClean Lake Amortised cost Carried at amortised cost less impairment on the balance sheet interest is recognised in the income statement at the effective interest rate for the asset.
Mining and exploration interests Fair value through other comprehensive income
Held at fair value on the balance sheet with fair value movements taken through other comprehensive income and not recycled to the income statement on disposal.
Dividends recognised as income in the income statement.
There would have been no impact on the Groups net assets at January 1 2017 or December 31 2017.
The Groups results for the year would have reduced from the reported profit after tax of 11203000 to 8222000 as a result of the following 1774000  gain on disposal of mining and exploration interest no longer recycled and recognised in the income statement 1689000  royalty income received from EVBC now recognised in the fair value movement and 482000  revaluation of EVBC now recognised in the income statement net of deferred tax.
Impairment
IFRS 9 introduces an expected credit loss model for the assessment of impairment of financial assets held at amortised costs.
The Group has not undertaken a detailed assessment of expected credit loss applicable to the Groups other noncurrent receivable arising from the Denison transaction however it is not expected to have a material impact on the Groups results.
The Groups royalty financial instrument in relation to the Jogjakarta royalty was fully impaired during 2017 and therefore no further losses would arise from expected credit loss.
IFRS 9 and IFRS 15 became effective for the Group from January 1 2018.
As the effects of applying these standards are considered immaterial to the Group the Group has elected not to restate prior period on adoption of the new standards in 2018.
FI N A N C I A L S T A T EM E N T S
ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 84 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS for the year ended December 31 2017 IFRS 16 Leases IFRS 16 was published in January 2016 and will be effective for the Group from January 1 2019 replacing IAS 17 Leases.
The principal impact of IFRS 16 will be to change the accounting treatment by lessees of leases currently classified as operating leases.
Lease agreements will give rise to the recognition by the lessee of an asset representing the right to use the leased item and a related liability for future lease payments.
Lease costs will be recognised in the income statement in the form of depreciation of the rightofuse asset over the lease term and finance charges representing the unwinding of the discount on the lease liability.
As the Groups operating leases relate primarily to office space and office equipment the adoption of IFRS 16 is not expected to result in a material increase in lease liabilities or a corresponding increase in property plant and equipment rightofuse assets.
Information on the Groups operating lease commitments is disclosed in note 30.
Other issued standards and amendments that are not yet effective are not expected to have a significant impact on the financial statements.
3.2 Consolidation
The financial statements incorporate a consolidation of the financial statements of the Company and entities controlled by the Company its subsidiaries.
Control is achieved when the Company has the power over the investee is exposed or has rights to variable returns from its involvement with the investee and has the ability to affect those returns through its power over the investee.
The existence and effect of potential voting rights that are currently exercisable or convertible are considered when assessing whether the Group controls another entity.
Subsidiaries are fully consolidated from the date on which control is transferred to the Group.
They are deconsolidated from the date that control ceases.
Investments in subsidiaries are accounted for in the parent company at cost less impairment.
Cost is adjusted to reflect changes in consideration arising from contingent consideration amendments.
Intercompany transactions balances and unrealised gains on transactions between Group companies are eliminated on consolidation.
Unrealised losses are also eliminated.
Accounting policies of subsidiaries have been changed where necessary to ensure consistency with the policies adopted by the Group.
3.3 Foreign currencies a Functional and presentation currency Items included in the financial statements of each of the Groups entities are measured using the currency of the primary economic environment in which the entity operates the functional currency.
The consolidated financial statements are presented in pounds sterling which is the Companys functional and the Groups presentation currency.
Foreign currency transactions are translated into the functional currency of the respective Group entity using the exchange rates prevailing at the dates of the transactions or valuation where items are remeasured.
Foreign exchange gains and losses resulting from the settlement of such transactions and from the translation at year end exchange rates of monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are recognised in the income statement.
Nonmonetary assets and liabilities measured at historical cost are translated using the exchange rates at the date of the transaction and not retranslated.
Nonmonetary assets and liabilities measured at fair value are translated using the exchange rates at the date when fair value was determined.
The results and financial position of all the Group entities that have a functional currency different from the presentation currency are translated into the presentation currency as follows i assets and liabilities for each balance sheet presented are translated at the closing rate at the date of that balance sheet ii income and expenses for each income statement are translated at average exchange rates and iii all resulting exchange differences are chargedcredited to other comprehensive income and recognised in the currency translation reserve in equity.
Exchange differences on foreign currency balances with foreign operations for which settlement is neither planned nor likely to occur in the foreseeable future and therefore form part of the Groups net investment in these foreign operations are recognised in other comprehensive income and accumulated in the foreign currency translation reserve in equity.
If a foreign operation is partially disposed of or sold exchange differences that were recorded in equity are reclassified in the income statement as part of the gain or loss on sale.
APGAR1728.03.18BACKARTWORK
ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 85 GROUP OVERVIEW STRATEGIC REPORT
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION 3.4 Property plant and equipment Property plant and equipment is stated at cost less accumulated depreciation and accumulated impairment losses.
The cost of property plant and equipment comprises its purchase price and any costs directly attributable to bringing the asset to the location and condition necessary for it to be capable of operating in the manner intended by management.
Once a mining project has been established as commercially viable expenditure other than that on land buildings plant and equipment is capitalised as a producing asset within Other Assets together with any amount transferred from Exploration and Evaluation Costs note 3.6b.
Property plant and equipment is depreciated over its useful life or where applicable over the remaining life of the mine if shorter once it is operating in the manner intended by management.
The major categories of property plant and equipment are depreciated on a units of production andor straightline basis as follows Equipment and fixtures 4 to 10 years Other Assets Producing assets Units of production over reserves Coal tenures Units of production over reserves The gain or loss arising on the disposal or retirement of an asset is determined as the difference between the sales proceeds and the carrying amount of the asset and is recognised in profit or loss.
3.5 Coal royalties investment property Royalty arrangements which are derived from the ownership of substratum lands are accounted for as investment properties in accordance with IAS 40.
Investment property is held to earn a return in the form of royalty entitlements arising from mining activity and is initially measured at cost including any transaction costs.
Investment property is subsequently measured at fair value at each reporting date with any valuation movements recognised in the income statement.
Fair value is determined by a suitably qualified independent external consultant based on the discounted future royalty income expected to accrue to the Group.
3.6 Intangible assets a Royalty arrangements Royalty arrangements which are identified and classified as intangible assets are initially measured at cost including any transaction costs.
Upon commencement of production at the underlying mining operation intangible assets are amortised on a straightline basis over the life of the mine.
Amortisation rates are adjusted on a prospective basis for all changes to estimates of the life of mine.
Exploration expenditure relates to the initial search for deposits with economic potential.
Evaluation expenditure arises from a detailed assessment of deposits or other projects that have been identified as having economic potential.
Expenditure on exploration and evaluation activities is capitalised when there is a high degree of confidence in the projects viability and hence it is probable that future economic benefits will flow to the Group.
If this is no longer the case an impairment loss is recognised in the income statement.
Amortisation of capitalised exploration and evaluation costs does not commence until the underlying project commences commercial production.
3.7 Impairment of property plant and equipment and intangible assets At each reporting date the Group reviews the carrying amounts of its property plant and equipment and intangible assets to determine whether there is any indication that those assets are impaired.
If such an indication is identified the recoverable amount of the asset is estimated in order to determine the extent of any impairment.
The recoverable amount is the higher of fair value less costs of disposal and value in use.
In assessing value in use the estimated cash flows are discounted to their present value using a pretax discount rate that has been adjusted to reflect the risks specific to that asset.
If the recoverable amount of the asset is estimated to be less than its carrying value the carrying amount of the asset is reduced to its recoverable amount.
An impairment loss is also recognised in the income statement.
Should an impairment loss subsequently reverse the carrying amount of the asset is increased to the revised estimate of its recoverable amount but so that the increased carrying amount does not exceed the carrying amount that would have been determined had no impairment been recognised.
A reversal of an impairment loss is also recognised in the income statement.
3.8 Financial instruments Financial assets and financial liabilities are recognised on the Groups balance sheet when the Group has become a party to the contractual provisions of the instrument.
Cash and cash equivalents comprise cash on hand and demand deposits together with other shortterm highly liquid investments that are readily convertible into known amounts of cash and which are subject to an insignificant risk of changes in value.
Loans and receivables are nonderivative financial assets with fixed or determinable payments that are not quoted in an active market.
On initial recognition loans and receivables are stated at their fair value.
After initial recognition these are measured at amortised cost using the effective interest method less provision for impairment.
Discounting is omitted where the effect of discounting is immaterial.
The Groups trade and other receivables fall into this category of financial instruments.
FI N A N C I A L S T A T EM E N T S
ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 86 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS for the year ended December 31 2017 c Derivative financial instruments The Group will selectively enter into foreign exchange forward contracts to manage its exposure to foreign exchange risk associated with its Australian dollar denominated royalty income when considered necessary.
Further details of derivative financial instruments are disclosed in note 21.
Derivatives are initially recognised at fair value at the date a derivative contract is entered into and are subsequently remeasured to their fair value at each balance sheet date.
The resulting gain or loss is recognised in profit or loss immediately.
A derivative with a positive fair value is recognised as a financial asset whereas a derivative with a negative fair value is recognised as a financial liability.
A derivative is presented as a noncurrent asset or a noncurrent liability if the remaining maturity of the instrument is more than 12 months and it is not expected to be realised or settled within 12 months.
Other derivatives are presented as current assets or current liabilities.
Mining and exploration interests are recognised and derecognised on a trade date where a purchase or sale of an investment is under a contract whose terms require delivery of the investment within the time frame established by the market concerned and are initially measured at fair value including transaction costs.
Mining and exploration interests are classified upon initial recognition as availableforsale financial assets.
Interests classified as availableforsale are measured at subsequent reporting dates at their fair value.
For availableforsale investments unrealised gains and losses arising from changes in fair value are recognised directly in other comprehensive income and accumulated in the investment revaluation reserve until the security is either disposed of or is determined to be impaired at which time the cumulative gain or loss previously recognised in other comprehensive income is included in profit or loss for the period.
Unquoted investments are measured at cost where fair value cannot be reliably determined.
When a market price can be established these investments are revalued to fair value accordingly.
Royalty instruments are recognised or derecognised on completion date where a purchase or sale of the royalty is under a contract and are initially measured at fair value including transaction costs.
Royalty instruments are classified as either debt or equity instruments depending on the nature of the individual agreement.
Debt
Assets classified as debt instruments are carried on the balance sheet at fair value.
Upon initial recognition an effective interest rate is computed based on the estimated future cash flows.
Expected future cash flows are determined based on nonobservable market data such as commodity price forecasts and estimated production schedules.
Valuation movements caused by changes in expected future cash flows which could be caused by changes in resource estimates or commodity price assumptions are recognised in the Income Statement along with the effective interest if material with other valuation changes taken to other comprehensive income.
Amounts are required to be recognised whether received in cash or not.
Equity
Similar to debt instruments equity instruments are carried at fair value at each reporting date based on the estimated future cash flows from the underlying operation.
All valuation movements are recognised in other comprehensive income except to the extent where valuation is below cost and is considered significant or prolonged in accordance with IAS 39 and the policy outlined in note 3.9.
In this case the valuation difference is recycled through the Income Statement.
Financial liabilities and equity instruments are classified according to the substance of the contractual arrangements entered into.
An equity instrument is any contract that evidences a residual interest in the assets of the Group after deducting all of its liabilities.
Trade payables are not interest bearing and are stated at their fair value on initial recognition.
After initial recognition these are measured at amortised cost using the effective interest method.
Interest bearing bank facilities are initially recognised at fair value net of directly attributable transaction costs.
Transaction costs are recognised in the income statement on a straightline basis over the term of the facility.
Equity instruments issued by the Company are recorded as the proceeds received net of direct issue costs.
3.9 Impairment of financial assets including receivables A financial asset not measured at fair value through profit or loss is assessed at each reporting date to determine whether there is any objective evidence that it is impaired.
A financial asset is impaired if objective evidence indicates that a loss event has occurred after the initial recognition of the asset.
APGAR1728.03.18BACKARTWORK
ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 87 GROUP OVERVIEW STRATEGIC REPORT
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION An impairment loss in respect of a financial asset measured at amortised cost is calculated as the difference between its carrying amount and the present value of the estimated cash flows discounted at the assets original effective interest rate.
Losses are recognised in the income statement.
When a subsequent event causes the amount of impairment loss to decrease the decrease in impairment loss is reversed through the income statement.
Impairment losses relating to availableforsale equity investments are recognised when the decline in fair value is considered significant or prolonged which are defined as follows Prolonged a period of greater than 18 months that the interests fair value is below cost or Significant a decline in fair value of greater than 25% relative to an individual assets original acquisition cost or its rebased cost post impairment.
These impairment losses are recognised by transferring the cumulative loss that has been recognised in the statement of comprehensive income to the income statement.
The loss recognised in the income statement is the difference between the acquisition cost or rebased cost and the current fair value.
Once the Group has recognised an impairment loss on an availableforsale equity investment it cannot recognise a reversal through the income statement.
Impairment losses on debt instruments classified as availableforsale are reversed only if in a subsequent period the fair value of that debt instrument increases and the increase can be objectively related to an event occurring after the impairment loss was recognised.
The amount of such reversal is recognised through the income statement.
3.10 Taxation The tax expense represents the sum of the tax currently payable and deferred tax.
Current tax The tax currently payable is based on taxable profit for the year.
Taxable profit differs from net profit as reported in the income statement because it excludes items of income or expense that are taxable or deductible in other years and it further excludes items that are never taxable or deductible.
The Groups liability for current tax is calculated by using tax rates and laws that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the reporting date.
Deferred tax Deferred tax is the tax expected to be payable or recoverable on differences between the carrying amount of assets and liabilities in the financial statements and the corresponding tax bases used in the computation of taxable profit and is accounted for using the balance sheet liability method.
Deferred tax liabilities are generally recognised for all taxable temporary differences and deferred tax assets are recognised to the extent that it is probable that taxable profits will be available against which deductible temporary differences can be utilised.
Such assets and liabilities are not recognised if the temporary difference arises from the initial recognition of goodwill or from the initial recognition other than in a business combination of other assets and liabilities in a transaction that affects neither the taxable profit nor the accounting profit.
Deferred tax liabilities are recognised for taxable temporary differences arising on investments in subsidiaries and associates and interests in joint ventures except where the Group is able to control the reversal of the temporary difference and it is probable that the temporary difference will not reverse in the foreseeable future.
Deferred tax assets arising from deductible temporary differences associated with such investments and interests are only recognised to the extent that it is probable that there will be sufficient taxable profits against which to utilise the benefits of the temporary differences and they are expected to reverse in the foreseeable future.
The carrying amount of deferred tax assets is reviewed at each balance sheet date and reduced to the extent that it is no longer probable that sufficient taxable profits will be available to allow all or part of the asset to be recovered.
Deferred tax is calculated at the tax rates that are expected to apply to the period when the liability is settled or the asset is realised based on tax laws and rates that have been enacted or substantively enacted at the balance sheet date.
The measurement of deferred tax liabilities and assets reflects the tax consequences that would follow from the manner in which the Group expects at the end of the reporting period to recover or settle the carrying amount of its assets and liabilities.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are offset when there is a legally enforceable right to set off current tax assets against current tax liabilities and when they relate to income taxes levied by the same taxation authority and the Group intends to settle its current tax assets and liabilities on a net basis.
Current and deferred tax for the year Current and deferred tax are recognised in profit or loss except when they related to items that are recognised in other comprehensive income or directly in equity in which case the current and deferred tax are also recognised in other comprehensive income or directly in equity respectively.
Where current tax or deferred tax arises from the initial accounting for a business combination the tax effect is included in the accounting for the business combination.
FI N A N C I A L S T A T EM E N T S
ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 88 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS for the year ended December 31 2017 3.11 Share based payments The Group operates a number of equitysettled sharebased compensation plans under which the entity receives services from employees as consideration for equity instruments options and jointlyowned shares of the Company.
The fair value of the employee services received in exchange for the grant of the options is recognised as an expense.
The total amount to be expensed is determined by reference to the fair value of the options granted including any market performance conditions excluding the impact of any service and nonmarket performance vesting conditions and including the impact of any nonvesting conditions.
Nonmarket vesting conditions are included in assumptions about the number of options and jointlyowned shares that are expected to vest.
The total expense is recognised over the vesting period which is the period over which all of the specified vesting conditions are to be satisfied.
At the end of each reporting period the entity revises its estimates of the number of options and jointlyowned shares that are expected to vest based on the nonmarket vesting conditions.
It recognises the impact of the revision to original estimates if any in the income statement with a corresponding adjustment to equity.
When options are exercised the Company issues new shares.
The proceeds received net of any directly attributable transaction costs are credited to share capital and share premium when the options are exercised.
3.12 Reserves Equity comprises the following Share capital represents the nominal value of equity shares in issue.
Share premium represents the excess over nominal value of the fair value of consideration received for equity shares net of issuance costs.
Other reserves Merger reserve is created when more than 90% of the shares in a subsidiary are acquired and the consideration includes the issue of new shares by the Company.
Warrant reserve The warrant reserve was created in June 2014 in connection with the issue of share warrants as part consideration of the Maracs royalty.
Investment revaluation reserve represents gains and losses due to the revaluation of the investments in mining and exploration interests and royalty instruments from the opening carrying values including the effects of deferred tax and foreign currency changes.
Share based payment reserve represents equitysettled sharebased employee remuneration until such share options are exercised.
Foreign currency reserve represents the differences arising from translation of investments in overseas subsidiaries.
Special reserve represents the level of profit attributable to the Group for the period ended June 30 2002 which was created as part of a capital reduction performed in 2002.
Investment in own shares represents the shares held by the Anglo Pacific Group Employee Benefit Trust for awards made under the Joint Share Ownership Plan JSOP note 27 and note 28.
Retained earnings represents retained profits.
Of these reserves 88601000 are considered distributable as at December 31 2017 December 31 2016 93928000.
3.13 Revenue recognition The revenue of the Group comprises mainly royalty income.
It is measured at the fair value of the consideration received or receivable after deducting discounts value added tax and other sales tax.
The royalty income becomes receivable on extraction and sale of the relevant minerals and once able to be reliably measured the revenue is recognised.
Interest income is accrued on a time basis by reference to the carrying value and at the effective interest rate applicable which is the rate that exactly discounts estimated future cash receipts through the expected life of the financial asset to that assets net carrying amount.
Dividend income from investments is recognised when the shareholders rights to receive payment have been established.
3.14 Leases Rentals payable under operating leases are charged to income on a straightline basis over the term of the lease except where another more systematic basis is more representative of the time pattern in which economic benefits from the lease asset are consumed.
In the event that lease incentives are received to enter into operating leases such incentives are recognised as a liability.
The aggregate benefit of incentives is recognised as a reduction of rental expense on a straightline basis over the lease except where another systematic basis is more representative of the time pattern in which economic benefits from the leased asset are consumed.
3.15 Dividend distribution Dividend distribution to the Companys shareholders is recognised as a liability in the Groups financial statements in the period in which the dividends are approved by the Companys shareholders or in the case of the interim dividend when it is paid to the shareholders.
3.16 Alternative Performance Measures The financial statements include certain Alternative Performance Measures APMs which include adjusted earnings per share dividend cover and free cash flow per share.
These APMs are defined in the table of contents and explained in the Strategic Report on page 24 and are reconciled to GAAP measures in the notes 11 12 and 33 respectively.
APGAR1728.03.18BACKARTWORK
ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 89 GROUP OVERVIEW STRATEGIC REPORT
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION 4 SEGMENT INFORMATION The Groups chief operating decision maker is considered to be the Executive Committee.
The Executive Committee evaluates the financial performance of the Group based on a portfolio view of its individual royalty arrangements.
Royalty income and its associated impact on operating profit is the key focus of the Executive Committee.
The income from royalties is presented based on the jurisdiction in which the income is deemed to be sourced as follows Australia Kestrel Narrabri Four Mile Pilbara Mount Ida Americas McClean Lake Maracs Menchen Ring of Fire Piau Amap and Tucano Europe EVBC Salamanca Bulqiza Other Jogjakarta Dugbe I and includes the Groups mining and exploration interests The following is an analysis of the Groups results by reportable segment.
The key segment result presented to the Executive Committee for making strategic decisions and allocation of resources is operating profit as analysed below.
The segment information for the year ended December 31 2017 is as follows noting that total segment operating profit corresponds to operating profit before impairments revaluations and gainslosses on disposals which is reconciled to ProfitLoss before tax on the face of the consolidated income statement
Royalties
Americas
Royalties
Europe
Royalties
All other segments
Royalty related income 33692 2001 1689  37382 Amortisation of royalties 2623 493   3116 Operating expenses 2987   2903 5890 Total segment operating profitloss 28082 1508 1689 2903 28376 Total segment assets 168823 43122 6328 35089 253362 Total assets include Additions to noncurrent assets other than financial instruments and deferred tax assets Total segment liabilities 30539  676 2732 33947 The segment information for the year ended December 31 2016 is as follows
Royalty
Americas
Royalty
Europe
Royalty
All other segments
Royalty related income 17691 791 1223  19705 Amortisation of royalties 2416 453   2869 Operating expenses 1652   2478 4130 Total segment operating profitloss 13623 338 1223 2478 12706 Total segment assets 187879 19106 12314 36956 256255 Total assets include Additions to noncurrent assets other than financial instruments and deferred tax assets Total segment liabilities 35799 1215 662 8441 46117 The amounts provided to the Executive Committee with respect to total segment assets are measured in a manner consistent with that of the financial statements.
These assets are allocated based on the operations of the segment and the physical location of the asset.
The amounts provided to the Executive Committee with respect to total segment liabilities are measured in a manner consistent with that of the financial statements.
These liabilities are allocated based on the operations of the segment.
The royalty related income in Australia of 33692000 2016 17691000 includes the Kestrel and Narrabri royalties which generated 28746000 and 4946000 respectively 2016 Kestrel 13134000 Narrabri 4243000.
Individually the revenue generated by Kestrel and Narrabri royalties represents greater than 10% of the Groups revenue in 2016 and 2017.
Impairments
There has been no impairment of the Groups royalty intangible assets during the year ended December 31 2017.
The Group recognised an impairment charge of 2.0m in relation to the Amap royalty which is within the Americas Royalties segment during the year ended December 31 2016.
Refer to note 16 for further details on the Groups impairments.
FI N A N C I A L S T A T EM E N T S
ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 90 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS for the year ended December 31 2017 5a Expense by nature
Employee benefit expense note 6a 3794 2547 Professional fees 1073 626 Listing fees 127 93 Operating lease payments 227 220 Other expenses 669 644 5890 4130 5b Auditor s remuneration
Fees payable to Companys auditor for the audit of Parent Company and consolidated financial statements 83 97 Fees payable to the Companys auditor and its associates for other services The audit of Companys subsidiaries 34 18 Total audit fees 117 115 Auditrelated assurance services Other assurance services pursuant to legislation 30 20 Other services 23 Total nonaudit fees 53 242 Audit related assurance services relate wholly to the reporting accountant work performed in 2016 by the auditors for fundraising activities.
Details of the Companys policy on the use of auditors for nonaudit services the reasons why the auditor was used rather than another supplier and how the auditors independence and objectivity are safeguarded are set out in the Audit Committee Report on page 49.
No services were provided pursuant to contingent fee arrangements.
6a Employee costs Group Company Wages and salaries 2293 1501 2171 1452 Sharebased awards to directors and employees 1174 708 1174 708 Social security costs 26telOther pension costs 794 2547 3669 2495 6b Retirement benefits plans The Group operates a money purchase group personal pension scheme.
Under this scheme the Group makes contributions to personal pension plans of individual Directors and employees.
The pension cost charge represents contributions payable by the Group to these plans in respect of the year.
The total cost charged to income of 66000 2016 60000 represents contributions payable to these schemes by the Group at rates specified in the rules of the schemes.
As at December 31 2017 contributions of 8500 2016 8000 due in respect of the current reporting period had not been paid over to the schemes.
APGAR1728.03.18BACKARTWORK
ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 91 GROUP OVERVIEW STRATEGIC REPORT
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION 6c Average number of people employed 2017 2016
Number of employees Group Average number of people including executive directors employed Executive directors 1 1 Administration Company The average number of administration staff employed by the Company during the year including Executive Directors was 9 2016 9.
Directors salaries are shown in the Directors Remuneration Report on pages 53 to 65 including the highest paid Director.
7 FINANCE INCOME
Interest on bank deposits 19 56 Interest on longterm receivables 1926 26 Foreign exchange lossgain 747 2265 1198 2347 8 FINANCE COSTS
Professional fees 422 676 Revolving credit facility fees and interest 373 410 795 1086 9 OTHER LOSSESINCOME
Effective interest income on royalty financial instruments 258 246 Revaluation of foreign exchange instruments 188 664 Writeoff of interest receivable 300 Sundry income  63 FI N A N C I A L S T A T EM E N T S
ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 92 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS for the year ended December 31 2017 10 INCOME TA X EXPENSE The effective tax rate for the year of 11.2% 2016 6.9% is lower 2016 lower than the applicable weighted average statutory rate of corporation tax in the United Kingdom of 19.25% 2016 20.00%.
The reconciling items are Analysis of charge for the year United Kingdom corporation tax charge 3 Overseas tax 2132 1403 Adjustments in respect of prior years 138 809 Current tax 1997 594 Deferred tax charge in current year 853 1356 Adjustments in respect of prior years 1530 Deferred tax 677 1356 Income tax creditexpense 1320 1950 Factors affecting tax charge for the year Profit before tax 11847 28312 Tax on profit calculated at United Kingdom corporation tax rate of 19.25% 2016 20.00% 2281 5662 Tax effects of Items nontaxabledeductible for tax purposes Nondeductible expenses 1120 310 Temporary difference adjustments Utilisation of losses not previously recognised 1986 Current year losses not recognised 199 801 Deferred tax not previously recognised  4954 Write down of deferred tax assets previously recognised 1016 Adjustment in deferred tax due to change in tax rate 2418 Other temporary difference adjustments 667 399 Other adjustments Withholding taxes 2132 1349 Effect of differences between local and United Kingdom tax rates 1309 192 Prior year adjustments to current tax 1668 809 Other adjustments 2 380 Income tax creditexpense 1320 1950 The Groups effective tax rate for the year ended December 31 2017 was 11.2% 2016 6.9%.
The lower effective tax rate in 2017 compared to the headline tax rate is mainly due to the utilisation of carried forward losses not previously recognised and the reduction in the tax rates applicable to certain deferred tax liabilities.
In future periods it is expected that the Groups effective tax rate will mainly be driven by withholding taxes suffered in overseas jurisdictions.
Refer to note 25 for information regarding the Groups deferred tax assets and liabilities.
Uncertain tax provisions The Group has investments in a large number of jurisdictions and has established structures in certain of those jurisdictions where its royalties are located.
Due to the complexity of tax in relation to royalty assets the Group frequently takes local tax advice in relation to transactions.
Where the amount of tax payable or receivable is uncertain the Group could establish provisions based on its interpretation of tax law and its judgement of the most likely amount of the liability or recovery assisted by third party tax advice received.
There can be no certainty that tax authorities would make the same interpretation.
See note 2 for further details.
APGAR1728.03.18BACKARTWORK
ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 93 GROUP OVERVIEW STRATEGIC REPORT
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION 11 EARNINGS PER SHARE Earnings per ordinary share is calculated on the Groups profit after tax of 10527000 2016 26362000 and the weighted average number of shares in issue during the year of 178895115 2016 169016101.
Net profit attributable to shareholders Earnings  basic 10527 26362 Earnings  diluted 10527 26tel Weighted average number of shares in issue Basic number of shares 178895115 169016101 Dilutive effect of employee share option schemes note 28 267660 13385 Diluted number of shares outstanding 179162775 169029486 Earnings per share  basic 5.88p 15.60p Earnings per share  diluted 5.88p 15.60p Earnings per ordinary share excludes the issue of shares under the Groups JSOP as the Employee Benefit Trust has waived its right to receive dividends on the 925933 ordinary 2p shares it holds as at December 31 2017 December 31 2016 925933.
Adjusted earnings per share Adjusted earnings represents the Groups underlying operating performance from core activities.
Adjusted earnings is the profit attributable to equity holders less all valuation movements noncash impairments and amortisation charges which are noncash adjustments that arise primarily due to changes in commodity prices finance costs any associated deferred tax and any profit or loss on noncore asset disposals as these are not expected to be ongoing.
Valuation and other noncash movements such as these are not considered by management in assessing the level of profit and cash generation available for distribution to shareholders.
As such an adjusted earnings measure is used which reflects the underlying contribution from the Groups royalties during the year.
Earnings
Earnings per share
Net profit attributable to shareholders Earnings  basic and diluted for the year ended December 31 2017 10527 5.88p 5.88p Adjustment for Amortisation of royalty intangible assets 3116 Gain on sale of mining and exploration interests 1774 Impairment of mining and exploration interests 219 Revaluation of royalty financial instruments 6324 Revaluation of coal royalties Kestrel 11933 Revaluation of foreign currency instruments 188 Sharebased payments and associated national insurance 1174 Tax effect of the adjustments above 1614 Adjusted earnings  basic and diluted for the year ended December 31 2017 30093 16.82p 16.80p FI N A N C I A L S T A T EM E N T S
ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 94 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS for the year ended December 31 2017 Earnings
Diluted earnings per share Net profit attributable to shareholders Earnings  basic and diluted for the year ended December 31 2016 26362 15.60p 15.60p Adjustment for Amortisation of royalty intangible assets 2869 Gain on sale of mining and exploration interests 2449 Impairment of mining and exploration interests 29 Impairment of royalty and exploration intangible assets 2009 Revaluation of royalty financial instruments 4939 Revaluation of coal royalties Kestrel 17900 Revaluation of foreign currency instruments 664 Sharebased payments and associated national insurance 803 Tax effect of the adjustments above 496 Adjusted earnings  basic and diluted for the year ended December 31 2016 16494 9.76p 9.76p In calculating the adjusted earnings per share the weighted average number of shares in issue takes into account the dilutive effect of the Employee Share Option Scheme in those years where the Group has adjusted earnings.
In years where the Group has an adjusted loss the Employee Share Option Scheme is considered antidilutive as including them in the diluted number of shares outstanding would decrease the loss per share as such they are excluded.
The weighted average number of shares in issue for the purpose of calculating basic and diluted earnings per share and basic and diluted adjusted earnings per share are as follows 2017 2016 Weighted average number of shares in issue Basic number of shares 178895115 169016101 Dilutive effect of Employee Share Option Scheme 267660 13385 Diluted number of shares outstanding 179162775 169029486 12 DIVIDENDS AND DIVIDEND COVER On February 4 2017 an interim dividend of 3.00p per share was paid to shareholders in respect of the year ended December 31 2016.
On
August 9 2017 a final dividend of 3.00p per share was paid to shareholders to make a total dividend for the year ended December 31 2016 of 6.00p per share.
Following the Groups move to a quarterly dividend payment on November 15 2017 an interim dividend of 3.00p per share was paid to shareholders in respect of the year ended December 31 2017.
Total dividends paid during the year were 15.9m 2016 11.8m.
On February 15 2018 a further interim dividend of 1.50p per share was paid to shareholders in respect of the year ended December 31 2017.
This dividend has not been included as a liability in these financial statements.
The Directors propose that a final dividend of 2.50p per share be paid to shareholders on May 31 2018 to make a total dividend for the year of 7.00p per share.
This dividend is subject to approval by shareholders at the AGM and has not been included as a liability in these financial statements.
The proposed final dividend for 2017 will be payable to all shareholders on the Register of Members on May 18 2018.
The total estimated dividend to be paid is 4.5m.
At the present time the Board has resolved not to offer a scrip dividend alternative.
Dividend cover Dividend cover is calculated as the number of times adjusted earnings per share exceeds the dividend per share.
The Groups adjusted earnings per share for the year ended December 31 2017 is 16.82p per share note 11 with dividends for the year totalling 7.00p resulting in dividend cover of 2.4x 2016 adjusted earnings per share 9.76p dividends totalling 6.00p dividend cover 1.6x.
APGAR1728.03.18BACKARTWORK
ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 95 GROUP OVERVIEW STRATEGIC REPORT
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION 13 PROPERT Y PL ANT AND EQUIPMENT
Other
Equipment and fixtures
Gross carrying amount At January 1 2017 and December 31 2017 1356 276 1632 Depreciation and impairment At January 1 2017 1356 199 1555 Depreciation  33 33 At December 31 2017 1356 232 1588 Carrying amount December 31 2017  44 44
Other
Equipment and fixtures
Gross carrying amount At January 1 2016 and December 31 2016 1356 276 1632 Depreciation and impairment At January 1 2016 1356 163 1519 Depreciation  36 36 At December 31 2016 1356 199 1555 Carrying amount December 31 2016  77 77 Other assets relate to the Groups Panorama and Trefi coal projects in British Columbia Canada and the Groups talc deposit in Shetland Scotland.
Impairment
In 2014 the Directors took a view that the Groups ability to monetise both the Trefi coal project and the Shetland talc deposit was inherently uncertain and as a result fully impaired these assets resulting in an impairment charge of 1.4m.
There were no impairments during 2016 or 2017.
Company
Other
Equipment and fixtures
Gross carrying amount At January 1 2017 and December 31 tel1097 Depreciation and impairment At January 1 2017 821 199 1020 Depreciation  33 33 At December 31 2017 821 232 1053 Carrying amount December 31 2017  44 44
Other
Equipment and fixtures
Gross carrying amount At January 1 2016 and December 31 tel1097 Depreciation and impairment At January 1 2016 821 163 984 Depreciation  36 36 At December 31 2016 821 199 1020 Carrying amount December 31 2016  77 77 FI N A N C I A L S T A T EM E N T S
ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 96 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS for the year ended December 31 2017 14 COAL ROYALTIES KESTREL
At January 1 2016 82649 Foreign currency translation 16336 Gain on revaluation of coal royalties 17900 At December 31 2016 116885 Foreign currency translation 686 Loss on revaluation of coal royalties 11933 At December 31 2017 104266 The Groups coal royalty entitlements comprise the Kestrel and Crinum coal royalties and derive from mining activity carried out within the Groups private land area in Queensland Australia.
Rather uniquely to this royalty the substratum land is the property of the freeholder including the minerals contained within.
The ownership of the land therefore entitles the Group to a royalty equivalent to what the State receives on areas outside the Groups private land.
This royalty is accounted for as Investment Property in accordance with IAS 40.
The coal royalty was valued during December 2017 at 104.3m A180.2m 2016 116.9m and A200.3m by an independent coal industry advisor on a net present value of the pretax cash flow discounted at a nominal rate of 7.50% 2016 7.50%.
The key assumptions in the independent valuation relate to price and discount rate.
The price assumptions used in the 2017 valuation decrease from US141t in the shortterm to a longterm flat nominal price of US119t.
If the price were to increase or decrease 10% over the life of the mine the valuation effect would be a 10% reduction in the coal price would have resulted in the coal royalties being valued at A152.8m 88.4m and an increase of 28.2m in the revaluation loss in the income statement to 16.3m and a 10% increase in the coal price would have resulted in the coal royalties being valued at A209.5m 121.2m and a 17.4m reversal of the revaluation loss in the income statement resulting in a revaluation gain of 5.5m.
The pretax nominal discount rate used for the asset is 7.50% of the discount rate used were to increase or decrease by 1% the valuation effect would be a 1% reduction in the nominal discount rate would have resulted in the coal royalties being valued at A186.7m 108.0m and a 3.9m reduction in the revaluation loss in the income statement to 8.0m and a 1% increase in the nominal discount rate would have resulted in the coal royalties being valued at A174.2m 100.8m and a 3.6m increase in the revaluation loss in the income statement to 15.5m.
The net royalty income from this investment is currently taxed in Australia at a rate of 30%.
The revaluation of the underlying Australian dollar asset is recognised in the Income Statement with the retranslation of the Groups sterling presentation currency recognised in the foreign currency translation reserve.
Were the coal royalty to be realised at the revalued amount there are 5.3m A9.2m of capital losses potentially available to offset against taxable gains.
As it is not the Groups present intention to dispose of the coal royalty these losses have not been included in the deferred tax calculation note 25.
Were the coal royalty to be carried at cost the carrying value would be 0.2m 2016 0.2m.
The Directors do not presently have any intention to dispose of the coal royalty.
Refer to note 32 for additional fair value disclosures relating to Kestrel.
The shares over the entity which is the beneficial owner of the Kestrel royalty have been guaranteed as security in connection with the Groups borrowing facility note 24.
APGAR1728.03.18BACKARTWORK
ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 97 GROUP OVERVIEW STRATEGIC REPORT
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION 15 ROYALT Y FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS The Groups royalty instruments are represented by five royalty and toll milling agreements which entitle the Group to the repayment of principal and a net smelter return NSR royalty for the life of the mine or a gross revenue royalty GRR where the project commences commercial production or the repayment of principal where it does not or tolling receipts.
Details of the Groups royalty financial instruments which are held at fair value are summarised below
Original Cost
Rate Escalation Classification December 31 2017 Carrying value December 31 2016 Carrying value
Gold Silver Copper C7500 2.50% 3% gold US1100oz Availableforsale equity 3979 3483 Jogjakarta Iron Sands US4000 2.00%  Availableforsale debt  3241 Dugbe 1 Gold US15000 2.00% 2.5% US1800oz and production 50000ozqrt Availableforsale debt 3408 6832 McClean Lake Uranium C2700 22.5% of tolling milling receipt on production 215Mlbs Availableforsale debt 1877 Piau NickelCobalt US2000 1.00%  Fair value 1603 10867 13556 The Groups entitlements to cash by way of the repayment of the principal and either the NSR royalty or the GRR or by way of tolling receipts have been classified as availableforsale financial assets in accordance with IAS 39 and are carried at fair value in accordance with the classification of royalty arrangements criteria set out in note 2.
Group
Company
Fair value At December 31 2016 6534 6534 Additions 10133 Revaluation of royalty financial instruments recognised in profit or loss 4939 Revaluation of royalty financial instruments recognised in equity 350 350 Foreign currency translation 2178 540 At December 31 2016 13556 6724 Additions 3323 Revaluation and impairment of royalty financial instruments 6324 3076 Revaluation of royalty financial instruments recognised in equity 496 496 Foreign currency translation 184 165 At December 31 2017 10867 3979 Effective interest of 0.3m was recognised in other income see note 9 for the year ended December 31 2017 2016 0.2m.
This was directly offset by cash received in the period of the same amount.
Jogjakarta
During 2017 the Groups convertible debenture with Indo Mines Limited including a gross revenue royalty over the Jogjakarta project was fully provided for as a result of inherent uncertainty of this project reaching commercial production due to the limited progress made to date by the operator in securing longterm strategic investment.
This has resulted in a 3.1m impairment charge to the income statement.
Indo Mines is subject to a takeover bid by its majority shareholder which could see the Group recover some of the debenture provided for.
Dugbe 1 On February 23 2016 Hummingbird Resources PLC Hummingbird the operator of the Dugbe 1 project gave notice under the US15.0m royalty financing arrangement with the Group that a Mineral Development Agreement MDA had been approved by the Liberian Government although this is yet to be signed into law.
There are certain mechanisms available to the Group to recover the US15.0m investment although at present these seem unlikely to be triggered.
The net smelter return royalty over the Dugbe 1 project is accounted for as an availableforsale debt financial asset as outlined in note 2.
As at December 31 2017 the Group assessed the likely start date of commercial production at Dugbe 1 to be 2025 and have applied a 75% probability factor to the project reaching commercial production to the discounted future flows of the royalty with an 18% post tax nominal discount rate resulting in a valuation of 3.4m 2016 6.8m.
The 3.4m decrease in carrying value has been recognised as an impairment to the income statement for the year.
FI N A N C I A L S T A T EM E N T S
ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 98 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS for the year ended December 31 2017 McClean Lake On February 13 2017 the Group completed a C43.5m 26.6m financing and streaming agreement with Denison Mines Inc Denison.
The financing agreement comprises two separate transactions a 13year amortising secured loan of C40.8m 24.9m with an interest rate of 10% per annum payable to the Group and is classified as noncurrent other receivables note 20 and a streaming agreement which entitles the Group to receive Denisons portion of toll milling proceeds from the McClean Lake Mill after the first 215Mlbs of throughput from July 1 2016 was acquired for C2.7m 1.7m and is classified as availableforsale debt in accordance with note 2.
Given the early stage nature of the project the Group has considered there to be no value to the option.
As at December 31 2017 the Group assessed the probability of the McClean Lake Mill achieving throughput in excess of 215Mlbs at 50% and applied this to the discounted future cash flows of the stream with a 6.5% post tax nominal discount rate resulting in a valuation of 1.9m.
The 0.2m increase in the carrying value of the stream has been recognised in the income statement for the year.
Piau
On September 14 2017 the Group acquired a 1% gross revenue royalty over the Piau nickelcobalt project in Brazil for US2.0m 1.6m.
Under the acquisition agreement subject to certain development milestones the Group has the option to acquire up to a total of US70.0m in additional gross revenue royalties.
The Group has decided to evoke the fair value option in classifying this royalty financial instrument due to there being one or more embedded options that are not closely related in the underlying contract note 2.
As at December 31 2017 the Group assessed the probability of the Piau project reaching commercial production at 30% and applied this to the discounted future cash flows of the royalty with a 12% post tax nominal discount rate resulting in a valuation of 1.6m which is equal to the acquisition cost.
16 ROYALT Y AND EXPLOR ATION INTANGIBLE ASSETS The Groups intangibles comprise capitalised exploration and evaluation costs and royalty interests.
Group
Exploration and evaluation costs
Total
Gross carrying amount At January 1 tel017 115714 Transfer from deferred acquisition costs  1125 1125 Foreign currency translation  1073 1073 At December 31 tel069 115766 Amortisation and impairment At January 1 2017 697 34970 35667 Amortisation charge  3116 3116 Foreign currency translation  438 438 At December 31 2017 697 37648 38345 Carrying amount December 31 2017  77421 77421
Exploration and evaluation costs
Total
Gross carrying amount At January 1 2016 697 96845 97542 Additions  650 650 Foreign currency translation  17522 17522 At December 31 tel017 115714 Amortisation and impairment At January 1 2016 697 25354 26051 Amortisation charge  2869 2869 Impairment charge  2009 2009 Foreign currency translation  4738 4738 At December 31 2016 697 34970 35667 Carrying amount December 31 2016  80047 80047
ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 99 GROUP OVERVIEW STRATEGIC REPORT
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Company Royalty interests At January 1 and at December 31 2349 2349 Exploration and evaluation costs The exploration and evaluation costs comprise expenditure that was directly attributable to the Trefi coal project in British Columbia Canada.
Due to the inherent uncertainty that the Trefi coal project will be developed the Group fully impaired it in 2014.
Acquisition of royalty interests Under the terms of the Maracs Menchen royalty sale agreement entered into in 2014 a further US3.0m of cash is payable when the project reaches certain annualised production milestones.
The first of these milestones was annualised production over a quarter of 9500t which was achieved in Q3 2017 resulting in the Group paying the first tranche of deferred consideration of US1.5m 1.1m in November 2017.
This amount had previously been provided for with a corresponding deferred acquisition cost asset see note 18 which was transferred to intangibles on payment in the year.
The second tranche of deferred consideration of US1.5m becomes payable once annualised production over a quarter reaches 12000t.
Based on the current publicly available production profile management do not consider it probable that this milestone will be achieved in the foreseeable future.
As a result no liability for this portion of the deferred consideration has been recognised as at December 31 2017.
On March 31 2016 in satisfaction of the outstanding principal of 0.7m owed by Atrum Coal NL the Group accepted a 0.10% gross revenue royalty over the Groundhog project in British Columbia.
The promissory note arose from the 2014 sale of the Groups Panorama Coal tenements which included the Groundhog project.
Amortisation of royalty interests The Groups royalty intangible assets are amortised on a straightline basis upon the commencement of production at the underlying mining operation over the life of mine.
Three of the underlying mining operations of the Groups royalty intangibles assets were in production during 2017 and were amortised on the following basis Royalty interest Carrying value December 31 2017 Carrying value December 31 2016 A000 Estimated life of mine Remaining life of mine Narrabri 76715 80754 22 years 19 years Maracs Menchen 23456 22318 29 years 26 years Four Mile 2597 2968 10 years 7 years Amortisation of the Groups remaining royalty interests will commence once they begin commercial production.
As at December 31 2017 the shares over the entity which is the beneficial owner of the Narrabri royalty have been guaranteed as security in connection with the Groups borrowing facility note 24.
Impairments of royalty intangible assets As described in notes 3.6 and 3.7 at each reporting date the Groups royalty intangible assets are reviewed for any impairment indicators.
Consideration is given to the presence or occurrence of adverse operational developments at the underlying mines together with any significant declines in commodity prices.
Where impairment indicators exist a full impairment review is carried out to determine whether the discounted future expected cash flows calculated on a valueinuse basis exceed cost.
Note 2 outlines the impairment methodology applied.
There were no impairments recognised during the year ended December 31 2017 in respect of the Groups royalty intangible assets.
During the year ended December 31 2016 the Groups Amap royalty was fully impaired as detailed below.
Amap
Production at Amap has been suspended since 2013 following a major port incident.
The mines then operator Zamin Ferrous Limited had previously indicated that attempts were being made to restructure its finances in order to fund the rebuilding of the port facilities however in 2016 the Directors understood that Zamin had filed for bankruptcy protection in Brazil.
As a result the Directors assessed the timing of Amap returning to commercial production as being indeterminable and recognised an impairment charge of 2.0m for the year ended December 31 2016 reducing the carrying value to nil.
There have been no developments at Amap during the year ended December 31 2017 that would result in a reversal of managements assessment.
FI N A N C I A L S T A T EM E N T S
ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 100 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS for the year ended December 31 2017 17 MINING AND EXPLOR ATION INTERESTS
Company
Fair value At January 1 2016 10898 8259 Mining and exploration interests received in lieu of payment 47 Disposals 3431 3326 Revaluation adjustment 9534 8928 Foreign currency translation 14 At December 31 2016 17062 13861 Disposals 2424 2424 Revaluation adjustment 1737 1836 Foreign currency translation 56 At December 31 2017 16431 13273 The current strategy of the Group is to obtain royalties by other means and as such these assets which have historically been acquired with a view to negotiating royalty acquisitions have been gradually disposed of as they are now noncore to the Groups primary business.
The fair values of listed securities are based on quoted market prices.
Unquoted investments are initially recognised using cost where fair value cannot be reliably determined.
In the absence of an active market for these securities the Group considers each unquoted security to ensure there has been no material change in the fair value since initial recognition.
Further guidance on fair value measurement is provided in note 2.
An impairment charge representing the recognition of losses previously deferred to equity is recognised in the income statement when the absolute decline in value below cost of any individual investment is considered significant or prolonged in accordance with the Groups impairment policy.
Following further declines in the quoted market prices of a number of the listed securities in which the Group has an interest an impairment charge of 219000 for the year ended December 31 2017 December 31 2016 29000 was recognised.
For the year ended December 31 2017 the Group realised 2.4m in cash December 31 2016 3.4m through its disposal of a number of its mining and exploration interests from which management no longer considered royalty opportunities to exist.
These disposals resulted in a gain of 1.8m for the year ended December 31 2017 December 31 2016 2.4m.
Total mining and exploration interests at December 31 are represented by 2017 2016
Company
Group
Company
Quoted investments 13270 13095 14070 13680 Unquoted investments 3161 178 2992 181 16431 13273 17062 13861 Number of investments  DEFERRED COSTS
Deferred acquisition costs
Total
Carrying amount At January 1 2017 1370  1370 Transferred from borrowings  133 133 Additions 224 632 856 Transfer to royalty intangible assets 1125  1125 Transfer to royalty financial instrument 11  11 Transfer to interest bearing receivable 153  153 Released to income during the year 13 279 292 Foreign currency translation 90 1 89 Carrying amount at December 31 tel689
ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 101 GROUP OVERVIEW STRATEGIC REPORT
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Group
Deferred financing costs
Carrying amount At January 1 2016 1013  1013 Additions 155  155 Foreign currency translation 202  202 Carrying amount at December 31 2016 1370  1370
Deferred acquisition costs
Total
Carrying amount At January 1 2017 155  155 Additions 224 355 579 Transfer to interest bearing receivable 153  153 Released to income during the year 13 108 121 Transfer to subsidiary 11  11 Carrying amount at December 31 tel449
Deferred acquisition costs
Total
Carrying amount At January 1 2016 Additions 155  155 Carrying amount at December 31 2016 155  155 Deferred acquisition costs As at December 31 2016 deferred acquisition costs largely represented the corresponding asset for the deferred consideration payable by the Group in relation to its acquisition of the Maracs Menchen vanadium royalty in 2014 see note 16.
Under the terms of the royalty sale agreement the Group was required to pay an additional US1.5m 1.1m once production reached an annualised rate over a quarter of 9500t.
The production rate was achieved in Q3 2017 resulting in the Group remitting the deferred consideration in November 2017 with the deferred cost asset transferred to give a corresponding increase in the royalty intangible assets refer to note 16.
As at December 31 2017 deferred acquisition costs represent those costs associated with royalty acquisitions that the Group are actively pursuing and expect to complete in 2018.
Deferred financing costs As at December 31 2017 deferred financing costs represent the costs associated with entering into the new undrawn US30.0m three year secured revolving credit facility with a US10.0m accordion that have been deferred and will be amortised over the term of the facility.
All deferred costs relating to the Groups previous facility were released to the income statement at the time of refinancing with the new facility and accordion.
FI N A N C I A L S T A T EM E N T S
ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 102 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS for the year ended December 31 2017 19 INVESTMENTS IN SUBSIDIARIES The Groups full listing of subsidiaries is provided in note 33.
The Companys investment in subsidiaries as December 31 2017 and December 31 2016 is as follows
At January 1 2017 70734 Capital injection into subsidiaries 15131 Return of capital from subsidiaries At December 31 2017 85865 Impairment of investment in subsidiaries At January 1 2017 14191 Impairment of investment in subsidiaries 1467 At December 31 2017 15658 Carrying amount December 31 2017 70207
At January 1 2016 70736 Capital injection into subsidiaries Return of capital from subsidiaries 2 At December 31 2016 70734 Impairment of investment in subsidiaries At January 1 2016 14141 Impairment of investment in subsidiaries 50 At December 31 2016 14191 Carrying amount December 31 2016 56543 20 TR ADE AND OTHER RECEIVABLES 2017 2016
Company
Group
Company
Current
Income tax receivable 388  373 Prepayments Royalty receivables 8131 264 11257 70 Other receivables Deposits with subsidiaries    8038 8702 427 12090 8551
Other receivables 21259 21259 Amounts due from subsidiaries  35603  39303 21259 56862  39303 Current trade and other receivables Trade and other receivables principally comprise amounts relating to royalties receivable for the final quarter in each year.
The decrease in royalty receivables as at December 31 2017 is the result of the Kestrel royalty being remitted on a monthly basis since July 2017 compared to 30 days after the end of the quarter in 2016.
The Directors consider that the carrying amount of trade and other receivables is approximately their fair value.
APGAR1728.03.18BACKARTWORK
ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 103 GROUP OVERVIEW STRATEGIC REPORT
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Noncurrent other receivables On February 13 2017 the Group completed a C43.5m 26.6m financing and streaming agreement with Denison.
The streaming agreement is classified as an availableforsale debt royalty financial instrument note 15 with an initial value of C2.7m 1.7m.
The financing agreement is structured as a 13year secured loan of C40.8m 24.9m with an interest rate of 10% per annum payable to the
The loan contains mandatory repayment provisions in any period where the equivalent toll revenues exceed the interest liability.
Conversely in any period when toll revenues are less than the interest payment the shortfall is capitalised and carried forward to the next period.
The loan principal along with any capitalised interest is repayable in full at maturity.
Subsequent to entering the financing agreement the Group has earned 1.9m in interest revenue 2016 nil and received principal repayments of 3.1m for the period to December 31 2017.
Amounts due from subsidiaries are considered longterm loans.
The Directors consider that the carrying amount of amounts due from subsidiaries is approximately their fair value.
21 DERIVATIVE FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS In 2016 the Group implemented a policy whereby foreign exchange forward contracts can be entered into to manage its exposure to foreign exchange risk associated with its Australian dollar denominated royalty income note 32.
These foreign exchange forward contracts are accounted for as financial assets or liabilities carried at fair value through profit or loss in accordance with note 3.8c.
The fair value of the foreign exchange forward contracts as at December 31 is as follows 2017 2016
Company
Group
Company
Financial assets carried at fair value through profit or loss Held for trading derivatives  foreign currency forward contracts Fair value as at January 1 711 Revaluation gain included in profit or loss note 9 188  664 LossGain on settlement foreign currency forward contracts 423  47 Fair value as at December 31 100  711 22 CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTS Cash and cash equivalents include the following for the purposes of the statement of cash flows 2017 2016
Company
Group
Company
Cash at bank and on hand 8099 1349 5196 789 Trading deposits with brokers   135 135 Cash and cash equivalents 8099 1349 5331 924 23 NET DEBT See note 3.8a and note 3.8g for the Groups accounting policy on cash and debt.
Net debt is a measure of the Groups financial position.
The Group uses net debt to monitor the sources and uses of financial resources the availability of capital to invest or return to shareholders and the resilience of the balance sheet.
Net debt is calculated as total borrowings less cash and cash equivalents.
The Group and Companys net debtcash and cash equivalents position after offsetting the revolving credit facility against cash and cash equivalents is as follows 2017 2016
Company
Group
Company
Revolving credit facility   6300 3100 Cash and cash equivalents 8099 1349 5331 924 Net cash and cash equivalentsdebt 8099 1349 969 2176 FI N A N C I A L S T A T EM E N T S
ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 104 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS for the year ended December 31 2017 Movement in net debt Cash and cash equivalents Medium and longterm borrowings Net debt At January 1 2016 5708 7527 1819 Cash flow 162 1256 1418 Currency movements 539 29 568 At December 31 2016 5331 6300 969 Cash flow 2587 6153 8740 Currency movements 181 147 328 At December 31 2017 8099  8099 24 BORROWINGS 2017 2016
Company
Group
Company
Secured borrowing at amortised cost Revolving credit facility   6300 3100 Deferred borrowing costs 133 6167 3100 Amount due for settlement within 12 months Amount due for settlement after 12 months   6300 3100 As at December 31 2016 the Groups borrowings related to the partial drawdown of the threeyear revolving credit facility maturing in February 2018 which is available at LIBOR plus 250bps.
Deferred borrowing costs relate to the establishment fees associated with the facility and will be amortised over its threeyear term.
In February 2017 the Group refinanced its existing facility with a further threeyear revolving credit facility of US30.0m with a US10.0m accordion maturing in February 2020 which is available at LIBOR plus 300bps.
The Group triggered the accordion in November 2017 and as at December 31 2017 has access to US40.0m 29.6m.
The Groups revolving credit facility is secured by way of a floating charge over the Groups assets and is subject to a number of financial covenants all of which have been met during the year ended December 31 2017.
APGAR1728.03.18BACKARTWORK
ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 105 GROUP OVERVIEW STRATEGIC REPORT
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION 25 DEFERRED TA X The following are the major deferred tax liabilities and assets recognised by the Group and the movements thereon during the period Coal royalties Availablefor saleinvestments
Revaluation of coal royalty Effects of tax losses
Revaluation of mining interests Accrual of royalty receivable Other tax losses
At January 1 2016 24279 1356 767 107 567 2912 21452 Chargecredit to profit or loss 5510  1583 19 1874 4426 1356 Chargecredit to other comprehensive income   66 92   26 Exchange differences 4754 249  16 226  4715 Effect of change in tax rate equity   38    38 At December 31 2016 34543 1605 920 164 2667 7338 27511 Chargecredit to profit or loss 2908 1636 316 190 964 4103 1741 Chargecredit to other comprehensive income   84 356   272 Exchange differences 356 31 14 10 3 109 469 Effect of change in tax rate income statement 2154  264    2418 equity   70    70 At December 31 2017 29125  1472 8 1706 3344 26023 Deferred tax assets and liabilities are offset where the Group has a legally enforceable right to do so.
The following is the analysis of the deferred tax balances after offset for financial reporting purposes Deferred tax liabilities 31507 36637 Deferred tax assets 5484 9126 26023 27511 As at December 31 2017 the Group has unused tax losses of 11.0m 2016 10.7m available for offset against future profits.
A deferred tax asset has been recognised in respect of these losses which may be carried forward indefinitely.
The Group has the following balances in respect of which no deferred tax asset has been recognised 2017 2016 Tax losses trading Tax losses capital
Total
Tax losses trading Tax losses capital
Total
Expiry date Within one year Greater than one year less than five years Greater than five years No expiry date 17683 36959 5899 60541 18786 34946 5823 59555 17683 36959 5899 60541 18786 34946 5823 59555 Temporary differences associated with investments in subsidiaries joint ventures and associates are insignificant.
FI N A N C I A L S T A T EM E N T S
ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 106 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS for the year ended December 31 2017 The following are the major deferred tax liabilities recognised by the Company and the movements thereon during the period
Company
Revaluation of royalty instruments
At January 1 telReleased to income for the year Charge to equity for the year 104 104 At December 31 telReleased to income for the year Charge to equity for the year 14 14 At December 31 telDeferred tax assets and liabilities are offset where the Company has a legally enforceable right to do so.
The following is the analysis of the deferred tax balances after offset for financial reporting purposes
Deferred tax liabilities 676 662 Deferred tax assets 26 TR ADE AND OTHER PAYABLES 2017 2016
Company
Group
Company
Current
Other taxation and social security payables Trade payables Borrowings from subsidiaries  10726 Other payables 58telAccruals and deferred income 1824 1731 745 671 2494 12715 1357 1090 The average credit period taken for trade purchases is 25 days 2016 34 days.
The Directors consider that the carrying amount of trade and other payables approximates their fair value.
All amounts are considered shortterm and none are past due.
2017 2016
Company
Group
Company
Noncurrent
Deferred consideration   1215 Other taxation and social security payables 41tel419 419 1491 276 Noncurrent other taxation and social security payables relates to employer national insurance due on vesting of the certain sharebased payments.
Deferred consideration of 1.2m as at December 31 2016 related to the first tranche of deferred consideration of US1.5m due under the 2014 royalty sale and purchase agreement to acquire the Maracs Menchen royalty.
Following production reaching an annualised rate over a quarter of 9500t in Q3 2017 the Group paid the US1.5m due in November 2017 note 18.
APGAR1728.03.18BACKARTWORK
ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 107 GROUP OVERVIEW STRATEGIC REPORT
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION 27 SHARE CAPITAL AND SHARE PREMIUM Issued share capital Number of shares
Share premium
Total
Group and Company Ordinary shares of 2p each at January 1 2016 and December 31 2016 169942034 3399 49211 29134 81744 Issue of share capital under placing 10960000 219 12755  12974 Ordinary shares of 2p at December 31 2016 180902034 3618 61966 29134 94718 On February 6 2017 the Group issued 10960000 new ordinary shares of 2p each to part fund the Denison transaction refer to notes 15 and 20.
The shares were placed at 125p per share raising gross proceeds of 13.7m C22.4m and net proceeds of 13.0m.
Own shares Included in the Companys issued share capital are shares held by the Anglo Pacific Group Employee Benefit Trust EBT in accordance with the Groups JSOP as follows 2017 2016 Number of shares 000 Number of shares 000 Own shares Own shares held by the Anglo Pacific Group Employee Benefit Trust 925933 2601 925933 2601 Total 925933 2601 925933 2601 As the EBT has waived its right to receive dividends the Companys shares held by the EBT are excluded from the weighted average number of shares in issue for the purposes of calculating earnings per share in note 11.
28 SHAREBASED PAYMENTS The Group operates fur equitysettled sharebased compensation plans as follows The HMRC approved Company Share Ownership Plan the CSOP The Unapproved Share Ownership Plan the USOP The JSOP operated through the Anglo Pacific Group Employee Benefit Trust and The Value Creation Plan the VCP.
Under the CSOP share options are granted to Executive Directors and to selected employees.
The exercise price of the granted options is equal to the average midmarket closing price of an ordinary share for the three days before the grant.
The options are conditional on the employee completing three years service the vesting period.
The options are exercisable starting three years from the grant date subject to the Group achieving its target growth in absolute TSR over the period of 3% per annum not compounded in excess of the UK Retail Price Index the options have a contractual option term of ten years.
The Group has no legal or constructive obligation to repurchase or settle the options in cash.
Movements in the number of share options outstanding and their related weighted average exercise prices are as follows 2017 2016
Weighted average exercise price  Options
Outstanding at January 1 133981 0.9764 157812 0.9557 Forfeited during the year   23831 0.8392 Outstanding at December 31 133981 0.9764 133981 0.9764 Out of the 133981 outstanding options 2016 133981 nil options 2016 nil were exercisable.
Share options outstanding at the end of the year have the following expiry date and exercise prices
Expiry date Exercise price in per sharetel 1.6258 24600 24600 2025 0.9221 37954 37954 2025 0.7700 71427 71427 133981 133981 Weighted average remaining contractual life 7.82 8.82 FI N A N C I A L S T A T EM E N T S
ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 108 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS for the year ended December 31 2017 No awards were made under the CSOP during 2016 or 2017.
In accordance with the terms of the CSOP an employee forfeited 23831 options upon their resignation in 2016.
The Groups USOP was approved by shareholders at the 2016 AGM.
The plan was established to provide the Group additional scope to incentivise employees particularly those who do not participate in the VCP over and above the limit of the CSOP.
In addition the USOP is intended to replace the Groups JSOP.
The exercise price of the granted options is equal to the average midmarket closing price of an ordinary share for the three days before the grant.
The options are conditional on the employee completing three years service the vesting period.
The options are exercisable starting three years from the grant date and have a contractual option term of five years.
The Group has no legal or constructive obligation to repurchase or settle the options in cash.
Movements in the number of share options outstanding and their related weighted average exercise prices are as follows 2017 2016
Weighted average exercise price  Options
Outstanding at January 1 Granted during the year 2097593 0.8801 Outstanding at December 31 2097593 0.8801 The weighted average fair value of options granted during 2017 determined using a BlackScholes valuation model was 0.39 per option granted in April 2017.
The significant inputs into the model were the weighted average share price of 1.258 at the grant date exercise price of 0.88 volatility of 40.21% expected dividend yield of 4.77% expected option life of four years and an annual risk free rate of 0.21%.
Out of the 2097593 outstanding options 2016 nil nil options 2016 nil were exercisable.
Share options outstanding at the end of the year have the following expiry date and exercise prices
Expiry date Exercise price in per sharetel  633334 2027 1.2607 1464259 Weighted average remaining contractual life 4.28 c Joint Share Ownership Plan Under the JSOP the Remuneration Committee invites selected Executive Directors and employees to enter into an agreement with the Anglo Pacific Group Employee Benefit Trust the Coowner to acquire a number of ordinary shares in the capital of the Company.
The shares are held in the name of the coowner however the selected Directors and employees maintain a beneficial interest in these shares.
Awards under the JSOP are conditional on the employee completing three years service the vesting period and the Groups absolute total shareholder return growing at an annual rate not compounded of 3% in excess of the UK Retail Price Index over the threeyear vesting period.
In addition the Companys share price must reach a hurdle price during the threeyear vesting period as determined by the Remuneration Committee at the time of making the award.
Upon satisfying the performance targets and service requirements the beneficial interest conferred will entitle the Director or employee to receive a proportion of the proceeds of sale of the ordinary shares.
Their entitlement will be to receive the equivalent of all sales proceeds in excess of the threshold amount settled in ordinary shares of the Company.
The threshold amount is fixed by the Remuneration Committee and will not be set less than the market value of the ordinary shares of the Company at the time the JSOP award is made.
No shares were awarded under the JSOP during 2016 or 2017 as a result there are no outstanding awards under this plan.
Following the approval at the 2014 AGM the Group implemented a new longterm incentive arrangement for the Executive Directors and selected senior management.
The VCP was designed by the Remuneration Committee to incentivise the Executive Directors and senior management to drive growth in shareholder return over a fiveyear measurement period.
At the 2016 AGM shareholders approved the extension of the measurement period from five to seven years.
Under the terms of the VCP no value would accrue to the participants unless growth in the Groups total shareholder return over the measurement period is at least equal to 7% per annum.
Subject to such threshold growth participants would become entitled to receive nil or nominal cost options over the ordinary shares of the Company subject to a cap set by reference to a share of a pool value equal to 10% of the growth in the Companys total shareholder return over the measurement period or if less 50% of the growth in the Companys total shareholder return over the measurement period in excess of the threshold growth.
Options granted under the VCP will comprise three equal tranches the first tranche exercisable as from the time of the grant of the options and the other tranches exercisable as from one and two years thereafter respectively.
Subject to appropriate adjustments in accordance with the terms of the VCP the maximum number of shares set under the option grants will not be capable of exceeding such number equating to 7.5% of the Companys issued share capital as at the end of the measurement period.
APGAR1728.03.18BACKARTWORK
ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 109 GROUP OVERVIEW STRATEGIC REPORT
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION VCP awards outstanding at December 31 2017 and December 31 2016 are as follows Expiry date
Units
Outstanding at January 1 66880 66880 Awarded in May 2017 24000 Forfeited during the year 4013 Outstanding at December 31 86867 66880 Weighted average remaining contractual life 3.50 4.50 At the 2016 AGM the shareholders approved an amendment to the VCP extending the performance period from five years to seven years resulting in the weighted average remaining contractual life increasing by two years to 4.5 years.
The weighted average fair value of options granted during 2017 determined using a Monte Carlo valuation model was 35.46 per option granted in May 2017.
The significant inputs into the model were the weighted average share price of 1.145 at the grant date exercise price of nil volatility of 40.25% expected dividend yield of 5.25% expected option life of four years and an annual risk free rate of 0.30%.
Refer to note 6a for the total expense recognised in the income statement for awards under the Groups CSOP JSOP and VCP granted to Directors and employees.
29 SPECIAL RESERVE As part of the capital reduction in 2002 a special reserve was created which represents the level of profit attributable to the Group for the period ended June 30 2002.
At December 31 2016 this reserve remains unavailable for distribution.
Group
Company
At January 1 2017 and December 31 tel30 FINANCIAL COMMITMENTS Operating leases The Groups most significant operating lease commitments relate to premises maintained in both London England and Shetland Scotland.
At the balance sheet date the Group had outstanding commitments under noncancellable operating leases.
The total commitments due under these leases are shown according to the scheduled expiry dates of the leases as follows
Within one year 330 300 In the second to fifth years inclusive 252 526 After five years Capital commitments At the year end the Group had capital commitments of nil 2016 nil in respect of purchases of quoted investments.
31 REL ATED PART Y TR ANSACTIONS During the year the Company entered into the following transactions with subsidiaries
Net financing of related entities 1969 2530 Management fee 2778 1632 Amounts owed by related parties at year end 35603 47341 All transactions were made in the course of funding the Groups continuing activities.
FI N A N C I A L S T A T EM E N T S
ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 110 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS for the year ended December 31 2017 Remuneration of key management personnel The remuneration of the key management personnel including Directors of the Group is set out below in aggregate for each of the categories specified in IAS 24 Related Party Disclosures.
Further information about the remuneration of individual Directors is provided in the audited part of the Directors Remuneration Report on pages 53 to 65.
Shortterm employee benefits 1559 1275 Postemployment benefits 52 50 Sharebased payment 936 791 2547 2116 Directors transactions The Group received 68547.76 from Audley Capital Advisors LLP a company which Mr.
J.
Treger Chief Executive Officer is both a director and shareholder for the subletting of office space during the year ended December 31 2017 2016 59533.94.
At December 31 2017 there were no amounts owing from Audley Capital Advisors LLP 2016 27952.16.
The Group paid 4562.50 to Audley Capital Advisors LLP a company which Mr.
J.
Treger Chief Executive Officer is both a director and shareholder for office expenses and subscriptions during the year ended December 31 2017 2016 nil.
No amounts were owing to Audley Capital Advisors LLP as at December 31 2017 or 2016.
32 FINANCIAL RISK MANAGEMENT
The Groups principal treasury objective is to provide sufficient liquidity to meet operational cash flow and dividend requirements and to allow the Group to take advantage of new growth opportunities whilst maximising shareholder value.
The Groups activities expose it to a variety of financial risks including liquidity risk credit risk foreign exchange risk and price risk.
The Group operates controlled treasury policies which are monitored by management to ensure that the needs of the Group are met while minimising potential adverse effects of unpredictability of financial markets on the Groups financial performance.
The Groups financial risk management should be read in conjunction with the principal risks outlined on pages 18 to 23 of the Strategic Report.
Financial instruments The Group and Company held the following investments in financial instruments this includes investment properties 2017 2016
Company
Group
Company
Investment property held at fair value Coal royalties Kestrel 104266  116885
Royalty financial instruments 10867 3979 13556 6724 Mining and exploration interests 16431 13273 17062 13861 Fair value through profit or loss Derivative financial instruments 100  711 Loans and receivables Trade and other receivables 29444 57173 11616 47767 Cash at bank and in hand 8099 1349 5331 924 Financial liabilities Trade and other payables Borrowings   6300 3100 Deferred consideration   1215 Derivative financial instruments include the Groups foreign exchange forward contracts as set out in note 21.
Trade and other receivables include royalty receivables and other noncurrent receivables only as set out in note 20.
Trade and other payables include trade payables and accruals only as set out in note 26.
Borrowings include the revolving credit facility only as set out in note 24.
Other payables include the deferred consideration only as set out in note 26.
APGAR1728.03.18BACKARTWORK
ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 111 GROUP OVERVIEW STRATEGIC REPORT
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Cash and cash equivalents comprise cash and shortterm deposits held by the Group treasury function.
The carrying amount of these assets approximates their fair value.
Liquidity and funding risk The objective of the Company in managing funding risk is to ensure that it can meet its financial obligations as and when they fall due.
At
December 31 2017 the Group was debt free 2016 borrowings of 6.3m and continued to have access to its undrawn US40.0m 29.6m revolving credit facility.
The following tables detail the Groups remaining contractual maturity for its nonderivative financial liabilities with agreed repayments periods.
The table has been drawn up based on the undiscounted cash flows of financial liabilities based on the earliest date on which the Group can be required to pay.
The table includes both interest and principal cash flows.
To the extent that interest flows are floating rate the undiscounted amount is derived from the interest rate at the balance sheet date.
The contractual maturity is based on the earliest date on which the Group may be required to pay.
Weighted average effective interest rate % 15 years
December 31 2017 Interest bearing revolving credit facility 3.50 December 31 2016 Interest bearing revolving credit facility 2.76 6300 Credit risk The Groups principal financial assets are bank balances royalty instruments held as financial assets trade and other receivables and investments.
These represent the Groups maximum exposure to credit risk in relation to financial assets and total 37.5m at December 31 2017 16.9m at December 31 2016.
The Groups credit risk is primarily attributable to its other receivables including royalty receivables.
It is the policy of the Group to present the amounts in the balance sheet net of allowances for doubtful receivables estimated by the Groups management based on prior experience and the current economic environment.
In certain cases the Group has the right to audit the reported royalty income.
The Groups credit risk on royalty interests held as financial instruments has been reviewed and the estimated current exposure is as disclosed in note 15 where the future contractual right to cash flows from these instruments is reflected in their fair value.
The credit risk on bank deposits is mitigated by banking with household name financial institutions in reputable jurisdictions.
The Group has no significant concentration of credit risk with exposure spread over a large number of currencies and counterparties.
The Groups credit risk on foreign exchange forward contracts is mitigated by entering into these agreements with large financial institutions.
The Group limits its exposure to credit risk together with that of the contracting financial institution by restricting the settlement date to no more than a year from the contract date.
In addition the Group limits the quantum of the forward contracts to no more than an average 70% of forecast royalty revenue expected to be received by the date of settlement.
Share price risk The Group is exposed to share price risk in respect of its mining and exploration interests which include listed and unlisted equity securities and any convertible instruments.
A 10% increase or decrease in the fair value of our mining and exploration interests listed and unlisted would increasedecrease the mining and exploration interests balance and investment revaluation reserve in equity by 1.6m at December 31 2017 1.7m at December 31 2016.
We note that if a 10% decrease were to occur then a further assessment would be required to determine whether the decrease was considered to be significant with any resulting impairment recognised in the income statement.
The Groups mining and exploration interests are held for the purposes of generating additional royalties and are considered longterm strategic investments.
This strategy is unaffected by recent fluctuations in prices for mining and exploration equities however interests are continually monitored for indicators that may suggest problems for these companies raising capital or continuing their daytoday business activities to ensure remedial action can be taken if necessary.
This is expected to be a less significant part of the Groups strategy going forward.
No specific hedging activities are undertaken in relation to these interests and the voting rights arising from these equity instruments are utilised in the Groups favour.
FI N A N C I A L S T A T EM E N T S
ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 112 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS for the year ended December 31 2017 Other price risk The royalty portfolio exposes the Group to other price risk through fluctuations in commodity prices particularly the prices of coking coal iron ore gold and uranium.
As the Directors obtain independent commodity price forecasts the generation of which takes into account fluctuations in prices limited analysis of the impact of fluctuations on the valuations of the royalties has been undertaken in note 14 and note 15.
Foreign exchange risk The Groups transactional foreign exchange exposure arises from income expenditure and purchase and sale of assets denominated in foreign currencies.
With royalty income from Kestrel and Narrabri accounting for over 90% of the Groups income 2016 88% the Groups primary foreign exchange exposure is to the Australian dollar which these royalties are denominated in.
In 2016 the Group implemented a hedging policy whereby foreign exchange forward contracts can be entered into with a maximum exposure of 70% of forecast Australian dollar denominated royalty revenue expected to be received during a period not exceeding 12 months from contract date to settlement.
Refer to note 20 for further details on the fair value of the foreign exchange forward contracts outstanding at December 31 2017.
The
Group has no other hedging programme in place.
In terms of material commitment the risk in relation to currency fluctuations is assessed by the Executive Committee at the time the commitment is made and regularly reviewed.
Financial assets and liabilities are split by currency as follows 2017 2016
AUD
CAD
USD
NOK
EUR
GBP
AUD
CAD
USD
NOK
EUR
Financial assets 9985 131815 23092 4192  24 7904 148511 1347 7354 1 45 Financial liabilities 1760 27 2   52 7163 1 1 1215  67 Net exposure 8225 131788 23090 4192  28 741 148510 1346 6139 1 22 Foreign exchange sensitivities With the exception of the cash balances the majority of the financial instruments not denominated in GBP are held in entities with the same functional currency and for the purpose of this sensitivity analysis the impact of changing exchange rates on the translation of foreign subsidiaries into the Groups presentation currency has been excluded.
In terms of the cash balance the significant sensitivities are as follows A  10% change in the GBP AUD rate would increasedecrease profit after tax and equity by 243k 2016 114k A  10% change in the GBP CAD rate would increasedecrease profit after tax and equity by 117k 2016 117k A  10% change in the GBP USD rate would increasedecrease profit after tax and equity by 50k 2016 82k.
Exposures to foreign exchange rates vary during the year depending on the volume of overseas transactions.
Nonetheless the analysis above is considered to be representative of the Groups exposure to currency risk.
Capital management and procedures The Groups capital management objectives are to safeguard the Groups ability to continue as a going concern in order to realise the full value of its assets and to enhance shareholder value in the company and returns to shareholders by acquiring further royalty assets.
The Directors continue to monitor the capital requirements of the Group by reference to expected future cash flows.
Capital for the reporting periods presented is summarised in the consolidated statement of changes in equity.
In funding the business activities of the Group the Directors consider both debt and equity having regard to the Groups available debt facility and the prevailing share price at the time funding is required.
Where funding is obtained through debt the Group maintains its targeted debt capacity of 1.52 times free cash flow although a higher ratio can be tolerated for shorter periods when there is a reasonable expectation of a recovery in free cash flow.
Fair value hierarchy The following tables present financial assets and liabilities measured at fair value in the balance sheet in accordance with the fair value hierarchy.
This hierarchy aggregates financial assets and liabilities into three levels based on the significance of the inputs used in measuring the fair value of the financial assets and liabilities.
The fair value hierarchy has the following levels Level 1 quoted prices unadjusted in active markets for identical assets and liabilities Level 2 inputs other than quoted prices included within Level 1 that are observable for the asset or liability either directly i. or indirectly i.
Level 3 inputs for the asset or liability that are not based on observable market data unobservable inputs.
The level within which the financial asset or liability is classified is determined based on the lowest level of significant input to the fair value measurement.
APGAR1728.03.18BACKARTWORK
ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 113 GROUP OVERVIEW STRATEGIC REPORT
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION The following table presents the Groups assets that are measured at fair value at December 31 2017 Group Notes Level 1 Level 2 Level 3
Assets
Coal royalties Kestrel a   104266 104266 Royalty financial instruments b   10867 10867 Mining and exploration interests  quoted c 13270   13270 Mining and exploration interests  unquoted d  3161  3161 Financial derivative instruments e  100  100 Net fair value 13270 3261 115133 131664 The following table presents the Groups assets that are measured at fair value at December 31 2016 Group Notes Level 1 Level 2 Level 3
Assets
Coal royalties Kestrel a   116885 116885 Royalty financial instruments b   13556 13556 Mining and exploration interests  quoted c 14070   14070 Mining and exploration interests  unquoted d  2992  2992 Financial derivative instruments e  711  711 Net fair value 14070 3703 130441 148214 The following table presents the Companys assets that are measured at fair value at December 31 2017 Company Notes Level 1 Level 2 Level 3
Assets
Royalty financial instruments a   3979 3979 Mining and exploration interests  quoted b 13095   13095 Mining and exploration interests  unquoted c  178  178 Net fair value 13095 178 3979 17252 The following table presents the Companys assets that are measured at fair value at December 31 2016 Company Notes Level 1 Level 2 Level 3
Assets
Royalty financial instruments a   6724 6724 Mining and exploration interests  quoted b 13680   13680 Mining and exploration interests  unquoted c  181  181 Net fair value 13680 181 6724 20585 There have been no significant transfers between Levels 1 and 2 in the reporting period.
FI N A N C I A L S T A T EM E N T S
ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 114 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS for the year ended December 31 2017 The methods and valuation techniques used for the purposes of measuring fair value of royalty financial instruments gives more prominence to the probability of production by applying a risk weighting to the discounted net present value outcome in order to fully reflect the risk that the operation never comes into production rather than factoring this risk into the discount rate applied to the future cash flow.
The Groups coal royalties derive from its ownership of certain substratum land in Queensland Australia.
In accordance with IAS 40 this land is revalued at each reporting date on the basis of future expected income discounted at 7.5% 2016 7.5% by an independent valuation consultant.
Refer to note 14 for details of the key inputs into the valuation together with a sensitivity analysis for fluctuations in the price assumptions and discount rate.
All unobservable inputs are obtained from third parties.
At the reporting date the royalty financial instruments are valued based on the net present value of pretax cash flows discounted at a rate between 6.5% and 18.0%.
The discount rate of each royalty arrangement is derived using a capital asset pricing model specific to the underlying project making reference to the risk free rate of return expected on an investment with the same time horizon as the expected mine life together with the country risk associated with the location of the operation.
For those royalty financial instruments not in production the outcome of this net present value calculation is then risk weighted to reflect managements current assessment of the overall likelihood and timing of each project coming into production and royalty income arising.
This assessment is impacted by news flow relating to the underlying operation in the period in conjunction with managements assessment of the economic viability of the project based on commodity price projections.
The table below outlines the discount rate and risk weighting applied in the valuation of the Groups royalty financial instruments December 31 2017 December 31 2016 Classification Discount rate Risk weighting Discount rate Risk weighting EVBC Availableforsale equity 7.00% 100% 6% 100% Jogjakarta Availableforsale debt 10.00%  8% 100% Dugbe 1 Availableforsale debt 18.00% 75% 13% 75% McClean Lake Availableforsale debt 6.50% 50% Piau Availableforsale debt 12.00% 30% The Group has reviewed the impact on the carrying value of its royalty financial instruments and does not consider a  1% change in the discount rate or a  10% change in the underlying commodity prices to have a material impact.
All the quoted mining and exploration interests have been issued by publicly traded companies on well established security markets.
Fair values for these securities have been determined by reference to their quoted bid prices at the reporting date.
All the unquoted mining and exploration interests are initially recognised using cost as the best approximation of fair value.
The Group notes any trading activity in the unquoted instruments and will value its holding accordingly.
At present the Group holds these investments with a view to generating future royalties and there is no present intention to sell.
The vast majority of these are in investments which the Group anticipates a realistic possibility of a future listing.
The derivative financial instruments consist of the foreign exchange forward contracts entered into to hedge the Groups Australian dollar denominated royalty income.
At the reporting date the foreign exchange forward contracts are valued based on the net present value of the discounted future cash flows estimated based on forward exchange rates and contract forward rates discounted at rates that reflect the credit risk of various counterparties.
APGAR1728.03.18BACKARTWORK
ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 115 GROUP OVERVIEW STRATEGIC REPORT
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Fair value measurements in Level 3 The Groups financial assets classified in Level 3 use valuation techniques based on significant inputs that are not based on observable market data.
The following table presents the changes in Level 3 instruments for the year ended December 31 2017.
Royalty financial instruments Coal royalties
Total
At January 1 2017 13556 116885 130441 Additions 3323  3323 Revaluation gains or losses recognised in Other comprehensive income 496  496 Income statement 6324 11933 18257 Foreign currency translation 184 686 870 At December 31 2017 10867 104266 115133 The following table presents the changes in Level 3 instruments for the year ended December 31 2016.
Royalty financial instruments Coal royalties
Total
At January 1 2016 6534 82649 89183 Additions 10133  10133 Revaluation gains or losses recognised in Other comprehensive income 350  350 Income statement 4939 17900 12961 Foreign currency translation 2178 16336 18514 At December 31 2016 13556 116885 130441 There have been no transfers into or out of Level 3 in any of the years.
The Group measures its entitlement to the royalty income and any optionality embedded within the royalty instruments using discounted cash flow models.
In determining the discount rate to be applied management considers the country and sovereign risk associated with the projects together with the time horizon to the commencement of production and the success or failure of projects of a similar nature.
FI N A N C I A L S T A T EM E N T S
ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 116 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS for the year ended December 31 2017 33 FREE CASH FLOW The structure of a number of the Groups royalty financing arrangement such as the Denison transaction completed in February 2017 result in a significant amount of cash flow being reported as principal repayments which are not included in the income statement.
As the Group considers dividend cover based on the free cash flow generated by its assets management have determined that free cash flow per share is a key performance indicator going forward.
Free cash flow per share is calculated by dividend net cash generated from operating activities proceeds from the disposal of noncore assets less finance costs divided by the weighted average number of shares in issue.
Free cash flow per share Net cash generated from operating activities Net cash generated from operating activities for the year ended December 31 2017 34629 Adjustment for Proceeds on disposal of mining and exploration interests 2424 Finance income  excluding foreign exchange gainslosses 1945 Finance costs 795 Proceeds from royalty financial instruments 258 Repayments under commodity related financing agreements 3051 Free cash flow for the year ended December 31 2017 41512 23.20p Free cash flow per share Net cash generated from operating activities Net cash generated from operating activities for the year ended December 31 2016 10316 Adjustment for Proceeds on disposal of mining and exploration interests 3431 Finance income  excluding foreign exchange gainslosses 82 Finance costs 1086 Proceeds from royalty financial instruments 246 Other royalty related repaymentsadvances 352 Sundry income 63 Free cash flow for the year ended December 31 2016 13404 7.93p The weighted average number of shares in issue for the purpose of calculating the free cash flow per shares is as follows 2017 2016 Weighted average number of shares in issue 178895115 169016101 34 EVENTS OCCURRING AF TER YEAR END No events have occurred subsequent to year end that require additional disclosure.
APGAR1728.03.18BACKARTWORK
ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 117 GROUP OVERVIEW STRATEGIC REPORT
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION 35 SUBSIDIARIES The following tables outline the Groups subsidiaries as defined in Regulation 7 of the UK Companies Act 2006.
All subsidiaries are included in the Group consolidation.
Company and country of incorporationoperation Principal activities Class of shares held
December 31 % Group interest at December 31 2017 %
Alkormy Pty Ltd Investments Ordinary A1.00 100% 100% APG Aus No 1 Pty Ltd Owner of iron ore royalties Ordinary A1.00 100% 100% APG Aus No 2 Pty Ltd Owner of iron ore royalties Ordinary A1.00 100% 100% APG Aus No 3 Pty Ltd Owner of uranium royalties Ordinary A1.00 100% 100% APG Aus No 4 Pty Ltd Owner of iron ore royalties Ordinary A1.00 100% 100% APG Aus No 5 Pty Ltd Owner of iron ore royalties Ordinary A1.00 100% 100% APG Aus No 6 Pty Ltd Owner of vanadium royalties Ordinary A1.00 100% 100% APG Aus No 7 Pty Ltd Owner of coal royalties Ordinary A1.00 100% 100% APG Aus No 8 Pty Ltd Owner of nickelcobalt royalties Ordinary A1.00 100% 100% APG Aus No 9 Pty Ltd Investments Ordinary A1.00 100% 100% Argo Royalties Pty Ltd Investments Ordinary A1.00 100% 100% Gordon Resources Ltd Owner of coal royalties Ordinary A0.20 100% 100% HydroCarbon Holdings Pty Ltd Dormant Ordinary A1.00 100% 100% Indian Ocean Resources Pty Ltd Investments Ordinary A0.25 100% 100% Indian Ocean Ventures Pty Ltd Dormant Ordinary A0.20 100% 100% Starmont Holdings Pty Ltd Investments Ordinary A1.00 100% 100% Starmont Ventures Pty Ltd Investments Ordinary A1.00 100% 100% Woodford Wells Pty Ltd Dormant Ordinary A0.25 100% 100% The registered office of all of the entities listed above is 6 Price Street Subiaco Western Australia 6008
Advance Royalty Corporation Owner of uranium royalties Ordinary C0.01 100% 100% Albany River Royalty Corporation Owner of chromite royalties Ordinary C1.00 100% 100% Panorama Coal Corporation Owner of coal royalties Ordinary C0.01 100% 100% Polaris Royalty Corporation Intermediate holding company Ordinary C1.00 100% 100% Trefi Coal Corporation Owner of coal tenures Ordinary C0.01 100% 100% The registered office of all of the entities listed above is 1720 Queens Avenue West Vancouver British Columbia Canada V7V 2X7
Anglo Pacific Cygnus Ltd Investments Ordinary 1.00 100% 100% Centaurus Royalties Ltd Investments Ordinary 1.00 100% 100% Southern Cross Royalties Ltd Investments Ordinary 1.00 100% 100% The registered office of all of the entities listed above is 1 Savile Row London England W1S 3JR
Anglo Pacific Group Employee Benefit
Administering Group incentive plans 100% 100% The registered office of the entity listed above is Frances House Sir William Place St Peter Port GY1 4HQ
Anglo Pacific Finance Ltd Treasury Ordinary 1.00 100% 100% The registered office of the entity listed above is Atlantic Avenue Westpark Business Campus Shannon Co Clare
Shetland Talc Ltd Mineral exploration Ordinary 1.00 100% 100% The registered office of the entity listed above is Grant Thornton 95 Bothwell Street Glasgow Scotland G2 7JZ FI N A N C I A L S T A T EM E N T S
ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 118 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS for the year ended December 31 2017 Registered office Anglo Pacific Group PLC 1 Savile Row London W1S 3JR Registered in England
TelephonetelFaxtelWebsite site
Please contact the respective registrar if you have any queries about your shareholding.
Equiniti Registrars Limited Aspect House Spencer Road
West Sussex BN99 6DA Telephone 44 0tel Equity Transfer and Trust Company Suite 400 200 University Avenue
Ontario M5H 4H1 Telephone 1tel
BMO Capital Markets Limited 1st Floor 95 Queen Victoria Street London EC4V 4HG Peel Hunt LLP 120 London Way London EC2Y 5ET Canacord Genuity Limited Ropemaker Place 88 Wood Street London EC2V 7QR a Size of Holding at March 21 2018
Number of Shareholders %
UK and Canada 1  1000 580 34.73% 295735 0.16% 1001  5000 607 36.35% 1419445 0.78% 5001  10000 157 9.40% 1151647 0.64% 10001  and over 326 19.52% 178035207 98.42% 1670 100% 180902034 100% b The percentage of total shares held by or on behalf of the twenty largest shareholders as at March 21 2018 was 63.27%.
CORPORATE DETAILS
ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 119 GROUP OVERVIEW STRATEGIC REPORT
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION O T H E R I N F OR M A T I ON SHAREHOLDER STATISTICS Performance measures Throughout the Strategic Report we use a number of financial measures to assess our performance.
The measures are defined on inside front cover.
Third party information As a royalty holder the Group often has limited if any access to nonpublic scientific and technical information in respect of the properties underlying its portfolio of royalties or such information is subject to confidentiality provisions.
As such in preparing this Annual Report the Group has relied upon the public disclosures of the owners and operators of the properties underlying its portfolio of royalties as available at the date of this Annual
References in this Annual Report to websites are made as inactive textual references and for informational purposes only.
Information found at the relevant websites is not incorporated by reference into this Annual Report.
The Group makes no representation as to the accuracy of any such information.
Cautionary statement on forwardlooking statements and related information Certain statements in this Annual Report other than statements of historical fact are forwardlooking statements based on certain assumptions and reflect the Groups expectations and views of future events.
Forwardlooking statements which include the phrase forwardlooking information are provided for the purposes of assisting readers in understanding the Groups financial position and results of operations as at and for the periods ended on certain dates and of presenting information about managements current expectations and plans relating to the future.
Readers are cautioned that such forwardlooking statements may not be appropriate other than for purposes outlined in this Annual Report.
These statements may include without limitation statements regarding the operations business financial condition expected financial results cash flow requirement for and terms of additional financing performance prospects opportunities priorities targets goals objectives strategies growth and outlook of the Group including the outlook for the markets and economies in which the Group operates costs and timing of acquiring new royalties mineral reserve and resources estimates estimates of future production production costs and revenue future demand for and prices of precious and base metals and other commodities for the current fiscal year and subsequent periods.
Forwardlooking statements include statements that are predictive in nature depend upon or refer to future events or conditions or include words such as expects anticipates plans believes estimates seeks intends targets projects forecasts or negative versions thereof and other similar expressions or future or conditional verbs such as may will should would and could.
Forward looking statements are based upon certain material factors that were applied in drawing a conclusion or making a forecast or projection including assumptions and analyses made by the Group in light of its experience and perception of historical trends current conditions and expected future developments as well as other factors that are believed to be appropriate in the circumstances.
The material factors and assumptions upon which such forwardlooking statements are based include the stability of the global economy the stability of local governments and legislative background the relative stability of interest rates the equity and debt markets continuing to provide access to capital the continuing of ongoing operations of the properties underlying the Groups portfolio of royalties by the owners or operators of such properties in a manner consistent with past practice the accuracy of public statements and disclosures including feasibility studies estimates of reserve resource production grades mine life and cash cost made by the owners or operators of such underlying properties no material adverse change in the price of the commodities underlying the Groups portfolio of royalties and investments no material adverse change in foreign exchange exposure no adverse development in respect of any significant property in which the Group holds a royalty or other interest including but not limited to unusual or unexpected geological formations and natural disasters successful completion of new development projects planned expansions or additional projects being within the timelines anticipated and at anticipated production levels and maintenance of mining title.
Forwardlooking statements are not guarantees of future performance and involve risks uncertainties and assumptions which could cause actual results to differ materially from those anticipated estimated or intended in the forwardlooking statements.
By its nature this information is subject to inherent risks and uncertainties that may be general or specific and which give rise to the possibility that expectations forecasts predictions projections or conclusions will not prove to be accurate that assumptions may not be correct and that objectives strategic goals and priorities will not be achieved.
A variety of material factors many of which are beyond the Groups control affect the operations performance and results of the Group its businesses and investments and could cause actual results to differ materially from those suggested by any forwardlooking information.
Such risks and uncertainties include but are not limited to current global financial conditions royalty portfolio and associated risk adverse development risk financial viability and operational effectiveness of owners and operators of the relevant properties underlying the Groups portfolio of royalties royalties subject to other rights and contractual terms not being honoured together with those risks identified in the Principal Risks and Uncertainties section herein.
If any such risks actually occur they could materially adversely affect the Groups business financial condition or results of operations.
Readers are cautioned that the list of factors noted in the section herein entitled Risk is not exhaustive of the factors that may affect the Groups forwardlooking statements.
Readers are also cautioned to consider these and other factors uncertainties and potential events carefully and not to put undue reliance on forwardlooking statements.
This Annual Report also contains forwardlooking information contained and derived from publicly available information regarding properties and mining operations owned by third parties.
The
Groups management relies upon this forward looking information in its estimates projections plans and analysis.
Although the forwardlooking statements contained in this Annual Report are based upon what the Group believes are reasonable assumptions there can be no assurance that actual results will be consistent with these forwardlooking statements.
The forwardlooking statements made in this Annual Report relate only to events or information as of the date on which the statements are made and except as specifically required by applicable laws listing rules and other regulations the Group undertakes no obligation to update or revise publicly any forwardlooking statements whether as a result of new information future events or otherwise after the date on which the statements are made or to reflect the occurrence of unanticipated events.
US Employment Retirement Income Security Act Fiduciaries of i US employee benefit plans that are subject to Title I of the US Employment Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 ERISA ii individual retirement accounts Keogh and other plans that are subject to Section 4975 of the US Internal Revenue Code of 1986 as amended the Internal Revenue Code and iii entities whose underlying assets are deemed to be ERISA plan assets by reason of investments made in such entities by such employee benefit plans individual retirement accounts Keogh and other plans collectively referred to as Benefit Plan Investors should consider whether holding the Companys ordinary shares will constitute a violation of their fiduciary obligations under ERISA or a prohibited transaction under ERISA or the Internal Revenue Code.
Shareholders should be aware that the assets of the Company may be or become treated as plan assets that are subject to ERISA fiduciary requirements andor the prohibited transaction rules of ERISA and the Internal Revenue
The Companys ordinary shares are subject to transfer restrictions and provisions that are intended to mitigate the risk of among other things the assets of the Company being deemed to be plan assets under ERISA.
Shareholders who believe these provisions may be applicable to them should review these restrictions which are set forth in the Companys Articles of Association and should consult their own counsel regarding the potential implications of ERISA the prohibited transaction provisions of the Internal Revenue Code or any similar law in the context of an investment in the Company and the investment of the Companys assets.
APGAR1728.03.18BACKARTWORK
ANGLO PACIFIC GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 120 O T H E R I N F OR M A T I ON FORWARDLOOKING STATEMENTS APGAR1728.03.18COVERARTWORK APGAR1728.03.18COVERARTWORK Printed in the UK by CPI Colour on Amadeus Primo Silk FSC certified paper.
Amadeus Primo Silk is certified FSC is made using ECF pulp and manufactured according to ISO 9001 and ISO 14001.
Designed and produced by Boone site C O NTE NT S 01 GROUP OVERVIEW A n g l o P a c i fi c a t g l a n c e M i n i n g r o y a l t i e s e x p l a i n e d O ur por t f o li o C h air m ans s t a t e m e n t 08 STRATEGIC REPORT C h i e f E x e c u t i v e O ffi c e r s s t a t e m e n t M a r k e t o v e r v i e w O u r b u s i n e s s m o d e l O u r s t r a t e g y N e w r o y a l t y a c q u i s i t i o n P r in c ip al r i s k s and un c e r t ain t ie s Ke y pe r f or m an c e indic a tor s B u s i n e s s r e v i e w F i n a n c i a l r e v i e w C or por a t e s oc i al r e s pon s ib ili t y 44 GOVERNANCE C or por a t e g o v e r n an c e r e por t T h e B o a r d N omin a t i on C om mi t t e e A udi t C om mi t t e e R e m un e r a t i on C om mi t t e e D ir e c tor s  r e m un e r a t i on r e por t D ir e c tor s  r e por t S t a t e m e n t o f D ir e c tor s  r e s pon s ib ili t ie s 69 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS I nd e pe nd e n t audi tor s r e por t C o n s o l i d a t e d i n c o m e s t a t e m e n t C o n s o l i d a t e d s t a t e m e n t o f c o m p r e h e n s i v e i n c o m e C o n s o l i d a t e d a n d C o m p a n y b a l a n c e s h e e t s C o n s o l i d a t e d s t a t e m e n t o f c h a n g e s i n e q u i t y C o m p a n y s t a t e m e n t o f c h a n g e s i n e q u i t y C o n s o l i d a t e d s t a t e m e n t o f c a s h fl o w s a n d C o m p a n y s t a t e m e n t o f c a s h fl o w s N o t e s t o t h e c o n s o l i d a t e d fi n a n c i a l s t a t e m e n t s 11 9 O TH E R I NF O R M A TIO N Sh a r eh o l der s t a t i s t i c s C or por a t e d e t ail s For war d  l o ok in g s t a t e m e n t s Throughout this report a number of financial measures are used to assess the Groups performance.
The measures are defined as follows Operating profitloss O perat ing profi t   los s repre s ent s t he G roup s under l y ing operat ing per f or mance f rom it s royalt y int ere s t s .
O perat ing pr ofit   lo ss is r oyalt y income less amor tisation o f r oyalties and operat ing ex pens e s and exclude s impair ment s revaluat ions an d g a i n   lo s s o n dis po s als .
O pe r at i ng pr ofi t   lo s s r e co ncil e s t o operat ing profi t   los s bef ore impair ment s revaluat ions and gain   los s e s on dis pos als on t he income s t at ement .
Adjusted earnings per share Adjus t ed earnings r epr esen t s the Gr oup s underlying operating p e r fo r m a n c e f ro m co re a c t i v i t i e s .
A d j us te d e a r n i n g s is t h e p rofi t   l os s at t r i b u t a b l e t o e q u i t y h o l d e r s l e s s a l l v a l u at i o n movement s and non  c as h impair ment s amor t is at ion charge s s hare base d pay ment s fi nance cos t s any as sociat e d defer re d t a x and any profi t or los s on non  core as s et dis pos als .
Adjus t e d ear nings di v ide d by t he weight e d average number of s hare s in is sue gi ve s adjus t e d ear nings per s hare .
Refer t o note 11 to t he fi nancial s t at ement s f or adjus t e d ear nings   los s per s hare .
Dividend cover D i v idend cover is c alculat e d as t he number of t ime s adjus t e d ear nings per s hare exce e ds t he di v idend per s hare .
Refer t o note 12 t o t he fi nancial s t at ement s f or di v idend cover .
Free cash flow per share F re e c as h fl ow p e r s h a re is c a l c u l ate d by d i v i d i n g n et c as h ge n e r ate d f ro m o p e r at i n g a c t i v i t i e s p l us p ro c e e ds f ro m t h e dis pos al of non  core as s et s and any c as h considere d as repay ment of pr incipal le s s fi nance cos t s by t he weight e d average number of s hare s in is sue .
Refer t o note 33 t o t he fi nancial s t at ement s f or f re e c as h flow per s hare .
