Annual report Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Ebiquity plc  Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Contents Financial statements Statement of Directors responsibilities 49 Independent auditors report 50
Consolidated statement of comprehensive income 56 Consolidated statement of financial position 57 Consolidated statement of changes in equity 58 Consolidated statement of cash flows 59 Notes to the consolidated financial statements 60 Independent auditors report 94 Company statement of financial position 98 Company statement of changes in equity 99 Notes to the Company financial statements 100 Advisers 108 Shareholder information 108 Glossary IBC Strategic report Highlights 2 At a glance 4 Chairmans statement 6 Market overview 8 Chief Executive Officers review 10 Our business model 16 Our strategy for growth 18 Case studies 26 Chief Financial Officers review 30 Corporate governance Board of Directors 34
Audit and Risk Committee report 40
Committee report 42 Directors report 45 Visit us online at siteeninvestors Creating clarity At Ebiquity our role is creating clarity for our clients.
In fact its our declared purpose.
This means enabling marketers to work with their partners to choose the level of transparency thats right for them.
It means subjecting marketing performance to evergreater scrutiny.
And it means harnessing advances in technology and data to competitive advantage.
This is how we empower our clients to be sure that every marketing decision leads to enhanced effectiveness.
To better return on investment.
By creating clarity in the evermore digital increasingly opaque media landscape we help drive accountability in marketing.
Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Ebiquity plc Strategic report Michael Karg PhD
Group Chief Executive Officer
Ebiquitys longterm ambition is to be the worlds leading techenabled independent marketing and media consultancy the left brain adviser to the CMO.
Final results for the year ended 31 December 2017 Ebiquity plc Ebiquity or the Company a leading techenabled independent marketing and media consultancy announces final results for the year ended 31 December 2017.
Ebiquity provides services to over 80 of the top 100 global advertisers with 20 offices across 14 countries.
Highlights
Outlook
Taking advantage of the rapid changes in media and marketing  driven by changes in technology consumer behaviour and data  requires players in the industry to adjust their business models.
As many of our clients and partners have embarked on this journey so have we.
The sale of the Advertising Intelligence business now better focuses Ebiquity on service areas offering structural market growth.
The actions that have been taken in 2017 has positioned the business for faster revenue growth in 2018 and beyond.
With an expectation of a turnaround in performance in the US in 2018 together with continued revenue growth outside of the US we remain confident of delivering against the financial goals we set out in the Growth Acceleration Plan.
Michael Karg CEO commented 2017 was a year of change for Ebiquity.
The planned sale of the Advertising Intelligence business in particular was significant and resource intensive.
While our financial performance was held back by disappointing results in the US we achieved important milestones on our multiyear transformational journey.
The underlying changes that we are driving throughout our business are designed to align our services with clientside trends  as well as competitive dynamics  which provide mid to longterm growth opportunities.
We are positioning Ebiquity to become the preferred independent adviser to marketers at worldleading brands.
We have a clear focused and differentiated destination and are implementing the relevant changes to get these now and going forward.
2 Ebiquity plc Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 1.
Likeforlike means prior year results are adjusted to include the results of recent acquisitions as if they had been owned for the same period in the prior year.
Constant currency is calculated by taking current year denominated results restated at last years foreign exchange rates.
Alternative performance measures are set out in the summary of results section of this report.
A transformational year for Ebiquity Anticipated 26m sale of Advertising Intelligence business to Nielsen Media Research Limited Clear progress against Growth Acceleration Plan including expansion of Effectiveness practice in Continental Europe US and Singapore culminating in the addition of a significant multimarket consumer goods client in Q4 2017 Announced restructure of our business into three core service offerings Ebiquity Media Ebiquity Analytics and Ebiquity Tech As previously reported revenue performance from the US MVM and MPO practices was disappointing and impacted the Groups revenue performance in 2017.
With new practice leadership in place we expect to see an improved performance in 2018 Continued service and tool development with launch of Ebiquity Portfolio Digital Ebiquity Connect Ebiquity Total View Attribution and Ebiquity Tech Extension of digital analytics capability to Asia Pacific with the acquisition of Digital Balance in September 2017.
Acquired the remaining noncontrolling interest in French subsidiary Appointment to the Board of Chairman Designate Rob Woodward who will replace Michael Higgins as Chairman in May 2018 Appointment of USbased Chief Operating Officer in January 2018 Faster revenue growth in H2.
Performance outside of the US in line with expectations Revenue up 4.6% to 87.4m 2016 83.6m with likeforlike constant currency revenue growth of 0.8% Excluding MI segment revenue up 6.7% to 64.2m 2016 60.2m with likeforlike constant currency revenue growth of 2.3% up 5.5% in the second half of the year On a likeforlike constant currency basis revenue up 5.8% excluding US MVM and MPO practice revenues
Statutory operating profit was 5.5m 2016 7.8m and statutory profit before tax was 4.5m 2016 6.6m Underlying diluted EPS 9.4p 2016 11.3p Underlying cash conversion from underlying operating profit of 93% 2016 88% Net debt at 28.9m 31 December 2016 28.1m Increase of 10% in proposed dividend to 0.71p 2016 0.65p per share reflecting maintained progressive dividend policy Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Ebiquity plc Strategic report At a glance Ebiquity is a leading techenabled independent marketing and media consultancy.
We help the worlds biggest brands leverage data and analytics to drive greater transparency in the marketing ecosystem to create more impactful customer experiences and to deliver greater returns on marketing investment.
We go to market with three practice areas Media Value Measurement MVM Helping clients to increase efficiency and transparency in their media performance 59% revenue Market Intelligence MI Providing clients with a clear picture of their own and their competitors advertising 27% revenue Marketing Performance Optimisation MPO Enabling clients to decide where to allocate and how to optimise marketing investment 14% revenue 4 Ebiquity plc Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Market presence Our people Employing over 900 people including data scientists developers modellers analysts and digital and media experts.
Our clients We work with over 80 of the top 100 global advertisers.
Global locations Global expertise and offices in 14 countries across North America Europe and Asia Pacific.
Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Ebiquity plc Strategic report Michael Higgins NonExecutive Chairman
Chairmans statement
In 2006 when I became Chairman of Ebiquity then Thomson Intermedia the Company operated from four offices  three in London and one in New York.
At that time threequarters of our revenue came from clients headquartered in the UK.
I stand down from the Board this year with a business that spans the globe with 20 offices in 14 countries and proud to count over 80 of the worlds 100 largest advertisers among its clients.
The marketing industry has been through a period of substantial change during this time bringing with it extraordinary complexity.
In 2006 Facebook celebrated its second birthday and Twitter was born.
Meanwhile eightyearold Google was already valued at 50 billion.
Now its over 17 times that figure and these three companies alone generated over 130 billion of advertising revenue in 2017.
Add to this the everevolving capabilities of technology and the creation of a totally pervasive online ecosystem and the balance of relationships and the level of complexity within marketing today has fundamentally changed.
I have greatly enjoyed being part of Ebiquitys evolution over the past 12 years and believe that with Rob Woodwards arrival we have the right leadership at the Boards helm to support the executive team led by Michael Karg in seizing Ebiquitys unique market opportunities.
6 Ebiquity plc Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 In 2006 Ebiquity was already focusing on transparency and accountability.
One key issue then was the need to verify whether adverts that had been paid for had actually appeared in newspapers.
We were able in part to apply technology to the oldstyle vouching process.
From 2007 through 2015 the underlying platform for the business we have today was assembled  mainly through acquisition  and we established our marketleading position in media benchmarking internationally.
We acquired additional skills to address some of the emerging opportunities and our Marketing Performance Optimisation segment was created.
Since 2016 there has been substantial progress in defining our strategic direction and delivering a simplified and streamlined service offering as One Ebiquity around the world.
This initiative is designed to ensure that our clients recognise us as one business with uniform capability and to reposition our service offering around our clients needs.
There have also been some important new hires of senior executives individuals with both operational and industrybased skills who will help us capitalise on our position in the marketplace.
Transparency and accountability remain the most significant challenges for the marketing industry.
The revelations and recommendations that came out of the 2016 ANA report were pivotal in creating advertisers prevailing and enduring mindset.
For Ebiquity it not only put us at the heart of the debate.
It also increased awareness of the need for an independent party with the right skills to help advertisers create clarity around the results that their investments in media deliver and the returns they generate.
The Chief Executive Officers report
It explains how we will be running our business going forward by our Media Analytics and Tech practices.
This aligns our business with the challenges that our clients face and it follows the planned divestment of the Advertising Intelligence business.
On behalf of the Board I must thank everyone who works at Ebiquity for the great commitment they show in deploying their skills for the benefit of our clients.
I would also like to thank my Board colleagues and welcome Rob Woodward my successor to Ebiquity.
Rob has a set of skills and experience ideally suited to our business as well as to todays opportunities and challenges.
Ebiquity is now wellpositioned at the heart of the marketing industry.
We have a significant opportunity to deploy our experience skills and talent for our clients benefit from our uniquely independent position.
Michael Higgins NonExecutive Chairman 21 March 2018 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Ebiquity plc Strategic report Market overview Marketing continues to experience a period of constant change and dynamic innovation.
Driven by a change in consumer behaviour the ongoing and incremental opportunities that digital tools technologies and social media platforms can offer marketers can find it hard to keep up with this relentless pace of change.
It can feel as if theyre running to stand still.
The rewards for getting it right can be huge but the risks of getting it wrong mean the role of the Chief Marketing Officer CMO has never been more challenging.
At the same time CMO tenure is one of the shortest in the Csuite.
Among bigspending consumer brands CMOs are in post for threeandahalf years.
Thats two years less than typical CFOs and less than half as long as CEOs The Wall Street Journal recently reported Marketing leaders are faced with the paradox of needing to achieve more but having less time in which to do it.
As a result executions in promising but niche areas can often capture marketers attention.
At times too much activity is focused on shortterm tactical wins.
This is at the expense of strategic marketing that delivers business impact and real and tangible return on investment.
In addition to marketers growing desire for media transparency across partners and suppliers we believe that this change in attitudes and behaviour is driven by three further interconnected trends.
First
Heightened scrutiny of digital marketing performance.
It is undeniable that digital advertising was given too much of a free pass as it developed.
Many brands overinvested with insufficient emphasis on ROI.
The exponential increase in data algorithms and data processing power are now being harnessed by some leading brands to measure what matters.
Second
Evermore complexity in both technology and data.
Before digital advertising there were typically just agencies and publishers between brands and their customers.
Today there are dozens of different links in the transactional chain the World Federation of Advertisers WFA estimates as many as 50.
This poses obvious challenges to marketers looking to run impactful campaigns but the new ecosystem also offers the potential for transformational returns for those who get it right.
Third
Increased focus on evidence based marketing particularly in leveraging data to drive better customer experiences and enhanced marketing performance.
Todays marketers operate in a paradoxical environment where its never been more challenging and at the same time never more possible to use data to drive evidencebased decisionmaking.
Todays marketing ecosystem is complex at times confusing and often opaque.
It has never been more challenging to be an effective marketer or marketing procurement professional.
Over the last 12 months several marketers have started to get more involved in the details of how their marketing spend is allocated.
Some very wellknown highprofile marketers are taking the lead on the issues that have held the industry back during digital advertisings teenage years.
Principal among these issues has been media transparency.
And following the lead of the two marketers with the worlds biggest budgets  PandGs Marc Pritchard and Unilevers Keith Weed the global marketing community is now routinely putting transparency high on the agenda.
8 Ebiquity plc Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 1. httpon. httpbit.
My guess is that the biggest challenge for marketers this year will be GDPR.
If 2017 was the year of digital media transparency then 2018 may well be the year of data transparency and ensuring that all of our data is kept safe and secure.
David Wheldon president of the WFA It is undeniable that the dominant theme of marketing in 2017 was media transparency.
The practical steps that everyone can take to secure greater transparency governed the tone and content of the debate.
With reference to the arrival of the EUs General Data Protection Regulation in May of this year the president of the WFA David Wheldon said in January 2018 At Ebiquity we agree with Davids analysis but would go further.
Our role indeed our declared purpose  at Ebiquity is creating clarity for our clients.
This means ensuring that marketers work with their partners to choose the level of transparency which is right for them.
It means subjecting digital marketing to evergreater scrutiny.
It means harnessing advances in technology and data for their advantage.
And it means taking an evidencebased approach to measurement and evaluation.
It is encouraging to hear Marc Pritchard in his recent address at ISBA put increased focus on data and analytics but change will take time in an industry obsessed with shiny new objects often at the expense of employing rigour to drive real business impact.
The media industry in general  and digital media in particular  will never truly become simple and straightforward and the issues that have dogged marketing for many years from ad misplacement to fraud from brand safety to nonhuman traffic wont disappear overnight.
It is encouraging that the industry is taking steps in the right direction but we firmly believe that there is much more that needs to be done.
My guess is that the biggest challenge for marketers this year will be GDPR.
If 2017 was the year of digital media transparency then 2018 may well be the year of data transparency and ensuring that all of our data is kept safe and secure.
Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Ebiquity plc Strategic report Michael Karg PhD
Group Chief Executive Officer
Chief Executive Officers review
2018 starts with two pieces of significant news.
As previously announced we have appointed a new Chairman Rob Woodward who joined Ebiquity on 1 March.
Rob succeeds Michael Higgins who will retire after 12 years as Chairman of Ebiquity following the AGM on 9 May.
Rob brings a wealth of both media and senior Boardlevel experience to
He was CEO of STV Group plc for nearly 11 years where he led their successful transformation into a preeminent digital media group.
Prior to joining STV Rob was Commercial Director at Channel 4 Television for four years and was previously a Managing Director with UBS Corporate Finance and lead partner for Deloittes TMT industry group in
Rob is an experienced leader who has an inspiring track record in building teams and delivering successful outcomes.
His approach and personality are a great fit for Ebiquity and I am looking forward to partnering with him.
I would like to express our deep gratitude to Michael Higgins for his significant contribution over the past 12 years where his guidance has been invaluable in the successful development of the Company.
We wish him all the very best for the future.
Additionally in February 2018 we announced that we had entered into an agreement to sell our Advertising Intelligence business to Nielsen.
The sale is subject to UK Competition and Markets Authority CMA approval and completion is anticipated to take place in the second quarter of 2018 assuming the CMA provides clearance following its highlevel Phase 1 examination.
If the CMA instead refer the transaction for a more detailed Phase 2 investigation the completion would likely take place in Q4 2018.
The Advertising Intelligence business represents in excess of 90% of the reported revenue and underlying operating profit within the Market Intelligence MI segment and 25% of Group revenues and contributed 4.4 million to operating profit before allocation of overheads and for this reason we refer in places of this report to revenue growth excluding the MI segment.
2017 financial performance overview Revenues for the year to 31 December 2017 grew 4.6% to 87.4 million.
With the majority of revenue denominated in nonsterling currencies revenue was boosted by sterling being on average weaker against the euro and the dollar in 2017 than in 2016.
In total currency movements benefited revenue by 3.4% with acquisitions further increasing revenue by 0.4%.
This resulted in likeforlike constant currency revenue growth of 0.8%.
Excluding performance of the MI segment which contains the Advertising Intelligence business revenue growth was 6.7% and 2.3% on a likeforlike constant currency basis.
Revenue was more evenly phased across 2017 than in 2016 when revenue was fronthalf weighted.
Likeforlike constant currency revenue growth was 5.5% in the second half of 2017 compared with the second half of 2016.
I would like to express our deep gratitude to Michael Higgins for his significant contribution over the past 12 years where his guidance has been invaluable in the successful development of the Company.
We wish him all the very best for the future.
10 Ebiquity plc Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 As previously highlighted revenue performance from the US business was well below management expectations and this impacted the Groups revenue growth yearonyear.
In our US MVM segment excluding FirmDecisions our contract compliance business the trend we observed in the first half of the year of clients facing cuts to their marketing and advertising budgets and consequently deferring Media benchmarking spending continued into the second half.
In the US MPO business unit after delivering greater than 50% revenue growth between 2014 and 2016 revenue declined in 2017.
The US MPO business had a high concentration of revenue with a small number of clients.
The two biggest clients reduced spend mainly driven by internal reorganisations  which caused revenue to fall by 19.8% in 2017.
US
MPO revenues were higher in H2 2017 than H1 2017 through the addition of new clients in Q4 2017.
Given the scale of the US advertising market and our relative size we feel positive about our mid to longterm opportunities.
With new leadership of our US MPO and US Media business units now in place we expect to see a sustained turnaround in 2018.
Excluding the performance of the US MVM and MPO segment but including US FirmDecisions the MVM and MPO segments grew by 10.0% and 7.4% respectively on a likeforlike constant currency basis.
The MVM segment reported revenue up 9.2% an increase of 5.2% on a likeforlike constant currency basis.
As clients focused on the issue of media transparency this significantly benefited FirmDecisions which recorded exceptional revenue growth in 2017.
Outside of the US MVM revenue was in line with management expectations with continued good progress in Europe SouthEast Asia and Australia offsetting slightly weaker performance in China resulting from a change in management post the end of the earnout period.
In the MPO segment reported revenue fell by 2.3% compared to 2016 and was down by 7.7% on a likeforlike constant currency basis.
Performance from the MPO segment was impacted by the significant decline in revenue from the US MPO segment.
Revenue from the MPO segment outside of the US grew by 6.4% with revenues from MPO Effectiveness services outside of the UK representing 10% of total revenue.
The year saw a scaling up of our MPO Effectiveness services in Continental Europe and our MPO practice in APAC.
The UK MPO business continued to deliver double digit revenue growth of 17.1% while revenue from our MPO team in Spain acquired as part of Media Value in February 2016 declined in 2017 reflecting high staff turnover during the year.
Revenue from the MI segment declined by 0.9% and declined by 3.1% on a likeforlike constant currency basis.
Revenue from the Advertising Intelligence business grew by 0.1% on a likeforlike constant currency basis with a slightly weaker second half.
Revenues from our project based Reputation business declined as expected from 2.0 million in 2016 to 1.2 million in 2017.
In March 2018 we entered into an agreement to sell the trade and assets of our Reputation business to Echo Research Holdings Limited.
Completion will take place on 31 March 2018.
Underlying operating profit was 12.0 million.
This represents a drop in operating margin from 2016 of 1.7pp to 13.8%.
This reflects lower profitability from the US MPO business combined with planned investment in our Growth Acceleration Plan  notably in investing in MPO Effectiveness resources in new markets.
Investment in the Growth Acceleration Plan was scaled back during 2017 and cost control measures were implemented in the US MPO business during 2017 but these were not sufficient to offset the revenue decline.
Margins in the MVM segment were consistent with 2016 as strong performance from our Contract Compliance business offset lower profitability from our US Media benchmarking business.
Margins in the MPO segment declined sharply in 2017 reflecting the revenue decline in the US MPO business together with the investment in the expansion of the MPO segment in Europe and APAC.
Central costs which are not allocated to a segment were in line with the prior year.
Underlying profit before tax was 11.0 million.
Statutory operating profit was 5.5 million down from 7.8 million in 2016 and statutory profit before tax decreased to 4.5 million from 6.6 million in 2016.
The lower statutory operating profit and profit before tax reflect both lower underlying profitability as well as an increase highlighted items.
Highlighted items are detailed in the CFOs report.
Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Ebiquity plc Strategic report
Chief Executive Officers review continued
Our service offerings.
In the last quarter of 2016 we defined the core purpose of Ebiquity to be creating clarity for our clients.
The consequence of the clarity that we create for marketers  through independent impartial advice delivered by the most knowledgeable and experienced consultants in the industry  is better informed marketing investment decision making.
Through our different service offerings we empower our clients to focus on the metrics that matter for their businesses.
We then show them how to use these to judge whats working well for them whats not and how they should adjust their media and marketing investment plans accordingly.
Creating clarity is the North Star which guides everything we do.
This includes how we advise and guide our clients and is the foundation that underpins our longterm strategic ambition to become the leading media and marketing analytics consultancy globally.
For the past few years we have gone to market with three core practice areas Media Value Measurement Marketing Performance Optimisation and Market Intelligence.
Media Value Measurement MVM Ebiquity is the global market leader in media performance benchmarking media agency management and contract compliance.
We enable our clients to increase media efficiency and transparency through media performance reviews benchmarking and measurement.
Dietmar Kruse Practice Principal Media Performance Advertisers face many challenges in media today.
Transparency programmatic and meaningful metrics for walledgarden platforms like Google and Facebook to name but three.
By defining digital media benchmarks we help our clients to create clarity.
And we enable them to make the right longterm decisions  including finding and working with the right agency partners.
Laetitia Zinetti Practice Principal Media
Good relationships between brands and their agencies need constant vigilance.
With the right support and a thoughtthrough endtoend process brands can ensure their agency relationships  both wellestablished and new  deliver for the longterm future.
We also assess agencies compliance with contractual terms via our specialist contract compliance business
In 2017 FirmDecisions undertook more than 300 contract compliance audits covering activity in 70 markets.
40 of the worlds leading 100 advertisers consulted with FirmDecisions over the course of the year.
Stephen Broderick Global CEO of FirmDecisions It is only through wellwritten regularlyupdated contracts that marketers can secure the level of transparency they desire.
With the industry changing so fast brands need to review and update their contracts regularly to stay ahead of the game.
12 Ebiquity plc Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Marketing
Optimisation MPO We guide clients to decide how much they need to spend on marketing where to allocate and how to optimise their marketing investments.
We help them choose which analytics technologies to select and how to improve digital customer journeys.
Our work in this practice has two distinct service offerings econometric modelling and customer experience analytics.
Mike Campbell Head of International Effectiveness Marketers are rewarded by the Csuite for delivering real and tangible ROI.
And its only by understanding the relative and absolute contribution of all channels and platforms  taking and attributing the Total View online and offline  that they can accomplish this.
Tim Hussain Practice Principal Tech  Europe There are so many options for marketing technology that many marketers dont know where to turn for simple clear and impartial advice.
By building a team from right across the industry  and by remaining staunchly independent  we are helping our clients make informed advertising technology decisions.
Market Intelligence
For almost 20 years we have provided clients with a clear picture of their own and their competitors inmarket creative executions ad spend and media strategies.
Our marketleading family of Ebiquity Portfolio media platforms was joined in 2017 by Ebiquity Portfolio Digital providing comprehensive coverage of creative and spend data for digital advertising content.
This is supported by specialist insight market and earned media research experts who combine automated analytics with native language human analysis.
The sale process of the AdIntel business required significant time investment by our senior management over the course of 2017.
Morag Blazey Managing Principal Intel With the sale of the Advertising Intelligence business the combined entity will be a strong global player with the scale and strategic focus to continue the level of investment needed to keep the business evolving and deliver better longterm career growth.
Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Ebiquity plc Strategic report Outlined vision Developed strategy Simplified service offering Acquired Digital Balance
Announced sale of AdIntel business Tech Practice Total View Attribution Portfolio Digital Ebiquity Connect Moved to matrix organisation New Managing Director Media North America Head of Analytics North
New Managing Director China New Managing Director France Chief Operating Officer New Chief Strategy Officer Strategic moves Product and service launches Talent and organisation enhancements
Chief Executive Officers review continued
Changing structure changing reporting As the media industry is changing rapidly so Ebiquity is transforming and developing to meet the needs of the worlds marketers and brand custodians.
Continued transformational change in 2017 14 Ebiquity plc Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 From 2018 onwards we will also therefore move from segmental reporting as MPO MVM and MI to reporting by 1 Media 2 Analytics and Tech and until such time as the sale of the Advertising Intelligence business is completed 3 Intel.
Michael Karg PhD
Group Chief Executive Officer
Christian Polman Chief Strategy Officer By creating a threepractice business that addresses our clients needs in Media Analytics and Tech weve made our market offering both more relevant and more buyable.
Weve shown our clients that we understand the challenges they face in the evermore complex media and marketing ecosystem.
As the media industry is changing rapidly so Ebiquity is transforming and developing to meet the needs of the worlds marketers and brand custodians.
When I joined Ebiquity as Group CEO in 2016 we launched a Growth Acceleration Plan designed to achieve a compound annual growth rate of 10% by 2021.
This strategy is designed to make our business the bestequipped partner to help our clients to build accountability into their marketing investments.
The sale of our Advertising Intelligence business is clear evidence of our transformation in action.
Creating a more operationallyaligned streamlined business will allow us to respond better to our clients needs and focus on our Growth Acceleration Plan moving forward.
Accordingly we have now restructured our business into three core service offerings.
This restructure better reflects both advertisers needs and the reality of the media and marketing ecosystem today and for the years to come.
Operating under an agile One Ebiquity consulting model we have now structured ourselves as
Media covering services such as media performance benchmarking media agency management and contract compliance
Analytics incorporates areas such as marketing effectiveness market mix modelling total view attribution and datadriven customer experience optimisation
Tech comprising services such as strategy vendor selection and implementation for ad tech martech and data management Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Ebiquity plc Strategic report
CLARITY
Inputs
Advertiser data  media spend sales social media market researchpolling data Consumer data  behavioural webdata 1st 2nd and 3rd party customer profiles attitudinal data inferred from behaviours Market data  creative assets competitor performance thirdparty demographic data Our business model We apply datadriven insights to help marketers deliver accountability of their marketing investment.
Our datadriven approach to creating clarity from complexity is hardwired into all our different products and services.
It is also central to our business model.
Our engagements always start with a strategic review of where our clients are today where they want to get to and what their motivations are.
This is true both for longestablished and firsttime clients.
This process of triage enables us to determine the most effective order in which to address specific priority tasks.
We then capture data we cleanse organise and harmonise that data we generate actionable datadriven insights and we tell our clients datadriven stories from which they can take practical action to achieve their business and marketing objectives.
In this way we empower our clients to take rightful ownership of their digital marketing strategy technology data and media spend.
Find out more about our divisions on pages 12 and 13
SCIENTISTS
STRATEGIC
CONSULTANTS
DEVELOPERS
We organise data We conduct strategic reviews
16 Ebiquity plc Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 CREATING
Find out more in our strategy section on pages 22 and 23
ANALYSTS
CLIENT
PARTNERS
MEDIA EXPERTS
EXPERTS
Outcomes
Improved media and marketing decisionmaking Increased sales  e.
Better cost control  e.
We apply advanced analytics We generate actionable insights We tell datadriven stories Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Ebiquity plc Strategic report Our strategy for growth Attract retain and develop highcalibre talent from the media analytics and data science and consultancy sectors
Launch proprietary products and services that harness our data and insights and enable us to be trusted advisers for our clients
Shape the organisation and its processes to support broader and deeper client relationships locally and globally
Raise our brand profile and broaden the perception of our expertise to support our growth plans
Deliver our Growth Acceleration Plan resulting in sustainable doubledigit revenue growth at sustainable operating margins
Ebiquitys 5P goals It is our ambition to be the worlds leading techenabled independent marketing and media consultancy.
Everything we do in pursuit of this objective is shaped by our corporate purpose creating clarity for our clients.
We have established fiveyear goals which are grouped into 5Ps covering People Product Process Profile and Performance.
And our 5Ps provides the framework for us to measure our progress towards our longterm business objectives.
How were doing on our fiveyear objectives for each strategic pillar of the 5Ps  in terms of progress priorities KPIs and risks is summarised on pages 22 and 23.
But first I want to focus on some of the highlights for each of the 5Ps that weve delivered during 2017.
People
For all the great tech data and smart use of analytics Ebiquity is first and foremost a people business.
During the course of 2017 the global Talent Team and our capability leaders have developed the first iteration of a Global Competency Framework.
This model allows people at all levels of the organisation to understand what behaviours and skills are required  to do their jobs and to meet targets.
By marrying this with a skills map we can systematically assess where we have skills and what the development needs for Ebiquity are at both an individual and a company level.
The senior hires we have made and the roles we have developed and created during the course of 2017 demonstrate the scope of our ambitions for Ebiquity.
So too do the range and diversity of backgrounds from which our new team members come including media agencies digital consulting and technology.
For instance we now have a global Chief Operating Officer our first global chairman of media and a new Chief Strategy Officer.
We have new leadership in China and France and new leadership for both Media and Analytics in the US.
We have strengthened our offering across Europe with the launch of our Tech practice and in Australia with the acquisition of Digital Balance.
It is through talents like these that we will achieve our objective of becoming the worlds leading marketing analytics consultancy.
Everything we do is shaped by our corporate purpose creating clarity for our clients.
18 Ebiquity plc Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 3.
Process
In part as a legacy of a business that has grown through acquisition and in part because operational efficiency across our network had not historically  been identified as a strategic priority a comprehensive analysis of operations has identified scope for enhanced delivery of products and services.
This programme was started in Q4 2016 by the recruitment of new team members whose purpose is to drive operational efficiency and synergies across practices.
And it has been strengthened considerably by the appointment of Jason Bailis at the start of 2018 as Global Chief Operating Officer following a 10year stint in senior operations roles at Publicis Groupe for Sapient Nitro Razorfish and DigitasLBi.
Jason Bailis Chief Operating Officer Operational excellence is a winwin.
A win for clients who get great services delivered smarter.
A win for our people who do what they do brilliantly but in a systematised and streamlined fashion.
We have also started to put in place a group of senior global client partners to service the needs of some of our biggest clients better and more holistically.
Our client partners are specialists in our clients businesses and generalists in the full spectrum of marketing and media consultancy advice our different practices offer.
This enables them to bring forward the right service to the right client at the right time.
Andrew Challier Chief Client Officer Our clients are at the heart of everything we do.
They face very real challenges in securing optimal return on their marketing investments.
By addressing these challenges directly our teams can help our clients deliver real value.
Our Media Consulting team has codified and standardised an endtoend Ebiquity Agency Selection approach.
Using this approach we provided pitch management services to almost 100 national and global brands in 2017 with total combined media billings of almost 9 billion.
This makes Ebiquity the biggest and most experienced agency relationship management business.
Our Media practice in Australia has developed an innovative methodology to benchmark and analyse online video advertising performance.
With advertisers following audiences who are shifting their viewing habits from broadcast TV towards online video this methodology enables us to assess performance of online video advertising per se and compared to the cost and efficiency of traditional TV advertising.
To help clients navigate the complexity of programmatic advertising and the myriad choices of martech and ad tech providers we launched a new Ebiquity Tech practice area including hiring a European ad tech team based out of our London office.
The teams remit includes helping advertisers select implement and manage their digital programmatic trading technology.
Our Analytics practice has developed and launched our pioneering Ebiquity Total View Attribution solution.
Ebiquity Total View is a multichannel attribution model that considers and weights the relative impact of all relevant inputs on consumer behaviour online and offline.
Combining topdown econometrics with bottomup digital attribution the Ebiquity Total View approach is a clearbox solution that lets the data decide cause and effect.
Product
To stay relevant and anticipate our clients needs in the constantly evolving digital marketing ecosystem its critical that we continually innovate our products and services.
At Ebiquity we encourage and facilitate innovation from the ground up based on the opportunities our teams know can help advertisers to meet their business and marketing objectives.
During 2017 our Media practice has completed development of and rolled out a new media data management platform called Ebiquity Connect.
This platform is designed to help agencies upload our advertiser clients media data consistently efficiently and securely.
Designed to drive data security and efficiency Ebiquity Connect saves both our clients and media agencies partners time and resource and enables us to produce even more relevant and insightful media measurement.
Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Ebiquity plc Strategic report Our strategy for growth continued How each dollar moves through the programmatic supply chain.
Data from Programmatic Seeing through the financial fog report produced with ADFIN Demand side
100%
12% Targeting Data 9%
6154%
58%
1118%
15%
6% Other Fees 1%
Inventory
Sell side Andreas Cohen Chairman of ICOM Global Ebiquity have continued to plant their credentials on the world stage of marketing analytics and play a growing and important role within the ICOM community.
Whether speaking at our annual Global Summit serving on our numerous boards and councils or as frontrunners in our Data Science Hackathon Ebiquity is partnering with us in our mission to help clients achieve competitive advantage in datadriven marketing.
Profile
Ebiquitys profile is now higher than it ever has been.
Our thought leadership content is sought and widely used around the world.
Our leaders have spoken at more industry events than ever and they are now regularly contacted for comment.
These approaches are from both specialist marketing media and generalist business media from Campaign to The Financial Times.
Our research is now quoted in the analyst reports commentating on marketing including Liberum and Bank of America.
In 2017 we published a firstofitskind study of programmatic media buying in the US marketplace.
The study analysed 16.4 billion impressions from 445 completed campaigns making it the most comprehensive study of its kind.
It was conducted and published with the US and Canadian Associations of Advertisers and ADFIN.
Two studies on the longterm value and return on investment delivered by TV were published during the year one in the UK in association with ThinkBox the other in Australia in partnership with ThinkTV.
Our partnership with global and national trade bodies including the ANA World Federation of Advertisers WFA and ICOM strengthens and deepens.
These partnerships generate joint research drive client conversations and result in leads.
A sample of our thought leadership research in 2017 is summarised on page 21.
20 Ebiquity plc Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Summary of major research studies by Ebiquity and partners in 2017 Month Partners Title and scope of study Short link April World Federation of Advertisers WFA Online advertising effectiveness.
Research among worlds leading advertisers on attitudes aspirations and behaviours for online advertising. httpbit.
May US Association of National Advertisers ANA Canadian Association of National Advertisers
Seeing through the programmatic fog.
Firstofitskind study into programmatic media buying in the US marketplace.
Study investigated costs and economics of programmatic.
16.4 billion impressions from 445 completed campaigns analysed. httpbit.
June ThinkTV  Payback Australia.
Econometric study demonstrating how and how much different media channels deliver in terms of ROI.
Multicategory FMCG automotive ecommerce finance.
TV online search and radio the most effective media. httpbit.
October WFA  Global Ad Viewability and Ad Fraud Levels.
By aggregating data from six leading verification companies comScore DoubleVerify Integral Ad Science Meetrics Moat and Pixalate we produced the industrys first collective view of viewability and fraud levels across more than 20 markets.
WFA members only November Thinkbox Gain Theory  Profit Ability the business case for advertising.
Total profit generated by different types of advertising quantified.
ROI of 3.24 for every pound spent over three years 4.20 for TV which accounts for 71% of profit.
TV shown to deliver best return. httpbit.
Richard BasilJones Managing Director of Ebiquity AsiaPacific shares findings of Payback Australia study for ThinkTV Stephan Loerke CEO of the World Federation of Advertisers As our longest standing partner Ebiquity has been instrumental in helping us understand market dynamics.
They have allowed us to surface global marketplace issues before they become mainstream discussion topics.
They have also provided practical solutions and steps that our members can take to help get ahead of these challenges and improve their marketing effectiveness.
Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Ebiquity plc Strategic report Our strategy for growth continued
The performance of Ebiquity in 2017 is summarised in more detail in the CEO review.
Total revenue growth in 2017 was 4.6% and 0.8% on a likeforlike constant currency basis.
Performance in our US Media and US MPO business units provided a drag on revenue growth.
Outside of the US we made progress against our revenue growth goal in both the MPO and MVM segments.
During 2017 we achieved a series of key milestones of our Growth Acceleration Plan set out in September 2016.
Further detail of both revenue growth in 2017 and progress against the Growth Acceleration Plan is detailed below.
PEOPLE
PRODUCT
PROCESS PROFILE PERFORMANCE
Attract retain and develop high calibre talent from the media data science and consultancy sectors.
Launch proprietary products and services that harness our data and insights and enable us to be trusted advisers to our clients.
Shape the organisation and its processes to support broader and deeper client relationships.
Raise our brand profile and broaden the perception of our expertise to support our growth plans.
Delivery of our Growth Acceleration Plan resulting in sustainable double digit revenue growth at sustainable operating margins.
PROGRESS
Launched first iteration of Global Competency Framework Kicked off Future Leaders Training programme Launched Ebiquity Connect Expanded Marketing Effectiveness footprint in Europe and APAC Rolled out Portfolio Digital Launched Total View Attribution Embedded operational tools e.
Salesforce to improve management information Hired a Global Chief Operating Officer Appointed Global Client Partners More press mentions in trade and business publication than ever before e.
FT
Expanded presence at key industry events such as ICOM WFA ISBA ANA ProcureCon Continued growth of Marketing Effectiveness practice in the UK Delivered strong growth in our Contract Compliance business globally
Organising global sales meeting Raising digital skill levels Rollout Phase I of digital paid media measurement tool Optix Grow Marketing Effectiveness internationally Continue expansion of FirmDecisions internationally Harmonise core methodologies used in our Media practice Improve sales forecasts Streamline hiring process Introduce stage gate process for key investments in innovations Publication of thought leadership articles providing insightful and actionable points Rollout a refreshed brand identity across all key brand touchpoints including website Delivery against the milestones published within our Growth Acceleration Plan Launch of marketing analytics and tech services in new markets
Target voluntary attrition rate below 20% Increase proportion of revenue generated from newenhanced products and services Percentage of clients taking two or more productsservices Publish quoted thought leadership pieces Average billings per employee Revenue CAGR of 10% between Medium term underlying operating profit margin target of 1213%
Our talent continues to be highly in demand due to the breadth of experience that it gains through our unique positioning.
There is a risk of an industrywide talent shortage for data scientists in particular as demand by clients agencies internet platforms and publishers increases.
We work hard on a number of initiatives to make Ebiquity a great place to work and foster retention The media landscape is constantly changing resulting in increasing pressure to developrefine products and services faster.
Through evolving our delivery methods and creating product owners we aim to stay highly relevant to our clients Our clients often have complex decentralised management structures requiring considerable investment of time to negotiate global commercial agreements.
We ensure we devote appropriate commercial and senior client facing resource to expedite the negotiation of commercial agreements Inability to capitalise on the opportunities arising from the focus on media transparency Some of the industry trends become less important or are resolved Identifying key talent to enable expansion of Marketing Analytics and Tech businesses could take longer than expected due to scarcity in the market Clients may be slower to respond to issues in media transparency and data driven marketing causing a delay in potential revenue growth.
We leverage our relationships with clients and industry bodies to influence change 22 Ebiquity plc Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 PEOPLE
PROCESS PROFILE PERFORMANCE
Attract retain and develop high calibre talent from the media data science and consultancy sectors.
Launch proprietary products and services that harness our data and insights and enable us to be trusted advisers to our clients.
Shape the organisation and its processes to support broader and deeper client relationships.
Raise our brand profile and broaden the perception of our expertise to support our growth plans.
Delivery of our Growth Acceleration Plan resulting in sustainable double digit revenue growth at sustainable operating margins.
PROGRESS
Launched first iteration of Global Competency Framework Kicked off Future Leaders Training programme Launched Ebiquity Connect Expanded Marketing Effectiveness footprint in Europe and APAC Rolled out Portfolio Digital Launched Total View Attribution Embedded operational tools e.
Salesforce to improve management information Hired a Global Chief Operating Officer Appointed Global Client Partners More press mentions in trade and business publication than ever before e.
FT
Expanded presence at key industry events such as ICOM WFA ISBA ANA ProcureCon Continued growth of Marketing Effectiveness practice in the UK Delivered strong growth in our Contract Compliance business globally
Organising global sales meeting Raising digital skill levels Rollout Phase I of digital paid media measurement tool Optix Grow Marketing Effectiveness internationally Continue expansion of FirmDecisions internationally Harmonise core methodologies used in our Media practice Improve sales forecasts Streamline hiring process Introduce stage gate process for key investments in innovations Publication of thought leadership articles providing insightful and actionable points Rollout a refreshed brand identity across all key brand touchpoints including website Delivery against the milestones published within our Growth Acceleration Plan Launch of marketing analytics and tech services in new markets
Target voluntary attrition rate below 20% Increase proportion of revenue generated from newenhanced products and services Percentage of clients taking two or more productsservices Publish quoted thought leadership pieces Average billings per employee Revenue CAGR of 10% between Medium term underlying operating profit margin target of 1213%
Our talent continues to be highly in demand due to the breadth of experience that it gains through our unique positioning.
There is a risk of an industrywide talent shortage for data scientists in particular as demand by clients agencies internet platforms and publishers increases.
We work hard on a number of initiatives to make Ebiquity a great place to work and foster retention The media landscape is constantly changing resulting in increasing pressure to developrefine products and services faster.
Through evolving our delivery methods and creating product owners we aim to stay highly relevant to our clients Our clients often have complex decentralised management structures requiring considerable investment of time to negotiate global commercial agreements.
We ensure we devote appropriate commercial and senior client facing resource to expedite the negotiation of commercial agreements Inability to capitalise on the opportunities arising from the focus on media transparency Some of the industry trends become less important or are resolved Identifying key talent to enable expansion of Marketing Analytics and Tech businesses could take longer than expected due to scarcity in the market Clients may be slower to respond to issues in media transparency and data driven marketing causing a delay in potential revenue growth.
We leverage our relationships with clients and industry bodies to influence change Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Ebiquity plc Strategic report The focus for our practices in 2018 For each of our three practice areas Media Analytics and Tech we have a clear and distinct plan to drive growth.
In Media we are the global market leader for media performance benchmarking agency selection and contract compliance.
For 2018 we plan to cement our leading position helping our clients to attain the levels of transparency they desire.
In Analytics we will accelerate.
In
2018 we plan to scale and grow across existing and selected new territories as well as across existing and new categories.
We will do this through a combination of our bestinclass integrated modelling engine capable of running more complex models than our competitors through machine learning and through cloudbased data processing of Big Data sets.
And for our Tech practice our strategy is ignite.
This newlycodified practice brings together products and services team members and leadership who were already in the business before the practice was created together with a series of senior hires with strong ad tech martech and media agency backgrounds.
Our combined experience tools and approach is designed to help advertisers secure optimal return on investment on digital advertising and technologies.
We have particular expertise and a growing client base in programmatic.
Our strategy for growth continued creating clarity for our clients Our purpose to be the worlds leading techenabled marketing consultancy 10year ambition 24 Ebiquity plc Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 In summary In Media we help achieve greater transparency of media spend and performance.
In Analytics we help build evidence based marketing programmes rooted in data and analytics.
And in Tech we help deploy the right technology  effectively  to create a unified single customer view.
And so with our purpose and values 10year mission fiveyear goals and strategy in place and active with clear progress against each of our 5Ps and with our company structure reorganising around client needs we are in the right position to ultimately achieve our mission of becoming the trusted adviser of the Chief Marketing
Naturally our approach and offer will continue to evolve as both the media and marketing ecosystems and as such CMO needs change.
In summary Across each of our three practices we help our clients tackle todays critical challenges in marketing delivered through a comprehensive service offering.
To do this we will work as One Ebiquity ensuring that our clients recognise us as one business with uniform capability.
By developing deeper relationships with our clients we introduce them to the full array of products and services we can offer.
By working across practices across geographies and across boundaries we deliver more to our clients and more to their bottom line.
The One Ebiquity mindset encourages a truly holistic view of marketing services.
This enables our clients to ensure that their marketing is strategic marketing designed to optimise the value and utility of their brands to their customers and it will enable us to deliver against our Growth Acceleration Plan.
Clear alwayson adaptable collaborative
Curious informed knowledgeable honest
Our values Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Ebiquity plc Strategic report Client objectives Mazda Spain wanted to understand how its media investments were performing.
As the decision to buy a car is long and complex the analysis needed to show not just impact on sales but impact all along the purchase funnel from web visits to dealershowroom visits and on to final orders.
By knowing what was working and what was not  Mazda was looking to optimise its media buying.
Ebiquity approach We conducted a comprehensive assessment of Mazdas media investment price discounts new car releases competitor activity and PR activations along the whole purchase lifecycle.
Our marketing effectiveness team built bespoke econometric models to identify Mazdas most impactful sales drivers.
We helped the company to deploy the optimal media mix phase spend appropriately and support the right product lines that work hardest for the company overall.
We used our learnings to develop forecasts and simulations to enhance future media planning and decision making.
Outcomes
Our analysis enabled Mazda Spain to understand with absolute clarity that TV advertising is fundamental to driving ROI for them.
Conventional TV advertising was shown to be more effective than programme sponsorship.
And we identified which creative executions were the most effective not only in generating sales for specific models shown but also in driving sales across the portfolio.
By understanding the impact that our media spend has right across the purchase funnel for different models of our cars weve been able to fine tune our media plans with precision.
Econometric modelling is a powerful tool.
Its enabled to do more of what works brilliantly less of what we were already doing more than enough of and to drop altogether whats not relevant or impactful in our category or for our company.
Jos Manuel Loscos Marketing Director Spain Achieved continuous and sustained improvements in ROI from media investments Leveraged halo effects of specific product lines across entire product portfolio Case study Enhancing media investment ROI Strategic report Ebiquity plc 26 Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Client objectives Subway needed to understand the effectiveness of its social media activity.
The marketing leadership team wanted to give the Board a rationale for what they should invest in which channels based on actual social media impact.
And as Subway is a franchised operation the team needed to address franchisee questions about what central marketing delivered through social.
Ebiquity approach We analysed all paid earned and owned social media content generated by and about Subway in the UK and Ireland compared with the other three big players in the category.
We found Subway generated the most positive and neutral sentiment across Twitter and Facebook.
The company also experienced the largest percentage growth in fans and followers on both platforms despite much less offline advertising.
Our Effectiveness team found that TV and radio drove earned media coverage while outofhome had minimal impact.
Outcomes
The analysis of peaks and troughs of activity enabled Subway to plan social better as a properly integrated component of marketing.
It joined up messaging across social and other channels making best use of different channels to optimise engagement Facebook to entertain Twitter to give healthy lifestyle advice and Instagram to feature product and packaging.
This allowed Subway to outperform its competitors on significantly leaner budgets.
Before we assessed the impact of social we found it hard to make a solid business case  to the company or our franchisees about how we were performing and what we should do as a result.
By understanding what topics issues and types of content drive conversation and engagement weve been able to finetune our content and engagement strategies.
Sacha Clark Country Marketing Director at Subway UK and Ireland Achieved bestinclass social media engagement in the quickservice restaurant category Finetuned content strategies to optimise impact of specific channels and platforms Case study Paid earned owned social media modelling Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements 27 Ebiquity plc Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Strategic report Reviewing agencies is a major undertaking and shouldnt be entered lightly or with insufficient time energy and resource.
Its
And a clear and methodical process should be followed giving prospective partners enough time and scope to demonstrate why theyre the right fit  not just for today but for the mediumterm future.
Celine Largy Marketing Director LOral France Identified and appointed new agency partner following bestinclass Agency Selection process Engaged cross functional teams of internal stakeholders from five divisions five departments Case study Agency selection and management Client objectives L Oral France is one of the biggest advertisers in the country and France is one of L Orals top three markets worldwide.
After more than 10 years in partnership with its media agency of record AOR the beauty giant decided to benchmark the service cost performance and thinking it received from its agency against the market.
Ebiquity approach Ebiquity Paris worked with L Oral France to understand motivations for and expectations of agency review.
We interviewed 30 internal stakeholders to shape the tender and review requirements.
We ran workshops with multiple teams in different divisions to design the optimal review process.
Five of the six global media agency groups participated in the Request for Information RFI stage answering 10 critical questions in writing and discussing three questions in a onehour chemistry meeting.
The request for proposals RFP was split into two lots one for all paid media except search the second for search.
Outcomes
L Oral France has now gone through a bestinclass process for AOR and search agency review and secured new partners for both.
The company has confidence that they have ideal partners  not just for today but for several years to come.
Strategic report Ebiquity plc 28 Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 The trainings been a big help and has increased the marketing teams focus on where were spending our media budget one of Britvics biggest annual investments.
Everyone now has far more confidence to ask the right questions especially around value for money on digital.
The session itself was really brought to life and made real by analysing our own historic strategy documents and media plans.
Fiona Graham Senior Capability Manager Britvic Soft Drinks Improved understanding of media planning process across the business Enhanced media ROI through improved knowledge and expertise in all relevant functions Case study Bespoke training in media planning and strategy Client objectives Softdrink manufacturer Britvic runs a broadranging education programme but the companys marketing and insight teams needed to increase their understanding of media planning and strategy to challenge agency recommendations.
Specifically the teams wanted help ensuring that agency plans successfully extended Britvics reach to the broadest possible audience to optimise sales.
Ebiquity approach Our media experts ran a series of workshops with Britvics marketing leadership to develop a bestinclass media planning and strategy training course.
We helped them to plot their vision for better media planning and how to build knowledge across the marketing department.
Britvic has delivered its new course to dozens of marketing and insight colleagues.
The course covers how the agency planning process works with a special focus on digital planning practices.
Real strategy documents and media plans were reviewed to identify improvements and the strength of Britvics own data was also addressed.
The course addresses best practice in briefing agencies what they should expect in return and how to ensure KPIs are applied to track improvements over time.
Outcomes
The Britvic marketing and insight team has established a new working framework with its media agency.
The agency provides planning information in a report format of Britvics design that shows the various media choices and provides full visibility of costs and reach.
Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements 29 Ebiquity plc Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Strategic report Andrew Noble Chief Financial Officer
Chief Financial Officers review
Alternative
Performance Measures In these results we refer to underlying and statutory results as well as other nonGAAP Alternative Performance
Alternative Performance Measures APMs used by the Group are constant currency likeforlike revenue growth underlying operating profit underlying operating margin underlying profit before tax underlying effective rate of tax underlying fully dilutive EPS and underlying operating cash flow conversion.
Underlying results are not intended to replace statutory results but are presented by removing the impact of highlighted items in order to provide a better understanding of the underlying performance of the business.
The above APMs are consistent with how business performance is measured internally by the Group.
Underlying profit is not recognised under IFRS and may not be comparable with underlying profit measures used by other companies.
Highlighted items comprise noncash charges and nonrecurring items which are highlighted in the consolidated income statement as separate disclosure is considered by the Directors to be relevant in understanding the underlying performance of the business.
The noncash charges include share option charges and amortisation of purchased intangibles.
The nonrecurring items include the costs associated with potential acquisitions where formal discussion is undertaken completed acquisitions and their subsequent integration into the Group adjustments to the estimates of contingent consideration on acquired entities asset impairment charges management restructuring and other significant oneoff items.
Costs associated with ongoing market landscaping acquisition identification and early stage discussions with acquisition targets are reported in underlying administrative expenses.
Further detail of highlighted items are set out below as well as within the consolidated income statement and notes 1 and 3 of the financial statements.
Disposal of Advertising Intelligence and Reputation businesses On 13 February 2018 the Company announced the disposal of its Advertising Intelligence business to Nielsen Media Research Limited for consideration of 26 million plus customary adjustments for working capital.
The disposal is subject to certain conditions including approval from the Competition and Markets Authority.
The Directors consider that as at 31 December 2017 the sale of the Advertising Intelligence business did not meet the definition of being highly probable and therefore the division is not reported as a business held for sale in the financial statements.
Performance outside of the US in line with expectations
4.6% revenue growth 6.7% revenue growth excluding the Market Intelligence segment Underlying operating profit margin of 13.8% Underlying diluted EPS of 9.4p 10% increase in proposed dividend to 0.71p per share Underlying cash conversion of 93% 30 Ebiquity plc Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 The Advertising Intelligence business represents in excess of 90% of the revenue and operating profit of the MI segment.
On a proforma basis the impact of the disposal on the 2017 results would be to reduce revenue by 21.9 million with a reduction of operating profit of 4.4 million reflecting the contribution to profit from the business before allocated overheads.
On 19 March 2018 the Company entered into an agreement to sell the trade and assets of its Reputation business to Echo Research Holdings
Completion will take place on 31 March 2018.
The consideration payable is dependent upon the revenue performance of the business during the 12 months following completion.
During 2017 the business contributed 1.2 million of revenue and generated a 0.2 million operating loss.
Acquisitions
On 1 September 2017 the Group completed the acquisition of Digital Balance Pty Digital Balance an independent digital analytics consultancy located in Perth Australia.
The acquisition of Digital Balance further extends the MPO segment in Asia Pacific bringing capabilities in Tech and Analytics.
Digital Balance was acquired for an initial cash consideration of AU475000 in cash.
The maximum total consideration is AU5 million payable in cash depending on the performance of the acquired business up to 31 December 2020.
Digital Balance contributed revenue of 424000 and operating profit 123000 in the period since acquisition.
PandL overview Commentary on segmental revenues are set out within the
Chief Executive Officers report.
Revenues grew to 87.4 million which represents 4.6% revenue growth over 83.6 million recorded over the 12 months ended 31 December 2016 2016.
Revenue grew by 1.2% on a constant currency basis and removing the impact of acquisitions by 0.8% on a constant currency likeforlike basis.
Underlying operating profit was 12.0 million compared with 13.0 million in 2016 reflecting a decrease in underlying operating profit margin from 15.5% to 13.8%.
Operating profit margin declined in both the MPO and MI segments.
Lower margins in the MPO segment reflect investment in the expansion of our Marketing Effectiveness services as set out in the Growth Acceleration Plan  together with weaker revenue performance from our US analytics business.
The MI segment operating profit margin decline reflects both a revenue decline from our projectbased Reputation business and investment in our Portfolio platform within our Advertising Intelligence business.
Statutory operating profit decreased by 2.3 million from 7.8 million in 2016 to 5.5 million in 2017 reflecting a 1.0 million reduction in underlying operating profit and a 1.3 million increase in highlighted items.
Highlighted items increased in 2017 reflecting costs associated with the sale of the Advertising Intelligence business together with severance costs and reorganisation changes.
Highlighted items are set out in more detail below.
Net finance costs were 1.0 million in the year to December 2017 2016 1.1 million the reduction reflects lower average gross debt in 2017 compared with 2016.
Underlying profit before tax was 11.0 million in the year to December 2017 2016 11.8 million.
Reported profit before was 4.5 million in the year to December 2017 2016 6.6 million due to lower underlying operating profit and an increase in highlighted items compared with 2016.
Highlighted items Highlighted items total 6.5 million in the year to December 2017 2016 5.2 million.
Highlighted items comprised the following 2.0 million related to purchased intangible asset amortisation 2016 1.9 million 0.7 million sharebased payment expenses 2016 0.6 million 2.4 million of severance and reorganisation costs including the cost of postearnout management change in China leadership change in France and severance costs across a number of markets in Europe and 1.4 million in relation to acquisition and strategic costs including 1.0 million of costs in relation to the disposal of the Advertising Intelligence business 0.2 million in respect of adjustments to contingent deferred consideration and 0.1 million associated to the acquisition of Digital Balance.
Revenue m Headline financials Operating profit m 13.0 FY2016 FY2016 Diluted EPS pence 9.4 FY2017 11.3 FY2016 87.4 FY2017 12.0 FY2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Ebiquity plc Strategic report
Chief Financial Officers review continued
Taxation
The total tax charge for the year ended December 2017 is 2.0 million FY2016 2.2 million representing a current tax charge of 1.6 million FY2016 1.8 million and a deferred tax charge of 20000 FY2016 0.5 million.
The effective rate of tax on underlying profit before tax for the year ended 31 December 2017 is 26.4% FY2016 21.7%.
The effective rate of tax is increased by a deferred tax liability booked in 2017 of 0.4 million arising from differences between IFRS and German GAAP.
Excluding the impact of the above deferred tax liability the underlying effective tax rate for the year ended 31 December 2017 is 22.6% which is broadly in line with the prior year.
Earnings per share Underlying diluted earnings per share was 9.4p in the year to 31 December 2017 2016 11.3p reflecting a decrease in underlying profit before tax combined with an increase in the effective tax rate to 26.4% 2016 21.7%.
Statutory diluted earnings per share was 2.6p in the year to 31 December 2017 2016 5.2p.
FY2017 FY2016 for the for the year ended year ended 31 December 31 December 2017 2016
Media Value Measurement 51482 47161 Marketing Performance Optimisation 12746 13048 Market Intelligence 23146 23360 Total revenue 87374 83569 Underlying operating profit Media Value Measurement 14037 12124 Marketing Performance Optimisation 1646 3739 Market Intelligence 3163 3902 Central costs 6820 6806 Total underlying operating profit 12026 12959 Highlighted items 6491 5202 Reported operating profit 5535 7757 Net finance costs 1044 1132 Reported profit before tax 4491 6625 Underlying profit before tax 10982 11827 Underlying diluted earnings per share
It is the Boards intention to pay a dividend of 0.71p per share for the 12 months ended 31 December 2017 FY2016 0.65p per share.
This would represent an increase in dividend per share of 10% and would also represent the continuation of a progressive dividend policy which commenced with our maiden dividend paid in October 2015.
The dividend will be recommended as a final dividend at the Companys AGM on 9 May 2018.
If shareholders approve this payment the dividend will be paid on 15 May 2018 to all shareholders who were on the Register of Members at close of business on 12 April 2018.
Equity
During the 12 months to December 2017 397710 shares were issued upon the exercise of employee share options and a further 600000 were issued as deferred consideration for the acquisition of Stratigent LLC.
As a result our share capital increased to 78197461 ordinary shares 31 December 2016 77199751.
Cash conversion Year ended Year ended 31 December 31 December Reported cash from operations 7948 10782 Underlying cash from operations 11203 11342 Underlying operating profit 12026 12959 Cash conversion 93.2% 87.5% 32 Ebiquity plc Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Underlying cash from operations represents the cash flows from operations excluding the impact of highlighted items.
The underlying net cash inflow from operations was 11.2 million in the year ended 31 December 2017 FY2016 11.3 million.
After highlighted items are considered reported net cash inflow from operations for 2017 was 8.0 million FY2016 10.8 million.
Underlying cash conversion has improved over 2016 by 6 percentage points.
We continue to improve policies and processes to further improve the management of working capital.
This will become particularly important following the disposal of the subscription based Advertising Intelligence business.
Net debt and banking facilities 31 December 31 December 2017 2016 Net cash 4325 4600 Bank debt 33250 32750 Net debt 28926 28150 Bank debt in the statement of financial position at 31 December 2017 is shown net of 0.2 million 31 December 2016 0.1 million of loan arrangement fees that have been paid and which are amortised over the life of the facility.
The bank debt stated above excludes these costs.
All bank borrowings are held jointly with Barclays and Royal Bank of Scotland RBS.
The committed facility totalling 45000000 comprises a term loan of 10000000 of which 1250000 remains outstanding at 31 December 2017 31 December 2016 3750000 and a revolving credit facility of 35000000 of which 32000000 was drawn down at 31 December 2017 31 December 2016 29000000.
During the year the Group extended the revolving credit facility through to 30 June 2019 and increased the facility to 35000000.
The term loan remains repayable by 30 June 2018.
During the period the Group continued to trade within each of its banking facilities and associated covenants.
Net debt to EBITDA ratio was 2.10x at 31 December 2017 31 December 2016 1.94x.
Statement of financial position and net assets A summary of the Groups balance sheet as at 31 December 2017 and 31 December 2016 is set out below 31 December 31 December 2017 2016 Goodwill and intangible assets 72440 72079 Other noncurrent assets 3331 3776 Net working capital 12443 10607 Other current liabilities 2014 1855 Other noncurrent liabilities 2288 2522 Deferred consideration 2094 2015 Net debt 28926 28015 Net assets 52982 52055 Net assets as at 31 December 2017 increased by 0.9 million to 53.0 million 2016 52.1 million due to an increase in goodwill and intangible assets of 0.4 million following the acquisition of Digital Balance and an increase in net working capital of 1.8 million resulting from an increase in net trade receivables of 1.7 million.
These increases in asset values were offset by an increase in net debt of 0.9 million.
Outlook
The actions that have been taken in 2017 has positioned the business for faster revenue growth in 2018 and beyond.
With an expectation of a turnaround in performance in the US in 2018 together with continued revenue growth outside of the US we remain confident of delivering against the financial goals we set out in the Growth Acceleration Plan.
By order of the Board Andrew Noble Chief Financial Officer 21 March 2018 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Ebiquity plc Corporate governance Board of Directors The Board of Directors has overall responsibility for the Group and aims to represent the interests of shareholders and provide leadership and control in order to ensure the growth and development of the business.
Andrew Noble Chief Financial Officer Andrew joined Ebiquity early in 2015 as Group Finance Director before becoming Chief Financial Officer in September 2016.
Experience
Having obtained his degree in Politics Philosophy and Economics from Oxford University he joined PwC where he spent four years before joining market research company Synovate where he held a number of finance roles culminating in his appointment as Director of Financial Reporting and Control.
Following the acquisition of Synovate by Ipsos in 2011 he became Global Chief Financial Officer within their marketing division overseeing financial performance and developing strategy.
Michael Higgins NonExecutive Chairman Michael in addition to chairing the Ebiquity Board chairs the Nomination Committee and sits on the Remuneration Committee and the Audit and Risk Committee.
Experience
Michael qualified as an accountant at Price Waterhouse now PwC.
He then worked at Saudi International Bank and Charterhouse before becoming a partner at KPMG in 1996 from which he retired in 2006.
Michael is currently senior independent director of Plant Health Care plc a leading provider of novel patent protected biological products to the global agricultural market and a nonexecutive director of Premier Technical Services Group PLC a niche specialist service provider and nonexecutive Chairman of IPSX UK.
He is an alternate member of the Panel on Takeovers and Mergers on behalf of the Quoted Companies Alliance.
Committees
Morag Blazey Managing Principal Market Intelligence In 2016 Morag took up the role of Managing Principal for Ebiquitys Market Intelligence practice.
Morag is a fellow of the IPA.
Experience
Morag spent more than 20 years in ad agencies as a TV buyer planner and account director.
She became Managing Director of PHD in 1999 and served as CEO from 2006 to 2008.
She assisted PwC and Fishburn Hedges in the development of a communications strategy for the pensions reform bill and worked with the Olympic Delivery Authority before joining Ebiquity in 2009 as International Practice Leader for Advertising Intelligence.
In 2012 Morag became CEO of Ebiquitys UK business and in 2015 she was appointed as an Executive Director.
Michael Karg PhD
Group Chief Executive Officer
Michael joined Ebiquity plc as CEO on 1 January 2016 and is a member of the Nomination
Experience
Michael was previously CEO International for Razorfish the digital business transformation agency of Publicis Groupe and held senior international leadership positions with both Razorfish and Digitas over a 15year career.
A native of Austria he has been based in Boston Paris and London.
He advised clients globally across industries on marketing and digital strategies worked closely with technology partners and led the integration of acquired businesses.
Michael holds a degree in Finance and Accounting and a doctorate in Management from the University in St Gallen Switzerland and was a visiting Fellow at Harvard University from 1999 to 2000.
Committees
34 Ebiquity plc Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Richard Nichols NonExecutive Director Richard is Chairman of Ebiquitys Audit and Risk Committee and also sits on the Nomination Committee.
Experience
Richard is Chief Executive of Instinctif Partners the international business communications consultancy and NonExecutive Chairman of the Digital Innovation Group.
Prior to joining Instinctif Partners Richard was Chief Executive of Huntsworth plc following the merger with Incepta Group plc where he was the Chief Executive and formerly Group Finance
An economics graduate from Cambridge University Richard subsequently qualified as a chartered accountant with Price Waterhouse now PwC in London.
Committees
Julie Baddeley NonExecutive Director Julie is Chairman of Ebiquitys Remuneration Committee and sits on the Nomination
Experience
Julie has served in both executive and nonexecutive capacities on the boards of leading companies in the FTSE100 and FTSE250 as well as a number of major public sector organisations.
She has chaired the remuneration committee of several company boards and been chairman of Harvey Nash plc since June 2013.
She is currently Senior Independent Director of Marshall of Cambridge and a director of Chrysalis VCT plc.
Julie has broad experience of businesses in professional services like Ebiquity and of those in the consumer industry sectors Ebiquity serves including The Woolwich Camelot and Greggs.
She was Associate Fellow at Oxford University Said Business School from 2000 to 2010 having previously run a global team as a partner at Accenture.
Committees
Tom Alexander NonExecutive Director Tom sits on Ebiquitys Nomination Committee Remuneration Committee and Audit and Risk Committee.
Experience
Following senior sales positions with Telia and BT Cellnet Tom founded Virgin Mobile in 1999 and subsequently built the business to revenues of 1 billion and 4.3 million customers in eight years.
He led the companys IPO in 2004 and eventual sale to NTL in 2006.
From 2007 he was Chief Executive Officer of Orange leading its turnaround and subsequent successful merger in 2010 with TMobile to create Everything Everywhere.
After running EE for a further year he left to pursue private equity opportunities and nonexecutive roles.
Tom brings a wealth of international business experience and consumer instinct to Ebiquity.
Committees
Rob Woodward NonExecutive Director Chairman Designate Rob joined the Board as a NonExecutive Director on 1 March 2018 and Chairman
He will succeed Michael Higgins who will retire following the Companys AGM on 9 May 2018.
Rob currently sits on the Remuneration Committee the Audit and Risk Committee and the Nomination Committee.
Experience
Prior to joining Ebiquity Rob was CEO of STV Group plc for nearly 11 years where he led their successful transformation into a preeminent digital media group and oversaw a dramatic increase in shareholder value.
Prior to STV Rob was Commercial Director at Channel 4 Television for four years and was previously a Managing Director with UBS Corporate Finance and the lead partner for Deloittes TMT Industry Group in Europe.
He is currently Chairman of the AIMlisted data services provider Blancco Technology Group plc.
Committees
Audit and Risk Committee Nomination Committee Remuneration Committee Denotes Chairperson Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Ebiquity plc Corporate governance Corporate governance report Chairmans governance overview I am pleased to present the corporate governance report for the year ended 31 December 2017.
The corporate governance report describes the framework for corporate governance and internal control that the Directors have established.
Ebiquity is committed to robust standards of corporate governance which are appropriate to the nature and size of the business.
Corporate governance code As a company listed on AIM Ebiquity is not required to comply with the UK Corporate Governance Code but considers the UK Code as part of its overall corporate governance strategy taking into account the Groups size and complexity.
Ebiquity seeks to comply with the Corporate Governance Code for Small and MidSize Quoted Companies 2013 produced by the Quoted Companies Alliance the QCA Code.
The Quoted Companies Alliance is the membership organisation which represents the interests of small and midsize quoted companies of which Ebiquity is a member.
The QCA Code contains minimum disclosure requirements for a company to meet in order for that company to state that it complies with the QCA
The Directors are of the opinion that the Company complies with these minimum disclosure obligations save to the extent referred to in the report.
My role as Chairman It is my principal responsibility as Chairman to ensure that the Board is effective in interrogating approving and monitoring the Companys direction and strategy.
As Chairman I am also responsible in consultation with the Company Secretary for ensuring proper information is supplied to the Board in a timely fashion that Board meetings are conducted effectively and that proper debate is had at Board meetings.
We acknowledge that shareholders look to the Board to promote the longterm success of the Company and as Chairman I recognise it is my role to provide the leadership to the Board to do so.
Michael Higgins
21 March 2018 We are committed to maintaining appropriate standards of corporate governance across the Group to complement our aim to deliver longterm success on behalf of our stakeholders.
Michael Higgins
36 Ebiquity plc Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Board of Directors Role of the Board The Board is responsible to shareholders for the strategic direction and proper management of the affairs of the Group.
The Directors are also collectively responsible for acting in the way which they consider in good faith is most likely to promote the success of the Company for the benefit of Ebiquitys shareholders as a whole.
In doing so the Directors have regard amongst other matters to the interests of the Companys employees and the need to foster the Companys business relationships with suppliers customers and other stakeholders.
A statement of the Directors responsibilities with regards to the annual report and financial statements is set out on page 49.
Composition of the Board and roles of the Directors Nick Manning stood down as a Director of the Company on 31 December 2017.
On 1 March 2018 Rob Woodward joined the Board as a NonExecutive Director and Chairman Designate.
He will succeed Michael Higgins who will retire as Chairman following the AGM on 9 May 2018.
The Board of Directors now comprises an independent NonExecutive Chairman four further independent NonExecutive Directors and three Executive Directors.
Michael Higgins independent NonExecutive Chairman is a qualified chartered accountant.
He brings to the Board significant experience of advising smaller quoted companies and is a director of a number of such companies.
The Directors are of the view that Michael Higgins retains his independence notwithstanding that he chairs the Board.
Michael Karg PhD Group Chief Executive Officer is responsible for setting longterm strategy developing appropriate annual business plans agreeing management KPIs and leading the Executive Directors and the senior Executive team in the daytoday running of the Groups business including chairing the management committees and communicating their decisions recommendations to the Board.
He is also responsible for shareholder communication and ongoing relationships with investors.
Andrew Noble Chief Financial Officer is responsible for the Groups worldwide functions in finance treasury and taxation.
He has responsibility for the Groups finance systems accounting policies and controls.
Andrew also works closely with the practice principals regional managing directors and finance leaders across Ebiquity.
Morag Blazey Managing Principal Market Intelligence leads the Market Intelligence capability globally.
Her principal responsibilities are to raise Ebiquitys profile drive renewals and new business and develop and execute service and product developments and growth strategies.
In light of the Companys announcement that it is selling its Advertising Intelligence business Morag is part of this business and will transfer with the business.
Richard Nichols independent NonExecutive Director is a qualified chartered accountant.
His previous experience includes serving as Finance Director and Chief Executive Officer of a number of listed and private companies.
Richard is currently Chief Executive Officer of Instinctif Partners who provide Ebiquity with financial PR advice.
Richard is not part of the Instinctif team which advises Ebiquity and in the event that the Board formally discusses Instinctifs instruction by the Company Richard would recuse himself from those discussions.
Accordingly the Board considers Richard to be independent.
Julie Baddeley independent NonExecutive Director has significant experience of serving on the boards of listed companies both as an executive and as a nonexecutive director and of serving on and chairing board committees.
Julie has experience across industry sectors including in professional services organisations such as Accenture.
She is currently chairman of Harvey Nash plc which is listed on AIM.
Julie brings valuable governance experience to Ebiquity.
Tom Alexander independent NonExecutive Director has enjoyed a highly successful career in the telecoms industry.
The commercialism and business instinct developed by Tom during his career is of great value to the Board.
The Board also draws upon Toms experience of an industry undergoing rapid technological change in guiding Ebiquitys management through similar changes in the sectors in which the Company operates.
Rob Woodward independent NonExecutive Director and Chairman Designate brings a wealth of Boardlevel experience to Ebiquity.
He was CEO of STV Group plc for nearly 11 years and is currently Chairman of the AIMlisted data services provider Blancco Technology Group plc.
Prior to STV Rob was Commercial Director at Channel 4 for four years and previously a Managing Director for UBS Corporate Finance.
Further biographical details regarding the Directors are contained on pages 34 and 35.
Each of the NonExecutive Directors has a written letter of appointment with the Company.
These are available for inspection on Ebiquitys website.
Each of the Executive Directors has a written service agreement with the
None of these service agreements entitles a director to receive more than six months notice terminating hisher employment.
Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Ebiquity plc Corporate governance Corporate governance report continued Matters reserved for the Board As part of good governance there are certain matters which are not appropriate to be delegated to management or a committee of the Board and should be reserved for consideration by the Board as a whole.
The Board has formally approved a written list of such matters which is available on Ebiquitys website and which include approving the annual budget and quarterly reforecasts changes to the Groups capital structure approving the Companys dividend policy reviewing nonroutine regulatory news service announcements made by the Company and approving material contracts to be entered into by the Group.
Board meetings During the year the Board met formally on 10 occasions.
In addition there were a small number of meetings convened on short notice to consider ad hoc matters.
The Board receives monthly management accounts and other relevant information as appropriate in advance of each Board meeting.
This information is made available electronically via an online Board portal.
Directors are able to access this information at any time including following Board meetings.
There are a number of standing agenda items reviewed by the Board at each regular Board meeting including a business update current trading and outlook.
Other items are considered by the Board as appropriate including as a minimum an annual review of the Companys governance arrangements.
Detailed minutes are taken of all Board meetings.
Minutes are circulated to the Board and approved at the following Board meeting.
Advisers to the Board and its committees The Board seeks advice from external advisers including legal tax and financial advisers on various matters as and when appropriate.
The
Company Secretary attends all Board meetings and is available to advise on any corporate governance issues which may arise.
The Companys auditors PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP attend meetings of the Audit and Risk Committee.
Directors may take independent professional advice at the Companys expense as and when necessary to support the performance of their duties as Directors of the Company.
Risk management
The Board retains ultimate control and direction over appropriate strategic financial organisational and compliance issues.
The Board has put in place an organisational structure with defined lines of responsibility.
The Company has adopted an authority matrix which sets out the delegation of authority to individual business units and members of staff.
The internal control system put in place by the Company is designed to provide reasonable assurance against material misstatement or loss.
Commercial risks are an inherent part of business and as such the internal control system cannot provide absolute assurance against these risks.
There is an internal Risk Committee which regularly meets to review existing risks and discuss new risks.
The output of this is fed into the Audit and Risk Committee of the Board.
Board committees The Board has constituted several committees to help it in the performance of its functions.
The principal committees are the Audit and Risk Committee the Remuneration Committee and the Nomination
The roles of these committees are set out below.
Audit and Risk Committee The Audit and Risk Committee which meets at least three times a year is chaired by Richard Nichols.
The Audit and Risk Committee currently comprises Richard Nichols Michael Higgins Rob Woodward and Tom Alexander.
The
Board considers Richard Nichols to have recent and relevant financial experience.
Richard is a qualified chartered accountant and has served as the Finance Director and Chief Executive Officer of listed and private companies.
Richard currently serves as the Chief Executive Officer of a privateequity backed company.
The purpose of the Audit and Risk Committee is to ensure the preservation of good financial practices throughout the Group to monitor that controls are in force to ensure the integrity of financial information to review the interim and annual financial statements to assess the adequacy and effectiveness of the Companys risk management systems and consider the Groups risks and to provide a line of communication between the Board and the external auditors.
The Audit and Risk Committee is responsible for reviewing the performance of the external auditors on an annual basis and for agreeing the scope of their work.
The Audit and Risk Committee also monitors the level of nonaudit work conducted by the external auditors to ensure that independence and objectivity are safeguarded.
Details of nonaudit fees paid to the external auditors are set out in note 4 to the consolidated financial statements.
The Audit and Risk Committee report can be found on pages 40 and 41.
38 Ebiquity plc Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Remuneration Committee The Remuneration Committee which meets at least twice a year is chaired by Julie Baddeley.
The Remuneration Committee currently comprises Julie Baddeley Michael Higgins Rob Woodward and Tom Alexander.
The Remuneration Committee is responsible for the Executive Directors remuneration and other benefits and Management committees Additionally and not formal committees of the Board the Companys management has constituted a number of executive committees which comprise the principal vehicles for directing the Groups business at an operational level. share options.
The Remuneration Committee report
Nomination Committee The Nomination Committee is chaired by Michael Higgins.
The Nomination Committee currently comprises
The Executive Directors meet regularly with institutional shareholders to discuss the Companys performance and future prospects.
The views of institutional shareholders as presented at these meetings are reported by the Executive Directors to the Board.
Michael Higgins Rob Woodward Richard Nichols Julie Baddeley Tom Alexander and Michael Karg.
The Nomination Committee meets as necessary and has responsibility for nominating candidates to the Board for appointment as Directors bearing in mind the need for diversity and a broad representation of skills across the Board.
An important vehicle for communications with private shareholders is the Companys Annual General Meeting.
The information displayed on the Investor Relations pages of the Companys website is regularly refreshed in order to provide accurate and uptodate information to all shareholders.
Attendance at meetings Details of the Directors attendance at each regular Board and Committee meeting in the year is as set out below number of meetings attended by each Directorthe maximum number of meetings each Director was entitled to attend Audit and
Risk Remuneration Nomination Michael Higgins 1010 33 44 11 Michael Karg PhD 1010   11 Andrew Noble Nick Manning Morag Blazey Richard Nichols 1010 33  11 Julie Baddeley 1010  44 11 Tom Alexander 1010 33 44 11 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Ebiquity plc Corporate governance Audit and Risk Committee report going concern the Committee reviews in particular managements forecasts of the Groups performance including performance against the covenants contained in the credit agreement with Barclays and RBS presentation of highlighted items the Committee reviews the nature and quantum of the items proposed by management to be classified as highlighted to ensure they are consistent with the Groups accounting policies capitalisation of intangibles the Committee reviews the nature and quantum of the items proposed by management to be capitalised together with the period over which the capitalised items will be amortised to ensure they are consistent with the Groups accounting policies revenue recognition the Committee reviews the quantum of accrued deferred income and the judgement applied by management in calculating revenue recognition cut off.
The Committee reviews the quality of evidence available to support revenue recognition.
The
Committee reviewed the impact of IFRS15 on the Groups revenue recognition policy sale of Advertising Intelligence business the Committee reviews the disclosure relating to the sale of the Advertising Intelligence business in relation to whether the assets of the business should be treated as held for sale and the carrying value of goodwill and taxation the Committee reviews the significant components of the tax charge and provision and the overall effective tax rate of the Group as a whole.
Introduction
The Audit and Risk Committee is a key component of the Groups governance framework.
The Board has delegated to the Committee oversight of the Groups financial reporting and the Groups risk management process which aims to identify and mitigate significant risks.
All of the members of the Committee are independent NonExecutive Directors with a combination of accounting financial and commercial experience.
The Board considers Richard Nichols who chairs the Committee to have recent and relevant financial experience.
Richard is a chartered accountant with significant financial and commercial experience in both listed and unquoted companies.
Richards biography and appointments are set out on page 35.
The Committee met on three occasions during the year.
The attendance of its members is set out in the table on page 39.
Meetings of the Committee are commonly comprised of three sections.
The first section of meetings of the Committee are also normally attended by the Group Chief
Executive Officer the Chief Financial
Officer the Company Secretary and other members of the senior management together with representatives from the external auditors PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP PwC which ensures the Committee and the external auditors have access to all financial and operational knowledge.
Subsequently Committee members also meet with the external auditors without the Executive Directors and other senior management in attendance which ensures that the Committee maintains an independent view.
Finally there is a section of the meeting attended solely by the members of the Committee.
Role and responsibility of the Audit and Risk Committee The Committees terms of reference can be found on the Companys website.
The principal responsibilities of the Committee include monitoring the integrity of the Groups financial statements including a review of significant financial reporting issues and judgements reviewing the external auditors independence and objectivity the effectiveness of the external audit process and the appointment reappointment and removal of the external auditors reviewing the Groups financial controls and other internal reporting systems reviewing progress on implementing control improvements and keeping under review the adequacy and effectiveness of the Companys risk management systems.
Activities during the year The key matters the Committee considered during the year are listed below.
In respect of the Groups financial statements and interim accounts the assessment of the carrying value of goodwill and intangible assets the Committee assesses on a twiceyearly basis whether there are any indicators of impairment to the carrying value of any cashgenerating unit.
The
Committee reviewed the key assumptions in the assessment of goodwill and the sensitivity of these assumptions and impact on the carrying value of goodwill and intangible assets.
On this basis the Committee makes recommendations to the Board in this regard 40 Ebiquity plc Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 In respect of risk management the Committee undertook significant work reviewing the output of managements exercise preparing a register of the principal risks relevant to the Group and its business together with the mitigation steps taken to date by management and planned to be undertaken in the future the Committee reviewed and approved the risk management framework prepared by management which outlined how risk would be identified and managed across the business and the Committee included risk as a standing agenda item at each meeting for management to update the Committee on significant changes to the risk register and mitigating actions.
With regard to Ebiquitys external auditors the Committees principal activities were to approve the terms of engagement and fees to be paid to the external auditors approve the annual audit plan review the findings of the auditors and managements response and evaluate the independence and objectivity of the external auditors.
External auditors PwC have been the external auditors of the Group since 2012 when a full tender process was carried out.
The original audit partner served from PwCs appointment until completion of the audit for the year ended 31 December 2016 when he rotated off the audit.
A new partner was appointed for the audit of the Companys financial statements for the year commenced 1 January 2017.
A review of PwCs independence is carried out each year before a recommendation is made to the Board to propose PwC for reelection at the
In assessing PwCs independence the Committee received confirmation that in PwCs professional judgement PwC is independent within the meaning of relevant UK regulatory and professional requirements.
Provision of nonaudit services The Committee reviews with management the engagement of the external auditors for nonaudit services and the level of associated nonaudit fees.
Details of fees paid to PwC during the year are outlined in note 4 to the financial statements.
Nonaudit fees of approximately 46000 were paid to PwC during the year in connection with Group restructuring activities.
The Committee does not consider that auditor independence has been impacted by this matter.
Richard Nichols Chair of the Audit and Risk Committee 21 March 2018 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Ebiquity plc Corporate governance
Remuneration Committee report
Remuneration policy The Board recognises the role of appropriate remuneration in attracting and retaining people with the industryleading skills knowledge and experience needed to develop and grow the business and incentivising them to perform.
The Remuneration Committee has maintained the policy set out in the annual report for the period ended 31 December 2015 which is used to determine Executive Directors remuneration and as a guide for the Executive Committee in setting organisationwide remuneration.
In summary the policy is as follows
Objective and link to strategy Operation Opportunity Performance conditions and assessment Base salary Provides an appropriate level of fixed income commensurate with the role to attract and retain the individual with the required capability.
Militates against excessive risktaking andor focus on shortterm metrics by establishing sufficient balance against variable remuneration elements.
Paid monthly.
Used as basis for pension contributions and performancerelated pay eligibility.
Reviewed annually normally effective 1 April.
Set at role commencement.
Updated via review against market comparators as needed.
The Committee has not set a maximum salary.
The Committee ensures base salaries are equitable across all variables.
The Committee aims to maintain alignment between increases for the Directors and the wider workforce.
It retains discretion to deviate in order to address specific circumstances for example but not limited to an increase in the individuals scope and responsibilities and the need to retain specialist expertise within a competitive talent market.
Not applicable.
Benefits including pension Provides the necessary current and future health and security for the individual and their dependents to enable the individual to focus maximum attention on their role.
Private medical life and critical illness insurances.
Defined contributions to personal pension.
Other benefits as considered appropriate by the
The Committee has not set maximum levels for benefits.
It aims to ensure that individual arrangements for Directors are in line with policies applicable to the wider workforce.
Not applicable.
Performance bonus Incentivises achievement of shortterm financial and strategic performance goals.
Ontarget expectations expressed as a percentage of salary relative to role.
Group financial targets set annually in relation to management expectations.
Personal goals are set annually for each Executive Director in relation to strategy.
Individual participation is set with respect to the role performed.
Individual ontarget expectation capped at 50% of base salary.
Maximum award of 200% of ontarget amount in any one year i.
Director.
Measured over a oneyear period.
Minimum thresholds of the Groups annual financial performance determine the extent to which individuals may attain ontarget expectation which is also judged on individual performance against personal goals.
LongTerm
Incentives
Incentivises longerterm growth and value creation through shareholder returns Standard LTIP with nominal price options subject to a minimum threeyear vesting period with performance conditions.
Extent of individual awards determined with reference to role performance and perceived future value.
Awards made in respect of each financial year typically do not exceed 100% of salary subject to a maximum of 200% of salary in exceptional circumstances.
Uses appropriate targets for growth in earnings per share andor total shareholder return over vesting period.
This policy reflects the Companys current stage of development and anticipated growth and balances risk and reward.
42 Ebiquity plc Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Directors exercised share options during the year FY2016 nil.
The highest paid Director exercised no share options FY2016 nil.
The Remuneration Committee consulted with its largest institutional investors during 201617 with the intention of amending its LongTerm Incentive LTI plans to better align Directors and other Executives interests with those of shareholders and with the longerterm strategy of the Group.
The Company did not issue LTIs to executives during 2016 or 2017 due to this ongoing consultation with shareholders and the strategic review which resulted in the decision to sell the Advertising Intelligence business.
The Company was unable to attain consensus amongst its major institutional investors and  given the need to retain and incentivise management  has since granted LTIs to Executives under the previously established executive incentive plan details of which were shared with major institutional shareholders and are presented below.
The Remuneration Committee relies from timetotime on advice and benchmarking from third parties in setting specifics of the Executive Directors remuneration.
Directors remuneration in the year ended 31 December 2017 FY2017 FY2016 year ended year ended 31 December 31 December
2017 2016 Salaryfees benefits Bonus Total Total
Michael Karg PhD Andrew Noble Nick Manning Morag Blazey Andrew Beach Michael Greenlees
Michael Higgins Richard Nichols Julie Baddeley Tom Alexander 1295 44  1339 1581 Michael Karg was in receipt of a 120000 signon bonus in the financial year ended 2016.
Andrew Noble was appointed as Chief Financial Officer and a Director with effect from 9 September 2016.
Andrew Beach previously Chief Financial Officer left the Company on 14 October 2016.
Michael Greenlees previously Chief Executive Officer left the Company on 30 April 2016.
LongTerm Incentives During the year a total of 79425 share options that were previously granted to Directors under the Companys Executive Incentive Plan vested FY2016 311355 as follows Beneficiary Grant date Volume
Performance conditions Achievement vs condition % vested
Morag Blazey 15 May 2014 150000 Growth in adjusted diluted EPS vs 201314 11.2pshare vs 10.7p  4.12% compound growth 21.18% Nick Manning 15 May 2014 200000 42360 Andrew Noble 15 May 2014 25000 5295 During the fiscal period no options were granted to any Directors under the Groups Executive Incentive Plan FY2016 nil.
The totals above are inclusive of annual performance bonuses FY2016 8000.
Directors were eligible for cash bonuses as a percentage of base salary dependent on individual and Company performance against established financial targets in excess of analyst expectations.
No Director was a member of a Company pension scheme FY2016 nil.
Contributions totalling 26301 FY2016 28127 were made to Directors private pension schemes 14010 to the highest paid Director FY2016 14000 during the year.
Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Ebiquity plc Corporate governance Remuneration Committee report continued Share options have been granted to Directors since the period end in respect of the financial years 2016 and 2017 when no LTIs were granted to the executive management.
These were as follows Beneficiary Grant date Volume
Vesting
Date
Michael Karg 13 February 2018 350000 Growth in adjusted diluted EPS over fiveyear period to 31 December 2020 vs 2015 4%20% vesting 8%60% vesting 10%100% vesting.
A quarter of the total may vest early if Total Shareholder Return from 1 January 2016 31 December 2018 is in top quartile of AIM Media Index.
30 April Andrew Noble 13 February 2018 150000 Michael Karg 13 February 2018 350000 Growth in adjusted diluted EPS over fiveyear period to 31 December 2021 vs 2015 4%20% vesting 8%60% vesting 10%100% vesting.
A quarter of the total may vest early if Total Shareholder Return from 1 January 2017 31 December 2019 is in top quartile of AIM Media Index.
30 April Andrew Noble 13 February 2018 150000 Gender pay reporting The Company has published and reported its UK business Gender Pay Gap for the first time under the UK Governments new reporting guidelines in relation to the snapshot date of 5 April 2017 and the year to that date.
This is available on our website at httpssitemediaebiquitygenderpaygap. df.
Julie Baddeley Chair of the Remuneration Committee 21 March 2018 Termination payments to Directors One Director Nick Manning left the Company in the year ended 31 December 2017 and has since been paid six months pay in lieu of notice and pension entitlements 150000 and an exgratia termination payment of 50000 2016 no directors nil.
Implementation of remuneration policy in 2018 The Executive Directors remuneration for the year that commenced on 1 January 2018 includes base salary and benefits and an annual cash bonus in line with the Companys remuneration policy.
The target bonus is 50% of base salary for the Group CEO and 30% for the other Executive Directors.
Each individual must achieve the personal performance targets KPIs set for them by the Board and the Company must achieve its target levels of proforma i. theoretical bonus.
Thresholds below target levels of revenue minimum 97.5% of budget and operating profit minimum 90% of operating profit postbonus have been set to allow for prorata payment of bonuses at a level which protects operating profit margins and overall Group performance.
Each Director has the potential to achieve up to a maximum of 200% of their theoretical target bonus as a result of exceptional individual and Company performance.
44 Ebiquity plc Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Directors report The Directors present their report and the audited consolidated financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017.
Ebiquity plc is incorporated in England and Wales under registered number Its registered address and principal office is at CityPoint One Ropemaker Street London EC2Y 9AW.
The Company is the ultimate parent of the Group.
Its overseas operations are subsidiaries see note 12.
Future developments The future developments of the Group are considered in the strategic report on pages 2 to 33.
Dividends
The Board is recommending the payment of a final dividend of 0.71p per share for the year ended 31 December 2017.
If shareholders approve this payment at the AGM on 9 May 2018 the dividend will be paid on 15 May 2018 to all shareholders who were on the Register of Members at close of business on 12 April 2018.
Research and development The Group continues to invest in the development of products.
During the period a total of 1.2 million was capitalised in relation to development projects.
This has resulted in the development of a number of new products and services.
Political donations and political expenditure No political donations were made and no political expenditure was incurred in the period 2016 nil.
Modern Slavery Act 2015 Ebiquitys statement regarding the Modern Slavery Act 2015 can be viewed on its website site.
Acquisitions
On 1 September 2017 the Group completed the acquisition of Digital Balance Pty Digital Balance an independent digital analytics consultancy located in Perth Australia.
Digital Balance is one of a small number of consultancies who are certified sales and implementation partners of both Google and Adobe.
Digital Balance will provide an important extension to Ebiquitys digital analytics services in Australia.
Digital Balance was acquired for an initial cash consideration of AU475000 in cash.
The maximum total consideration is AU5000000 payable in cash depending on the performance of the acquired business up to 31 December 2020.
Events after the reporting period On 13 February 2018 the Company announced the disposal of its Advertising Intelligence business to Nielsen Media Research Limited for consideration of 26 million plus customary adjustments for working capital.
The disposal is subject to certain conditions including approval from the Competition and Markets Authority CMA.
Completion is anticipated to take place during the second quarter of 2018 assuming the CMA provides clearance following its highlevel Phase 1 examination.
In the event the CMA should instead refer the transaction for a more detailed Phase 2 investigation then Completion is unlikely to take place before the fourth quarter of 2018.
On 19 March 2018 the Company entered into an agreement to sell the trade and assets of its Reputation business to Echo Research Holdings
Completion will take place on 31 March 2018.
The consideration payable is dependent upon the revenue performance of the business during the 12 months following completion.
During 2017 the business contributed 1.2 million of revenue and generated a 0.2 million operating loss.
Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Ebiquity plc Corporate governance Directors report continued Directors and Directors interests The Directors in office during the period and until the date of this report were as follows Michael Higgins NonExecutive Chairman Rob Woodward NonExecutive Director and Chairman Designate Michael Karg PhD Executive Director Chief Executive Officer Andrew Noble Executive Director Chief Financial Officer Nick Manning Executive Director Chief Strategy Officer Morag Blazey Executive Director Managing Principal Market Intelligence Richard Nichols NonExecutive Director Julie Baddeley NonExecutive Director Tom Alexander NonExecutive Director Nick Manning stood down as a Director on 31 December 2017.
Mark Sanford General Counsel acts as the Company Secretary to the Board and its Committees.
The beneficial interests of Directors who were Directors at the period end in the ordinary shares of the Company and options to purchase such shares at the beginning and end of the financial period comprised 31 December 2017 31 December 2016
Ordinary
Michael Higgins 64500  64500 Michael Karg 500000  500000 Andrew Noble 40295  60000 Morag Blazey 483199  601429 Richard Nichols 100000  100000 Julie Baddeley Tom Alexander No Director has any direct interest in the shares of any subsidiary company between 31 December 2017 and the date of this report.
Michael Karg has been awarded options over a further 700000 ordinary shares and Andrew Noble has been awarded options over a further 300000 ordinary shares.
Further information about the Directors interests is provided in the Remuneration Committee report on pages 42 to 43.
46 Ebiquity plc Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Directors thirdparty and pension scheme indemnity provisions The Company purchased and maintained throughout the period and up to the date of this report directors and officers liability insurance in respect of its Directors and officers and those of its subsidiaries and a deed if indemnity is in place between the Company and each of the
There were no pension scheme indemnity provisions in place during the period.
Employees
Ebiquity is committed to the continuous development of its employees.
The
Groups employees are integral to the success of the business and as a result the Group pursues employment practices which are designed to attract retain and develop this talent to ensure the Group retains its market leading position with motivated and satisfied employees.
The Group has continued this year with its employee engagement programme initiated in 2011 measuring engagement levels and drivers through an annual survey and taking actions to further develop the leadership and organisation on the back of these findings.
During 2017 the Company launched the Future Leaders programme which was created to ensure that the Group develops a pipeline of the leaders of tomorrow and supports the careers of highpotential individuals.
We also developed and deployed a Global Competency Framework which is supporting our annual Talent Review process and the continuous development of our peoples behaviours skills and knowledge.
The Group has continued its practice of using formal and informal communication channels to provide employees with the information they need to understand and achieve the objectives of the Group and to keep employees informed of matters affecting them as employees and the financial and economic factors affecting the performance of the
The Group seeks to recruit develop and employ throughout the organisation suitably qualified capable and experienced people irrespective of sex age race disability religion or belief marital or civil partnership status or sexual orientation.
The Group gives full and fair consideration to all applications for employment made by people with disabilities having regard to their particular aptitudes and abilities.
Where existing employees become disabled it is the Groups policy to provide continuing employment wherever practicable in the same or an alternative position and to provide appropriate training.
It is the policy of the Group that training career development and promotion opportunities should be available to all employees.
Employees are encouraged to own shares in the Company and many employees are shareholders andor hold options under the Companys share option schemes.
Financial instruments The Groups principal financial instruments comprise bank loans and cash.
The main purpose of these financial instruments is to provide finance for the Groups operations.
The Group has various other financial assets and liabilities such as trade receivables and trade payables which arise directly from its operations.
The operations of the Group generate cash and the planned growth of activities is cash generative.
Full details of financial instruments are included in note 24 to the financial statements.
Substantial shareholdings At the date of this report the Companys issued share capital consisted of 78367690 ordinary shares of 25p each and a total of 74167690 voting rights.
The Ebiquity plc 2010 Employee Benefit Trust the EBT held 4200000 issued ordinary shares to satisfy awards for the Companys senior management team.
At the date of this report these awards had not been exercised.
The trustee has agreed not to vote the ordinary shares held by it.
As such 4200000 ordinary shares are treated as not carrying voting rights.
At the date of this report the following had notified the Company that they held more than 3% of the Companys ordinary share capital other than the shareholdings held by Directors and the EBT.
No other person has reported an interest of more than 3% in the Companys ordinary shares.
Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Ebiquity plc Corporate governance Directors report continued AGM notice The notice of the Companys Annual General Meeting accompanies this document and is also available for inspection on the Companys website.
Going concern The Board is responsible for considering whether it is appropriate to prepare the financial statements on a going concern basis.
After making appropriate enquiries the Board concluded that the Group has adequate resources to continue in operation for the foreseeable future and operate within banking facilities and the covenants therein.
Furthermore the anticipated proceeds from the sale of the Advertising Intelligence business would allow the Group to repay a significant proportion of its outstanding bank facility.
For these reasons the Group continues to adopt the going concern basis in preparing the financial statements.
Independent auditors and disclosure of information to auditors All of the current Directors have taken all the steps that they ought to have taken to make themselves aware of any information needed by the Groups auditors for the purposes of their audit and to establish that the auditors are aware of that information.
The Directors are not aware of any relevant audit information of which the auditors are unaware.
The auditors PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP have indicated their willingness to continue in office and a resolution that they be reappointed will be proposed at the Annual General Meeting.
By order of the Board Mark Sanford Company Secretary 21 March 2018 Financial instruments continued Substantial shareholdings continued Number of % of issued % of total
Artemis Investment Management 12142282 15.49% 16.37% T Rowe Price Global Investments 8557742 10.92% 11.54% Kabouter Management 8093228 10.33% 10.91% JO Hambro Capital Management 7384944 9.42% 9.96% Invesco Perpetual 5374876 6.86% 7.25% Herald Investment Management 5341125 6.82% 7.20% Legal and General Investment Management 5139200 6.56% 6.93% Hargreave Hale 3992500 5.09% 5.38% 48 Ebiquity plc Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 The Directors are responsible for preparing the annual report and the financial statements in accordance with applicable law and regulations.
Company law requires the Directors to prepare financial statements for each financial year.
Under that law the Directors have prepared the Group financial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and the parent company financial statements in accordance with United Kingdom Generally Accepted Accounting Practice United Kingdom Accounting Standards comprising Financial Reporting Standard 101 Reduced Disclosure Framework FRS 101 and applicable law.
Under company law the Directors must not approve the financial statements unless they are satisfied that they give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Group and the Company and of the profit or loss of the Group for that period.
In preparing these financial statements the Directors are required to select suitable accounting policies and then apply them consistently make judgements and accounting estimates that are reasonable and prudent state whether IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and applicable UK Accounting Standards comprising FRS 101 have been followed subject to any material departures disclosed and explained in the Group and parent company financial statements respectively and prepare the financial statements on the going concern basis unless it is inappropriate to presume that the Company will continue in business.
The Directors are responsible for keeping adequate accounting records that are sufficient to show and explain the Companys transactions and disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the financial position of the Company and enable them to ensure that the financial statements comply with the Companies Act 2006.
They are also responsible for safeguarding the assets of the Company and the Group and hence for taking reasonable steps for the prevention and detection of fraud and other irregularities.
The Directors are responsible for the maintenance and integrity of the Companys website.
Legislation in the United Kingdom governing the preparation and dissemination of financial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
Statement of Directors responsibilities Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Ebiquity plc Financial statements Basis for opinion We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing UK ISAs UK and applicable law.
Our responsibilities under ISAs UK are further described in the Auditors responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements section of our report.
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion.
Independence
We remained independent of the group in accordance with the ethical requirements that are relevant to our audit of the financial statements in the UK which includes the FRCs Ethical Standard as applicable to listed entities and we have fulfilled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with these requirements. the engagement team.
These matters and any comments we make on the results of our procedures thereon were addressed in the context of our audit of the financial statements as a whole and in forming our opinion thereon and we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters.
This is not a complete list of all risks identified by our audit.
Report on the audit of the group financial statements
In our opinion Ebiquity plcs group financial statements the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the groups affairs as at 31 December 2017 and of its profit and cash flows for the year then ended have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006.
The scope of our audit As part of designing our audit we determined materiality and assessed the risks of material misstatement in the financial statements.
In particular we looked at where the directors made subjective judgements for example in respect of significant accounting estimates that involved making assumptions and considering future events that are inherently uncertain.
As in all of our audits we also addressed the risk of management override of internal controls including evaluating whether there was evidence of bias by the directors that represented a risk of material misstatement due to fraud.
Our audit approach
We have audited the financial statements included within the Annual Report and Financial Statements the Annual Report which comprise the consolidated statement of financial position as at 31 December 2017 the consolidated income statement and statement of comprehensive income the consolidated statement of cash flows and the consolidated statement of changes in equity for the year then ended and the notes to the financial statements which include a description of the significant accounting policies.
Key audit matters Key audit matters are those matters that in the auditors professional judgement were of most significance in the audit of the financial statements of the current period and include the most significant assessed risks of material misstatement whether or not due to fraud identified by the auditors including those which had the greatest effect on the overall audit strategy the allocation of resources in Independent auditors report to the members of Ebiquity plc
Scope
Key Audit
Materiality
Overall group materiality 547000 2016 587000 based on 5% of profit before tax and highlighted items.
Eight reporting units were audited as full scope entities.
These units were located in the U.
Germany USA and Australia.
The USA entities in scope were visited and audited by the group engagement team.
Australian and German components were audited by local audit teams.
Risk of impairment of goodwill and intangible assets.
Accounting for contract revenue recognition.
50 Ebiquity plc Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Key audit matter How our audit addressed the key audit matter Risk of impairment of goodwill and intangible assets We focused on this area because managements assessment of the carrying value of goodwill and intangible assets involves complex and subjective judgements about the future results of the business.
No impairment was recognised during the year.
We focused on those Cash Generating Units CGUs we considered to carry more judgement because of current year losses or historical underperformance against budgets or for which managements impairment assessment model gave lower headroom relative to other CGUs.
The value in use calculations in relation to the Groups China CGU goodwill of 4839k was most sensitive to changes in key assumptions.
The key judgements involved were future revenue growth cost assumptions and the discount rate applied as set out in Note 9 to the Group financial statements.
We have evaluated managements future cash flow forecasts which were prepared to a sufficiently detailed level including comparing them to the latest Board approved budgets testing the integrity of the underlying calculations and assessing how both internal and external drivers of performance were incorporated into the projections.
We also challenged the discount rates used by independently recalculating the cost of capital.
Given the China CGU has seen a weaker performance in 2017 new management has been put in place to address this and the carrying value of the goodwill is dependent on the CGUs ability to generate profits from 2019 onwards.
We compared 2017 financial performance to budget and understood the reasons for the differences from the forecasts prepared for the 31 December 2016 financial statements and their impact on the future drivers of improvement in profitability.
For the Groups China CGU we also performed sensitivity analysis around the key drivers of the cash flow forecasts in particular the revenue growth cost assumptions and discount rate.
Having ascertained the extent of change in those assumptions that either individually or collectively would be required for the goodwill and intangible assets to be impaired we considered the likelihood of such movement arising in those key assumptions.
Management has built increased profitability into their forecasts for the CGU and we challenged them on the realistic impact of the actions they have taken and intend to take to improve the profitability.
Although we considered management expectations of the impact of the their actions to be reasonable in light of the evidence available failure to meet these forecasts and to generate a profit may result in impairment of the goodwill associated with the China CGU.
Therefore we also examined the disclosures made in the financial statements and concluded that they are appropriate.
Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Ebiquity plc Financial statements Key audit matter How our audit addressed the key audit matter Accounting for contract revenue recognition Income is recognised evenly over the period of the contract for Market Intelligence businesses and in accordance with the stage of completion of the contract activity for the Media Value Measurement and Marketing Performance Optimisation businesses.
The stage of completion is determined relative to the total number of hours expected to complete the work or provision of services.
Where recorded revenue exceeds amounts invoiced to clients the excess is classified as accrued income and where recorded revenue is less than amounts invoiced to clients the difference is classified as deferred income.
Where services are performed by an indeterminate number of acts over a specific period revenue is recognised on a straightline basis over the specific period unless there is evidence that some other method better represents the stage of completion.
If the outcome of a contract cannot be estimated reliably the contract revenue is recognised to the extent of contract costs incurred that it is probable would be recoverable.
Costs are recognised as an expense in the period in which they are incurred.
Careful consideration needs to be given to projects open at year end requiring significant judgement in respect of the stage of completion and the associated revenue and profit to be recognised.
The total amount of revenue and profit to be recognised under a contract can be affected by changes in conditions and circumstances over time such as variations to the original contract terms cost overruns scope changes that require further negotiation and settlement.
Variations can arise from changing client specifications changes to the job based on unforeseen circumstances e. on the part of either party.
There can be some uncertainties therefore in determining the amounts to be recovered from any additional work performed.
The risk is therefore that contract revenue is not recognised in the correct period or that revenue and associated profit is misstated.
We understood managements policies and their controls for recording revenue.
We performed detailed endtoend walkthroughs of the finance and operational processes utilising our understanding from the prior years to reassess the design effectiveness of the key internal controls and identify changes if any.
We reviewed a sample of the terms and conditions attached to revenue contracts and evaluated managements judgements used to determine the timing of recognition of revenue.
We selected a number of contracts with significant revenue recognised in the year or with significant accrued income a further sample on a random basis.
To assess whether revenue and profit is accurately recorded we tested the hours complete on a sample of contracts by obtaining an understanding from project managers as to how they had estimated these hours challenging the assumptions evaluating the outturn of previous estimates and agreeing the actual hours incurred postyear end to the forecast for the period.
We also assessed how the project managers determined that the stage of completion was correctly calculated by obtaining their calculations and agreeing the inputs to supporting evidence and correspondence with customers.
We found that revenue was recorded appropriately.
To test the timing of contract revenue we challenged managements judgements on the completeness of work for our sample of contracts by checking original contracts amendments to contracts where applicable e. milestones had been reached.
No significant issues were noted from our work.
Independent auditors report continued to the members of Ebiquity plc 52 Ebiquity plc Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 How we tailored the audit scope We tailored the scope of our audit to ensure that we performed enough work to be able to give an opinion on the financial statements as a whole taking into account the structure of the group the accounting processes and controls and the industry in which it operates.
The following matters are considered when determining the scope of the audit by component We identify components which are financially significant to the Group We identify components considered likely to include a significant risk of material misstatement to the Group financial statements We consider the findings from prior year audits and assess whether it would provide further insight to the Group to revisit certain territories to provide an update and We consider if there are any other components that contribute a significant amount to key income statement and balance sheet measures and ensure sufficient coverage of each material line item in the financial statements is obtained through components in scope.
We also considered locations visited and those out of scope in the prior three years.
The scoping calculation is based upon obtaining sufficient coverage of each financial statement line item which varies depending on the risk assessment.
The Group operates through subsidiaries in the US Australia China UK France Germany and other European countries.
There are three financially significant components being Ebiquity plc Ebiquity Associates Ltd and Ebiquity Germany GmbH for the purpose of obtaining required coverage over the group balances we have also included in our scope Firm Decision Ltd and Ebiquity Russia Ltd both incorporated in UK Ebiquity Inc and Stratigent LLC both incorporated in USA and Ebiquity Pty Ltd incorporated in Australia.
The scoping calculation is based upon obtaining sufficient coverage of each financial statement line item which varies depending on the risk assessment.
The Group audit is performed in the UK by the same engagement leader and team the German and Australia components have been audited by other network firms.
As part of our audit procedures we have obtained access to the audit files of the components not directly audited by PwC UK and have reviewed the work performed.
In the current year we visited the component in Germany and Australia and attended the clearance meeting with the local management.
Materiality
The scope of our audit was influenced by our application of materiality.
We set certain quantitative thresholds for materiality.
These together with qualitative considerations helped us to determine the scope of our audit and the nature timing and extent of our audit procedures on the individual financial statement line items and disclosures and in evaluating the effect of misstatements both individually and in aggregate on the financial statements as a whole.
Based on our professional judgement we determined materiality for the financial statements as a whole as follows Overall group materiality 547000 2016 587000.
How we determined it 5% of profit before tax and highlighted items.
Rationale for benchmark applied Based on the benchmarks used in the annual report profit before tax and highlighted items is the primary measure used by the shareholders in assessing the performance of the group and is a generally accepted auditing benchmark.
For each component in the scope of our group audit we allocated a materiality that is less than our overall group materiality.
The range of materiality allocated across components was 46000 and 489000.
Certain components were audited to a local statutory audit materiality that was also less than our overall group materiality.
We agreed with the Audit Committee that we would report to them misstatements identified during our audit above 10000 2016 10000 as well as misstatements below that amount that in our view warranted reporting for qualitative reasons.
Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Ebiquity plc Financial statements Independent auditors report continued to the members of Ebiquity plc Conclusions relating to going concern We have nothing to report in respect of the following matters in relation to which ISAs UK require us to report to you when the directors use of the going concern basis of accounting in the preparation of the financial statements is not appropriate or the directors have not disclosed in the financial statements any identified material uncertainties that may cast significant doubt about the groups ability to continue to adopt the going concern basis of accounting for a period of at least twelve months from the date when the financial statements are authorised for issue.
However because not all future events or conditions can be predicted this statement is not a guarantee as to the groups ability to continue as a going concern.
Reporting on other information The other information comprises all of the information in the Annual Report other than the financial statements and our auditors report thereon.
The directors are responsible for the other information.
Our opinion on the financial statements does not cover the other information and accordingly we do not express an audit opinion or except to the extent otherwise explicitly stated in this report any form of assurance thereon.
In connection with our audit of the financial statements our responsibility is to read the other information and in doing so consider whether the other information is materially inconsistent with the financial statements or our knowledge obtained in the audit or otherwise appears to be materially misstated.
If we identify an apparent material inconsistency or material misstatement we are required to perform procedures to conclude whether there is a material misstatement of the financial statements or a material misstatement of the other information.
If based on the work we have performed we conclude that there is a material misstatement of this other information we are required to report that fact.
We have nothing to report based on these responsibilities.
With respect to the Strategic Report and Directors Report we also considered whether the disclosures required by the UK Companies Act 2006 have been included.
Based on the responsibilities described above and our work undertaken in the course of the audit ISAs UK require us also to report certain opinions and matters as described below.
Strategic Report and Directors Report In our opinion based on the work undertaken in the course of the audit the information given in the Strategic Report and Directors Report for the year ended 31 December 2017 is consistent with the financial statements and has been prepared in accordance with applicable legal requirements.
In light of the knowledge and understanding of the group and its environment obtained in the course of the audit we did not identify any material misstatements in the Strategic Report and Directors Report.
Responsibilities for the financial statements and the audit Responsibilities of the directors for the financial statements As explained more fully in the Directors Responsibilities Statement set out on page 49 the directors are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements in accordance with the applicable framework and for being satisfied that they give a true and fair view.
The directors are also responsible for such internal control as they determine is necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error.
In preparing the financial statements the directors are responsible for assessing the groups ability to continue as a going concern disclosing as applicable matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless the directors either intend to liquidate the group or to cease operations or have no realistic alternative but to do so 54 Ebiquity plc Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Auditors responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error and to issue an auditors report that includes our opinion.
Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with ISAs UK will always detect a material misstatement when it exists.
Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if individually or in the aggregate they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these financial statements.
A further description of our responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements is located on the FRCs website at www. rc. auditorsresponsibilities.
This description forms part of our auditors report.
Use of this report This report including the opinions has been prepared for and only for the companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006 and for no other purpose.
We do not in giving these opinions accept or assume responsibility for any other purpose or to any other person to whom this report is shown or into whose hands it may come save where expressly agreed by our prior consent in writing.
Other required reporting Companies Act 2006 exception reporting Under the Companies Act 2006 we are required to report to you if in our opinion we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit or certain disclosures of directors remuneration specified by law are not made.
We have no exceptions to report arising from this responsibility.
Other matter We have reported separately on the company financial statements of Ebiquity plc for the year ended 31 December 2017.
Richard Porter Senior Statutory Auditor for and on behalf of PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP Chartered Accountants and Statutory Auditors
21 March 2018 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Ebiquity plc Financial statements Year ended Year ended 31 December 2017 31 December 2016 Before Highlighted Before Highlighted highlighted items highlighted items items note 3 Total items note 3 Total
2 87374  87374 83569  83569 Cost of sales 45130  45130 38282  38282 Gross profit 42244  42244 45287  45287 Administrative expenses 30218 6491 36709 32328 5202 37530 Operating profitloss 4 12026 6491 5535 12959 5202 7757 Finance income Finance expenses 6 1061  1061 1150  1150 Net finance costs 1044 1132  1132 Profitloss before taxation 10982 6491 4491 11827 5202 6625 T axation  charge  credit 7 2897 854 2043 2570 340 2230 Profitloss for the year 8085 5637 2448 9257 4862 4395 Attributable to Equity holders of the parent 7522 5458 2064 8987 4837 4150 Noncontrolling interests 8085 5637 2448 9257 4862 4395 Earnings per share
Diluted
The notes on pages 60 to 93 are an integral part of these financial statements.
Consolidated statement of comprehensive income for the year ended 31 December 2017 Year ended Year ended 31 December 31 December 2017 2016 Profit for the year 2448 4395 Other comprehensive incomeexpense Items that will not be reclassified subsequently to profit or loss Exchange differences on translation of overseas subsidiaries 623 4844 Total other comprehensive incomeexpense for the year 623 4844 Total comprehensive income for the year 1825 9239 Attributable to Equity holders of the parent 1441 8994 Noncontrolling interests 1825 9239 The notes on pages 60 to 93 are an integral part of these financial statements.
Consolidated income statement for the year ended 31 December 2017 56 Ebiquity plc Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 31 December 31 December 2017 2016 Note 000 000 Noncurrent assets
9 59317 58045 Other intangible assets 10 13123 14034 Property plant and equipment 11 1829 2438 Deferred tax asset 19 1502 1338 Total noncurrent assets 75771 75855 Current assets Trade and other receivables 13 32509 28416 Cash and cash equivalents 14 4732 6662 Total current assets 37241 35078 Total assets 113012 110933 Current liabilities Trade and other payables 15 7401 5919 Accruals and deferred income 16 12665 11890 Financial liabilities 17 2473 6253 Current tax liabilities 1598 1841
Deferred tax liability Total current liabilities 24549 25912 Noncurrent liabilities Financial liabilities 17 33193 30448
Deferred tax liability 19 1895 2125 Total noncurrent liabilities 35481 32966 Total liabilities 60030 58878 Total net assets 52982 52055
Ordinary shares 21 19549 19300 Share premium Other reserves 4877 6134 Retained earnings 27495 25860 Equity attributable to the owners of the parent 51942 51294 Noncontrolling interests 1040 761 Total equity 52982 52055 The notes on pages 60 to 93 are an integral part of these financial statements.
The financial statements on pages 56 to 59 were approved and authorised for issue by the Board of Directors on 21 March 2018 and were signed on its behalf by Michael Karg PhD Andrew Noble
Director
Consolidated statement of financial position as at 31 December 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Ebiquity plc Financial statements Consolidated statement of changes in equity for the year ended 31 December 2017
Non
Ordinary Share Other Retained to owners of controlling Total shares premium reserves earnings the parent interests equity 31 December 2015 19290 11764 656 9891 41601 808 42409 Profit for the year 4150 4150 245 4395 Other comprehensive income 4844  4844  4844 Total comprehensive income for the year 4844 4150 8994 245 9239 Shares issued for cash Share premium reduction 11780  11780 Shares issued to employees Share options charge Deferred tax on share options 19    321 321  321 Dividends paid to shareholders 25    292 292  292 Dividends paid to noncontrolling interests 31 December 2016 19300  6134 25860 51294 761 52055 Profit for the year 2064 2064 384 2448 Other comprehensive income Total comprehensive income for the year 623 2064 1441 384 1825 Shares issued for cash Shares issued to employees Share options charge Deferred tax on share options 19    61 61  61 Acquisition of noncontrolling interest 1107 1107  1107 Dividends paid to shareholders 25    474 474  474 Dividends paid to noncontrolling interests 31 December 2017 19549 21 4877 27495 51942 1040 52982 Includes 3667000 31 December 2016 3667000 in the merger reserve a debit balance of 1478000 31 December 2016 1478000 in the ESOP reserve a sharebased payment reserve of nil 31 December 2016 634000 and a gain of 2688000 31 December 2016 3311000 gain recognised in the translation reserve.
Refer to note 22 for further details.
On 8 June 2016 the Group announced the cancellation of the share premium account the Capital Reduction effective 9 June 2016 following registration of the Court order confirming the Capital Reduction by the Registrar of Companies.
A sharebased payment reserve of 634000 was created during the year ended 31 December 2016 and settled during the year ended 31 December 2017.
The notes on pages 60 to 93 are an integral part of these financial statements 58 Ebiquity plc Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Consolidated statement of cash flows for the year ended 31 December 2017 Year ended Year ended 31 December 31 December 2017 2016 Note 000 000 Cash flows from operating activities Cash generated from operations 26 7948 10782 Finance expenses paid 938 1092 Finance income received Income taxes paid 2207 166 Net cash generated from operating activities 4820 9542 Cash flows from investing activities Acquisition of subsidiaries net of cash acquired Payments to acquire noncontrolling interest Payments in respect of contingent consideration 1799 4431 Purchase of property plant and equipment Purchase of intangible assets 10 1589 1872 Net cash used in investing activities 5313 6782 Cash flows from financing activities Proceeds from issue of share capital net of issue costs Proceeds from bank borrowings 24 3000 3336 Repayment of bank borrowings 24 2500 6411 Dividends paid to shareholders Dividends paid to noncontrolling interests Capital repayment of finance leases Net cash flow generated byused in financing activities 160 3891 Net decrease in cash cash equivalents and bank overdrafts 333 1131 Cash cash equivalents and bank overdraft at beginning of year 14 4600 6364 Effects of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents Cash cash equivalents and bank overdraft at end of year 14 4325 4600 The notes on pages 60 to 93 form part of these financial statements.
Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Ebiquity plc Financial statements Notes to the consolidated financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Goodwill is allocated to each of the Groups cashgenerating units expected to benefit from the synergies of the combination.
Following initial recognition goodwill is measured at cost less any accumulated impairment losses.
Goodwill is reviewed for impairment at least annually or whenever there is evidence that it may be required.
Any impairment is recognised immediately in the income statement and is not subsequently reversed.
Goodwill arising on the acquisition of the Groups interest in an associate being the excess of the cost of acquisition over the Groups share of the fair values of the identifiable net assets of the associate is included within the carrying amount of the investment.
The noncontrolling shareholders interest in the acquiree is initially measured at the noncontrolling interests proportion of the net fair value of the assets liabilities and contingent liabilities recognised.
Where transactions with noncontrolling parties do not result in a change in control the difference between the fair value of the consideration paid or received and the amount by which the noncontrolling interest is adjusted is recognised in equity.
Where the consideration for the acquisition includes a contingent consideration arrangement this is measured at fair value at the acquisition date.
Any subsequent changes to the fair value of the contingent consideration are adjusted against the cost of the acquisition if they occur within the measurement period and only if the changes relate to conditions existing at the acquisition date.
Any subsequent changes to the fair value of the contingent consideration after the measurement period are recognised in the income statement within administrative expenses as a highlighted item.
The carrying value of contingent consideration at the statement of financial position date represents managements best estimate of the future payment at that date based on historical results and future forecasts.
Accounting policies General information Ebiquity plc the Company and its subsidiaries together the Group provide independent datadriven insights to the global media and marketing community.
The Group has 22 offices across 14 countries.
The Company is a public limited company which is listed on the London Stock Exchanges AIM Market and is incorporated and domiciled in the UK.
The address of its registered office is CityPoint One Ropemaker Street London EC2Y 9AW.
Basis of preparation The consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards International Accounting Standards and IFRS IC Interpretations collectively IFRSs issued by the International Accounting Standards Board IASB as adopted by European Union Adopted IFRSs and with those parts of the Companies Act 2006 applicable to companies preparing their financial statements under Adopted IFRSs.
The consolidated financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis.
The Group meets its daytoday working capital requirements through its cash reserves and borrowings described in note 17.
The Groups forecasts and projections taking account of reasonably possible changes in trading performance show that the Group should be able to operate within the level of its current cash reserves and borrowings including continuing to meet the bank covenants therein.
The Group therefore continues to adopt the going concern basis in preparing its financial statements.
The consolidated financial statements have been prepared under the historical cost convention as modified by the revaluation of financial assets and financial liabilities at fair value through profit or loss.
The consolidated financial statements are presented in pounds sterling and rounded to the nearest thousand.
The principal accounting policies adopted in these consolidated financial statements are set out below.
These policies have been consistently applied to all periods presented unless otherwise stated.
Basis of consolidation The consolidated financial statements incorporate the financial statements of the Company and entities controlled by the Company its subsidiaries.
Control is achieved where the Company has the power to govern the financial and operating policies of an investee entity so as to obtain benefits from its activities.
The results of each subsidiary are included from the date that control is transferred to the Group until the date that control ceases.
Where necessary adjustments are made to the financial statements of subsidiaries to bring the accounting policies used in line with those used by the Group.
All intragroup transactions balances income and expenses are eliminated on consolidation.
Noncontrolling interests represent the portion of the results and net assets in subsidiaries that is not held by the Group.
Business combinations and goodwill The Group applies the acquisition method to account for business combinations.
The cost of the acquisition is measured at the aggregate of the fair values at the date of exchange of assets given liabilities assumed and equity instruments issued by the Group in exchange for control of the acquiree.
The acquirees identifiable assets liabilities and contingent liabilities are recognised initially at their fair value at the acquisition date.
Goodwill is initially measured at cost being the excess of the aggregate of the consideration transferred over the fair value of net identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed.
The determination of the fair values of acquired assets and liabilities is based on judgement and the Directors have 12 months from the date of the business combination to finalise the allocation of the purchase price.
60 Ebiquity plc Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 All costs directly attributable to the business combination are expensed as incurred and recorded in the income statement within highlighted items.
Revenue recognition Revenue is measured at the fair value of the consideration received or receivable and represents amounts receivable for services provided in the normal course of business net of discounts VAT and other salesrelated taxes.
Income is recognised evenly over the period of the contract for our Market Intelligence businesses and in accordance with the stage of completion of the contract activity for our Media Value Measurement and Marketing Performance Optimisation businesses.
The stage of completion is determined relative to the total number of hours expected to complete the work or provision of services.
Where recorded revenue exceeds amounts invoiced to clients the excess is classified as accrued income and where recorded revenue is less than amounts invoiced to clients the difference is classified as deferred income.
Where services are performed by an indeterminate number of acts over a specific period revenue is recognised on a straightline basis over the specific period unless there is evidence that some other method better represents the stage of completion.
If the outcome of a contract cannot be estimated reliably the contract revenue is recognised to the extent of contract costs incurred that it is probable would be recoverable.
Costs are recognised as an expense in the period in which they are incurred.
Finance income and expenses Finance income and expense represents interest receivable and payable.
Finance income and expense is recognised on an accruals basis based on the interest rate applicable to each bank or loan account.
Foreign currencies For the purposes of the consolidated financial statements the results and financial position of each Group company are expressed in pounds sterling which is the functional currency of the Company and the presentation currency for the consolidated financial statements.
In preparing the financial statements of the individual companies transactions in currencies other than the entitys functional currency foreign currencies are recorded at the rates of exchange prevailing on the dates of transactions.
At each yearend date monetary assets and liabilities that are denominated in foreign currencies are retranslated at the rates prevailing on the yearend date.
For the purpose of presenting consolidated financial statements the assets and liabilities of the Groups foreign operations are translated at exchange rates prevailing on the yearend date.
Income and expense items are translated at the average exchange rate for the period which approximates to the rate applicable at the dates of the transactions.
The exchange differences arising from the retranslation of the year end amounts of foreign subsidiaries and the difference on translation of the results of those subsidiaries into the presentational currency of the Group are recognised in the translation reserve.
All other exchange differences are dealt with through the consolidated income statement.
Highlighted items Highlighted items comprise noncash charges and nonrecurring items which are highlighted in the consolidated income statement as separate disclosure is considered by the Directors to be relevant in understanding the underlying performance of the business.
The noncash charges include share option charges and amortisation of purchased intangibles.
The nonrecurring items include the costs associated with potential acquisitions where formal discussion is undertaken completed acquisitions and their subsequent integration into the Group adjustments to the estimates of contingent consideration on acquired entities asset impairment charges management restructuring and other significant oneoff items.
Costs associated with ongoing market landscaping acquisition identification and early stage discussions with acquisition targets are reported in underlying administrative expenses.
Taxation
The tax expense included in the consolidated income statement comprises current and deferred tax.
Current tax is the expected tax payable on the taxable income for the period using tax rates enacted or substantively enacted by the yearend date.
The Group is subject to corporate taxes in a number of different jurisdictions and judgement is required in determining the appropriate provision for transactions where the ultimate tax determination is uncertain.
In such circumstances the Group recognises liabilities for anticipated taxes based on the best information available and where the anticipated liability is both probable and estimable.
Where the final outcome of such matters differs from the amount recorded any differences may impact the income tax and deferred tax provisions in the period in which the final determination is made.
Tax is recognised in the consolidated income statement except to the extent that it relates to items recognised directly in equity or other comprehensive income in which case it is recognised in equity.
Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Ebiquity plc Financial statements Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued for the year ended 31 December 2017 Internally generated intangible assets are amortised on a straightline basis over their useful lives.
Amortisation commences when the asset is available for use and useful lives range from one to five years.
The amortisation expense is included within administrative expenses.
Where an internally generated intangible asset cannot be recognised development expenditure is recognised as an expense in the period in which it is incurred.
Purchased intangible assets Externally acquired intangible assets are initially recognised at cost and subsequently amortised on a straightline basis over their useful economic lives which vary from three to 10 years.
The amortisation expense is included as a highlighted item within the administrative expenses line in the income statement.
Intangible assets recognised on business combinations are recorded at fair value at the acquisition date using appropriate valuation techniques where they are separable from the acquired entity or give rise to other contractuallegal rights.
The significant intangibles recognised by the Group are customer relationships which are amortised on a straightline basis over a typical useful life of eight to 10 years.
Computer software Purchased computer software intangible assets are amortised on a straightline basis over their useful lives which vary from two to eight years.
Impairment
Assets that have an indefinite useful life are not subject to amortisation and are tested annually for impairment.
For the purpose of impairment testing goodwill is grouped at the lowest levels for which there are separately identifiable cash flows known as cashgenerating units.
If the recoverable amount of the cashgenerating unit is less than the carrying amount of the unit the impairment loss is allocated first to reduce the carrying amount of any goodwill allocated to the unit and then to the other assets of the unit prorata on the basis of the carrying amount of each asset in the unit.
Property plant and equipment Property plant and equipment is stated at cost less accumulated depreciation and any recognised impairment loss.
Depreciation is charged so as to write off the cost of assets over their estimated useful economic lives.
The rates applied are as follows Motor vehicles 25% per annum reducing balance Fixtures fittings Five to 14 years and equipment straightline or 25% per annum reducing balance Computer Two to four years e q u i p m e n t s t r a i g h t  li n e
Over the shorter of land and the life or the buildings estimated useful improvements life of the lease Other intangible assets Internally generated intangible assets development expenditure Internally generated intangible assets relate to bespoke computer software and technology developed by the Groups internal software development team.
During the year the Group generated 1202000 of internally generated intangible assets 31 December 2016 1091000.
An internally generated intangible asset arising from the Groups development expenditure is recognised only if all of the following conditions are met it is technically feasible to develop the asset so that it will be available for use or sale adequate resources are available to complete the development and to use or sell the asset there is an intention to complete the asset for use or sale the Group is able to use or sell the intangible asset it is probable that the asset created will generate future economic benefits and the development cost of the asset can be measured reliably.
Accounting policies continued Taxation continued Using the liability method deferred tax is provided on all temporary differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and their tax bases except for differences arising on the initial recognition of goodwill the initial recognition of an asset or liability in a transaction which is not a business combination and at the time of the transaction affects neither accounting or taxable profit and investments in subsidiaries and jointly controlled entities where the Group is able to control the timing of the reversal of the difference and it is probable that the difference will not reverse in the foreseeable future.
Recognition of deferred tax assets is restricted to those instances where it is probable that taxable profit will be available against which the difference can be utilised.
The recognition of deferred tax assets is reviewed at each yearend date.
The amount of the asset or liability is determined using tax rates that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the yearend date and are expected to apply when the deferred tax liabilitiesassets are settledrecovered.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are offset when the Group has a legally enforceable right to offset current tax assets and liabilities and the deferred tax assets and liabilities relate to taxes levied by the same tax authority on either the same taxable Group company or different Group entities which intend either to settle current tax assets and liabilities on a net basis or to realise the assets and settle the liabilities simultaneously in each future period in which significant amounts of deferred tax assets or liabilities are expected to be settled or recovered.
62 Ebiquity plc Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Financial liabilities Borrowings consisting of interestbearing secured and unsecured loans and overdrafts are initially recognised at fair value net of directly attributable transaction costs incurred and subsequently measured at amortised cost using the effective interest method.
The difference between the proceeds received net of transaction costs and the redemption amount is amortised over the period of the borrowings to which they relate.
The revolving credit facility is considered to be a longterm loan.
Trade and other payables are initially recognised at their nominal value which is usually the original invoiced amount.
Leases
Where substantially all of the risks and rewards incidental to ownership of a leased asset have been transferred to the Group a finance lease the asset is treated as if it had been purchased outright.
The amount initially recognised as an asset is the lower of the fair value of the leased property and the present value of the minimum lease payments payable over the term of the lease.
The corresponding lease commitment is shown as a liability.
Lease payments are analysed between capital and interest.
The interest element is charged to the income statement over the period of the lease and is calculated so that it represents a constant proportion of the lease liability.
The capital element reduces the balance owed to the lessor.
Where substantially all of the risks and rewards incidental to ownership are retained by the lessor an operating lease the total rentals payable under the lease are charged to the income statement on a straightline basis over the lease term.
The aggregate benefit of lease incentives is recognised as a reduction of the rental expense over the lease term on a straightline basis.
The land and buildings elements of property leases are considered separately for the purposes of lease classification.
Financial instruments Financial assets and financial liabilities are recognised in the Groups statement of financial position when the Group becomes a party to the contractual provisions of the instrument.
Financial assets The Group classifies its financial assets as loans and receivables.
Loans and receivables are nonderivative financial assets with fixed or determinable payments that are not quoted in an active market.
They arise principally through the provision of goods and services to customers trade receivables but also incorporate other types of contractual monetary assets.
They are initially recognised at fair value plus transaction costs that are directly attributable to their acquisition or issue and are subsequently carried at amortised cost using the effective interest rate method less provision for impairment.
Impairment provisions are recognised when there is objective evidence such as significant financial difficulties on the part of the counterparty or default or significant delay in payment that the Group will be unable to collect all of the amounts due the amount of such a provision being the difference between the net carrying amount and the present value of the future expected cash flows associated with the impaired receivable.
For trade receivables which are reported net such provisions are recorded in a separate allowance account with the loss being recognised within administrative expenses in the income statement.
On confirmation that the trade receivable will not be collectable the gross carrying value of the asset is written off against the associated provision.
Assets that are subject to amortisation or depreciation are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable.
If any such condition exists the recoverable amount of the asset is estimated in order to determine the extent if any of the impairment loss.
Where the asset does not generate cash flows that are independent from other assets estimates are made of the cash flows of the cashgenerating unit to which the asset belongs.
Recoverable amount is the higher of fair value less costs to sell and value in use.
In assessing value in use estimated future cash flows are discounted to their present value using a pretax discount rate appropriate to the specific asset or cashgenerating unit.
If the recoverable amount of an asset or cashgenerating unit is estimated to be less than its carrying amount the carrying value of the asset or cashgenerating unit is reduced to its recoverable amount.
Impairment
In respect of assets other than goodwill an impairment loss is reversed if there has been a change in the estimates used to determine the recoverable amount.
An impairment loss is reversed only to the extent that the assets carrying amount does not exceed the carrying amount that would have been determined net of depreciation or amortisation if the impairment loss had been recognised.
Cash and cash equivalents Cash and cash equivalents comprise cash in hand and shortterm deposits.
Cash and cash equivalents and bank overdrafts are offset when there is a legally enforceable right to offset.
Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Ebiquity plc Financial statements Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued for the year ended 31 December 2017 Retirement benefits For defined contribution pension schemes the Group pays contributions to privately administered pension plans on a voluntary basis.
The Group has no further payment obligations once the contributions have been paid.
Contributions are charged to the income statement in the year to which they relate.
Dividend distribution Dividend distribution to the Companys shareholders is recognised as a liability in the Groups financial statements in the period in which the dividends are approved by the Companys shareholders.
Critical accounting estimates and judgements In preparing the consolidated financial statements the Directors have made certain estimates and judgements relating to the reporting of results of operations and the financial position of the Group.
Actual results may significantly differ from those estimates often as a result of the need to make assumptions about matters which are uncertain.
The estimates and judgements discussed below are considered by the Directors to be those that have a critical accounting impact to the Groups financial statements.
Critical accounting estimates include the terminal growth rate used in impairment assessments inputs to share option accounting fair value models and amounts to capitalise as intangible assets.
These estimates are reached with reference to historical experience supporting detailed analysis and in the case of impairment assessments and share option accounting external economic factors.
Critical accounting judgements include the treatment of events after the reporting period as adjusting or nonadjusting and the determination of segments for segmental reporting based on the reports reviewed by the Executive Directors that are used to make strategic decisions.
These judgements are determined at a Board level based on the status of strategic initiatives of the Group.
Where there are modifications to sharebased payments that are beneficial to the employee then as well as continuing to recognise the original sharebased payment charge the incremental fair value of the modified share options as identified at the date of the modification is also charged to the income statement over the remaining vesting period.
Where the Group cancels share options and identifies replacement options this arrangement is also accounted for as a modification.
The grant by the Company of options over its equity instruments to the employees of subsidiary undertakings in the Group is treated as a capital contribution.
The fair value of employee services received measured by reference to the grant date fair value is recognised over the vesting period as an increase to investment in subsidiary undertakings with a corresponding credit to equity in the parent entity financial statements.
Provisions
Provisions including provisions for onerous lease costs are recognised when the Group has a present legal or constructive obligation as a result of past events it is probable that an outflow of resources will be required to settle that obligation and the amount can be reliably estimated.
Provisions are not recognised for future operating losses.
Provisions are measured at the Directors best estimate of the expenditure required to settle the obligation at the yearend date.
If the effect of the time value of money is material provisions are determined by discounting the expected future cash flows at a pretax rate which reflects current market assessments of the time value of money and where appropriate the risks specific to the obligations.
Accounting policies continued Share capital Equity instruments issued by the Group are recorded at the amount of the proceeds received net of direct issuance costs.
Employee Share Ownership Plan
As the Company is deemed to have control of its ESOP trust it is treated as a subsidiary and consolidated for the purposes of the Group financial statements.
The ESOPs assets other than investments in the Companys shares liabilities income and expenses are included on a linebyline basis in the Group financial statements.
The
ESOPs investment in the Companys shares is deducted from shareholders equity in the Group statement of financial position as if they were treasury shares.
Sharebased payments Where equitysettled share options are awarded to employees the fair value of the options at the date of grant is charged to the income statement over the vesting period with a corresponding increase recognised in retained earnings.
Fair value is measured using an appropriate valuation model.
Nonmarket vesting conditions are taken into account by adjusting the number of equity investments expected to vest at each yearend date so that ultimately the cumulative amount recognised over the vesting period is based on the number of options that eventually vest.
A charge is made irrespective of whether the market vesting conditions are satisfied.
The cumulative expense is not adjusted for failure to achieve a market vesting condition.
64 Ebiquity plc Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 establishes three primary measurement categories for financial assets amortised cost fair value through other comprehensive income and fair value through profit or loss.
The basis of classification depends on the entitys business model and the contractual cash flow characteristics of the financial asset.
Investments in equity instruments are required to be measured at fair value through profit or loss with the irrevocable option at inception to present changes in fair value in other comprehensive income not recycling.
An expected credit losses model replaces the incurred loss impairment model used in IAS 39.
For financial liabilities there are no changes to classification and measurement except for the recognition of changes in own credit risk in other comprehensive income for liabilities designated at fair value through profit or loss.
IFRS 9 relaxes the requirements for hedge effectiveness by replacing the brightline hedge effectiveness tests.
To qualify for hedge accounting it requires an economic relationship between the hedged item and hedging instrument and for the hedged ratio to be the same as the one that management actually uses for risk management purposes.
Contemporaneous documentation is still required but it is different from that currently prepared under IAS 39.
There is an accounting policy choice to continue to account for all hedges under IAS 39.
IFRS 9 is effective for accounting periods beginning on or after 1 January 2018.
The Group is implementing IFRS 9 during the first half of 2018.
The classification and measurement basis for the Groups financial assets and liabilities is expected to be largely unchanged by adoption of IFRS 9.
Managements preliminary view based on work performed to date is that no material impact on profit for future periods is expected.
Management is in the process of assessing the impact on credit losses on receivables and past refinancings and this assessment is expected to be concluded during the first half of 2018.
Taxation
The Group is subject to income taxes in all the territories in which it operates and judgement and estimates of future profitability are required to determine the Groups deferred tax position.
If the final tax outcome is different to that assumed resulting changes will be reflected in the income statement unless the tax relates to an item charged to equity in which case the changes in the tax estimates will also be reflected in equity.
The Group believes that its accruals for tax liabilities are adequate for all open audit years based on its assessment of many factors including past experience and interpretations of tax law.
This assessment relies on estimates and assumptions and may involve a series of complex judgements about future events.
To the extent that the final tax outcome of these matters is different than the amounts recorded such differences will impact income tax expense in the period in which such determination is made.
Provisions
The Group provides for certain costs of reorganisation that has occurred due to the Groups acquisition and disposal activity.
When the final amount payable is uncertain these are classified as provisions.
These provisions are based on the best estimates of management.
Adoption of new standards and interpretations On 1 January 2018 the Group will adopt the following amendments which are effective for accounting periods on or after 1 January 2018 and which have not yet been endorsed by the EU.
Management is currently assessing the impact of these new pronouncements on the financial statements which are not expected to be significant.
IFRS 9 Financial Instruments.
This standard addresses the classification measurement and recognition of financial assets and financial liabilities.
It replaces the guidance in IAS 39 that relates to the classification and measurement of financial instruments.
IFRS 9 retains but simplifies the mixed measurement model and Revenue recognition The Group is required to make an estimate of the project completion levels in respect of contracts which straddle the year end for revenue recognition purposes.
This involves a level of judgement and therefore differences may arise between the actual and estimated result.
Carrying value of goodwill and other intangible assets Impairment testing requires management to estimate the value in use of the cashgenerating units to which goodwill and other intangible assets have been allocated.
The value in use calculation requires estimation of future cash flows expected to arise from the cashgenerating unit and the application of a suitable discount rate in order to calculate present value.
The sensitivity around the selection of particular assumptions including growth forecasts and the pretax discount rate used in managements cash flow projections could significantly affect the Groups impairment evaluation and therefore the Groups reported assets and results.
Further details including a sensitivity analysis are included in notes 9 and 10 to the consolidated financial statements.
Contingent consideration The Group has recorded liabilities for contingent consideration on acquisitions made in the current and prior periods.
The calculation of the contingent consideration liability requires judgements to be made regarding the forecast future performance of these businesses for the earnout period.
Any changes to the fair value of the contingent consideration after the measurement period are recognised in the income statement within administrative expenses as a highlighted item.
Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Ebiquity plc Financial statements Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued for the year ended 31 December 2017 The following new standard has been published that is mandatory to the Groups future accounting periods but has not been adopted early in these financial statements.
IFRS 16 Leases effective on or after 1 January 2019.
This standard replaces IAS 17 Leases and related interpretations and sets out the principles for the recognition measurement presentation and disclosure of leases for both the lessee and the lessor.
The standard addresses the definition of a lease recognition and measurement of leases and it establishes principles for reporting useful information to users of financial statements about the leasing activities of both lessees and lessors.
A key change arising from IFRS 16 is that most operating leases will be accounted for on balance sheet for lessees.
In future periods the operating lease charge would be replaced by a depreciation charge that whilst lower over the life of the lease than the current operating lease charge is not expected to be materially different.
The Directors are in the process of reviewing contracts to identify any additional lease arrangements that would need to be recognised under IFRS 16.
IFRS 16 eliminates the two lease classifications that IAS 17 has operating and finance leases for the lessee and instead all leases will have the same classification.
Management will assess the impact on the Group of IFRS 16 prior to the effective date of implementation.
Although the detailed impact has not yet been quantified management expects that the adoption of IFRS 16 will impact the accounting for those leases currently classified as operating leases.
The Group will apply IFRS 16 from 1 January 2019 and the quantitative impact will be included in the Groups 2018 interim results announcement.
Accounting policies continued Adoption of new standards and interpretations continued IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers.
This standard deals with revenue recognition and establishes principles for reporting useful information to users of financial statements about the nature amount timing and uncertainty of revenue and cash flows arising from an entitys contracts with customers.
Revenue is recognised when a customer obtains control of a good or service and thus has the ability to direct the use and obtain the benefits from the good or service.
Variable consideration is included in the transaction price if it is highly probable that there will be no significant reversal of the cumulative revenue recognised when the uncertainty is resolved.
The standard replaces IAS 18 Revenue and IAS 11 Construction Contracts and related interpretations.
The standard is effective for annual periods beginning on or after 1 January 2018 and earlier application is permitted.
The
Group implemented IFRS 15 on 1 January 2018 and has carried out a review of existing contractual arrangements as part of this process.
The Directors anticipate there will be no material impact for the Media Value Measurement Market Intelligence and Marketing Performance Optimisation revenue streams based on the outputs of that contract review in the context of IFRS 15s five step revenue recognition model.
Under the existing accounting policy revenue is recognised when the amounts can be reliability measured which is considered to be when project milestones are reached.
Under IFRS 15 revenue can only be recognised when the Group has an enforceable right to be paid for work completed.
Management assessed the likelihood of contract cancellation midflight noting minimal instances of this occurring in prior periods.
The classification and measurement of revenue is largely unchanged following the adoption of IFRS 15.
No material impact on profit for future periods is expected.
66 Ebiquity plc Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 2.
Segmental reporting In accordance with IFRS 8 the Groups operating segments are based on the reports reviewed by the Executive Directors that are used to make strategic decisions.
Certain operating segments have been aggregated to form three reportable segments Media Value Measurement Market Intelligence and Marketing Performance Optimisation Media Value Measurement includes our media benchmarking financial compliance and associated services Market Intelligence includes our advertising monitoring reputation management and researchinsight services and Marketing Performance Optimisation consists of our marketing effectiveness and multichannel analytics services.
The Executive Directors are the Groups chief operating decisionmaker.
They assess the performance of the operating segments based on operating profit before highlighted items.
This measurement basis excludes the effects of nonrecurring expenditure from the operating segments such as restructuring costs and purchased intangible amortisation.
The measure also excludes the effects of equitysettled sharebased payments.
Interest income and expenditure are not allocated to segments as this type of activity is driven by the central treasury function which manages the cash position of the Group.
The segment information provided to the Executive Directors for the reportable segments for the year ended 31 December 2017 is as follows Year ended 31 December 2017
Media Value Market Performance Reportable Measurement Intelligence Optimisation segments Unallocated Total
51482 23146 12746 87374  87374 Operating profitloss before highlighted items 14037 3163 1646 18846 6820 12026 Total assets 58334 33715 13547 105596 7416 113012 Year ended 31 December 2016
Media Value Market Performance Reportable Measurement Intelligence Optimisation segments Unallocated Total
47161 23360 13048 83569 Operating profitloss before highlighted items 12124 3902 3739 19765 6806 12959 Total assets 32469 11868 101285 9648 110933 A reconciliation of segment operating profit before highlighted items to total profit before tax is provided below Year ended Year ended 31 December 31 December 2017 2016 Reportable segment operating profit before highlighted items 18846 19765 Unallocated costs Staff costs 5770 5219 Property costs Exchange rate movements Other administrative expenses Operating profit before highlighted items 12026 12959 Highlighted items note 3 Operating profit 5535 7757 Net finance costs 1044 1132 Profit before tax 4491 6625 Unallocated costs comprise central costs that are not considered attributable to the segments.
Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Ebiquity plc Financial statements Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued for the year ended 31 December 2017 Segmental reporting continued A reconciliation of segment total assets to total consolidated assets is provided below 31 December 31 December 2017 2016 Total assets for reportable segments 105596 101285 Unallocated amounts Property plant and equipment 1153 1900 Other intangible assets 1574 1517 Other receivables 1953 1015 Cash and cash equivalents 2056 3989 Deferred tax asset 680 1227 Total assets 113012 110933 The table below presents revenue and noncurrent assets by geographical location Year ended Year ended 31 December 2017 31 December 2016 Revenue by Revenue by location of Noncurrent location of Noncurrent customers assets customers assets United Kingdom 26050 45611 22627 46617 Rest of Europe 31451 9654 31586 9378 North America 18680 6591 20032 7257 Rest of world 11193 12413 9324 11265 87374 74269 83569 74517 Deferred tax assets 1502  1338
87374 75771 83569 75855 No single customer or group of related customers contributes 10% or more of revenue.
Highlighted items Highlighted items comprise items which are highlighted in the income statement because separate disclosure is considered relevant in understanding the underlying performance of the business.
Year ended Year ended 31 December 2017 31 December 2016 Cash Noncash Total Cash Noncash Total Administrative expenses Share option chargecredit Amortisation of purchased intangibles 1952 1952  1865 1865 Severance and reorganisation costs 2052 312 2364 Acquisition integration and strategic costs 1650 213 1437 2777  2777 Total highlighted items before tax 3711 2780 6491 2685 2517 5202 Taxation credit Total highlighted items after tax 3251 2386 5637 2433 2429 4862 Amortisation of purchased intangibles relates to acquisitions made in the current financial year of 28000 and to acquisitions made in prior years of 1924000 31 December 2016 26000 in the current financial year and 1839000 in prior years.
Separate disclosure is considered relevant because amortisation of purchased intangibles has no correlation to underlying profitability of the Group.
In the current year a noncash IFRS 2 charge of 729000 31 December 2016 652000 was recorded.
Separate disclosure is considered relevant to isolate charges and credits which are subject to volatility as a result of nontrading factors.
Total severance and reorganisation costs of 2364000 31 December 2016 nil were recognised during the year primarily consisting of 2061000 in relation to severances in the UK France Spain and China as part of oneoff management restructuring in those countries.
The remaining 303000 relates to settlement of a client dispute.
Separate disclosure is considered relevant as these charges are nonrecurring and not reflective of the underlying operating costs of the business.
68 Ebiquity plc Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Total acquisition integration and strategic costs of 1437000 31 December 2016 2777000 were recognised during the year primarily consisting of 981000 in relation to costs associated with the sale of the Ad Intel business refer to note 30 for further detail 330000 in relation to earnout costs associated with the CMCG acquisition and other contingent consideration adjustments net of foreign exchange differences 68000 in relation to the Digital Balance Australia Pty Ltd acquisition and 58000 in relation to financial restructuring costs.
Separate disclosure is considered relevant as these charges are nonrecurring and not reflective of the underlying operating costs of the business.
Contingent consideration adjustments within acquisition integration and strategic costs are included as a cash item.
Current tax arising on the highlighted items is included as a cash item while deferred tax on highlighted items is included as a noncash item.
Refer to note 7 for more detail.
As at 31 December 2017 2860000 of the 3711000 cash highlighted items had been settled 31 December 2016 1197000 of the 2685000 cash highlighted items had been settled.
Operating profit after highlighted items Operating profit after highlighted items is stated after chargingcrediting Year ended Year ended 31 December 31 December 2017 2016 Operating lease rentals other land and buildings 1603 1739 Depreciation and amortisation notes 10 and 11 3961 3682 Loss on disposal of fixed assets Research costs  expensed Foreign exchange gain Operating lease rentals  land and buildings includes a credit of 406000 in respect of a lease amendment incentive 31 December 2016 nil.
Auditors remuneration During the year the Group including its overseas subsidiaries obtained the following services from the Groups auditors at costs as detailed below Year ended Year ended 31 December 31 December 2017 2016 Fees payable to the Companys auditors for the audit of the parent company and consolidated financial statements Fees payable to the Companys auditors and its associates for other services the audit of the Companys subsidiaries pursuant to legislation other auditrelated assurance services other assurance services tax compliance services Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Ebiquity plc Financial statements Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued for the year ended 31 December 2017 Employee information The monthly average number of employees employed by the Group during the year including Executive Directors was as follows Year ended Year ended 31 December 31 December 2017 2016 Number Number Media Value Measurement Market Intelligence Marketing Performance Optimisation IT development and support
Directors
At 31 December 2017 the total number of employees of the Group was 932 31 December 2016 919.
Staff costs for all employees including Executive Directors consist of Year ended Year ended 31 December 31 December 2017 2016 Wages and salaries 39537 41571 Social security costs 5808 3502 Other pension costs 1013 925 Share options charge note 23 47096 46650 Directors remuneration Total Directors remuneration was 1339000 including 427000 to the highest paid Director 31 December 2016 1474000 including 426000 to the highest paid Director.
Directors are eligible for cash bonuses as a percentage of base salary dependent on individual and Company performance against established financial targets.
No performance bonuses were paid during the year 31 December 2016 nil.
No Directors were a member of a Company pension scheme as at 31 December 2017 31 December 2016 none.
Contributions totalling 26000 31 December 2016 28000 were made to Directors private pension schemes during the year including 14000 to the highest paid Director 31 December 2016 14000.
No Directors exercised share options during the year 31 December 2016 nil.
In the period to 31 December 2017 the highest paid Director exercised no share options 31 December 2016 nil.
During the year nil 31 December 2016 500000 share options were granted to Directors under the Groups Executive Incentive Plan scheme.
Vesting is subject to the satisfaction of certain performance criteria see note 23 for further details.
Further details on Directors remuneration can be found in the Remuneration Committee report on pages 42 to 44.
Finance income and expenses Year ended Year ended 31 December 31 December 2017 2016 Finance income Bank interest Finance income Finance expenses Bank loans and overdraft interest 941 1058 Loan fee amortisation Finance lease interest Finance expenses 1061 1150 70 Ebiquity plc Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 7.
Taxation chargecredit Year ended Year ended 31 December 2017 31 December 2016
Before highlighted Highlighted highlighted Highlighted items items Total items items Total UK tax Current year Adjustment in respect of prior year Foreign tax Current year 1827 401 1426 1409 65 1344 Adjustment in respect of prior year 1763 401 1362 1315 65 1250 Total current tax 2484 461 2023 2022 252 1770 Deferred tax Origination and reversal of temporary differences note 19 Adjustment in respect of prior year Total tax chargecredit 2897 854 2043 2570 340 2230 The difference between tax as chargedcredited in the financial statements and tax at the nominal rate is explained below Year ended Year ended 31 December 31 December 2017 2016 Profit before tax 4491 6625 Corporation tax at 19.25% 31 December 2016 20% 876 1325 Nondeductible taxable expenses Overseas tax rate differential Overseas losses not recognised Losses utilised not previously recognised Adjustment in respect of prior years Effect of change in statutory tax rates Total tax chargecredit 2043 2230 Reductions in the UK corporation tax rate to 19% effective from 1 April 2017 and to 18% effective 1 April 2020 were substantively enacted on 26 October 2015.
Further reductions to 17% effective 1 April 2020 were substantively enacted on 6 September 2016.
As these changes have been substantively enacted at the statement of financial position date their effects are included in these financial statements.
Management considers that US tax reform substantively enacted by the date of these financial statements has not caused any material effect to the Groups financial statements.
Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Ebiquity plc Financial statements Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued for the year ended 31 December 2017 Earnings per share The calculation of the basic and diluted earnings per share is based on the following data Year ended Year ended 31 December 31 December 2017 2016 Earnings for the purpose of basic earnings per share being net profit attributable to equity holders of the parent 2064 4150
Impact of highlighted items net of tax 5458 4837 Earnings for the purpose of underlying earnings per share 7522 8987 Number of shares Weighted average number of shares during the year basic 77876427 77186127 dilutive effect of share options 2499656 2598806 diluted 80376083 79784933 Basic earnings per share Diluted earnings per share Underlying basic earnings per share Underlying diluted earnings per share Highlighted items attributable to equity holders of the parent see note 3 stated net of their total tax impact.
Goodwill
Cost
At 1 January 2016
Foreign exchange differences At 31 December 2016
Foreign exchange differences At 31 December 2017 Accumulated impairment At 1 January 2016 At 31 December 2016
At 31 December 2017 Net book value At 31 December 2017 At 31 December 2016 1552000 of goodwill was recognised following the acquisition of Digital Balance Australia Pty Limited.
Refer to note 27 for further details.
72 Ebiquity plc Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Goodwill has been allocated to the following segments Year ended Year ended 31 December 31 December 2017 2016 Media Value Measurement 28957 28778 Market Intelligence 22299 22360 Marketing Performance Optimisation 8061 6907 59317 58045 The Group tests goodwill annually for impairment or more frequently if there are indications that goodwill may be potentially impaired.
Goodwill is allocated to the Groups cashgenerating units CGUs in order to carry out impairment tests.
The Groups remaining carrying value of goodwill by CGU at 31 December was as follows Year ended Year ended 31 December 31 December 2017 2016 Cashgenerating unit Reporting segment Advertising UKUSInternational Market Intelligence 19114 19114 Media UK and International Media Value Measurement 9265 9238
Marketing Performance Optimisation 4774 5229
Media Value Measurement 4839 4966 Media Germany Media Value Measurement 4325 4319 Media Value Group Media Value MeasurementMarketing Performance Optimisation 3162 3035
Media Value Measurement 2981 2981 Media Australia Media Value Measurement 2478 2506 Advertising Germany Market Intelligence 2429 2333
Marketing Performance Optimisation 1678 1678 Digital Balance Marketing Performance Optimisation Advertising Australia Market Intelligence Media America Media Value Measurement Media France Media Value Measurement Media Italy Media Value Measurement
Media Value Measurement 59317 58045 At 31 December 2017 the balance included 1552000 of acquired goodwill recognised following the acquisition of Digital Balance Australia Pty Limited.
Refer to note 27 for further details.
The impairment test involves comparing the carrying value of the CGU to which the goodwill has been allocated to the recoverable amount.
The recoverable amount of all CGUs has been determined based on value in use calculations.
Under IFRS an impairment charge is required for goodwill when the carrying amount exceeds the recoverable amount defined as the higher of fair value less costs to sell and value in use.
No impairment of goodwill was recognised in the year ended 31 December 2017 year ended 31 December 2016 nil.
Value in use calculations The key assumptions used in managements value in use calculations are budgeted operating profit pretax discount rate and the longterm growth rate.
The Directors prepare a threeyear pretax cash flow forecast based on the following financial years budget as approved by the Board with revenue and cost forecasts for the following two years adjusted by segment and geography.
The forecast takes account of actual results from previous years combined with management expectations of market developments.
Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Ebiquity plc Financial statements Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued for the year ended 31 December 2017 Goodwill continued Value in use calculations continued Budgeted operating profit assumptions To calculate future expected cash flows management has taken the Board approved budgeted operating profit EBIT for each of the CGUs for the 2018 financial year.
Additionally management charges have been allocated from the unallocated central costs budget back into the CGUs and thereby reducing Board approved EBIT in each CGU by this amount.
The management charge is allocated based on 2017 actual management charges.
For the 2019 and 2020 financial years the forecast EBIT is as per managements threeyear plan.
The forecast 2020 balances are taken to perpetuity in the model.
Managements threeyear plan uses certain assumptions to forecast revenue and operating costs within the Groups operating segments beyond the 2018 budget.
Discount rate assumptions The Directors estimate discount rates using rates that reflect current market assessments of the time value of money and risk specific to the CGUs.
The threeyear pretax cash flow forecasts have been discounted at between 7.0% and 8.6% 31 December 2016 between 7.2% and 8.7%.
Growth rate assumptions Cash flows beyond the threeyear period are extrapolated at a rate of 2.25% 31 December 2016 2.25% which does not exceed the longterm average growth rate in any of the markets in which the Group operates.
The excess of the value in use to the goodwill carrying values for each CGU gives the level of headroom in each CGU.
The estimated recoverable amounts of the Groups operations in all CGUs significantly exceed their carrying values with the exception of China.
Sensitivity analysis The Groups calculations of value in use for its respective CGUs are sensitive to a number of key assumptions.
Other than disclosed below management does not consider a reasonable possible change in isolation of any of the key assumptions to cause the carrying value of any CGU to exceed its value in use.
The considerations underpinning why management believes no impairment is required in respect of China are as follows specifically what change in key assumptions would result in an impairment % change leading Current % to impairment Budgeted revenue growth Budgeted cost growth Pretax discount rate 74 Ebiquity plc Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 10.
Other intangible assets
Purchased Total development Computer intangible intangible costs software assets assets
At 1 January 2016 3638 2383 23299 29320
1091 781  1872
Disposals
Foreign exchange differences 68 147 1414 1629 At 31 December 2016 4344 3051 24938 32333
1202 412 420 2034 Foreign exchange differences At 31 December 2017 5530 3472 25333 34335 Amortisation and impairment At 1 January 2016 1544 1320 12929 15793 Charge for the year 256 330 1865 2451
Foreign exchange differences At 31 December 2016 1376 1517 15406 18299 Charge for the year 573 370 1952 2895 Foreign exchange differences At 31 December 2017 1949 1896 17367 21212 Net book value At 31 December 2017 3581 1576 7966 13123 At 31 December 2016 2968 1534 9532 14034 Purchased intangible assets consist principally of customer relationships with a typical useful life of eight to 10 years.
Customer relationships of 420000 were recognised during the year ended 31 December 2017 as part of the Digital Balance Australia Pty Limited acquisition referred to in note 27.
Customer relationships of 142000 and a brand valuation of 83000 were recognised during the year ended 31 December 2016 as part of the acquisition of Fairbrother Marsh Company Limited.
Amortisation of 1924000 is charged within administrative expenses so as to write off the cost of the intangible assets over their estimated useful lives.
The amortisation of purchased intangible assets is included as a highlighted administrative expense.
Of the net book value of capitalised development costs 870000 remains in development at 31 December 2017.
No impairment charge is required for the year ended 31 December 2017 year ended 31 December 2016 nil following managements review of the carrying value of other intangible assets.
Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Ebiquity plc Financial statements Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued for the year ended 31 December 2017 Property plant and equipment
Leasehold land Motor fittings and Computer and building vehicles equipment equipment improvements Total
At 1 January 2016 38 1490 4942 1150 7620
Additions
Acquisitions
Disposals
Foreign exchange differences tel638 At 31 December 2016 44 1504 5299 1637 8484
Acquisitions
Disposals
Foreign exchange differences At 31 December 2017 46 1854 5308 1599 8807 Accumulated depreciation At 1 January 2016 6 753 3366 567 4692
Charge for the year
Foreign exchange differences At 31 December 2016 13 765 4049 1219 6046 Charge for the year
Disposals
Foreign exchange differences 3 At 31 December 2017 21 917 4607 1433 6978 Net book value At 31 December 2017 2tel1829 At 31 December 2016 31 739 1250 418 2438 The Group holds assets under finance leases within fixtures fittings and equipment with cost of 21000 31 December 2016 21000 and accumulated depreciation of 17000 31 December 2016 13000.
During the year ended 31 December 2016 an amount of leasehold land and buildings improvements previously included within the net book value of leasehold land and building improvements and netted against depreciation was reclassified to cost.
76 Ebiquity plc Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 12.
Subsidiaries
Details of the Companys subsidiaries are set out below.
Proportion of nominal value of issued ordinary Country of
Subsidiary undertaking shares held incorporation of business Adtrack Limited 100%
Nontrading
AMMO Limited 100%
Nontrading
Axiology Limited 100%
Nontrading
Barsby Rowe Limited 100%
Nontrading
BCMG Acquisitions Limited 100%
Nontrading
BCMG Limited 100% UK Holding company Billetts Consulting Limited 100%
Nontrading
Billetts International Limited 100%
Nontrading
Billetts Limited 100%
Nontrading
Billetts Marketing Investment Management Limited 100%
Nontrading
Billetts Marketing Sciences Limited 100%
Nontrading
Billetts Media Consulting Limited 100%
Nontrading
Brief Information Limited 100%
Nontrading
Checking Advertising Services Limited 100%
Nontrading
China Media Shanghai Management Consulting Company Limited 100%
Media consultancy China Media Consulting Group Limited 100% Hong Kong Holding company Data Management Services Group Limited 100%
Nontrading
Digital Balance Australia Pty Limited 100% Australia Multichannel analytics Digireels Limited UK 100%
Nontrading
Ebiquity Asia Pacific Limited 100%
Holding company Ebiquity Associates Limited 100%
Media monitoring and consultancy Ebiquity Germany GmbH 94.03%
Media monitoring and consultancy Ebiquity Holdings Inc.
100% US Holding company Ebiquity Inc.
100%
Media monitoring and consultancy and reputation management Ebiquity Italia S.
51%
Media consultancy Ebiquity Marsh Limited 100% Ireland Media monitoring and consultancy Ebiquity Pte.
Limited
100%
Media consultancy Ebiquity Pty Limited 100% Australia Media monitoring and consultancy Ebiquity Russia Limited 50.1%
Media consultancy Ebiquity Russia OOO 50.1%
Media consultancy Ebiquity SAS 100%
Media consultancy Ebiquity US Financing Limited 100% UK
Ebiquity US Holdings Limited 100%
Holding company Ebiquity US Holdings LLC 100%
Holding company Echo Group Limited 100%
Holding company Echo Research Limited 100%
Reputation management Efficiency Elements SL 100%
Marketing effectiveness Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Ebiquity plc Financial statements Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued for the year ended 31 December 2017 Subsidiaries continued Proportion of nominal value of issued ordinary Country of
Subsidiary undertaking shares held incorporation of business Fairbrother Lenz Eley Limited 100%
Nontrading
Fairbrother Marsh Company Limited 100%
Media monitoring and consultancy Faulkner Group Pty Limited 100%
Nontrading
FirmDecisions ASJP Germany GmbH 100% Germany Media consultancy FirmDecisions Group Limited 100% UK Holding company FirmDecisions ASJP LLC 100%
Media consultancy FirmDecisions Pty Limited 100%
Media consultancy FirmDecisions Limited 100%
Media consultancy FLE Holdings Limited 100% UK Holding company Fouberts Place Subsidiary No.
4 Limited 100%
Nontrading
Freshcorp Limited 100%
Nontrading
Media Value SL 100%
Media consultancy Mediaadvantage Consulting L.
100%
Media consultancy Nova Vision Europe S.
100%
Nontrading
Prominent Pages Limited 100%
Nontrading
Shots Limited 100%
Nontrading
Stratigent LLC 100%
Multichannel analytics Telefoto Monitoring Services Limited 100%
Nontrading
The Billett Consultancy Limited 100%
Nontrading
The Communication Trading Company Limited 100%
Nontrading
The Press Advertising Register Limited 100%
Nontrading
The Register Group Limited 100%
Nontrading
Worldwide Media Management Limited 100%
Nontrading
Xtreme Information Limited 100%
Nontrading
Xtreme Information Services Australia Pty Limited 100% Australia Nontrading Xtreme Information Services Limited 100% UK Holding company Xtreme Information Services SPRL 100%
Nontrading
Xtreme Information USA Limited 100%
Nontrading
On 1 September 2017 the Groups whollyowned subsidiary Digital Balance Australia Pty Limited acquired the assets and liabilities of Digital Balance Pty Limited.
On 18 December 2017 the Group acquired the outstanding 20% interest in its French media consultancy associate Ebiquity France SAS.
On 11 March 2016 the Group acquired the outstanding 50% interest in its Irish media consultancy associate Fairbrother Marsh Company Limited.
Refer to note 27 for further details.
Principal trading entity.
Shares held by an intermediate holding company.
78 Ebiquity plc Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 13.
Trade and other receivables 31 December 31 December 2017 2016 Trade and other receivables due within one year Net trade receivables note 24 20978 19291 Other receivables 1693 845
1132 1207 Accrued income 8706 7073 32509 28416 The Directors consider that the carrying amount of trade and other receivables are reasonable approximations of their fair value.
Cash and cash equivalents 31 December 31 December 2017 2016 Cash and cash equivalents 4732 6662 The Group has certain legally enforceable rights of offset for cash and cash equivalents and bank overdrafts.
Cash and cash equivalents earn interest at between 0% and 0.5%.
Cash and cash equivalents include the following for the purposes of the cash flow statement 31 December 31 December 2017 2016 Cash and cash equivalents 4732 6662 Bank overdrafts note 17 407 2062 Cash cash equivalents and bank overdrafts 4325 4600 Trade and other payables 31 December 31 December 2017 2016 Trade payables 4229 3071 Other taxation and social security 2281 2281 Other payables 7401 5919 The Directors consider that the carrying amount of trade and other payables are reasonable approximations of their fair value.
Accruals and deferred income 31 December 31 December 2017 2016
5560 4827 Deferred income 7105 7063 12665 11890 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Ebiquity plc Financial statements Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued for the year ended 31 December 2017 Financial liabilities 31 December 31 December 2017 2016
Bank overdraft 407 2062 Bank borrowings 1161 2410 Finance lease liabilities Contingent consideration 901 1777 2473 6253
Bank borrowings 32000 30205 Finance lease liabilities Contingent consideration 1193 238 33193 30448 Total financial liabilities 35666 36701
Bank Finance lease Contingent overdrafts borrowings liabilities consideration Total At 1 January 2016 Recognised on acquisition
4 5110 5114 Charged to the income statement Discounting charged to the income statement Discounting charged to the statement of financial position
3336   3336
329 6410   6739 Foreign exchange released to the income statement 574  808 1382 Foreign exchange released to reserves At 31 December 2016 2062 32615 9 2015 36701 Recognised on acquisition 1483 1483
1799 1799 Charged to the income statement Discounting charged to the income statement
3000   3000
1655 2500 5  4160 Foreign exchange released to the income statement At 31 December 2017 407 33161 4 2094 35666 A currency analysis for the bank borrowings is shown below 31 December 31 December 2017 2016 Pounds sterling 33161 32615 Total bank borrowings 33161 32615 80 Ebiquity plc Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 All bank borrowings are held jointly with Barclays and Royal Bank of Scotland RBS.
The committed facility totalling 44000000 comprises a term loan of 10000000 of which 1250000 remains outstanding at 31 December 2017 31 December 2016 3750000 and a revolving credit facility RCF of 34000000 of which 32000000 was drawn down at 31 December 2017 31 December 2016 29000000.
The term loan has a maturity date of 2 July 2018 and the RCF has a maturity date of 30 June 2019.
The 10000000 term loan is being repaid on a quarterly basis to maturity and the drawn RCF and any further drawings under the RCF are repayable on maturity of the facility.
The facility may be used for contingent consideration payments on past acquisitions to fund future potential acquisitions and for general working capital requirements.
Loan arrangement fees of 90000 31 December 2016 135000 are offset against the term loan and are being amortised over the period of the loan.
The facility bears variable interest of LIBOR plus a margin of 2.50%.
The margin rate is able to be lowered each quarter end depending on the Groups net debt to EBITDA ratio.
The undrawn amount of the revolving credit facility is liable to a fee of 40% of the prevailing margin which is set depending on the Groups net debt to EBITDA ratio as referred to above.
The Group may elect to prepay all or part of the outstanding loan subject to a break fee by giving five business days notice.
All amounts owing to the bank are guaranteed by way of fixed and floating charges over the current and future assets of the
As such a composite guarantee has been given by all significant subsidiary companies in the UK US and Germany.
Contingent consideration represents additional amounts that are expected to be payable for acquisitions made by the Group and is held at fair value at the statement of financial position date.
All amounts are expected to be fully paid by April 2021.
All finance lease liabilities fall due within five years.
The minimum lease payments and present value of the finance leases are as follows Minimum lease payments 31 December 31 December 2017 2016 Amounts due Within one year Between one and five years Less finance charges allocated to future periods Present value of lease obligations The minimum lease payments approximate the present value of minimum lease payments.
Provisions
Onerous
Dilapidations
Total
At 1 January Utilisation of provision Unused amounts released to income statement Arising on acquisition Foreign exchange At 31 December 2016 Unused amounts released to income statement At 31 December 2017
Noncurrent
The onerous property lease obligations in the prior year related to properties that the Group has vacated where there is a shortfall between the head lease costs and sublease income properties with excess vacant space and certain property leases held in acquired companies upon acquisition where lease payments are payable above a fair market rate.
The provision was fully utilised by January 2016.
The dilapidations provision relates to the expected costs of vacating various properties.
The provision is expected to be fully utilised by December 2020.
Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Ebiquity plc Financial statements Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued for the year ended 31 December 2017 Deferred tax Tangible Intangible Sharebased Tax Other timing assets assets payments losses differences Total At 1 January 2016 1Creditcharge to income Credit to equity
At 31 December 2016 225 2126 1060  54 787 Creditcharge to income At 31 December 2017 Certain noncurrent deferred tax assets and liabilities have been offset.
The following is the analysis of the deferred tax balance after offset for financial reporting purposes 31 December 31 December 2017 2016 Deferred tax assets  noncurrent 1502 1338 Deferred tax liabilities  current Deferred tax liabilities  noncurrent 1895 2125 At the year end the Group had tax losses of 282000 31 December 2016 nil available for offset against future profits.
A deferred tax asset of 220000 31 December 2016 nil has been recognised in respect of such losses.
The Group has unrecognised tax losses of 34000 31 December 2016 548000 and unrecognised deferred tax assets of 76000 31 December 2016 110000 in relation to tax losses.
Deferred tax on unremitted earnings has not been recognised as management do not intend to pay dividends from jurisdictions where a tax charge would be incurred and dividends received are not taxed in the UK.
Operating leases
The Group leases various offices under noncancellable operating leases with the majority of these expiring within one to five years.
The leases have varying terms break clauses and renewal rights.
The Group has future aggregate minimum lease payments under noncancellable operating leases which fall due as follows 31 December 2017 31 December 2016 Land and Land and buildings Other buildings Other No later than one year 1671 44 1410 76 Later than one year but no later than five years 4243 44 3055 202 Later than five years 1978  7 7892 88 4472 278
There is no minimum aggregate future rent receivable under noncancellable operating leases as at 31 December 2017 2016 nil.
82 Ebiquity plc Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 21.
Ordinary shares
Number value of shares 000 At 31 December 2015  ordinary shares of 25p Share options exercised 38063 10 At 31 December 2016  ordinary shares of 25p 77199751 19300 Share options exercised 397710 99 Shares issued 600000 150 At 31 December 2017  ordinary shares of 25p 78197461 19549 Ordinary shares carry voting rights and are entitled to share in the profits of the Company dividends.
At the year end 3956066 shares were held by the ESOP 31 December 2016 4201504.
The Company does not have a limited amount of authorised capital.
Reserves
Share premium The share premium reserve of 21000 31 December 2016 nil shows the amount subscribed for share capital in excess of the nominal value.
Other reserves Other reserves consists of the merger reserve ESOP reserve and translation reserve.
Merger reserve The merger reserve of 3667000 31 December 2016 3667000 arose on the issuance of shares at a premium on a Group restructure where the premium on issue qualified for merger relief.
There has been no movement in the period.
Sharebased payment reserve On 29 March 2016 the Group agreed to increase the total cap on consideration payable on the Stratigent LLC Stratigent acquisition.
The Group acquired Stratigent on 19 August 2013.
Stratigents management held a 7% economic interest in Stratigent which was acquired by the Group for a total consideration to be determined by the financial performance of Stratigent over the three financial years ending 30 April 2016 and capped at 1.5 million.
Stratigents financial performance over the first two financial years resulted in consideration of 1.1 million being paid to Stratigents management.
In order to ensure that management remains incentivised to continue to drive and generate the financial performance achieved over the first two financial years the Group agreed to increase the total cap on consideration payable to management.
Accordingly in March 2016 the cap on consideration was increased by an amount of 1.5 million with any excess over and above the existing cap on consideration payable 25% in cash and 75% in new ordinary shares in Ebiquity plc capped at 600000 new shares.
A sharebased payment reserve amounting to 634000 was created in equity representing 600000 new shares in the Company.
The sharebased payment reserve was settled on 17 November 2017 through the issuance of 600000 new shares.
ESOP reserve The ESOP reserve of 1478000 debit 31 December 2016 1478000 debit represents the cost of own shares acquired in the Company by the Employee Benefit Trust EBT.
The purpose of the EBT is to facilitate and encourage the ownership of shares by employees by acquiring shares in the Company and distributing them in accordance with employee share schemes.
The EBT may operate in conjunction with the Companys existing share option schemes and other schemes that may apply from time to time.
Translation reserve The translation reserve of 2688000 31 December 2016 2688000 arises on the translation into sterling of the net assets of the Groups foreign operations offset by any changes in fair value of financial instruments used to hedge this exposure.
At this time there are no hedges in place.
Retained earnings The retained earnings reserve shows the cumulative net gains and losses recognised in the consolidated income statement.
For detailed movements on each of the above reserves refer to the consolidated statement of changes in equity.
Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Ebiquity plc Financial statements Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued for the year ended 31 December 2017 Sharebased payments The Group operates a number of equitysettled share incentive schemes used to award employees of the Group.
A charge based on the fair value of the award on the grant date is taken to the consolidated income statement over the vesting period to recognise the cost of these.
Options outstanding at 31 December 2017
Exercise exercise Life of Exercise price price Name of share option scheme option period pence pence Number Executive Incentive Plan 27 January 2016 10 years January 2016  January 2026 25.0 25.0 500000 Executive Incentive Plan 12 May 2010 10 years May 2011  May 2020 Executive Incentive Plan 24 July 2017 10 years January 2019  January 2020 nil nil 460000 Executive Share Option Plan 01 October 2015 10 years May 2018  October 2025 25.0 25.0 1270295 Executive Share Option Plan 15 May 2014 10 years May 2017 April 2024 25.0 25.0 775869 Executive Share Option Plan 17 January 2014 10 years May 2016  January 2024 25.0 25.0 338829 Executive Share Option Plan 23 May 2013 10 years May 2016  May 2023 Executive Share Option Plan 27 September 2012 10 years September 2012  September 2022 25.0  98.0 97.5 135002 EMI and UCSOP Scheme 10 years May 2004  August 2021 nil  72.0 38.3 668282 Executive Incentive Plan EIP This is a discretionary scheme for the Directors of the Company.
On 12 May 2010 4200000 options with an exercise price of 35p each were awarded under the EIP to two Directors.
Vesting of the options was subject to the satisfaction of performance criteria designed to achieve growth of the business while at the same time maintaining and enhancing underlying earnings per share over the period to 30 April 2013.
On 27 January 2016 200000 options with an exercise price of 25p each were awarded under the EIP to an Executive Director.
100000 of these options will vest after six months service and the remaining 100000 options will vest after 12 months service in each case subject to the Executive Director remaining in the employment of the Company.
Also on 27 January 2016 an additional 300000 options with an exercise price of 25p each were granted under the EIP to an Executive Director.
These options will vest conditionally on the satisfaction of performance criteria relating to the growth of the Companys diluted adjusted earnings per share EPS as described below.
100000 options tranche two will vest conditionally on the satisfaction of EPS growth.
Any options from tranche one which do not vest will be rolled over into tranche two and will be capable of vesting along with the options granted as part of tranche two.
EPS growth over the relevant performance period for each tranche of 10% or more will result in all of the options in that tranche vesting.
EPS growth of 4% over the relevant performance period will vest onefifth of the options in that tranche.
None of the options in a tranche will vest if EPS growth over the relevant performance period is less than 4%.
Threefifths of the options in a tranche will vest if EPS growth over the relevant performance period is 8%.
The options in a tranche will vest on a straightline basis where EPS growth over the relevant performance period is between 4% and 8% or between 8% and 10%.
84 Ebiquity plc Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Executive share option plan ESOP This is a discretionary scheme comprised of an HMRC approved schedule and an unapproved schedule.
The ESOP provides a lockin incentive to Executive Directors and key management.
Vesting of these options is subject to the satisfaction of certain performance criteria and typically around the rate of growth of diluted adjusted earnings per share over a threeyear period.
Rights to ESOP options lapse if the employee leaves the Company.
Options awarded in the 2015 and May 2014 grants vest based on a sliding scale of compound growth rates of between 4% and 10% whilst options awarded in the January 2014 and 2013 grants vest based on a sliding scale of compound growth rates of between 5% and 15%.
In May 2014 a oneoff award was made to an Executive Director in recognition of his continued service through to retirement.
These options vest according to the rate of annual growth in the range between 4% and 12% in the total shareholder returns TSR over a threeyear period.
The remaining options issued in the 2012 grant have no performance conditions attached.
460000 31 December 2016 nil share options have been granted to employees under the ESOP in the year ended 31 December 2017.
Enterprise management incentive scheme EMI scheme The EMI scheme is a discretionary share option scheme which provides that options with a value at the date of grant of up to 120000 may be granted to employees.
The EMI scheme provides a lockin incentive to key management and is also utilised to attract key staff.
Rights to EMI share options lapse if the employee leaves the Company.
There are no further performance conditions.
No share options have been granted under this scheme since 13 April 2010 as the Group was from that date too large to qualify under the HMRC EMI scheme rules.
Unapproved company share option plan UCSOP This is a discretionary scheme which provides that options may be granted where employees were not eligible to join the EMI scheme.
The UCSOP provides a lockin incentive to key management.
Rights to UCSOP options lapse if the employee leaves the Company.
No share options have been granted to any employees under the UCSOP in the year ended 31 December 2017.
Movements in outstanding ordinary share options 31 December 2017 31 December 2016
Weighted
Number average Number average of share exercise price of share exercise price options pence options pence Outstanding at beginning of year 9563786 32.1 10280037 31.9 Granted during the year 460000  500000 25.0 Exercised during the year 397711 40.1 38063 69.6 Forfeited during the year 65001 39.7 297000 29.1 Performance criteria not expected to be met 1117273 25.0 881188 25.0 Outstanding at the end of the year 8443801 30.9 9563786 32.1 Exercisable at the end of the year 6718801 32.9 6236286 35.9 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Ebiquity plc Financial statements Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued for the year ended 31 December 2017 Sharebased payments continued Movements in outstanding ordinary share options continued During the year share options were granted with a weighted average fair value of 110.0p 31 December 2016 119.1p.
These fair values were calculated using the BlackScholes model with the following inputs 31 December 31 December 2017 2016 Weighted average share price Exercise price Expected volatility 13.1% 17.4% Vesting period 2 to 2.5 years 0.5 to 2 years Riskfree interest rates 0.33% to 0.40% 0.18% to 0.35% Expected volatility is based on historical volatility of the Company over the period commensurate with the expected life of the options.
Options exercised in the period resulted in 397711 shares 31 December 2016 38063 shares being issued at a weighted average price of 40.1p each 31 December 2016 69.6p.
The weighted average share price on the dates of exercise for options exercised during the year was 117.9p 31 December 2016 126.5p.
The options outstanding at the end of the year have a weighted average remaining contractual life of 4.5 years 31 December 2016 5.4 years with a range of exercise prices being between nil and 97.5p.
The total charge in respect of share option schemes recognised in the consolidated income statement during the period amounted to 738000 31 December 2016 92000 credit.
Capital and financial risk management General objectives policies and processes The overall objective of the Board is to set policies that seek to reduce risk as far as possible without unduly affecting the Groups competitiveness and flexibility.
The Board has overall responsibility for the determination of the Groups risk management policies and whilst retaining ultimate responsibility for them it has delegated the authority for designing and operating the processes that ensure the effective implementation of the financial risk management objectives and policies to the Groups finance function.
The Board receives monthly reports from the Groups finance function through which it monitors the effectiveness of the processes put in place and the appropriateness of the policies it sets.
Further details regarding these policies are set out on pages 86 to 91.
Capital and other reserves The Group considers its capital to comprise of its cash and cash equivalents borrowings ordinary share capital share premium noncontrolling interests reserves and accumulated retained earnings.
The Groups objective when maintaining capital is to safeguard the entitys ability to continue as a going concern so that it can continue to invest in the growth of the business and ultimately to provide an adequate return to its shareholders.
The Directors believe the Group has sufficient capital to continue trading in the foreseeable future.
86 Ebiquity plc Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 The following table summarises the capital of the Group 31 December 31 December 2017 2016 Financial assets Cash and cash equivalents 4732 6662 Financial liabilities held at amortised cost Bank overdraft 407 2062 Bank borrowings 33161 32615 Net debt 28836 28015
52982 52055
81818 80070 Financial risk management The Group is exposed to risks that arise from its use of financial instruments.
The Groups objectives policies and processes for managing those risks and the methods used to measure them are described below.
Further quantitative information in respect of these risks is presented throughout these financial statements.
There have been no substantive changes in the Groups exposure to financial instrument risks its objectives policies and processes for managing those risks or the methods used to measure them from previous periods unless otherwise stated in this note.
The Group is exposed through its operations to a variety of financial risks credit risk market risk including interest rate and currency risk and liquidity risk.
Credit risk Credit risk is the risk of financial loss to the Group if a customer or a counterparty to a financial instrument fails to meet its contractual obligations.
Trade receivables The Group operates in an industry where most of its customers are reputable and wellestablished multinational or large national businesses.
When the credit worthiness of a new customer is in doubt credit limits and payment terms are established and authorised by the Territory Finance Director.
The Group will suspend the services provided to customers who fail to meet the terms and conditions specified in their contract where it is deemed necessary.
There is no concentration of credit risk within the Group.
The maximum credit risk exposure relating to financial assets is represented by the carrying values as at the year end.
The credit control function of the Group monitors outstanding debts of the Group.
Debtor reports are reviewed and analysed on a regular basis.
Trade receivables are analysed by the ageing and value of the debts.
Customers with any overdue debts are contacted for payment and progress is tracked on a credit control report.
Based on these procedures management assessed the credit quality of those receivables that are neither past due nor impaired as low risk.
There have been no significant changes to the composition of receivables counterparties within the Group that indicate this would change in the future.
The Directors consider that the carrying amount of trade and other receivables are reasonable approximations of their fair value.
Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Ebiquity plc Financial statements Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued for the year ended 31 December 2017 Capital and financial risk management continued Credit risk continued Financial assets past due but not impaired The following is an analysis of the Groups trade receivables identifying the totals of trade receivables which are past due but not impaired Past due Past due Total  30 days 60 days At 31 December 2017 7460 3775 3685 At 31 December 2016 5855 2130 3725 The following is an analysis of the Groups provision against trade receivables 31 December 2017 31 December 2016
Carrying Gross
Provision value value Provision value Trade receivables 21240 262 20978 19491 200 19291 The Group records impairment losses on its trade receivables separately from the gross amounts receivable.
Impaired
The movements on this allowance during the year are summarised below 31 December 31 December 2017 2016 Opening balance Increase in provision Written off against provision Recovered amount reversed Foreign exchange Closing balance Market risk Market risk arises from the Groups use of interest bearing tradable and foreign currency financial instruments.
There is a risk that the fair value of future cash flows of a financial instrument will fluctuate because of changes in interest rates interest rate risk foreign exchange rates currency risk or other market factors other price risk.
Interest rate risk The Group is exposed to interest rate risk from bank loans and a revolving credit facility.
To illustrate the Groups exposure to interest rate risk a 0.5% increasedecrease in the rate applied to the Groups borrowings would have resulted in a posttax movement of 129000 31 December 2016 139000.
Currency risk The Group is exposed to currency risk on foreign currency trading and intercompany balances and also on the foreign currency bank accounts which it holds.
These risks are offset by the holding of certain foreign currency bank borrowings.
The translation of the assets and liabilities of the Groups overseas subsidiaries represents a risk to the Groups equity balances.
The Groups exposure to currency risk at the year end can be illustrated by the following 31 December 2017 31 December 2016
Increase
10% strengthening of US dollar 179 4270 59 4342 10% strengthening of euro 72 1979 465 1530 10% strengthening of Australian dollar An equal weakening of any currency would broadly have the opposite effect.
88 Ebiquity plc Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 The currency profile of the financial assets at 31 December 2017 is as follows Cash and cash equivalents Gross trade receivables 31 December 31 December 31 December 31 Decembertel 2016 Pounds sterling 461 1937 5083 5091 US dollar 1203 1626 6169 6005
1286 1667 8096 7064 Australian dollar 111telRussian rouble 40telSingapore dollar Chinese renminbi 24telNew Zealand dollar South African rand 4732 6662 20978 19491 Other price risks The Group does not have any material exposure to other price risks.
Liquidity risk Liquidity risk arises from the Groups management of working capital and the finance charges and principal repayments on its debt instruments the risk being that the Group may not meet its financial obligations as they fall due.
The liquidity risk of each Group company is managed centrally by the Group.
All surplus cash in the UK is held centrally to maximise the returns on deposits through economies of scale.
The type of cash instrument used and its maturity date will depend on the Groups forecast cash requirements.
Throughout the year the Group maintained a draw down facility with Barclays and Royal Bank of Scotland RBS see note 17 to manage any shortterm cash requirements.
At 31 December 2017 2000000 31 December 2016 nil was undrawn.
The facility expires in June 2019 at which point drawn down amounts will be repayable.
It is a condition of the borrowings that the Group pass various covenant tests on a quarterly basis and the Group finance team regularly monitors the Group forecasts to ensure they are not breached.
Categories of financial assets and liabilities The following tables set out the categories of financial instruments held by the Group.
All of the Groups financial assets and liabilities are measured at amortised cost.
Financial assets 31 December 31 December 2017 2016 Current financial assets Loans and receivables Trade and other receivables note 13 20978 20136 Cash and cash equivalents note 14 4732 6662 Total financial assets 25710 26798 Trade and other receivables includes net trade receivables and other receivables and excludes prepayments and accrued income.
Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Ebiquity plc Financial statements Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued for the year ended 31 December 2017 Capital and financial risk management continued Financial liabilities 31 December 31 December 2017 2016 Current financial liabilities Other financial liabilities at amortised cost Trade and other payables 5119 3638
5560 4827 Bank overdrafts 407 2062 Finance lease liabilities Loans and borrowings 1161 2410 Liabilities at fair value through profit and loss Contingent consideration 901 1777 13152 14718 Noncurrent financial liabilities Other financial liabilities at amortised cost Loans and borrowings 32000 30205 Finance lease liabilities Liabilities at fair value through profit and loss Contingent consideration 1193 238 33193 30448 Total financial liabilities 46345 45166 Trade and other payables includes trade payables and other payables and excludes other taxation and social security and deferred income.
The following table illustrates the contractual maturity analysis of the Groups financial liabilities Within One to one year five years Total At 31 December 2017 Trade and other payables 5119  5119
5560  5560 Finance lease liabilities Bank loans and overdrafts 3286 33774 37060 Contingent consideration 901 1193 2094 Total financial liabilities 14870 34967 49837 Less finance charges allocated to future periods 1718 1774 3492 Present value 13152 33193 46345 At 31 December 2016 Trade and other payables 3638  3638
4827  4827 Finance lease liabilities Bank loans and overdrafts 5484 33285 38769 Contingent consideration 1777 238 2015 Total financial liabilities 15732 33529 49261 Less finance charges allocated to future periods 1014 3081 4095 Present value 14718 30448 45166 90 Ebiquity plc Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Fair value measurement The following table provides an analysis of financial instruments that are measured subsequent to initial recognition at fair value grouped into Levels 1 to 3 based on the degree to which the fair value is observable Level 1 fair value measurements are those derived from quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities Level 2 fair value measurements are those derived from inputs other than quoted prices included within Level 1 that are observable for the asset or liability either directly or indirectly and Level 3 fair value measurements are those derived from valuation techniques that include inputs for the asset or liability that are not based on observable market data.
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total At 31 December 2017 Financial liabilities Contingent consideration 2094 2094 2094 2094 At 31 December 2016 Financial liabilities Contingent consideration 2015 2015 2015 2015 Refer to note 17 for a reconciliation of movements during the year.
The fair value of the contingent consideration of 2094000 31 December 2016 2015000 was estimated by applying the income approach.
The fair value estimates are based on a discount rate of 3% forecast EBIT of FMC Ireland and Digital Balance
This is a level 3 fair value measurement.
The key assumptions in calculating the contingent consideration payable are the EBIT of the businesses acquired and the discount rate.
Dividends
31 December 31 December 2017 2016 Dividend in respect of the prior year Total dividend paid A dividend of 474000 was paid during the current financial year 31 December 2016 292000.
Dividends were paid to noncontrolling interests as shown in the consolidated statement of changes in equity.
Cash generated from operations 31 December 31 December 2017 2016 Profit before taxation 4491 6625 Adjustments for Depreciation note 11 1066 1231 Amortisation note 10 2895 2451 Loss on disposal Unrealised foreign exchange gain Share option charges note 3 Finance income note 6 Finance expenses note 6 1061 1150 Contingent consideration revaluations 275 1599 9950 13616 Increase in trade and other receivables 4094 3968 Increase in trade and other payables 2111 1313 Movement in provisions Cash generated from operations 7958 10782 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Ebiquity plc Financial statements Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued for the year ended 31 December 2017
Digital Balance Australia Pty Limited On 1 September 2017 the Groups whollyowned subsidiary Digital Balance Australia Pty Limited acquired the assets and liabilities of Digital Balance Pty Limited a trust of the Digital Balance Unit Trust.
The acquisition was for an initial cash consideration of AU475000 278000 and a further cash payment of AU75000 45000 on 1 December 2017.
AU2725000 1596000 of contingent consideration was preliminarily recognised at acquisition however the maximum total purchase consideration is up to AU5000000 2928000 payable in cash depending on the performance of the Digital Balance business during the period ending 31 December 2020.
The fair value of the purchase consideration for the acquisition of acquired the assets and liabilities of Digital Balance Pty Limited is as follows
Net present value of contingent consideration Total purchase consideration The fair value of contingent consideration payable is based on EBIT for the years ending 31 December 2017 31 December 2018 31 December 2019 and 31 December 2020 with stage payments each year from 2018 onwards based on EBIT growth.
The potential range of future payments that Ebiquity plc could be required to make under the contingent consideration arrangement is between nil and 2928000 and will be paid in cash.
All contingent consideration payments are expected to be paid by June 2021.
The carrying value and the provisional fair value of the net assets recognised at the date of acquisition are as follows Carrying Fair value value adjustments Fair value Customer relationships Property plant and equipment Trade and other receivables Cash and cash equivalents Trade and other payables Net liabilities acquired Goodwill arising on acquisition Total purchase consideration The fair value adjustments relate to the finalisation of the allocation of the purchase consideration accounting for intangible assets customer relationships and deferred tax liabilities.
The goodwill recognised of 1552000 is attributable to the assembled workforce expected synergies and other intangible assets which do not qualify for separate recognition.
None of the goodwill arising from the acquisition is expected to be tax deductible.
Ebiquity SAS On 18 December 2017 the Group acquired the outstanding 20% interest in its subsidiary undertaking Ebiquity SAS from the minority shareholder for cash consideration of 1500000 1322000.
Fairbrother Marsh Company Limited On 11 March 2016 the Group acquired the outstanding 50% interest in its Irish media consultancy associate Fairbrother Marsh Company Limited FMC.
The 50% interest in FMC was acquired for an initial cash consideration of 150000 118000.
643000 500000 in contingent consideration was recognised at acquisition however the maximum total purchase consideration is up to 2000000 1559000 payable in cash depending on the performance of the FMC business during the year ended 31 December 2020.
Contingent liabilities The Group is subject to claims and litigation arising in the ordinary course of business and provision is made where liabilities are considered likely to arise on the basis of current information and legal advice.
92 Ebiquity plc Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 29.
Related party transactions The Group has a related party relationship with its subsidiaries refer to note 12 and key management personnel including Directors and Executive Committee members.
Transactions between the Company and its subsidiaries or between subsidiaries have been eliminated on consolidation and are not disclosed in this note.
Details of transactions between the Group and other related parties are disclosed below.
Compensation of key management personnel The remuneration of the Directors who are considered to be the key management personnel of the Group is set out in note 5.
There were no postemployment or other longterm benefits other than contributions to private pension schemes.
Transactions with companies related to key management personnel Revenue of nil 31 December 2016 14000 was recognised by the Group from Travelzoo Inc.
Michael Karg is a director.
Costs of nil 31 December 2016 1500 for a membership subscription were charged to the Company by the Quoted Companies Alliance a company of which Michael Higgins is a director.
Costs of 60000 31 December 2016 79000 for public relations consultancy were charged to the Company by Instinctif Partners Limited a company of which Richard Nichols is a director.
As at the year end 400 31 December 2016 16000 was owed to Instinctif Partners Limited a company of which Richard Nichols is a director.
Events after the reporting period On 13 February 2018 the Group agreed to sell its Advertising Intelligence business to Nielsen Media Research Limited for 26000000 in cash.
This has been treated as a nonadjusting event since the Advertising Intelligence business was not available for sale in its present condition nor was a transaction highly probable as of 31 December 2017.
This determination was made based on the status of the potential sale as of 31 December 2017 with no agreement reached legal terms not finalised and several external regulatory and other approvals not having been cleared.
The sale is subject to approval by the UK Competition and Markets Authority which if the regulator does not refer the transaction to a phase two investigation management expects will be completed during the second quarter of 2018.
On 19 March 2018 the Group entered into an agreement to sell the business assets of its Reputation division to Echo Research Holdings Limited.
This is the remaining part of its Groups Marketing Intelligence segment in addition to the Advertising Intelligence business.
Completion will take place on 31 March 2018.
The consideration payable is dependent upon the revenue performance of the business during the 12 months following completion.
Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Ebiquity plc Financial statements Independent auditors report to the members of Ebiquity plc Report on the audit of the company financial statements
In our opinion Ebiquity plcs company financial statements the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the companys affairs as at 31 December 2017 have been properly prepared in accordance with United Kingdom Generally Accepted Accounting Practice United Kingdom Accounting Standards comprising FRS 101 Reduced Disclosure Framework and applicable law and have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006.
We have audited the financial statements included within the Annual Report and Financial Statements the Annual Report which comprise the statement of financial position as at 31 December 2017 and the statement of changes in equity for the year then ended and the notes to the financial statements which include a description of the significant accounting policies.
Basis for opinion We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing UK ISAs UK and applicable law.
Our responsibilities under ISAs UK are further described in the Auditors responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements section of our report.
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion.
Independence
We remained independent of the group in accordance with the ethical requirements that are relevant to our audit of the financial statements in the UK which includes the FRCs Ethical Standard as applicable to listed entities and we have fulfilled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with these requirements. the engagement team.
These matters and any comments we make on the results of our procedures thereon were addressed in the context of our audit of the financial statements as a whole and in forming our opinion thereon and we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters.
This is not a complete list of all risks identified by our audit.
The scope of our audit As part of designing our audit we determined materiality and assessed the risks of material misstatement in the financial statements.
In particular we looked at where the directors made subjective judgements for example in respect of significant accounting estimates that involved making assumptions and considering future events that are inherently uncertain.
As in all of our audits we also addressed the risk of management override of internal controls including evaluating whether there was evidence of bias by the directors that represented a risk of material misstatement due to fraud.
Our audit approach
Key audit matters Key audit matters are those matters that in the auditors professional judgement were of most significance in the audit of the financial statements of the current period and include the most significant assessed risks of material misstatement whether or not due to fraud identified by the auditors including those which had the greatest effect on the overall audit strategy the allocation of resources in
Scope
Key Audit
Materiality
Overall materiality 1027000 2016 912000 based on 1% of total assets.
To the extent balances were audited to support the Group audit opinion materiality has been capped at an amount below the overall Group materiality.
Each financial statement line item is based scoped based on the materiality level.
Qualitative factors are also taken into account as well as the risk of understatement.
All work is performed by PwC UK.
Impairment of investments.
94 Ebiquity plc Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Key audit matter How our audit addressed the key audit matter Impairment of investments Given the Company is the ultimate parent of the group it holds investments in many subsidiaries.
The value of these investments is material to the accounts and there is a risk of impairment if the carrying values are deemed to be in excess of the recoverable amount.
We have reviewed investments for indicators of impairment.
Where indicators of impairment exist for example where the investments carrying value is in excess of its net assets we have obtained managements impairment assessment.
We have challenged managements assumptions in their impairment assessment recalculated models and agreed inputs.
We agree that no impairment is necessary.
How we tailored the audit scope We tailored the scope of our audit to ensure that we performed enough work to be able to give an opinion on the financial statements as a whole taking into account the structure of the company the accounting processes and controls and the industry in which it operates.
The Company operates from location and is corporate cost centre.
Based on the materiality level identified financial statement line items which are considered material both on a qualitative and quantitative basis are selected as in the scope of our testing.
The audit work performed over the Company was conducted by PwC UK the group audit team component auditors were not used.
Materiality
The scope of our audit was influenced by our application of materiality.
We set certain quantitative thresholds for materiality.
These together with qualitative considerations helped us to determine the scope of our audit and the nature timing and extent of our audit procedures on the individual financial statement line items and disclosures and in evaluating the effect of misstatements both individually and in aggregate on the financial statements as a whole.
Based on our professional judgement we determined materiality for the financial statements as a whole as follows Overall materiality 1027000 2016 912000.
How we determined it 1% of total assets.
Rationale for benchmark applied Based on total assets as the entity holds a majority of the Groups assets and is not a profit generating entity.
We agreed with the Audit Committee that we would report to them misstatements identified during our audit above 10000 2016 10000 as well as misstatements below that amount that in our view warranted reporting for qualitative reasons.
Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Ebiquity plc Financial statements Independent auditors report continued to the members of Ebiquity plc Conclusions relating to going concern We have nothing to report in respect of the following matters in relation to which ISAs UK require us to report to you when the directors use of the going concern basis of accounting in the preparation of the financial statements is not appropriate or the directors have not disclosed in the financial statements any identified material uncertainties that may cast significant doubt about the companys ability to continue to adopt the going concern basis of accounting for a period of at least twelve months from the date when the financial statements are authorised for issue.
However because not all future events or conditions can be predicted this statement is not a guarantee as to the companys ability to continue as a going concern.
Reporting on other information The other information comprises all of the information in the Annual Report other than the financial statements and our auditors report thereon.
The directors are responsible for the other information.
Our opinion on the financial statements does not cover the other information and accordingly we do not express an audit opinion or except to the extent otherwise explicitly stated in this report any form of assurance thereon.
In connection with our audit of the financial statements our responsibility is to read the other information and in doing so consider whether the other information is materially inconsistent with the financial statements or our knowledge obtained in the audit or otherwise appears to be materially misstated.
If we identify an apparent material inconsistency or material misstatement we are required to perform procedures to conclude whether there is a material misstatement of the financial statements or a material misstatement of the other information.
If based on the work we have performed we conclude that there is a material misstatement of this other information we are required to report that fact.
We have nothing to report based on these responsibilities.
With respect to the Strategic Report and Directors Report we also considered whether the disclosures required by the UK Companies Act 2006 have been included.
Based on the responsibilities described above and our work undertaken in the course of the audit ISAs UK require us also to report certain opinions and matters as described below.
Strategic Report and Directors Report In our opinion based on the work undertaken in the course of the audit the information given in the Strategic Report and Directors Report for the year ended 31 December 2017 is consistent with the financial statements and has been prepared in accordance with applicable legal requirements.
In light of the knowledge and understanding of the company and its environment obtained in the course of the audit we did not identify any material misstatements in the Strategic Report and Directors Report.
Responsibilities for the financial statements and the audit Responsibilities of the directors for the financial statements As explained more fully in the Directors Responsibilities Statement set out on page 49 the directors are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements in accordance with the applicable framework and for being satisfied that they give a true and fair view.
The directors are also responsible for such internal control as they determine is necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error.
In preparing the financial statements the directors are responsible for assessing the companys ability to continue as a going concern disclosing as applicable matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless the directors either intend to liquidate the company or to cease operations or have no realistic alternative but to do so.
Auditors responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error and to issue an auditors report that includes our opinion.
Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with ISAs UK will always detect a material misstatement when it exists.
Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if individually or in the aggregate they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these financial statements.
A further description of our responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements is located on the FRCs website at www. rc. auditorsresponsibilities.
This description forms part of our auditors report.
96 Ebiquity plc Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Use of this report This report including the opinions has been prepared for and only for the companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006 and for no other purpose.
We do not in giving these opinions accept or assume responsibility for any other purpose or to any other person to whom this report is shown or into whose hands it may come save where expressly agreed by our prior consent in writing.
Other required reporting Companies Act 2006 exception reporting Under the Companies Act 2006 we are required to report to you if in our opinion we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit or adequate accounting records have not been kept by the company or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or certain disclosures of directors remuneration specified by law are not made or the financial statements are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns.
We have no exceptions to report arising from this responsibility.
Other matter We have reported separately on the group financial statements of Ebiquity plc for the year ended 31 December 2017.
Richard Porter Senior Statutory Auditor for and on behalf of PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP Chartered Accountants and Statutory Auditors
21 March 2018 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Ebiquity plc Financial statements Company statement of financial position as at 31 December 2017 31 December 31 December 2017 2016 Note 000 000 Fixed assets Intangible assets 6 1239 990 Property plant and equipment Investments in subsidiaries 8 74890 74890 Total fixed assets 76129 75901 Current assets Trade and other receivables 9 26558 15290 Cash at bank and in hand Total current assets 26736 15290 Creditors amounts falling due within one year 10 47745 35599 Net current liabilities 21009 20309 Total assets less current liabilities 55120 55592 Creditors amounts falling due after more than one year 11 32000 30205 Net assets 23120 25387
Ordinary shares 12 19549 19300 Share premium Other reserves Retained earnings 13 4283 6186 Total shareholders funds 23120 25387 The Company has taken advantage of the exemption allowed under section 408 of the Companies Act 2006 not to present its own income statement in these financial statements.
The movement in reserves of the Company includes a loss for the year of 1913000 31 December 2016 loss for the year of 1380000.
The notes on pages 100 to 107 are an integral part of the financial statements of the Company.
The financial statements on pages 98 to 99 were approved and authorised for issue by the Board of Directors on 21 March 2018 and were signed on its behalf by Michael Karg PhD Andrew Noble
Director
98 Ebiquity plc Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Company statement of changes in equity for the year ended 31 December 2017
Share
Other
Retained capital premium reserves earnings Total At 31 December 2015 19290 11764 733 4576 25745 Loss for the year 1380 1380 Other comprehensive lossincome for the year Total comprehensive loss for the year 1380 1380 Proceeds from shares issued Share premium reduction 11780  11780 Shares issued to employees Sharebased payments credit Capital contribution relating to sharebased payments 8    180 180 Dividends to shareholders At 31 December 2016 19300  99 6186 25387 Loss for the year 1913 1913 Other comprehensive lossincome for the year Total comprehensive loss for the year 1913 1913 Proceeds from shares issued Shares issued to employees Dividends to shareholders At 31 December 2017 19549 21 733 4283 23120 On 8 June 2016 the Group announced the cancellation of the share premium account the Capital Reduction effective 9 June 2016 following registration of the Court order confirming the Capital Reduction by the Registrar of Companies.
A sharebased payment reserve of 634000 was created during the year ended 31 December 2016 and settled during the year ended 31 December 2017.
Refer to note 13 for further details.
The notes on pages 100 to 107 are an integral part of the financial statements of the Company.
Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Ebiquity plc Financial statements b.
Financial Instruments Disclosures c.
91 to 99 of IFRS 13 Fair Value Measurement disclosure of valuation techniques and inputs used for Fair Value Measurement of assets and liabilities d.
IAS 1 Presentation of Financial Statements to present comparative information in respect of i. ii.
Property Plant and Equipment iii.
Intangible Assets reconciliations between the carrying amount at the beginning and end of the period The following paragraphs of IAS 1 Presentation of Financial i.
10D statement of cash flows ii.
16 statement of compliance with all IFRS iii.
38A requirement for minimum of two primary statements including cash flow statements iv.
38BD additional comparative information v.
111 cash flow statement information and vi.
134136 capital management disclosures. e.
IAS 7 Statement of Cash Flows f.
Accounting Policies changes in accounting estimates and errors requirement for the disclosure of information when an entity has not applied a new IFRS that has been issued but is not yet effective g.
Party Disclosures key management compensation and h.
Party Disclosures to disclose related party transactions entered into between two or more members of a group.
General information Ebiquity plc the Company acts as a holding company and is incorporated and domiciled in the UK.
The address of its registered office is CityPoint One Ropemaker Street London EC2Y 9AW.
The financial statements of the Company represent the results for the year ended 31 December 2017 whilst the comparatives represent the results for the year ended 31 December 2016.
The financial statements present information about the Company as an individual undertaking and not about its group.
Basis of preparation The financial statements of the Company have been prepared in accordance with Financial Reporting Standard 101 Reduced Disclosure Framework FRS 101.
The financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis.
The Company meets its daytoday working capital requirements through its cash reserves and borrowings described in note 17 to the consolidated financial statements.
The Companys forecasts and projections taking account of reasonably possible changes in trading performance show that the Company should be able to operate within the level of its current cash reserves and borrowings including continuing to meet the bank covenants therein.
The
Company therefore continues to adopt the going concern basis in preparing its financial statements.
The financial statements have been prepared under the historical cost convention and in accordance with the Companies Act 2006.
The Company has taken advantage of the following disclosure exemptions under FRS 101 a.
45b and 4652 of IFRS 2 Sharebased Payment details of the number of weightedaverage exercise prices of share options and how the fair value of goods and services received was determined Summary of significant accounting policies The principal accounting policies adopted are set out below.
These policies have been consistently applied to all periods presented unless otherwise stated.
Finance income and expenses Finance income and expenses represents interest receivable and payable.
Finance income and expense is recognised on an accruals basis based on the interest rate applicable to each bank or loan account.
Foreign currency transactions The results and financial position of the Company are expressed in pounds sterling which is the functional currency of the Company and the presentation currency for the Company financial statements.
Trading transactions denominated in foreign currencies are translated into sterling at the exchange rate ruling when the transaction was entered into.
Assets and liabilities expressed in foreign currencies are translated into sterling at rates of exchange ruling at the end of the financial period.
All transactions involving foreign exchange gains and losses are dealt with through the income statement as and when they arise.
Sharebased payments The Company issues equitysettled sharebased payments to its employees and employees of subsidiaries using the Companys equity instruments.
These are measured at fair value excluding the effect of nonmarketbased vesting conditions at the date of grant and expensed on a straightline basis over the vesting period based on the Groups estimate of shares that will eventually vest and adjusted for the effect of nonmarketbased vesting conditions.
A corresponding credit is recorded in equity.
Notes to the Company financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 100 Ebiquity plc Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 For share options without performance conditions fair value is measured by use of the BlackScholes Model.
The expected life used in the model has been adjusted based on managements best estimates for the effects of nontransferability exercise restrictions and behavioural considerations.
The grant by the Company of options over its equity instruments to the employees of subsidiary undertakings in the Group is treated as a capital contribution.
The fair value of employee services received measured by reference to the grant date fair value is recognised over the vesting period as an increase to investment in subsidiary undertakings with a corresponding credit to equity in the parent entity financial statements.
Retirement benefits For defined contribution pension schemes the Company pays contributions to privately administered pension plans on a voluntary basis.
The
Company has no further payment obligations once the contributions have been paid.
Contributions are charged to the income statement in the period to which they relate.
Dividend income Dividend income is recognised when the right to receive payment is established.
Dividend distribution Dividend distribution to the Companys shareholders is recognised as a liability in the Companys financial statements in the period in which the dividends are approved by the Companys shareholders.
Intangible assets Computer software Purchased computer software intangible assets are amortised on a straightline basis over their useful lives which vary from four to five years.
Property plant and equipment Property plant and equipment is stated at cost less accumulated depreciation and any recognised impairment loss.
Depreciation is charged so as to write off the cost of assets over their estimated useful lives and is recognised in the income statement within administrative expenses.
The rates applied are as follows Fixtures fittings 20% per annum and equipment straightline
25% straightline Investments in subsidiaries Investments in subsidiaries are held at cost less accumulated impairment losses.
Where the purchase consideration for the acquisition of an interest in a subsidiary is contingent on one or more future events the cost of investment includes a reasonable estimate of the fair value of the amounts of consideration that are expected to be payable in the future.
The cost of investment and the contingent consideration liability is adjusted until the ultimate payable is known.
Cash and cash equivalents Cash and cash equivalents comprise cash in hand and shortterm deposits.
In the statement of financial position bank overdrafts are shown within borrowings in current liabilities.
Share capital Equity instruments issued by the Company are recorded at the amount of the proceeds received net of direct issuance costs.
Deferred taxation Recognition of deferred tax assets is restricted to those instances where it is probable that taxable profit will be available against which the difference can be utilised.
The recognition of deferred tax assets is reviewed at each yearend date.
The amount of the asset or liability is determined using tax rates that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the yearend date and are expected to apply when the deferred tax liabilitiesassets are settledrecovered.
Financial instruments Financial assets and financial liabilities are recognised in the Companys statement of financial position when the Company becomes a party to the contractual provisions of the instrument.
Financial assets The Company classifies its financial assets as loans and receivables.
Loans and receivables are nonderivative financial assets with fixed or determinable payments that are not quoted in an active market.
They arise principally through the provision of goods and services to customers trade receivables but also incorporate other types of contractual monetary asset.
They are initially recognised at fair value plus transaction costs that are directly attributable to their acquisition or issue and are subsequently carried at amortised cost using the effective interest rate method less provision for impairment.
Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Ebiquity plc Financial statements Notes to the Company financial statements continued for the year ended 31 December 2017 Operating loss Auditors remuneration Fees for the audit of the Company are 3000 31 December 2016 3000.
Fees paid to the Companys auditors for services other than the statutory audit of the Company are disclosed in note 4 to the consolidated financial statements.
Directors remuneration Fees paid to the Companys Directors are disclosed in note 5 to the consolidated financial statements.
Employee Share Ownership Plan
The ESOPs investment in the Companys shares is deducted from shareholders equity in the statement of financial position as if they were treasury shares except that profits on the sale of ESOP shares are not credited to the share premium account.
Critical accounting estimates and judgements In preparing the Company financial statements in conformity with FRS 101 the Directors are required to make certain estimates and judgements relating to the reported results of revenue and expenses during the period and the financial position of the Company at the reporting date.
Actual results may differ from those estimates.
Due to the nature of operations the key area of judgement that has the most significant effect on the amounts recognised in the Company financial statements is the review for impairment of the carrying value of investments in subsidiaries.
Company results for the year The Company has taken advantage of the exemption allowed under section 408 of the Companies Act 2006 not to present its own income statement in these financial statements.
The movement in reserves of the Company includes a loss for the year of 1913000 31 December 2016 loss for the year of 1380000.
Basis of preparation continued Financial instruments continued Financial liabilities Borrowings consisting of interestbearing secured and unsecured loans and overdrafts are initially recognised at fair value net of directly attributable transaction costs incurred and subsequently measured at amortised cost using the effective interest method.
The difference between the proceeds received net of transaction costs and the redemption amount is amortised over the period of the borrowings to which they relate.
The revolving credit facility is considered to be a longterm loan.
Trade and other payables are initially recognised at their nominal value which is usually the original invoiced amount.
Provisions
Provisions are recognised when the Company has a present legal or constructive obligation as a result of past events it is probable that an outflow of resources will be required to settle that obligation and the amount can be reliably estimated.
Provisions are not recognised for future operating losses.
Provisions are measured at the Directors best estimate of the expenditure required to settle the obligation at the yearend date.
If the effect of the time value of money is material provisions are determined by discounting the expected future cash flows at a pretax rate which reflects current market assessments of the time value of money and where appropriate the risks specific to the obligations.
102 Ebiquity plc Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 5.
Tax on loss on ordinary activities Year ended Year ended 31 December 31 December 2017 2016 The tax charge is made up as follows Current tax Deferred tax Origination and reversal of timing differences Taxation on ordinary activities The tax assessment for the year differs to the standard rate of corporation tax in the UK of 19.25% 31 December 2016 20%.
The differences are explained below Year ended Year ended 31 December 31 December 2017 2016 Loss on ordinary activities before taxation 1913 1380 Loss on ordinary activities at the standard rate of corporation tax in the UK of 19.25% 31 December 2016 20% Effects of Expenses not deductible for tax purposes Capital allowances for year in excess of depreciation Additions to intangibles Relieved to other Group companies Losses carried forward Current tax charge for the year Deferred tax on unremitted earnings has not been recognised as management do not intend to pay dividends from jurisdictions where a tax charge would be incurred and dividends received are not taxed in the UK.
Intangible assets
Cost
At 1 January 2017 1197 1197
At 31 December 2017 1590 1590
At 1 January 2017 Charge for the year At 31 December 2017 Net book value At 31 December 2017 1239 1239 At 31 December telStrategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Ebiquity plc Financial statements Notes to the Company financial statements continued for the year ended 31 December 2017 Property plant and equipment
Cost
At 1 January Disposals At 31 December 2017
At 1 January 2017 Charge for the year
At 31 December 2017 Net book value At 31 December 2017 At 31 December .
Investments in subsidiaries Cost and net book value At 31 December 2016
At 31 December 2017 The Companys principal trading subsidiaries and associated undertakings are listed in note 12 to the consolidated financial statements.
The Directors believe that the carrying value of the remaining investments is supported by their underlying net assets based on the impairment assessment carried out as described in note 9.
Trade and other receivables 31 December 31 December 2017 2016 Amounts owed by Group undertakings 26062 14989 Other receivables
26558 15290 Included within the amounts owed by Group undertakings above is an amount which is unsecured earns interest at 3% above EURIBOR has no fixed date of repayment and is repayable on demand.
Also included within the amounts owed by Group undertakings above is an amount which is unsecured earns interest at 2.65% above LIBOR has no fixed date of repayment and is repayable on demand.
The residual amounts owed by Group undertakings are unsecured noninterest bearing have no fixed date of repayment and are repayable on demand.
104 Ebiquity plc Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 10.
Creditors amounts falling due within one year 31 December 31 December 2017 2016 Bank loans and overdrafts 1568 4472 Trade creditors 1148 844 Other taxation and social security Other creditors
1070 669 Amounts owed to Group undertakings 43908 29560 47745 35599 Included within amounts owed to Group undertakings is an amount which is unsecured incurs interest at 5.5% plus Bank of England base rate has no fixed date of repayment and is repayable on demand.
The residual amounts owed to Group undertakings are unsecured interest free have no fixed date of repayment and are repayable on demand.
Creditors amounts falling due after more than one year 31 December 31 December 2017 2016 Bank loans  between two and five years 32000 30205 32000 30205 All bank borrowings are held jointly with Barclays and Royal Bank of Scotland RBS.
The committed facility totalling 44000000 comprises a term loan of 10000000 of which 1250000 remains outstanding at 31 December 2017 31 December 2016 3750000 and a revolving credit facility RCF of 34000000 of which 32000000 was drawn down at 31 December 2017 31 December 2016 29000000.
The term loan has a maturity date of 2 July 2018 and the RCF has a maturity date of 30 June 2019.
The 10000000 term loan is being repaid on a quarterly basis to maturity and the drawn RCF and any further drawings under the RCF are repayable on maturity of the facility.
The facility may be used for contingent consideration payments on past acquisitions to fund future potential acquisitions and for general working capital requirements.
Loan arrangement fees of 90000 31 December 2016 135000 are offset against the term loan and are being amortised over the period of the loan.
The facility bears variable interest of LIBOR plus a margin of 2.50%.
The margin rate is able to be lowered each quarter end depending on the Groups net debt to EBITDA ratio.
The undrawn amount of the revolving credit facility is liable to a fee of 40% of the prevailing margin.
The Group may elect to prepay all or part of the outstanding loan subject to a break fee by giving five business days notice.
All amounts owing to the bank are guaranteed by way of fixed and floating charges over the current and future assets of the
As such a composite guarantee has been given by all significant subsidiary companies in the UK US and Germany.
Ordinary shares
Number value of shares 000 Allotted called up and fully paid At 31 December 2015  ordinary shares of 25p 77161688 19290 Share options exercised 38063 10 At 31 December 2016  ordinary shares of 25p 77199751 19300 Share options exercised 397710 99 Shares issued 600000 150 At 31 December 2017  ordinary shares of 25p 78197461 19549 Ordinary shares carry voting rights which are entitled to share in the profits of the Company.
During the year the Company paid a dividend of 0.65p per share a total of 474000 31 December 2016 0.4p with a total of 292000 to shareholders.
Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Ebiquity plc Financial statements Notes to the Company financial statements continued for the year ended 31 December 2017
Share premium The share premium reserve shows the amount subscribed for share capital in excess of the nominal value.
On 8 June 2016 the Company announced the cancellation of the Companys share premium account the Capital Reduction effective 9 June 2016 following registration of the Court order confirming the Capital Reduction by the Registrar of Companies.
Other reserves Other reserves consists of the merger reserve and ESOP reserve.
Merger reserve The merger reserve arose on the issuance of shares at a premium on a Group restructure where the premium on issue qualified for merger relief.
There has been no movement in the year.
Sharebased payment reserve On 29 March 2016 the Group agreed to increase the total cap on consideration payable on the Stratigent LLC Stratigent acquisition.
The Group acquired Stratigent on 19 August 2013.
Stratigents management held a 7% economic interest in Stratigent which was acquired by the Group for a total consideration to be determined by the financial performance of Stratigent over the three financial years ended 30 April 2016 and capped at 1.5 million.
Stratigents financial performance over the first two financial years resulted in consideration of 1.1 million being paid to Stratigents management.
In order to ensure that management remains incentivised to continue to drive and generate the financial performance achieved over the first two financial years the Group agreed to increase the total cap on consideration payable to management.
Accordingly in March 2016 the cap on consideration was increased by an amount of 1.5 million with any excess over and above the existing cap on consideration payable 25% in cash and 75% in new ordinary shares in Ebiquity plc capped at 600000 new shares.
A sharebased payment reserve amounting to 634000 was created in equity representing 600000 new shares in the Company.
The sharebased payment reserve was settled on 17 November 2017 through the issuance of 600000 new shares.
ESOP reserve The ESOP reserve represents the cost of own shares acquired in the Company by the Employee Benefit Trust EBT.
The purpose of the EBT is to facilitate and encourage the ownership of shares by employees by acquiring shares in the Company and distributing them in accordance with employee share schemes.
The EBT may operate in conjunction with the Companys existing share option schemes and other schemes that may apply from time to time.
The ESOP trusts were created to award shares to certain employees at less than market value.
The trusts in aggregate hold unallocated shares costing 1471000 31 December 2016 1471000 funded by the Company.
The sponsoring company is responsible for the administration and maintenance of the trust.
The number of shares held by the trust is 4201504 31 December 2016 4201504 all of which are under option to the employees of the Group.
As at the statement of financial position date all of the shares in the ESOP had vested 31 December 2016 all had vested.
Retained earnings The retained earnings reserve shows the cumulative net gains and losses recognised in the income statement.
For detailed movements on each of the above reserves refer to the statement of changes in equity.
The distributable reserves of the Company total 4283000 31 December 2016 6186000.
Sharebased payments Full disclosure of sharebased payments is included in the consolidated financial statements see note 23 to the consolidated financial statements.
Commitments
Capital commitments contracted but not provided for by the Company amount to nil 31 December 2016 nil.
The Company has no operating lease commitments 31 December 2016 none.
106 Ebiquity plc Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 16.
Contingent liabilities The Company is subject to claims and litigation arising in the ordinary course of business and provision is made where liabilities are considered likely to arise on the basis of current information and legal advice.
Related party transactions Under FRS 101.8k the Company is exempt from the requirement to disclose transactions with entities that are part of the Ebiquity plc Group or investees of the Group qualifying as related parties as all of the Companys voting rights are controlled within the Group.
The Company has no other material related parties.
Related party transactions are detailed in note 30 to the consolidated financial statements.
Transactions with key management personnel FRS 101.8j exempts entities from the disclosures in respect of the compensation of key management personnel.
Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Ebiquity plc Financial statements
Independent auditors PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP Chartered Accountants and Statutory Auditors 1 Embankment Place London WC2N 6RH Nominated adviser and broker Numis Securities Limited The London Stock Exchange Building 10 Paternoster Square London EC4M 7LT
Computershare Investor Services plc PO Box 82 The Pavilions Bridgwater Road Bristol BS99 7NH Shareholder information Country of incorporation Ebiquity plc is registered and incorporated in England and Wales.
Number of securities in issue As of 21 March 2018 the Companys issued share capital consists of 78367690 ordinary shares of 25p each.
The Company has no treasury shares.
Details of any restrictions on the transfer of securities There are no restrictions on any of the Companys AIM securities.
Securities not in public hands As of 21 March 2018 the percentage of the Companys issued share capital that is not in public hands is 43.72%.
Company registration Registered office
One Ropemaker Street London EC2Y 9AW Company number 0telEbiquity plc Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 ANA Association of National Advertisers AOR agency of record APAC Asia Pacific APMs Alternative Performance Measures CAGR compound annual growth rate
Reduction the share premium account CGUs cashgenerating units CMA Competition and Markets Authority the Company Ebiquity plc
EBIT earnings before interest and tax
EBT Employee Benefit Trust
Executive Incentive Plan EMI scheme enterprise management incentive scheme
ESOP
Executive Share Option Plan
Fairbrother Marsh Company Limited FRS 101 Financial Reporting Standard 101 Reduced Disclosure Framework the Group Ebiquity plc and its subsidiaries
IASB International Accounting Standards Board
International Financial Reporting
IPA Institute of Practitioners in Advertising ISAs International Standards on Auditing
Incorporated Society of British Advertisers KPIs key performance indicators LIBOR London Interbank Offered Rate
LTI LongTerm Incentive
Market Intelligence
Marketing Performance Optimisation
Media Value Measurement Net debt longterm borrowings shortterm borrowings less cash and cash equivalents
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP QCA Code Quoted Companies Alliance  Corporate Governance Code for Small and MidSize Quoted Companies 2013
Royal Bank of Scotland
Stratigent
Stratigent LLC
UCSOP unapproved company share option plan
WFA
World Federation of Advertisers
Designed and produced by site Printed on Splendorgel Extra White an FSC mixed sources paper manufactured using pulp from well managed forests at a mill accredited with EMAS and ISO 14001 environmental standards.
Printed by CPI Colour who are ISO 14001 certified CarbonNeutral and FSC chain of custody certified.
The inks used are vegetable oil based.
Ebiquity plc  Annual report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Ebiquity plc
One Ropemaker Street
