ANNUAL REPORT Symphony Environmental Technologies plc 2017 AND ACCOUNTS Symphony Environmental Technologies plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 site
Business Review
01 Highlights 02 Symphony at a Glance
04 Chairmans Statement
06 Chief Executives Review
08 2017 Roundup 09 Corporate Social Responsibility Corporate Governance 10 Board of Directors 12 Strategic Report 13 Directors Report
15 Remuneration Report
Financial Statements
16 Independent Auditors Report
19 Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income 20 Consolidated Statement of Financial Position 21 Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity 22 Consolidated Cash Flow Statement 23 Notes to the Annual Report and Accounts 43 Company Balance Sheet 44 Company Statement of Changes in Equity 45 Notes to the Company Balance Sheet 49 Company information Symphony is a world leader in controlledlife plastic and supplies masterbatches and finished plastic products.
Our d w oxobiodegradable OBP controlledlife masterbatch was the first technology of this type to be awarded an EcoLabel distinguishing it from all similar products on the market.
Plastic waste is a global problem which is now dominating the media and concentrating the minds of legislators companies NGOs and scientists around the world.
Plastic is vital for our food chain because foods are safer and stay fresher when protected in plastic and this reduces food waste.
This is really significant as one third of the food produced each year is wasted.
Opponents of plastic have yet to find a viable alternative which goes anywhere near performing as well as plastic for most applications and have themselves raised concerns about food safety and food waste.
Reduce Reuse and Recycle.
It is also the best technology available for our customers for consumers and for the protection of the environment.
Symphony has also developed a range of plastic technologies under the d p designed to protect brand offering extra protection from bacteria insects fungi algae odour fouling and fire.
In addition to these we have recently developed a corrosion inhibitor and a range of products specifically designed for food packaging.
These include an oxygen absorber ethylene adsorber odouradsorber and a releaseagent to prevent food sticking to the inside of packaging.
Finally our d t tag and trace technologies give our customers the ability to check the authenticity of products of all kinds helping to protect brand owners from counterfeits and fraud.
Our products are marketed through a network of distributors in nearly 100 countries worldwide.
Symphony develops and produces a wide range of technologies to make plastic smarter.
FINANCIAL HIGHLIGHTS
Revenues increased by 21.6% to 8.27 million 2016 6.80 million Gross profit increased by 17.8% to 4.01 million 2016 3.41 million EBITDA before RandD increased by 57.9% to 1.20 million 2016 0.76 million Profit before tax increased by 249.6% to 0.43 million 2016 0.12 million Profit after tax increased by 156.0% to 0.43 million 2016 0.17 million Basic earnings per share increased to 0.28p 2016 0.11p Cash generated from operations 1.03 million 2016 cash used 0.34 million Improved working capital position with net cash of 0.63 million 2016 net debt 0.37 million Distributable reserves of 0.07 million 2016 retained deficit 3.97 million
OPERATIONAL HIGHLIGHTS
Saudi Standards Metrology and Quality Organisation SASO started enforcing legislation requiring the use of oxobiodegradable plastic Symphony was the first organisation to be awarded the SASO Quality Mark for its d w oxobiodegradable additives and to achieve authorised supplier status for the Saudi Arabian market Launched d p antimicrobial gloves into Wilko in the UK and several retail outlets in Italy Launched d p antimicrobial masterbatch for use in water pipes in Pakistan Continued significant investment in RandD 01 Symphony Environmental Technologies plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 site For more information visit site FINANCIAL STATEMENTS BUSINESS REVIEW CORPORATE GOVERNANCE SYMPHONY AT A GLANCE
STATEMENT
BOARD OF
CHIEF
EXECUTIVES
REVIEW
Highlights 2017 02 An international company with presence in nearly 100 countries worldwide Symphony at a glance Our product information 02 Symphony Environmental Technologies plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 site sited2w sitewhatisd2w2 The addition of d w turns ordinary polymer at the end of its useful life and in the presence of oxygen into a material which is biodegradable in the open environment. w is a masterbatch that is added to polymer during manufacture.
It offers seamless integration into the manufacturing process and is added at only 1% which means little or no extra cost.
Plastic products incorporating d can be made in existing plastic factories with their existing workforce and machinery. terms of degradation biodegradation and ecotoxicity  i.
British Standard 8472 ASTM D6954 UAE 50092009 AFNOR AC T51808 and SASO Standards. i. it is waterproof lightweight strong and flexible. can be recycled with conventional polymer and can be made from recyclate.
Products made with d w also have the crucial advantage in that if they escape collection and end up in the open environment as litter they will degrade and biodegrade until there is nothing left in the same way as natures waste only quicker and leaving nothing behind.
No Toxic residues and No Microplastics Several countries in Africa Asia and the Middle East have already legislated to require everyday plastic items to be made with oxobiodegradable technology because it works.
Bin liners Bottles tubs and cups Bubble wrap Carrier bags Cling film Food packets Frozen food packaging Garbage sacks Gloves and aprons Newspaper and magazine wrappers Paint ball spheres Pallet wrap
Shrink wrap w  Making Plastic Smarter Overview p is a suite of masterbatches which offer extra protection from bacteria insects fungi algae odour fouling and fire.
This year the product range has been expanded to include a corrosion inhibitor and a range of products specifically for food packaging consisting of an ethyleneadsorber an oxygenabsorber an odouradsorber and a releaseagent to help prevent food from sticking to the inside of packaging.
03 Symphony Environmental Technologies plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 site FINANCIAL STATEMENTS BUSINESS REVIEW CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
Fights healthcare and food industry infections.
Tested against dangerous organisms including MRSA Ecoli Listeria Salmonella Pseudomonas and Aspergillus Niger.
Natural
Antibacterial suitable for use in food and nonfood applications.
In compliance with FDA Food and Drug Administration USA and EFSA European Food Safety Authority requirements.
Antimicrobial
The primary purpose is to prevent bacterial and fungal contamination whilst preserving the aesthetic and functional properties of the plastic article.
Odour adsorber Inorganic masterbatches and additives designed to inhibit the development of odours in plastic products and to prevent spoilage of fruit and vegetables.
Insecticide technology Insecticidal plastic masterbatches used to control pests.
Typically used in mosquito nets agriculture horticulture forestry and home applications.
Flame retardant Flame retardants decrease the ignitability of materials and inhibit the combustion process  limiting the amount of heat released.
Pest control Rodents can cause dangerous damage to plastic products such as cable insulation warehouse pallets nonfood packaging and boxes etc.
Symphony has developed additive masterbatches with products that repel these pests.
Antifouling
Antifouling paint is a specialised coating applied to the hull of a ship or boat to reduce the growth of aquatic organisms.
Vapour corrosion inhibitor p VCI additives are a range of products to be used in protection of surfaces against the corrosion and oxidation of ferrous and nonferrous metals.
Ethylene moisture and odour adsorber Highly active adsorbent masterbatch for the removal of undesirable odours volatile organic compounds VOC and water vapour from plastic packaging to reduce spoilage of fruit and vegetables.
Oxygen absorber p OA is a powerful inorganic chemical compound produced from a natural ore and manufactured to a high purity.
Release agent A modern synthetic product produced from one of the most common of the earths elements.
It plays a key role in the improvement of the flow and processing of resins as well an enhancing the slip and lubricity of plastic products.
Water pipes and tanks
Clothing and accessories
Creditdebit cards Cuttingchopping boards Electronic devices Flexible food packaging Food containers
Home roofing wall cladding and decking tubing piping bed pans Kitchen utensils Kitchen worktop coating Pet food packaging Refuse sacks and longlife carrier bags Sanitary toilet seats shower heads shower curtains hand dryers toothbrush handles Sports ski boots bowling shoes insoles Transportation car interiors tube train plane Chairmans Statement Nirj Deva DL FRSA MEP Symphony Environmental Technologies plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 site 04
TECHNOLOGY and PRODUCTS I am very pleased to report a 249.6% increase in profit before tax to 430000 2016 123000 together with 1.03 million cash generated from operations 2016 cash consumed 0.34 million.
With the business now in a net cash position and with its technologies gaining increasing commercial traction together with elevated political and media coverage the Group has never been so well positioned in its key markets.
Symphony laboratory Our d w oxobiodegradable plastic technology fits in perfectly with many governments core principles of the 3 Rs reduce reuse recycle.
However unlike ordinary plastics a plastic upgraded with d w technology does not cause the accumulation of microplastics in the environment as it converts much more rapidly into biodegradable materials.
In addition to making conventional plastic more environmentally friendly d w can be used in some biobased plastics which would not otherwise degrade in the open environment.
This flexibility makes d w a vital insurance policy for many types of plastics some of which inevitably end up in the open environment.
Microplastics are the main concern today and they are caused by ordinary plastics fragmenting on land and in the oceans.
They need to be urgently upgraded with d w technology and this is already being done in the Middle East Africa and Asia  most recently in Saudi Arabia.
Symphony Environmental Technologies plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 site 05 Over the years we have established a strong distribution network with 74 distributors worldwide.
In the year ahead one of the Companys objectives will be to increase its lobbying and marketing to make sure that everyone understands the huge benefits that Symphonys d w and d p technologies can bring to the environment and human health.
Our strategy as previously reported was to expand the product range with synergistic technologies which can be offered to the same customer base and I am pleased to report that this is progressing well.
Revenues for the year increased by 21.6% to 8.27 million 2016 6.80 million with gross profits increasing by 17.8% to 4.01 million 2016 3.41 million.
The improved revenue was due to increased sales of d oxobiodegradable plastic additives in several markets.
These markets include South America and the Far East but momentum has been most apparent in the Middle East and in particular Saudi Arabia where legislation requires the use of oxobiodegradable technology for everyday plastic items made in or imported into the country.
Enforcement of the legislation commenced during 2017.
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS BUSINESS REVIEW CORPORATE GOVERNANCE The overall results highlight the operational gearing of the Group.
Additionally the Group effectively removed borrowings from the balance sheet as at yearend which was further enhanced by the completion of a capital reduction during the second half of the year.
This along with the profit generated in the year resulted in a consolidated retainedearnings position of 67000 2016 deficit 3.97 million.
I would like to thank the distributors staff and Board for all their hard and effective work in 2017 and we look forward with confidence.
N Deva DL FRSA MEP
13 March 2018 Profit before tax increased by 249% to 0.43 million Chief Executives Review Michael Laurier Symphony Environmental Technologies plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 site 06 Although Europe is not currently an important market for d w we note that the EU Commission have taken an interest in oxobiodegradable plastic and have asked the European Chemicals Agency ECHA to consider its environmental credentials.
The Commission do not as yet understand that the purpose of oxobiodegradable technology is not to produce microplastics but to ensure that if plastic does fragment in the open environment it will convert much more quickly into biodegradable materials.
We therefore welcome the reference to
Symphony and the Oxobiodegradable Plastics Association will be assisting ECHA with all necessary technical information but we do not expect any conclusions for some time.
The EU has been slow to realise the importance of this issue as countries in the Middle East and other parts of the world have already legislated to require the use of oxobiodegradable technology.
These countries want plastic fragments to be dealt with quickly and automatically and not to be left as a problem for future generations.
In Saudi Arabia the Saudi Standards Metrology and Quality Organisation SASO started enforcing legislation requiring the use of oxobiodegradable plastic for a range of locally manufactured and imported plastic products including carrier bags packaging films and agricultural films.
Symphony was the first company to be awarded the SASO Quality Mark for its d w oxobiodegradable additives and to achieve authorisedsupplier status for the Saudi Arabian market.
This year saw the completion of two RandD projects for p being antimicrobial household gloves and plastic water pipes.
The antimicrobial gloves were launched into Wilko in the UK and into several Italian retail outlets.
An initial order was also received from the Middle East.
As previously reported we have many customerled p development projects with applications including antimicrobials insecticide flame retardant odour and moisture adsorbers rodent repellents and corrosion inhibitors.
Trading results Group revenues increased by 21.6% to 8.27 million from 6.80 million in 2016.
Gross profit margins slightly decreased to 48.5% from 50.1% in 2016.
As a result the contribution from gross profit increased by 17.8% to 4.01 million from 3.41 million in 2016.
The majority of our revenues derive from d w and are earned mainly outside of the EU and the United States.
Costs increased by 6.9% to 3.30 million 2016 3.10 million due mainly to increased investment in RandD lobbying and marketing with associated travel expenditure into our key operating markets.
The
Group expensed RandD costs of 625000 in 2017 2016 514000.
EBITDA before RandD is a key metric for the Board and it increased by 57.9% to 1.20 million 2016 0.76 million showing the underlying profitability of the business as it has moved from a net debt position to a net cash position and its new technologies continue to be commercialised.
EXPANDING
OUR PRODUCT
I am pleased to report that the year under review saw a continued improvement in the Groups financial performance.
Our strategy throughout the year was to engage with governments NGOs and media globally explaining to them the benefits of using our growing range of technologies and in particular d oxobiodegradable plastic which can help to resolve the problem of persistent plastic pollution.
Symphony Environmental Technologies plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 site 07 During the second half of the year the Company completed a capital reduction which eliminated 3.61 million of share premium by transferring this to the credit of retained earnings.
Together with the results for the year the Groups retained earnings were 67000 2016 deficit 3.97 million with Company retained earnings of 1.13 million 2016 deficit 2.71 million.
The Board has considered the possible effects of Brexit on the business and due to its global operations is comfortable that this should not significantly affect the Groups future prospects.
Outlook
We expect to see an improving business environment where more countries legislate in favour of our type of technology and with better enforcement in countries where legislation has already been passed.
The desire to find a solution to the plastics problem and in particular microplastics has reached tipping point.
Our
This should make our entry into new markets and with new customers much easier than for disruptive technologies.
Our strategy for 2018 is to drive sales through an increased level of communications on a global scale increasing our social media presence together with media campaigns lobbying and direct selling.
We will announce these to the market at the relevant times.
We will continue with our RandD programme and maintain progress in commercialising our technologies including at the earliest opportunity our d p projects some of which require regulatory clearances and some require the completion of customerled product trials.
I would also like to thank all the staff at Symphony and our extended family of distributors for their hard and effective work and their continued commitment to the Symphony vision of being world leaders in making plastic smarter technologies and products.
Michael Laurier
Chief Executive Officer
EBITDA before RandD is calculated as follows Due to the operational gearing of the Group operating profit increased by 229.7% to 0.48 million from 0.15 million in 2016.
This resulted in a 249.6% increase in profit before tax of 0.43 million 2016 profit 0.12 million.
The Group therefore reports a profit after tax for 2017 of 0.43 million 2016 profit 0.17 million with basic earnings per share of 0.28 pence 2016 0.11 pence.
The Groups primary sellingcurrency is the US Dollar and therefore a strong dollar against sterling is beneficial for the Group.
The Group selfhedges by purchasing goods in US Dollars and utilises forward rate agreements to minimise exchange risk.
As at 31 December 2017 the Group had a net balance of US Dollar assets totalling 1.08 million 2016 0.91 million.
Balance sheet and cash flow The Group had net cash in the bank of 0.63 million at the yearend 2016 net debt of 0.37 million and had generated cash of 1.03 million from operations 2016 cash used 0.34 million.
This was achieved by improving profits as detailed above together with improved payment terms in one of its main markets.
There was a minimal 2000 hire purchase debt as at the yearend compared to 0.81 million of interest bearing debt at the end of 2016.
The Group also has if required a 1.5 million trade finance facility and a further 0.50 million working capital facility with HSBC
The Board do not envisage any working capital constraints as sales increase.
Revenue increased by 21.6% to 8.27 million FINANCIAL STATEMENTS BUSINESS REVIEW CORPORATE GOVERNANCE Operating profit Add Depreciation
RandD expenditure tel Roundup 08 Symphony Environmental Technologies plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 site In January of 2017 Symphony entered the household glove market with the launch of the UKs first d antimicrobial household gloves.
This innovative product sold under the Protector Health and Hygiene brand had been in development for two years prior to the launch in Wilko Stores nationwide.
Public awareness and concern about harmful bacteria and resistance to antibiotics has generated an increase in antimicrobial household products with further sales of antimicrobial household gloves made with d p technology in Italy Israel and the Middle East.
There are also more products for 2018 including toothbrushes water bottles cling film and food bags.
Staying with d p  Dadex Eternit Ltd in Pakistan who are one of the world leading producers of plastic pipes signed an exclusive fiveyear agreement with Business Dynamics Symphonys distributor in Pakistan to produce a range of plastic pipes made with d p antimicrobial technology  ensuring that the pipes will be free from the accumulation of harmful bacteria and fungi.
The d p suite of additives increased this year and now includes a corrosion inhibitor and a range of products specifically designed for food packaging which includes an oxygen absorber ethylene adsorber and a release agent to prevent food sticking to the inside of the plastic.
In April 2017 the Saudi government announced changes to legislation which require manufacturers and importers to prove that their plastic products are oxobiodegradable.
They must use masterbatches which have been approved by SASO Saudi Standards Metrology and Quality Organisation.
Symphony Environmental Ltd were the first to be granted a licence by SASO under the new regulations and we are now working with many companies in Saudi Arabia and abroad to make sure that their products comply with the new rules which cover an extensive list of shortlife plastic products.
Around the world the number of products benefitting from d oxobiodegradable technology has also recently expanded to include plastic coffee capsules.
These capsules were beginning to get a bad reputation by accumulating in the open environment so much so that the German city of Hamburg banned their use completely in 2016.
However  a company in Brazil has developed coffee capsules made with d w oxobiodegradable plastic technology giving their customers great coffee without the environmental problem.
Finally the d w logo pops up in all sorts of places as more and more companies and organisations are realising the benefit of making their plastic smarter.
An eagle eyed visitor on a tour of the Barcelona Football stadium was pleasantly surprised to find d w on the red tape used by the famous football club to seal off areas around the football ground.
Its great to know that d w is useful even for redtape.
Riyadh
Saudi government announced changes to legislation requiring manufacturers and importers to prove that their products are made with oxobiodegradable plastic.
09 Symphony Environmental Technologies plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 site Corporate Social Responsibility Symphony are ISO9001 and 14001 certified.
Our d w oxobiodegradable additive is the only product of this type to be awarded an internationally accredited EcoLabel distinguishing it from all similar products on the market.
We carefully monitor the energy we consume as a company and the waste we generate and we are committed to reducing our energy requirements and waste year on year.
We believe in the principles of the circular economy and are working towards reducing waste and avoiding pollution either by design or intention and embedding these principles into our business models and activities.
Our d w oxobiodegradable technology has been specifically designed to be consistent with these principles.
Our offices and laboratories use low energy lighting and all products and equipment are responsibly sourced.
We are committed to recycling and have a dedicated member of staff to monitor our recycling activities as well as following the principles of reduce reuse and recycle whenever practicable.
We work wherever possible with paperless administration and use the bestpractice documentmanagement systems utilising electronic communications and video conferencing to reduce postal costs and the need for business travel.
Finally we have production facilities in several locations around the world to minimise the need to transport supplies and to help reduce our carbonfootprint.
As an organisation we are committed to the wider community and regularly support charities and fundraisers.
This year we held events to support the MacMillan cancer charity and Noahs Ark Childrens Hospice as well as taking part in sponsored events and a beach cleanup in Ghana.
We also support local schools with their work experience programmes and often welcome students into our laboratory and our administration sales and accounts departments.
Like most modern businesses we appreciate that our staff are our greatest asset and that their success contributes to the success of the company.
We are happy to encourage staff in their career development with training courses seminars and conferences where appropriate and flexible working i. home where possible.
We currently have two staff members completing NVQ qualifications in Accountancy and Office Administration and two students gaining valuable experience in our laboratory as they complete their oneyear placement which is an essential part of their science degree courses.
We also support overseas students with similar placements whenever we can and this year we welcomed students from Germany and Spain.
In addition to all this we are keen to encourage our distributors around the world to develop and update their skills regularly hosting conferences and webinars and the sharing of best practice via networking events and the distributor forum on the Symphony website.
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS BUSINESS REVIEW CORPORATE GOVERNANCE As an organisation we are dedicated to creating a sustainable future by finding low cost solutions to the worlds environmental and public health problems.
Ghana beach cleanup Board of Directors Symphony Environmental Technologies plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 site 10 Nirj Deva DL FRSA MEP Chairman of the Board BACKGROUND AND EXPERIENCE Nirj Deva has been a Member of the European Parliament since 1999 and is Vicechairman of the Parliaments International Development Committee.
He is also Chairman of the EUChina Friendship Group.
From 1992 to 1997 he was a member of the UK Parliament.
He has held a number of senior political appointments and has advised the boards of a number of public companies including International Leisure Group Air Europe Plc Tricentrol Oil Co Plc EDS Television South West Thomas Howell Group John Laing Plc Aitken Spence and Rothmans International Plc.
Michael Stephen LL.
Commercial Director and Deputy Chairman BACKGROUND AND EXPERIENCE Michael Stephen was a member of the UK Parliament from 1992 to 1997 and was a member of the Trade and Industry Select Committee and the Environment Select Committee of the House of Commons.
He is Commercial Director and Deputy Chairman of the plc and Chairman of its subsidiary companies since 2007.
He qualified as a Solicitor with Distinction in Company
He was called to the Bar and practised from chambers in London for many years dealing with civil cases in the High Court and Court of Appeal.
Michael Laurier
Chief Executive Officer
BACKGROUND AND EXPERIENCE Michael Laurier is the Chief Executive of the Company.
Michaels career began with his long established family packaging business Brentwood Sack and Bag Co Limited.
He took over responsibility for sales and production in the midseventies and changed the emphasis of the companys business from jute products to polythene packaging introducing the then innovative high density and medium density polythene bags into the UK market in 1975.
He cofounded Symphony Plastics in 1995.
Ian Bristow FCCA Chief Financial Officer and Company Secretary BACKGROUND AND EXPERIENCE Ian Bristow was in private practice for seven years qualifying as a Chartered Certified Accountant in 1992.
In 1994 he joined Brentapac UK Plc until it was sold in 1994.
He went on to cofound Symphony in 1995 and has been Finance DirectorChief Financial Officer and Company Secretary of the Group since inception.
Symphony Environmental Technologies plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 site 11 Nicolas Clavel NonExecutive Director BACKGROUND AND EXPERIENCE Nicolas Clavel started his career in international banking in the mid seventies and his area of expertise has been structured trade finance and equity investments with a particular focus on Emerging Markets.
He is Chief Investment Officer of Scipion Capital Ltd.
African Opportunities Fund SPC.
Nicolas is Swiss and is based in London and Geneva.
Shaun Robinson NonExecutive Director BACKGROUND AND EXPERIENCE Shaun Robinson has nearly 20 years corporate finance restructuring and active asset management experience focusing on operational real estate with key specialities in hotels and healthcare.
A Chartered Certified Accountant Shaun Robinson joined the Somerston Group in 2004 and is responsible for business development MandA and taxcorporate structuring.
Shaun is Executive Director of Somerston Capital Richmount Management Ltd Somerston Health and St James Hotels.
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS BUSINESS REVIEW CORPORATE GOVERNANCE Bob Wigley BSc HonDBA FCA NonExecutive Director BACKGROUND AND EXPERIENCE Bob is Chairman of UK Finance Secure Broadcast Ltd Vesta Global Holdings Ltd Bink Ltd and Accloud Ltd.
He is NonExecutive Director of Nordengine Capital Ltd and the Qatar Finance Centre Authority.
From 20042009 he was Chairman of Merrill Lynch EMEA.
He is a former member of the Court of the Bank of England and a former NED of Royal Mail Group.
In 2009 he chaired the Green Investment Bank Commission for the then Chancellor of the
He is an Honorary Fellow of Judge Business School Cambridge University and a Visiting Fellow of Oxford Universitys Sad Business School.
Strategic Report Symphony Environmental Technologies plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 site 12 Principal activities and business review The primary business activities of the Group are the development and supply of environmental plastic products to a global market.
The Group also supplies other flexible polythene and related conventional products.
A review of the business is given in the Chairmans Statement on page 4 and 5 together with the Chief Executives Review on pages 6 and 7.
Future developments are summarised in the Outlook section of the Chief Executives Review on page 7.
Key performance indicators The Directors have monitored the progress of the overall Group strategy by reference to certain financial and non financial key performance indicators.
These are discussed within the Chairmans Statement and the Trading Results section of the Chief Executives Review Principal risks and uncertainties The Directors have identified and continually monitor the principal risks and uncertainties of the Group.
These may change over time as new risks emerge and others cease to be of concern.
The principal risks of the Group are detailed below.
Foreign exchange risk The Group sells products in many countries and generates revenues in US Dollars and Euros.
Foreign exchange rates fluctuate and as such assets created in foreign currencies are liable to constant revaluations into their Sterling equivalent.
The Group mitigates this risk by purchasing where practicable in currencies to match revenues.
The
Group also has exchange facilities with its bank to use as and when appropriate.
Competition risk The Group faces competition from suppliers of similar products which could affect revenues andor gross margins.
The Group mitigates this risk by having a large number of distributors globally who can concentrate on any competition issues within their market and also by differentiating the Groups products by branding and marketing activities.
Raw material pricing and availability The Group uses commodity and speciality materials in the makeup of its products.
There is a risk of price volatility and material availability.
The Group mitigates this risk by using more than one supplier of its products and continually researching separate supply alternatives for the materials used.
BY ORDER OF THE BOARD I Bristow Company Secretary 13 March 2018 Key performance indicator 2017 2016 Method of calculation Revenue 000 8267 6801 Revenues for the Group Gross profit margin % 49% 50% The ratio of gross profit to sales Number of distributors 74 73 Number of distribution agreements signed Directors Report Symphony Environmental Technologies plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 site 13 The Directors present their report and the audited annual report and accounts of the Group for the year ended 31 December 2017.
The Directors as referred to in these annual report and accounts are the directors of Symphony Environmental Technologies plc only.
Results and dividends The trading results for the year and the Groups financial position at the end of the year are shown in the attached annual report and accounts.
The profit for the year after taxation amounted to 430000 2016 168000.
The Directors do not recommend a dividend 2016 nil.
Research and development The Group is involved in the research and development of environmental plastic products.
The Directors and their interests The Directors who served during the year were as follows N Deva DL FRSA MEP  NonExecutive Chairman
M Laurier  Chief Executive Officer
I Bristow FCCA  Chief Financial Officer M Stephen LL.
Commercial Director and Deputy Chairman N Clavel  NonExecutive Director S Robinson  NonExecutive Director The Directors interests in the shares of the Company are shown in the Remuneration Report.
Directors responsibilities statement The Directors are responsible for preparing the Chairmans Statement the Chief Executives Review the Strategic Report the Directors Report the Remuneration Report and the financial statements in accordance with applicable law and regulations.
Company law requires the Directors to prepare financial statements for each financial year.
Under that law the Directors have elected to prepare the Group annual report and accounts in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as adopted by the European Union IFRSs.
The parent Companys own annual report and accounts continue to be prepared in accordance with United Kingdom Generally Accepted Accounting Practice United Kingdom Accounting Standards including FRS102 The Financial Reporting Standard applicable in the UK and Republic of Ireland and applicable laws.
Under company law the Directors must not approve the annual report and accounts unless they are satisfied that they give a true and fair view of the state of affairs and profit or loss of the Company and Group for that period.
In preparing these annual report and accounts the Directors are required to select suitable accounting policies and then apply them consistently make judgements and accounting estimates that are reasonable and prudent state whether applicable IFRSs or UK Accounting Standards have been followed subject to any material departures disclosed and explained in the annual report and accounts and prepare the annual report and accounts on the going concern basis unless it is inappropriate to presume that the Company and Group will continue in business.
The Directors are responsible for keeping adequate accounting records that are sufficient to show and explain the Companys transactions and disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the financial position of the Company and enable them to ensure that the annual report and accounts comply with the Companies Act 2006.
They are also responsible for safeguarding the assets of the Company and hence for taking reasonable steps for the prevention and detection of fraud and other irregularities.
The Directors confirm that so far as each Director is aware there is no relevant audit information of which the Companys auditor is unaware and the Directors have taken all steps that they ought to have taken as Directors in order to make themselves aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that the auditor is aware of that information.
The Directors are responsible for the maintenance and integrity of the corporate and financial information included on the Companys website.
Legislation in the United Kingdom governing the preparation and dissemination of annual report and accounts may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS BUSINESS REVIEW CORPORATE GOVERNANCE Directors Report continued Symphony Environmental Technologies plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 site 14 Going concern Management have prepared a cash flow forecast for the ensuing twelve months from the approval of the annual report and accounts.
Operating results for the start of 2018 have been in line with these forecasts.
The Group anticipates sales growth in the forthcoming year after the significant investments made in previous years.
Having reviewed the cash flow forecasts and the available headroom within existing facilities the Directors believe that the Group has sufficient cash resources to meet debt obligations as they fall due.
For these reasons the Directors are of the opinion that it is appropriate to continue to adopt the going concern basis in preparing these annual report and accounts.
Corporate governance The Group is committed to developing and adhering to high standards of corporate governance.
As an AIM listed company Symphony Environmental Technologies plc is not required to and does not apply the UK Corporate Governance Code as issued by the UKs Listing Authority however it seeks to follow the principles of good governance as far as management believes it is practical for a Group of its size nature and circumstances.
Financial risk management policies The Groups financial risk management policies are detailed in note 3 to the annual report and accounts.
Auditor
A resolution to appoint Mazars LLP as auditor for the ensuing year will be proposed at the Annual General Meeting.
BY ORDER OF THE BOARD I Bristow Company Secretary 13 March 2018 Symphony Environmental Technologies plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 site 15
Remuneration Report
Directors emoluments Basic salary
Total
Emoluments
Total
Emoluments
N Deva M Laurier I Bristow M Stephen N Clavel S Robinson 1tel16 1tel16 1telThe Company has taken out insurance for its officers against liabilities in relation to the Company under Section 233 of the Companies Act 2006.
Directors interests The Directors in office at the end of the year together with their beneficial interests in the shares of the Company were as follows Ordinary Shares of 0.01 each At 31 December At 1 January N Deva M Laurier I Bristow M Stephen N Clavel S Robinson Share options and warrants The Directors have share options and warrants or interests in share options and warrants as follows Number of share options or warrants Exercise price pence per share Exercisable from Exercisable to N Deva N Deva M Laurier M Laurier I Bristow I Bristow M Stephen M Stephen N Clavel N Clavel S Robinson 26 November 2008 18 December 2010 26 November 2008 31 March 2010 26 November 2008 31 March 2010 26 November 2008 31 March 2010 16 October 2009 18 December 2010 09 June 2016 26 November 2018 18 December 2019 26 November 2018 30 March 2020 26 November 2018 30 March 2020 26 November 2018 30 March 2020 16 October 2018 18 December 2019 09 June 2018 On 19 April 2017 M Stephen exercised 1200000 share options at the exercise price of 6.25 pence per share the market value of these shares at exercise was 9.75 pence resulting in a gain of 3.5 pence per share.
The above share options and warrants are HM Revenue and Customs unapproved.
See note 18 to the annual report and accounts for the terms of the above options and warrants.
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS BUSINESS REVIEW CORPORATE GOVERNANCE Symphony Environmental Technologies plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 site 16
We have audited the financial statements of Symphony Environmental Technologies plc the parent company and its subsidiaries the group for the year ended 31 December 2017 which comprise the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position the Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity the Consolidated Cash Flow Statement the Company Balance Sheet the Company Statement of Changes in Equity and notes to the annual report and accounts including a summary of significant accounting policies.
The financial reporting framework that has been applied in the preparation of the group financial statements is applicable law and International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union.
The financial reporting framework that has been applied in the preparation of the parent company financial statements is applicable law and United Kingdom Accounting Standards United Kingdom Generally Accepted Accounting Practice including Financial Reporting Standard 102 The Financial Reporting Standard applicable in the UK and Republic of Ireland.
In our opinion the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the groups and of the parent companys affairs as at 31 December 2017 and of the groups profit for the year then ended the group financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union the parent company financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with United Kingdom Generally Accepted Accounting Practice and the financial statements have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006.
Basis for opinion We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing UK ISAs UK and applicable law.
Our responsibilities under those standards are further described in the Auditors responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements section of our report.
We are independent of the company in accordance with the ethical requirements that are relevant to our audit of the financial statements in the UK including the FRCs Ethical Standard and we have fulfilled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with these requirements.
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion.
Use of the audit report This report is made solely to the companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006.
Our audit work has been undertaken so that we might state to the companys members those matters we are required to state to them in an auditors report and for no other purpose.
To the fullest extent permitted by law we do not accept or assume responsibility to anyone other than the company and the companys members as a body for our audit work for this report or for the opinions we have formed.
Conclusions relating to going concern We have nothing to report in respect of the following matters in relation to which the ISAs UK require us to report to you where the directors use of the going concern basis of accounting in the preparation of the financial statements is not appropriate or the directors have not disclosed in the financial statements any identified material uncertainties that may cast significant doubt about the groups or the parent companys ability to continue to adopt the going concern basis of accounting for a period of at least twelve months from the date when the financial statements are authorised for issue.
Key audit matters Key audit matters are those matters that in our professional judgement were of most significance in our audit of the financial statements of the current period and include the most significant assessed risks of material misstatement whether or not due to fraud we identified including those which had the greatest effect on the overall audit strategy the allocation of resources in the audit and directing the efforts of the engagement team.
These matters were addressed in the context of our audit of the financial statements as a whole and in forming our opinion thereon and we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters.
Key audit matter  Revenue Recognition The groups accounting policy in respect of revenue recognition is set out in the accounting policy notes on revenue on page 23.
Under this policy revenue is recognised when the stated conditions have been satisfied.
We have therefore considered revenue recognition in relation to cut off as a significant audit risk.
Our response our audit procedures included but were not limited to assessing the related internal control environment and Substantive test of detail enquiry of management and corroboration of explanations provided.
Substantive sampling procedures included but were not limited to selection of sample of transactions pre and post year end for each item selected assessing the right to and timing of consideration by reference to shipment or delivery documentation depending on the specific contractual terms.
Our response No significant deficiencies in the operation of related controls were detected that required us to revise the nature andor scope of planned audit procedures.
On the basis of our audit procedures we have not identified any misstatements in the level of revenue and recognised in the financial statements.
Independent Auditors Report
Our application of materiality We apply the concept of materiality in planning and performing our audit in evaluating the effect of identified misstatements on the financial statements and in forming our audit opinion.
The level of materiality we set is based on our assessment of the magnitude of misstatements that individually or in aggregate could reasonably be expected to have influence on the economic decisions of the users of the financial statements.
We established materiality based on For the consolidated accounts groups total revenue is considered appropriate as the group is still at an early stage of generating profits and as such the profit levels are low.
We determined the range of financial statement materiality for the consolidated financial statements as a whole to be between 124000 representing approximately 1.5% of the groups total revenue and 86800 representing 70% of financial statement materiality.
The range of materiality allocated across components was between 83360 and 119090.
For the parent statutory accounts total equity is considered appropriate as the company is not meant to be trading and mainly hold investment in subsidiaries.
We determined the range of financial statement materiality for the companys financial statement as a whole to be between 71000 representing approximatively 4.5% of the total equity and 50000 representing 70% of financial statement materiality.
We agreed with the Audit Committee that we would report to that committee all identified corrected and uncorrected audit differences in excess of 4000 for the group and in excess of 2000 for the company representing 3% of financial statement materiality together with differences below that threshold that in our view warranted reporting on qualitative grounds.
An overview of the scope of our audit Our audit involved obtaining evidence about the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements sufficient to give reasonable assurance that the financial statements are free from material misstatement whether caused by fraud or error.
The risks of material misstatement that had the greatest effect on our audit including the allocation of our resources and effort are discussed under Key audit matters within this report.
Our audit included an assessment of whether accounting policies are appropriate to the groups and parent companys circumstances and have been consistently applied and adequately disclosed the reasonableness of significant accounting estimates made by the Directors and the overall presentation of the financial statements.
In addition we read all the financial and nonfinancial information in the annual report to identify material inconsistencies with the audited financial statements and to identify an information that is apparently incorrect based on or materially inconsistent with the knowledge acquired by us in the course of performing the audit.
If we become aware of any apparent material misstatement or inconsistencies we consider the implications for our report.
Our audit scope included an audit of the group financial statements of Symphony Environmental Technologies plc.
The group audit was scoped by obtaining an understanding of the group and its environment including groupwide controls and assessing the risks of material misstatement at the group level.
Based on that assessment all entities within the group were subject to full scope audit and was performed by the group audit team at the groups main offices in Borehamwood.
Other information The directors are responsible for the other information.
The other information comprises the information included in the annual report and accounts other than the financial statements and our auditors report thereon.
Our opinion on the financial statements does not cover the other information and except to the extent otherwise explicitly stated in our report we do not express any form of assurance conclusion thereon.
In connection with our audit of the financial statements our responsibility is to read the other information and in doing so consider whether the other information is materially inconsistent with the financial statements or our knowledge obtained in the audit or otherwise appears to be materially misstated.
If we identify such material inconsistencies or apparent material misstatements we are required to determine whether there is a material misstatement in the financial statements or a material misstatement of the other information.
If based on the work we have performed we conclude that there is a material misstatement of this other information we are required to report that fact.
We have nothing to report in this regard.
Opinions on other matters prescribed by the Companies Act 2006 In our opinion based on the work undertaken in the course of the audit the information given in the Strategic Report and the Directors Report for the financial year for which the financial statements are prepared is consistent with the financial statements and the Strategic Report and the Directors Report have been prepared in accordance with applicable legal requirements.
Matters on which we are required to report by exception In light of the knowledge and understanding of the group and the parent company and its environment obtained in the course of the audit we have not identified material misstatements in the Strategic Report or the Directors Report.
We have nothing to report in respect of the following matters in relation to which the Companies Act 2006 requires us to report to you if in our opinion adequate accounting records have not been kept by the parent company or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or FINANCIAL STATEMENTS BUSINESS REVIEW CORPORATE GOVERNANCE Symphony Environmental Technologies plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 site 18 the parent company financial statements are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns or certain disclosures of directors remuneration specific by law are not made or we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit.
Responsibilities of Directors As explained more fully in the directors responsibilities statement set out on page 13 the directors are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements and for being satisfied that they give a true and fair view and for such internal control as the directors determine is necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error.
In preparing the financial statements the directors are responsible for assessing the groups and the parent companys ability to continue as a going concern disclosing as applicable matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless the directors either intend to liquidate the group or the parent company or to cease operations or have no realistic alternative but to do so.
Auditors responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error and to issue an auditors report that includes our opinion.
Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with ISAs UK will always detect a material misstatement when it exists.
Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if individually or in the aggregate they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these financial statements.
Our responsibility is to audit and express an opinion on the financial statements in accordance with applicable law and International Standards on Auditing UK.
Those standards require us to comply with the Financial Reporting Councils Ethical Standard.
A further description of our responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements is located on the Financial Reporting Councils website at www. rc. auditorsresponsibilities.
This description forms part of our auditors report.
Samantha Russell Senior Statutory Auditor for and on behalf of Mazars LLP Chartered Accountants and Statutory Auditor Tower Bridge House St Katharines Way
E1W 1DD 13 March 2018
Independent Auditors Report
Revenue
Cost of sales 5 8267 Gross profit Distribution costs Administrative expenses  recurring Administrative expenses  nonrecurring 6 Administrative expenses Operating profit  before nonrecurring items Operating loss  nonrecurring Operating profit Finance costs Profit for the year before tax Taxation 9 Profit for the year 430 168 Total comprehensive income for the year 430 168 Basic earnings per share Diluted earnings per share All results are attributable to the parent company equity holders.
There were no discontinued operations for either of the above periods.
The accompanying notes form an integral part of these annual report and accounts.
Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income for the year ended 31 December 2017 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS BUSINESS REVIEW CORPORATE GOVERNANCE Symphony Environmental Technologies plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 site 20
Assets
Noncurrent
Property plant and equipment Intangible assets
Inventories
Trade and other receivables Cash and cash equivalents 1tel416 2190 2429 Total assets 2528 2789
Equity attributable to shareholders of Symphony Environmental Technologies plc Ordinary shares Share premium Retained earningsdeficit Total equity 1583 1061
Noncurrent
Interest bearing loans and borrowings 19  2
Interest bearing loans and borrowings Trade and other payables tel945 1726 Total liabilities 945 1728 Total equity and liabilities 2528 2789 These annual report and accounts were approved by the Board of Directors on 13 March 2018 and authorised for issue on 13 March 2018.
They were signed on its behalf by I Bristow FCCA Chief Financial Officer The accompanying notes form an integral part of these annual report and accounts.
Consolidated Statement of Financial Position as at 31 December 2017  Company number  Symphony Environmental Technologies plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 site 21 Equity attributable to the equity holders of Symphony Environmental Technologies plc Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity for the year ended 31 December 2017
Share premium
Total equity For the year to 31 December 2017 Balance at 1 January 2017 Issue of share capital Capital reduction Transactions with owners 17 3533 3608 92 Total comprehensive income for the year   430 430 Balance at 31 December 2017 1516  67 1583 For the year to 31 December 2016 Balance at 1 January 2016 Total comprehensive income for the year Balance at 31 December 2016 1499 3533 3971 1061 The accompanying notes form an integral part of these annual report and accounts.
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS BUSINESS REVIEW CORPORATE GOVERNANCE Symphony Environmental Technologies plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 site 22
Operating activities Net cash generatedused in operations Tax received  RandD tax credits 21 1033 Net cash generatedused in operating activities Investing activities Additions to property plant and equipment Additions to intangible assets Proceeds from sale of property plant and equipment Net cash usedgenerated in investing activities Financing activities Movement in working capital facility Movement in finance lease liability Proceeds from share issue Interest paid Net cash usedgenerated in financing activities Net change in cash and cash equivalents Cash and cash equivalents beginning of year Cash and cash equivalents end of year 631 258 The reconciliation to the cash and cash equivalents as reported in the statement of financial position is as follows Consolidated Cash Flow
The accompanying notes form an integral part of these annual report and accounts.
Note
Loans and receivables Cash at bank and in hand Financial liabilities measured at amortised cost Bank overdraft Cash and cash equivalents end of year 631 258 Symphony Environmental Technologies plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 site 23 General information Symphony Environmental Technologies plc the Company and subsidiaries together the Group develop and supply environmental plastic additives and products and develop waste to value systems.
The Company a public limited company is the Groups ultimate parent company.
It is incorporated and domiciled in England Company number .
The address of its registered office is 6 Elstree Gate Elstree Way Borehamwood Hertfordshire WD6 1JD
The Companys shares are listed on the AIM market of the London Stock Exchange.
Summary of significant accounting policies These consolidated annual report and accounts have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS as adopted by the European Union and also as issued by the International Accounting Standards Board IASB.
These consolidated annual report and accounts have been prepared under the historical cost convention except as started in the accounting policies.
Financial information is presented in pounds sterling unless otherwise stated and amounts are express in thousands 000 and rounded accordingly.
The accounting policies have remained unchanged from the previous year.
Consolidation
The consolidated annual report and accounts incorporate those of Symphony Environmental Technologies plc and all of its subsidiary undertakings.
Subsidiaries acquired during the year are consolidated using the acquisition method.
Under the acquisition method their results are incorporated from the date that control passes.
The difference between the cost of acquisition of shares in subsidiaries and the fair value of the separable net assets acquired is capitalised as goodwill.
All annual report and accounts are made up to 31 December 2017.
All intragroup transactions balances and unrealised gains on transactions between group companies are eliminated on consolidation.
Unrealised losses are also eliminated unless the transaction provides evidence of an impairment of the asset transferred.
Where necessary adjustments are made to the annual report and accounts of subsidiaries to bring the accounting policies used into line with those used by other members of the Group.
Going concern Management have prepared a cash flow forecast for the ensuing twelve months from the approval of the annual report and accounts.
Operating results for the start of 2018 have been in line with these forecasts.
The Group anticipates sales growth in the forthcoming year after the significant investments made in previous years.
Having reviewed the cash flow forecasts and the available headroom within existing facilities the Directors believe that the Group has sufficient cash resources to meet debt obligations as they fall due.
For these reasons the Directors are of the opinion that it is appropriate to continue to adopt the going concern basis in preparing these annual report and accounts.
Revenue
Degradable and nondegradable plastic goods and associated products Revenue is stated at the fair value of the consideration receivable and excludes VAT and trade discounts.
The Groups revenue is from sale of goods.
Revenue from the sale of goods is recognised when all of the following conditions have been satisfied ownership of the significant risks and rewards has been transferred to the buyer.
The buyer may be one of the Groups distributors or an end customer.
This may be based upon shipment or delivery depending upon specific contractual terms whereby the Group relies on INCOTERMs a series of predefined commercial terms published by the International Chamber of Commerce to assess this the amount of revenue can be measured reliably whereby the Group sells goods after receipt of confirmed orders it is probable that the economic benefits associated with the transaction will flow to the entity the costs incurred or to be incurred in respect of the transaction can be measured reliably and the entity retains neither continuing managerial involvement to the degree usually associated with ownership nor effective control over the goods sold.
Nonrecurring items Expenditure is classified as nonrecurring where the cost is considered to be material oneoff and will not continue in future.
Intangible assets Research and development costs Expenditure on research or the research phase of an internal project is recognised as an expense in the period in which it is incurred.
Development costs incurred on specific projects are capitalised when all the following conditions are satisfied completion of the intangible asset is technically feasible so that it will be available for use or sale the Group intends to complete the intangible asset and use or sell it the Group has the ability to use or sell the intangible asset the intangible asset will generate probable future economic benefits.
Among other things this requires that there is a market for the output from the intangible asset or for the intangible asset itself or if it is to be used internally the asset will be used in generating such benefits there are adequate technical financial and other resources to complete the development and to use or sell the intangible asset and Notes to the Annual Report and Accounts FINANCIAL STATEMENTS BUSINESS REVIEW CORPORATE GOVERNANCE Symphony Environmental Technologies plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 site 24 the expenditure attributable to the intangible asset during its development can be measured reliably.
Development costs not meeting the criteria for capitalisation are expensed as incurred.
The cost of an internally generated intangible asset comprises all directly attributable costs necessary to create produce and prepare the asset to be capable of operating in the manner intended by management.
The nature of the Groups activities in the field of development work renders some internally generated intangible assets unable to meet the above criteria at present.
Amortisation commences upon completion of the asset and is shown within administrative expenses and is included at the following rate Plastic masterbatches and other additives  15 years straight line.
Careful judgement by the Directors is applied when deciding whether the recognition requirements for development costs have been met.
This is necessary as the economic success of any product development is uncertain and may be subject to future technical problems at the time of recognition.
Judgements are based on the information available at each balance sheet date.
All amounts disclosed within note 12 in development costs relate to plastic masterbatches and other additives.
Trademarks
Trademarks represent the cost of registration and are carried at cost less amortisation.
Amortisation is calculated so as to write off the cost of an asset less its estimated residual value over the useful economic life of that asset as follows Trademarks  10 years straight line.
Property plant and equipment Property plant and equipment are stated at cost net of depreciation and any provision for impairment.
The cost comprises of the purchase price of the asset plus directly attributable costs.
Depreciation is calculated so as to write off the cost of an asset less its estimated residual value over the useful economic life of that asset as follows Plant and machinery 20% reducing balance.
Fixtures and fittings 10% straight line.
Motor vehicles 25% reducing balance.
Office equipment 25% straight line.
The residual value and useful economic lives are reconsidered annually.
Impairment testing of intangible assets and property plant and equipment All individual assets are tested for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable.
An impairment loss is recognised for the amount by which the assets carrying amount exceeds its recoverable amount.
The recoverable amount is the higher of fair value reflecting market conditions less costs to sell and value in use based on an internal discounted cash flow evaluation.
All assets are subsequently reassessed for indications that an impairment loss previously recognised may no longer exist.
Inventories
Inventories are valued at the lower of cost and net realisable value after making due allowance for obsolete and slow moving items.
Cost is determined on the basis of purchase value plus all directly attributable costs of bringing the inventory to the current location and condition on a firstin firstout basis.
Leased assets In accordance with International Accounting Standard IAS 17 the economic ownership of a leased asset is transferred to the lessee if the lessee bears substantially all the risks and rewards related to the ownership of the leased asset.
The related asset is recognised at the time of inception of the lease at the fair value of the leased asset or if lower the present value of the minimum lease payments plus incidental payments if any to be borne by the lessee.
A corresponding amount is recognised as a finance leasing liability.
The interest element of leasing payments represents a constant proportion of the capital balance outstanding and is charged to statement of comprehensive income loss over the period of the lease.
All other leases are regarded as operating leases and the payments made under them are charged to statement of comprehensive income on a straight line basis over the lease term.
Lease incentives are spread over the term of the lease.
Employee costs Employee compensation Employee benefits are recognised as an expense.
Termination benefits Termination benefits are those benefits which are payable when employment is terminated before the normal retirement date or whenever an employee accepts voluntary redundancy in exchange for these benefits.
The Group recognises termination benefits when it is demonstrably committed to either terminating the employment of current employees according to a detailed formal plan without possibility of withdrawal or providing termination benefits as a result of an offer made to encourage voluntary redundancy.
Post employment obligations The Group operates a defined contribution pension scheme for employees.
The assets of the scheme are held separately from those of the Group.
The pension costs charged against profits are the contributions payable to the scheme in respect of the accounting period.
Taxation
Current tax is the tax currently payable based on taxable profit for the year.
Deferred income taxes are calculated using the liability method on temporary differences.
Deferred tax is Notes to the Annual Report and Accounts continued Symphony Environmental Technologies plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 site 25 generally provided on the difference between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities and their tax bases.
Tax losses available to be carried forward as well as other income tax credits to the Group are assessed for recognition as deferred tax assets insofar as Group companies are entitled to UK tax credits on qualifying research and development expenditure such amounts are recognised when received and presented in the income tax line within statement of comprehensive income.
Deferred tax liabilities are provided in full with no discounting.
Deferred tax assets are recognised to the extent that it is probable that the underlying deductible temporary differences will be able to be offset against future taxable income.
Current and deferred tax assets and liabilities are calculated at tax rates that are expected to apply to their respective period of realisation provided they are enacted or substantively enacted at the balance sheet date.
Changes in deferred tax assets or liabilities are recognised as a component of tax expense in profit or loss except where they either relate to items that are charged or credited directly to equity in which case the related deferred tax is also charged or credited directly to equity or where they relate to items charged or credited in other comprehensive income the deferred tax change is recognised in other comprehensive income.
Foreign currencies Monetary assets and liabilities in foreign currencies are translated into Sterling at the rates of exchange ruling at the balance sheet date.
Transactions in foreign currencies are translated into Sterling at the rate of exchange ruling at the date of the transaction.
Exchange differences are taken into account in arriving at the operating result.
The
Group uses derivatives such as forward rate agreements to mitigate its current or future positions against foreign exchange rate risks.
These derivatives are measured at fair value determined by reference to observable market prices at the reporting date.
Financial assets Financial assets held by the Group are divided into the following categories loans and receivables and available forsale financial assets.
Financial assets are assigned to the different categories by management on initial recognition depending on the purpose for which they were acquired.
All financial assets are recognised when the Group becomes a party to the contractual provisions of the instrument.
Financial assets are initially recognised at fair value plus transaction costs.
The Group currently has the following financial assets Trade and other receivables Trade receivables are categorised as loans and receivables.
Trade receivables are nonderivative financial assets with fixed or determinable payments that are not quoted in an active market.
Trade receivables are measured subsequent to initial recognition at amortised cost using the effective interest method less provision for impairment.
Any change in their value through impairment or reversal of impairment is recognised in profit or loss.
Provision against trade receivables is made when there is objective evidence that the Group will not be able to collect all amounts due to it in accordance with the original terms of those receivables.
The amount of the writedown is determined as the difference between the assets carrying amount and the present value of estimated future cash flows discounted using the original effective interest rate.
Availableforsale financial assets Availableforsale financial assets are nonderivative financial assets that are either designated to this category or do not qualify for inclusion in any of the other categories of financial assets.
The equity investments are measured at cost less any impairment charges if their fair values cannot currently be estimated reliably.
Impairment charges are recognised in the statement of comprehensive income.
An assessment for impairment is undertaken at least at each balance sheet date.
A financial asset is derecognised only where the contractual rights to the cash flows from the asset expire or the financial asset is transferred and that transfer qualifies for derecognition.
A financial asset is transferred if the contractual rights to receive the cash flows of the asset have been transferred or the Group retains the contractual rights to receive the cash flows of the asset but assumes a contractual obligation to pay the cash flows to one or more recipients.
A financial asset that is transferred qualifies for derecognition if the Group transfers substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership of the asset or if the Group neither retains nor transfers substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership but does transfer control of that asset.
Cash and cash equivalents Cash and cash equivalents comprise cash in hand and demand deposits together with other shortterm highly liquid investments that are readily convertible into known amounts of cash and which are subject to an insignificant risk of changes in value.
Financial liabilities Financial liabilities are obligations to pay cash or other financial assets and are recognised when the Group becomes a party to the contractual provisions of the instrument.
The Groups financial liabilities include trade payables other payables bank overdraft bank loans and other loans.
These are classified as financial liabilities measured at amortised cost. of direct issue costs.
Finance charges are charged to statement of comprehensive income where applicable on an accruals basis using the effective interest method and are added to the carrying amount of the instrument to the extent they are not settled in the period in which they arose.
A financial liability is derecognised only when the obligation is extinguished that is when the obligation is discharged or cancelled or expires.
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS BUSINESS REVIEW CORPORATE GOVERNANCE Symphony Environmental Technologies plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 site 26 Equity settled sharebased payments All sharebased payment arrangements granted after 7 November 2002 that had not vested prior to 1 January 2007 are recognised in the annual report and accounts.
All goods and services received in exchange for the grant of any sharebased payment are measured at their fair values.
Where employees are rewarded using sharebased payments the fair values of the instrument granted are determined using the BlackScholes model.
This fair value is appraised at the grant date.
The fair value is charged to statement of comprehensive income between the date of issue and the date the share options vest with a corresponding credit taken to equity.
Equity
Equity comprises the following Share capital represents the nominal value of equity shares Share premium represents the excess over nominal value of the fair value of consideration received for equity shares net of expenses of the share issue and after capital reduction and Retained earnings represents nondistributed reserves.
Standards and interpretations adopted during the year The adoption of the following mentioned amendments in the current year have not had a material impact on the GroupsCompanys financial statements Standards and interpretations in issue but not yet effective At the date of authorisation of these annual report and accounts certain new standards amendments and interpretations to existing standards have been published but are not yet effective and have not been adopted early by the Group.
Management anticipates that all of the pronouncements will be adopted in the Groups accounting policy for the first period beginning after the effective date of the pronouncement.
Information on new standards amendments and interpretations that are expected to be relevant to the Groups annual report and accounts is provided below.
Certain other new standards and interpretations have been issued but are not expected to have a material impact on the Groups annual report and accounts.
IFRS 9 Financial Instruments The IASB have released IFRS 9 following completion of the project to replace IAS 39 Financial Instruments Recognition and Measurement.
The new standard introduces extensive changes to IAS 39s guidance on the classification and measurement of financial assets and introduces a new expected credit loss model for the impairment of financial assets.
IFRS 9 also provides new guidance on the application of hedge accounting.
IFRS
9 is effective for annual reporting periods beginning on or after 1 January 2018 and has been endorsed by the European Union.
The Groups management have performed an impact assessment of the effects of IFRS 9 on the 2017 figures and do not expect there to be any material changes to the Groups annual report and accounts.
The main area that will be impacted is the measurement of the fair value of forward exchange contracts which are immaterial in value and the credit risk is low.
IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers IFRS 15 presents new requirements for the recognition of revenue replacing IAS 18 Revenue IAS 11 Construction Contracts and several revenuerelated Interpretations.
The new standard establishes a controlbased revenue recognition model and provides additional guidance in many areas not covered in detail under existing IFRSs including how to account for arrangements with multiple performance obligations variable pricing customer refund rights supplier repurchase options and other common complexities.
IFRS 15 is effective for reporting periods beginning on or after 1 January 2018.
This standard has been endorsed by the European
The Groups management have performed an impact assessment of the effects of IFRS 15 on the 2017 figures and do not expect there to be any change to the statement of comprehensive income as presented.
The revenue recognition and related disclosures of the Group will remain unchanged as all performance obligations under IFRS15 are met at the same time as per the current revenue recognition policy as set out above.
IFRS 16 Leases The IASB has published IFRS 16 Leases completing its longrunning project on lease accounting.
The new Standard which is effective for accounting periods beginning on or after 1 January 2019 requires lessees to account for leases onbalance sheet by recognised a rightofuse asset and a lease liability.
It will affect most companies that report under IFRS and are involved in leasing and will have a substantial impact on the annual report and accounts of lessees of property and high value equipment.
This standard has been endorsed by the European Union.
The Groups management will carry out an impact review of the implementation of IFRS 16 and disclose the impact in next years annual report and accounts.
We anticipate this will have a material effect on the Groups balance sheet.
Notes to the Annual Report and Accounts continued EU effective date  periods beginning on or after Amendment to IAS 7 Statement of Cash Flows Disclosure initiative Amendment to IAS 12 Income Taxes Recognition of deferred tax assets for unrealised losses 1 January 2017 1 January 2017 Symphony Environmental Technologies plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 site 27 Financial risk management The main risks arising from the Groups financial instruments are liquidity risk interest rate risk currency risk and credit risk.
The Directors review and agree policies for managing each of these risks and they are summarised below.
These policies have remained unchanged from previous years.
The Groups financial assets and liabilities are summarised as follows Financial assets Cash and cash equivalents Loans and receivables 1423 1867 Financial liabilities Financial liabilities measured at amortised cost 737 1534 737 1534 Liquidity risk The Group seeks to manage financial risk to ensure financial liquidity is available to meet foreseeable needs and to invest cash assets safely and profitability.
Short term flexibility is achieved through trade finance arrangements and overdrafts.
Having reviewed the maturity of financial liabilities and the forecast cash flows for the forthcoming twelve month period the Directors believe that sufficient cash will be generated from trading operations to meet debt obligations as they fall due.
The maturity of financial liabilities as at 31 December 2017 is summarised as follows Gross cash flows
Finance leases
Bank
Total
Zero to sixty days Sixty one days to three months Four months to six months Seven months to one year One year to three years The maturity of financial liabilities as at 31 December 2016 is summarised as follows Gross cash flows
Finance leases
Bank
Total
Zero to sixty days Sixty one days to three months Four months to six months Seven months to one year One year to three years FINANCIAL STATEMENTS BUSINESS REVIEW CORPORATE GOVERNANCE Symphony Environmental Technologies plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 site 28 Interest rate risk The Group seeks to reduce its exposure to interest rate risk where possible but this is offset by the availability of trade finance arrangements which are transaction specific to meet liquidity needs and so have variable interest rate terms.
Sensitivities have been looked at in the range of an absolute rate increase of 5% or a decrease of 1% which enable an objective calculation to be made depending on any interest rate changes in the future.
Any rate changes would be outside the control of the Group.
The Groups exposure to interest rate risk as at 31 December 2017 is summarised as follows
Variable
Zero
Total
Cash and cash equivalents Trade receivables Other debtors Trade payables Other payables Bank overdraft Lease purchase Sensitivity increase in interest rates of 5% Sensitivity decrease in interest rates of 1% The Groups exposure to interest rate risk as at 31 December 2016 is summarised as follows
Variable
Zero
Total
Cash and cash equivalents Trade receivables Other debtors Trade payables Other payables Bank overdraft Lease purchase Other loans Sensitivity increase in interest rates of 5% Sensitivity decrease in interest rates of 1% Sensitivity shows the effect on equity and statement of comprehensive income.
Notes to the Annual Report and Accounts continued Symphony Environmental Technologies plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 site 29 Currency risk The Group operates in overseas markets and is subject to currency exposure on transactions undertaken during the year.
The Group hedges the transactions where possible by buying goods and selling them in the same currency.
The Group also has bank facilities available for hedging purposes.
A summary of foreign currency financial assets and liabilities as stated in the statement of financial position together with a sensitivity analysis showing the effect of a 10% change in rate with Sterling is shown below Sensitivity shows the effect on equity and statement of comprehensive income.
A 10% change is shown to enable an objective calculation to be made on exchange rates which may be assumed for the future.
As at 31 December 2017 the company had entered into forward foreign currency contacts which all matured within 1 month of the year end and committed the Company to selling US Dollars 530000 and to receive a fixed sterling amount 2016  US Dollars 1000000.
The forward currency contracts are measured at fair value which is determined using the valuation techniques that utilise observable inputs.
The key inputs used in valuing the derivatives are the forward exchange rates for
The fair value of the forwardforeign currency contracts at 31 December 2017 is a profit of 16000 2016 loss 5000.
Credit risk The Groups exposure to credit risk is limited to the carrying value of financial assets at the balance sheet date summarised as follows
Sterling
Currency balance
Currency balance Financial assets Financial liabilities Net balances
Euro
Euro
Effect of 10% Sterling increase Effect of 10% Sterling decrease Financial assets Financial liabilities Net balances
USD
USD
Effect of 10% Sterling increase Effect of 10% Sterling decrease Loans and receivables Trade receivables Other debtors Cash and cash equivalents 1423 1867 The credit risk associated with the cash is limited as the counterparties have high credit ratings assigned by international creditrating agencies.
The principal credit risk arises therefore from trade receivables.
The seven largest customer balances at the end of the year make up 65% 2016 76% of the above trade receivables.
In order to manage credit risk the Directors set limits for customers based on a combination of payment history third party credit references and use of credit insurance.
These limits are reviewed regularly.
The maturity of overdue debts and details of impairments and amounts written off are set out in note 16.
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS BUSINESS REVIEW CORPORATE GOVERNANCE Symphony Environmental Technologies plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 site 30 Capital requirements Interest bearing loans and borrowings are monitored regularly to ensure the Group has sufficient liquidity and its exposure to interest rate risk is mitigated.
Management consider the capital of the Group comprises the share capital and interest bearing loans and borrowings as detailed in note 25.
The Company satisfies the Companies Act 2006 requirement to hold 50000 issued and authorised share capital.
The rule that 25% must be paid up is also satisfied by reference to note 18.
Critical accounting estimates and judgements Estimates and judgements are evaluated continually and are based on historical experience and other factors including expectations of future events that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances.
Although these estimates are based on managements best knowledge of current events and actions actual results may ultimately differ from those actions.
Material changes to the estimates and judgements made in the preparation of the interim statements are detailed in the notes.
In preparing these accounts the following areas were considered to involve significant judgements and estimates Capitalisation of development costs Judgements and estimates relating to the capitalisation of development costs are detailed in note 2.
In particular estimates are made in respect to future economic benefits based on market judgements at the time and over attributable internal staff time allocated to each product.
Recoverability of capitalised development cost Judgements and estimates relating to capitalised development costs are detailed in note 12.
In particular estimates are continued to be made in respect to future economic benefits and any changes to market conditions.
Share option judgements Judgements and estimates relating to sharebased payment charges are detailed in note 2.
Estimates are made on the fair value of the option using the BlackScholes model.
Going concern Judgements and estimates relating to going concern are detailed in note 2.
In particular estimates are made as to future revenues expectations which derive cash flow projections.
Bad debts Provisions for bad debts are shown in note 16.
Bad debt provisions are made when there is objective evidence of impairment.
Where there is no provision then it is due to cash having been received since the end of the year or adequate information exists to support the recoverability of the debt.
Recognition of deferred tax assets Judgements and estimates relating to a deferred tax asset are detailed in note 9.
In particular estimates are made as to future revenues which derive profit and loss projections.
Functional currency A significant proportion of the revenues generated by entities within the Group are denominated in United States Dollars USD.
The functional currency of the Company and of all individual entities within the Group has been determined to be Sterling.
Identification of functional currencies requires a judgement as to the currency of the primary economic environment in which the companies of the Group operate.
This is based on analysis of the economic environment and cash flows of the subsidiaries of the Group which has determined based upon the currency of funding and operating costs that the functional currency continues to be Sterling.
Notes to the Annual Report and Accounts continued Symphony Environmental Technologies plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 site 31 Revenue information The Board has reviewed the requirements of IFRS 8 Operating Segments including consideration of what results and information the Board reviews regularly to assess performance and allocate resources and concluded that all revenue falls under a single business segment.
The Directors consider the business does not have separate divisional segments as defined under IFRS 8.
The Board assesses the commercial performance of the business based upon a single set of revenues margins operating costs and assets.
The revenues of the Group are divided in the following geographical areas Geographical areas
Revenue
UK
Europe
Americas
Middle East and Africa
300tel3242 Total 8267 6801 Major customers There was one customer that accounted for greater than 10% of total Group revenues for 2017 2016 one customer.
In 2017 one customer accounted for 2861000 or 35% 2016 1465000 or 22% of the total group revenues.
Operating profit The operating profit is stated after charging
Amortisation
Loss on disposal of property plant and equipment Research and development expenditure not capitalised Operating lease rentals Land and buildings Plant and equipment Fees payable to the Companys auditor Audit related services Audit of the annual report and accounts Audit of the annual report and accounts of the Companys subsidiaries Nonaudit related services Other assurance related services Tax compliance services Net foreign exchange loss gain Nonrecurring item  redundancy cost The nonrecurring item in 2016 related to reconstruction costs.
All other items above relate to continued operations.
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS BUSINESS REVIEW CORPORATE GOVERNANCE Symphony Environmental Technologies plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 site 32 Notes to the Annual Report and Accounts continued Employee benefit expense Wages and salaries Social security costs Other pension costs 1602 1553 Average number of people employed 2017 2016 Testing and technical
Administration
Management
Marketing
Total average headcount 29 28 Emoluments 55telRemuneration in respect of the Directors was as follows The Directors are considered to be the key management personnel of the Group.
Further details on Directors remuneration and share options are set out in the Remuneration Report.
Shortterm employee benefits 55telKey management remuneration Interest expense Bank borrowings Other interest Total finance costs 48 22 Net finance costs 48 22 Finance costs Symphony Environmental Technologies plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 site 33
RandD tax credit  45 Total income tax credit  45 No tax arises on the profit for the year.
The tax assessed for the year is different from the standard rate of corporation tax in the UK of 19% 2016 20%.
The differences are explained as follows Profit for the year before tax 430 123 Tax calculated by rate of tax on the result Effective rate for year at 19.25% 2016 20% Expenses not deductible for tax purposes Difference between capital allowances and depreciation RandD tax relief Share scheme deduction Short term timing differences RandD tax credit Total income tax credit  45 The group has not recognised a deferred tax asset in respect of losses available for use against future taxable profits.
The group has tax losses of approximately 16000000 2016 16000000.
These tax losses have no expiry date.
The unrecognised deferred tax asset in respect of these losses based on latest profit projections is approximately 2730000 2016 2733000.
These brought forward losses will be subject to the new loss restriction rules introduced on 2 April 2017.
Groups with more than 5m taxable profits per annum will only be able to utilise 50% of their brought forward losses against taxable profits exceeding the 5m cap.
As Symphony does not expect its taxable profits to exceed 5m in the near to immediate term it is not possible to quantify the impact of these changes at this moment in time.
The main rate of corporation tax was reduced from 20% to 19% from 1 April 2017.
A further reduction in the UK corporation tax rate was substantively enacted on 6 September 2016 reducing the headline corporation tax rate from 18% to 17% applicable from 1 April 2020.
The group also has gross fixed asset temporary timing differences of 120000 2016 87000 which gives rise to a deferred tax liability of 20000 2016 15000.
Other gross temporary timing differences of 19000 2016 9000 give rise to a deferred tax asset of 3000 2016 2000.
The net deferred tax liability of 17000 2016 3000 is sheltered by the unrecognised deferred tax asset in respect of losses.
The recognition of the deferred tax asset is based on sensitising management forecasts to estimate the future taxable profits against which the losses will be relieved.
Judgements have been made in respect to profitability going forward based upon current sales leads and market receptiveness to anticipated product launches.
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS BUSINESS REVIEW CORPORATE GOVERNANCE Symphony Environmental Technologies plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 site 34 Notes to the Annual Report and Accounts continued Earnings per share and dividends The calculation of basic earnings per share is based on the profit attributable to ordinary shareholders divided by the weighted average number of shares in issue during the year.
The calculation of diluted earnings per share is based on the basic earnings per share adjusted to allow for the issue of shares on the assumed conversion of all dilutive options and warrants.
Reconciliations of the profit and weighted average numbers of shares used in the calculations are set out below Basic and diluted 2017 2016 Profit attributable to equity holders of the Company 430000 168000 Weighted average number of ordinary shares in issue 151089240 149939377 Basic earnings per share 0.28 pence 0.11 pence Dilutive effect of weighted average options and warrants Total of weighted average shares together with dilutive effect of weighted options Diluted earnings per share 0.27 pence 0.10 pence No dividends were paid for the year ended 31 December 2017 2016 nil A total of 15781500 options and warrants were outstanding at the end of the year which may become dilutive in future years.
Symphony Environmental Technologies plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 site 35 Property plant and equipment Plant and machinery
Motor vehicles
Total
At 1 January 2016
Accumulated depreciation Net book amount Year ended 31 December 2016 Opening net book amount
Disposals
Depreciation charge Eliminated on disposal Closing net book amount At 1 January 2017
Accumulated depreciation Net book amount Year ended 31 December 2017 Opening net book amount
Disposals
Depreciation charge Eliminated on disposal Closing net book amount At 31 December 2017
Accumulated depreciation Net book amount Included within net book value of motor vehicles is 7000 2016 12000 relating to assets held under finance leases and hire purchase contracts.
The depreciation charged to the annual report and accounts in the year in respect of such assets amounted to 3000 2016 4000 and is included within administrative expenses in the statement of comprehensive income.
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS BUSINESS REVIEW CORPORATE GOVERNANCE Symphony Environmental Technologies plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 site 36 Intangible assets
Trademarks
Total
At 1 January 2016
Accumulated amortisation Accumulated impairment Net book amount 56 17 73 Year ended 31 December 2016 Opening net book amount
Disposals
Amortisation charge Eliminated on disposal Closing net book amount 44 18 62 At 1 January 2017
Accumulated amortisation Accumulated impairment Net book amount 44 18 62 Year ended 31 December 2017 Opening net book amount
Disposals
Amortisation charge Eliminated on disposal Closing net book amount 32 15 47 At 31 December 2017
Accumulated amortisation Accumulated impairment Net book amount 32 15 47 The Group relies on the continued development of its product range and in so doing is maintaining satisfactory goals in fulfilling its strategy see Chairmans Statement and Chief Executives Review.
Development costs are capitalised in accordance with the policy set out in note 2.
In capitalising these costs judgements are made relating to ongoing feasibility and commerciality of products and systems being developed.
In making these judgements cashflow forecasts are used and these include significant estimates in respect to sales forecasts and future foreign exchange rates.
The amortisation charge is included within administrative expenses in statement of comprehensive income.
Notes to the Annual Report and Accounts continued Symphony Environmental Technologies plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 site 37 Subsidiary undertakings Name Country of incorporation Nature of business Proportion of ordinary shares held by parent Proportion of ordinary shares held by the
Symphony Environmental Limited England and Wales Supply of environmental polyolefin products and ancillaries 100% 100% D2W Limited England and Wales Dormant 0% 100% Symphony Recycling Technologies Limited England and Wales Dormant 100% 100% Symphony Energy Limited England and Wales Dormant 100% 100% Symphony Environmental Jamaica Limited Jamaica Dormant 0% 100% All of the above subsidiaries are consolidated in the Group annual report and accounts.
The above companies have their registered offices at 6 Elstree Gate Elstree Way Borehamwood WD6 1JD except for Symphony Environmental Jamaica Limited which has its registered office at 8 Olivier Road Saint Andrew Jamaica.
Available for sale financial assets All noncurrent Beginning and end of year The Company holds 30% of the ordinary share capital of Symphony Bin Hilal Plastics LLC a company incorporated in the United Arab Emirates.
The directors are of the opinion that this is an investment as the directors do not have significant influence because the Group has no representation on the board of directors of the investee does not participate in policy making processes and does not receive key financial or management information.
A full impairment had been made against this in 2012 due to limited availability of financial information.
The Company holds 10% of the ordinary share capital of American Plastic Technologies plc a company incorporated in the United States of America.
The directors are of the opinion that this is an investment as the directors do not have significant influence because they have no financial or management control.
The investment in American Plastics Technologies plc is measured at cost less impairment charges as the fair value cannot be estimated readily.
The cost of this investment was nil.
The Company holds c.5% of the ordinary share capital of Oxobioplast Inc.
States of America.
The directors are of the opinion that this is an investment as the directors do not have significant influence because they have no financial or management control.
The investment in Oxobioplast Inc. cost less impairment charges as the fair value cannot be estimated readily.
The cost of this investment was nil.
There is no collateral on the above amounts.
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS BUSINESS REVIEW CORPORATE GOVERNANCE Symphony Environmental Technologies plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 site 38 Trade and other receivables The Directors consider that the carrying value of trade and other receivables approximates to their fair values.
There is a provision of 23000 for the impairment of receivables 2016 88000 made up as follows Loans and receivables Trade receivables Other receivables
Prepayments
Balance at 1 January Impairment loss made during the year Uncollectible amounts written off Balance at 31 December 23 88 The maximum credit risk exposure at the balance sheet date equates to the carrying value of trade receivables.
Further disclosures are set out in note 3.
Included in trade receivables at 31 December 2017 are debtors which are past due but where no provision has been made as there has not been a change in the credit worthiness of these debtors and the amounts are considered recoverable.
As of 31 December 2017 trade receivables of 70000 2016 15000 were past due and not impaired.
The ageing analysis of these trade receivables is as follows More than three months but less than six months More than six months but not more than one year Due to the different markets that the Group operates in trade terms vary from proforma payment to payment under letter of credit due 150 days from shipment.
Trade receivables are secured against the facilities provided by the Groups bankers.
Inventories
Finished goods and goods for resale Raw materials The cost of inventories recognised as an expense and included in cost of sales amounted to 3819000 2016 2747000.
There is a provision of 73000 for the impairment of inventories 2016 77000.
There is no collateral on the above amounts.
Notes to the Annual Report and Accounts continued Symphony Environmental Technologies plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 site 39 Cash and cash equivalents Loans and receivables Cash at bank and in hand Invoice finance facility surplus The carrying amount of cash equivalents approximates to their fair values.
Equity
Group and Company Group Ordinary shares
Ordinary
Share premium
Total
At 1 January 2016 Profits for the year At 31 December 2016 149939377 1499 3533 3971 1061 At 1 January 2017 Issue of share capital Capital reduction Profit for the year At 31 December 2017 151614377 1516  67 1583 Share options and warrants As at 31 December 2017 the Group maintained an approved sharebased payment scheme for employee compensation.
For the options granted to vest the Group must have achieved an earnings per share in excess of 0.001p and employees must serve a specified amount of time.
All sharebased employee compensation will be settled in equity.
The Group has no legal or constructive obligation to repurchase or settle the options.
As at 31 December 2017 there were 1730000 approved staff options outstanding.
No approved staff options were issued in 2017.
The Group has also issued unapproved share options and warrants.
The weighted average exercise price of all of the Groups options and warrants are as follows
2017 Weighted average exercise price
2016 Weighted average exercise price Outstanding at 1 January
Exercised
Lapsed
Outstanding at 31 December 15781500 0.07 24456500 0.09 The weighted average exercise price of options exercised in 2017 was 5p 2016 no options were exercised.
The number of share options and warrants exercisable at 31 December 2017 was 15781500 2016 24456500.
The weighted average exercise price of those shares exercisable was 7p 2016 9p.
The weighted average option contractual life is eight years 2016 nine years and the range of exercise prices is 2.375p to 15p 2016 2.375p to 15p.
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS BUSINESS REVIEW CORPORATE GOVERNANCE During the year the Company issued 1675000 Ordinary Shares 2016 nil ordinary shares for a consideration of 92000 2016 nil.
On 14 December 2017 the Company completed a court approved capital reduction cancelling 3.61 million of its share premium account and transferring it to the Companys and Groups retained earnings creating distributable reserves.
Symphony Environmental Technologies plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 site 40
Directors interests in shares and share incentives are contained in the Remuneration Report on page 15.
IFRS2 expense The IFRS sharebased charge for the year is nil 2016 nil.
Trade and other payables
Financial liabilities measured at amortised cost Trade payables Other payables Social security and other taxes Accruals and deferred income telThe Directors consider that the carrying value of trade and other payables approximate to their fair value.
Interest bearing loans and borrowings
Financial lease liabilities  2
Financial liabilities measured at amortised cost Bank overdraft Other loans Finance lease liabilities The bank overdraft of nil 2016 179000 is included within the cash flow statement within cash and cash equivalents.
Other loans include An amount due relating to the invoice financing facility totalling nil 2016 625000.
Interest is charged at 2.96% over HSBC Bank plc base rate per annum.
At 31 December 2017 the invoice finance facility was showing a surplus so is included within cash and cash equivalents.
The bank and invoice finance facility are secured by a fixed and floating charge over the Groups assets.
The finance lease liabilities are secured against the asset that they finance.
Commitments under finance leases and hire purchase agreements mature as follows showing both gross and net of finance costs Gross 2017 Gross 2016 Net 2017 Net 2016 Amounts payable within one year Amounts payable between one and two years The finance leases are for the purchase of motor vehicles note 11.
Notes to the Annual Report and Accounts continued Symphony Environmental Technologies plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 site 41 Operating lease commitments include the lease for the Groups head office property which has a tenyear term with a fiveyear break clause at the option of the Group.
The financial obligations are calculated up to the expiry of the lease.
Net cash generatedused in operations Profit after tax Adjustments for
Amortisation
Loss on disposal of tangible assets Foreign exchange Tax credit Interest expense Changes in working capital
Trade and other receivables Trade and other payables Cash generatedused in operations 1033 343 Operating lease commitments The future aggregate minimum lease payments under noncancellable operating leases are as follows No later than one year Later than one year and no later than five years Greater than five years 978 1099 Related party transactions Included in other creditors is an amount of 2000 2016 4000 owed to The OxoBiodegradable Plastics Association a not for profit company limited by guarantee in which Symphony Environmental Technologies plc is a person of significant control.
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS BUSINESS REVIEW CORPORATE GOVERNANCE Post balance sheet events There have been no significant post balance sheet events.
Symphony Environmental Technologies plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 site 42 Notes to the Annual Report and Accounts continued Capital management The Groups capital management objectives are to ensure the Groups ability to continue as a going concern and to provide an adequate return to shareholders The Group monitors capital on the basis of the gearing ratio calculated as net debt divided by total capital.
Net debt is calculated as total borrowings as shown in the consolidated statement of financial position less cash and cash equivalents.
Total capital is calculated as equity as shown in the consolidated statement of financial position plus net debt.
The Groups goal in capital management is to maintain an optimal gearing ratio the ratio of net debt over debt plus equity.
The Group manages the capital structure and makes adjustments to it in the light of changes in economic conditions and the risk characteristics of the underlying assets.
In order to maintain or adjust the capital structure the Group may adjust the amount of dividends paid to shareholders return capital to shareholders issue new shares or sell assets to reduce debt.
The gearing ratios at 31 December 2017 and 2016 were as follows Total borrowings Cash and cash equivalents Net cash surplusdebt 629 373 Total equity
Overall financing 1585 1871 Gearing ratio 0% 20% Capital commitments The Group had capital commitments totalling nil at the end of the year 2016 nil.
The following pages contain the balance sheet and accompanying notes for the parent Company prepared under FRS 102 The Financial Reporting Standard applicable in the UK and Republic of Ireland.
The gearing ratios are in line with the managements working capital financing strategy.
Symphony Environmental Technologies plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 site 43
Fixed assets Tangible assets
Current assets
Cash at bank and in hand Creditors amounts falling due within one year 31 Net current assets 1495 1176 Total assets less current liabilities 2646 2327 Capital and reserves Share capital Share premium account Retained earningsdeficit 33 1516 2646 2327 The Company has applied the exemption under section 408 of the Companies Act 2006 not to present a statement of comprehensive income for the year ended 31 December 2017.
The profit after tax for the financial year 2017 within the annual report and accounts of the Company was 227000 2016 225000.
These annual report and accounts were approved by the Directors on 13 March 2018 and are signed on their behalf by I Bristow FCCA Chief Financial Officer The accompanying notes form an integral part of these annual report and accounts.
Company Balance Sheet at 31 December 2017 Company number FINANCIAL STATEMENTS BUSINESS REVIEW CORPORATE GOVERNANCE Symphony Environmental Technologies plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 site 44 The accompanying notes form an integral part of these annual report and accounts.
Company Statement of Changes in Equity for the year ended 31 December 2017
Share premium
Total equity For the year to 31 December 2017 Balance at 1 January 2017 1499 3533 2705 2327 Issue of share capital Capital reduction Transactions with owners Total comprehensive income for the year 17 3533 3Balance at 31 December 2017 1516  1130 2646 For the year to 31 December 2016 Balance at 1 January 2016 1499 3533 2930 2102 Transactions with owners   225 225 Balance at 31 December 2016 1499 3533 2705 2327 Symphony Environmental Technologies plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 site 45 Notes to the Company Balance Sheet Principal accounting policies Basis of accounting Symphony Environmental Technologies plc The Company is a public limited company.
It is incorporated and domiciled in England Company number .
The address of its registered office is 6 Elstree Gate Elstree Way Borehamwood Hertfordshire WD6 1JD England.
The Companys shares are listed on the AIM market of the London Stock Exchange.
The principal activity of the Company is to hold investments in subsidiaries which develop and supply environmental plastic additives and products and develop waste to value systems.
The annual report and accounts have been prepared in accordance with United Kingdom accounting standards including Financial Reporting Standard 102 The Financial Reporting Standard applicable in the United Kingdom and Republic of Ireland FRS 102 and with the Companies Act 2006.
The annual report and accounts have been prepared on the historical cost basis.
The Company has taken advantage of section 408 of the Companies Act 2006 and has not included its own statement of comprehensive income in these annual report and accounts.
The Company is considered a qualifying entity and has taken advantage of the FRS102 exemption not to include its own statement of cash flow in these annual report and accounts.
The annual report and accounts are presented in Sterling the functional and presentational currency of the Company and are expressed in round thousands unless otherwise stated 000s.
Fixed assets Tangible fixed assets are stated at cost net of depreciation and any provision for impairment.
Depreciation is calculated so as to write off the cost of an asset less its estimated residual value over the useful economic life of that asset as follows Motor vehicles 25% reducing balance.
Taxation
Current tax is the tax currently payable based on taxable profit for the year.
Deferred tax is recognised in respect of all timing differences that have originated but not reversed at the balance sheet date where transactions or events have occurred at that date that will result in an obligation to pay more or a right to pay less or to receive more tax with the following exception deferred tax assets are recognised only to the extent that the directors consider that it is more likely than not that there will be suitable taxable profits from which the future reversal of the underlying timing differences can be deducted.
Deferred tax is measured on an undiscounted basis at the tax rates that are expected to apply in the periods in which timing differences reverse based on tax rates and laws enacted or substantively enacted at the balance sheet date.
Foreign currencies Monetary assets and liabilities in foreign currencies are translated into Sterling at the rates of exchange ruling at the balance sheet date.
Transactions in foreign currencies are translated into Sterling at the rate of exchange ruling at the date of the transaction.
Exchange differences are taken into account in arriving at the operating profit.
Investments
Investments in subsidiaries are accounted for at cost less impairment in the individual annual report and accounts.
Impairment of assets At each reporting date fixed assets are reviewed to determine whether there is any indication that those assets have suffered an impairment loss.
If there is an indication of possible impairment the recoverable amount of any affected asset is estimated and compared with its carrying amount.
If estimated recoverable amount is lower the carrying amount is reduced to its estimated recoverable amount and an impairment loss is charged immediately to statement of comprehensive income.
If an impairment loss subsequently reverses the carry amount of the asset is increased to the revised estimate of its recoverable amount but not in excess of the amount that would have been determined had no impairment loss been recognised for the asset in prior years.
A reversal of an impairment loss is recognised immediately in statement of comprehensive income.
Financial instruments Financial liabilities and equity instruments are classified according to the substance of the contractual arrangements entered into.
An equity instrument is any contract that evidences a residual interest in the assets of the entity after deducting all of its financial liabilities.
Where the contractual obligations of the financial instruments including share capital are equivalent to a similar debt instrument those financial instruments are classified as financial liabilities.
Financial liabilities are presented as such in the balance sheet.
Finance costs are calculated so as to produce a constant rate of return on the outstanding liability.
Where the contractual terms of share capital do not have any terms meeting the definition of a financial liability then this is classified as an equity instrument.
Dividends and distributions relating to equity instruments are debited direct to equity.
Equitysettled sharebased payments Warrants and options granted to employees which relate to salary sacrifices of employees employed by this company are attributed a fair value by reference to the services provided.
This fair value is charged to statement of comprehensive income when the service is provided with a corresponding credit taken to shareholders funds.
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS BUSINESS REVIEW CORPORATE GOVERNANCE Symphony Environmental Technologies plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 site 46 Significant judgements and estimates Preparation of the annual report and accounts requires management to make significant judgements and estimates.
The items in the annual report and accounts where these judgements and estimates have been made include Judgements  impairment An impairment loss is recognised for the amount by which the assets or cash generating units carrying amount exceeds its recoverable amount.
To determine the recoverable amount management estimates expected future cash flows from each cashgenerating unit and determines a suitable discount rate in order to calculate the present value of those cash flows.
In the process of measuring expected future cash flows management makes assumptions about future operating results.
These assumptions relate to future events and circumstances.
In most cases determining the applicable discount rate involves estimating the appropriate adjustment to market risk and the appropriate adjustment to assetspecific risk factors.
Details of assumptions made and impairments recognised in the period are given in notes 29 and 30.
Notes to the Company Balance Sheet continued Symphony Environmental Technologies plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 site 47
Total
Cost
At 1 January 2017 14 14 At 31 December 2017 14 14
At 1 January 2017 13 13 At 31 December 2017 13 13 Net book value At 31 December 2017 1 1 At 31 December 2016 1 1 Tangible fixed assets Included within the net book value of 1000 is nil 2016 nil relating to assets held under finance leases and hire purchase contracts.
The depreciation charged to the annual report and accounts in the year in respect of such assets amounted to nil 2016 nil.
Investments
Shares in
Undertaking
Total
Cost
At 1 January 2017 At 31 December 2017
At 1 January 2017 At 31 December 2017 Net book value At 31 December 2017 At 31 December 2016 Group undertakings are detailed in note 13.
Debtors
Amounts owed by Group undertakings
Prepayments
1516 1210 The amounts owed by Group undertakings is at cost less impairment.
An impairment provision of nil has been made against intragroup receivables 2016 9000.
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS BUSINESS REVIEW CORPORATE GOVERNANCE Symphony Environmental Technologies plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 site 48 Contingent liabilities The Company has guaranteed all monies due to its bankers by Symphony Environmental Limited and Symphony Recycling Technologies Limited.
At 31 December 2017 the net indebtedness of these companies amounted to nil 2016 383000.
Share capital The Companys share capital is detailed in note 18 of the Group consolidated accounts.
Directors and employees All employees of Symphony Environmental Technologies plc are Directors.
See note 7 of the Group consolidated accounts.
The average number of staff employed by the Company during the financial year amounted to Creditors amounts falling due within one year Trade creditors
No.
No.
Management 3 3 The aggregate payroll costs of the above were Wages and salaries Social security costs The company has taken advantage of the FRS 102 exemption that allows intragroup transactions with a 100% subsidiary to not be disclosed.
There were no other related party transactions throughout the period.
Notes to the Company Balance Sheet continued Symphony Environmental Technologies plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 site 49 Company Information Company registration number Registered office 6 Elstree Gate Elstree Way
Hertfordshire
WD6 1JD
N Deva DL FRSA MEP NonExecutive Chairman M Laurier
Chief Executive Officer
I Bristow FCCA Chief Financial Officer M Stephen Commercial Director and Deputy Chairman N Clavel NonExecutive Director S Robinson NonExecutive Director B Wigley NonExecutive Director appointed 6 April 2018
I Bristow Nominated Adviser and Broker Cantor Fitzgerald Europe One Churchill Place Canary Wharf
EC14 5RD
HSBC Bank Plc 103 Station Road
Middlesex
HA8 7JJ
Olswang
90 High Holborn
WC1V 6XX
Mazars LLP Chartered Accountants and Statutory Auditors Tower Bridge House St Katharines Way
E1W 1DD
Link Asset Services The Registry 34 Beckenham Road
Kent
