Polypipe Group plc Annual Report and Accounts FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 Stock Code PLP investors.
To view the annual report online Polypipe Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 WELCOME TO POLYPIPE IS ONE OF EUROPES LARGEST MANUFACTURERS OF PIPING SYSTEMS WATER AND CLIMATE MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS DELIVERING ENGINEERED SOLUTIONS THAT ENABLE A SUSTAINABLE BUILT
Polypipe has an established market position spanning the residential commercial civils and infrastructure and public nonhousing sectors in the UK and selected markets around the world.
Through constant innovation and focused research and development Polypipe is uniquely positioned to offer solutions that help deal with the pressures placed on urban environments existing infrastructure and natural resources.
OUR PURPOSE Polypipe harnesses the knowledge of its expert staff to develop a deep understanding of the market sectors the Company serves.
In addition to a core offer of drainage plumbing and heating Polypipe is able to offer access to one of the largest water management product portfolios offering solutions to even the most demanding of water management infrastructure projects.
Plus the dedicated teams in our ventilation businesses work directly with MandE contractors and endcustomers which allows them to focus their efforts on new product development to keep them at the forefront of lowenergy and carbon efficient ventilation technology.
Polypipe continues to invest in its manufacturing scale to maintain its competitive position through operational efficiency operating stateoftheart manufacturing and fabrication facilities to provide valueengineered fitforpurpose solutions for the most diverse and complex challenges often substituting legacy materials.
With a high level of new product development and a solid working knowledge of the legislative requirements within its markets Polypipe is equipped to help customers not only meet their everyday product requirements but also solve a range of problems they will face today and tomorrow reinforcing sales through technical expertise that they can trust.
WHAT WE DO Polypipe develops engineered solutions for construction projects including some of the most prestigious buildings and infrastructure schemes around a core offer of plastic piping systems.
Placing the management of water and the healthy ventilation of buildings at the heart of its strategy Polypipe is able to provide solutions to some of the most pressing environmental challenges in these construction projects.
Polypipes focus on the management and movement of water and air has influenced the development of Polypipes range of systems enabling the Company to offer products and systems that help to contribute to a safer healthier and more sustainable built environment and to help respond to the trends of global warming and increased urbanisation.
Polypipes staff at all levels have a clear understanding of the Companys mission to lead the way in the development of futureproof plumbing drainage and ventilation systems that make use of modern sustainable materials and best practices in engineering manufacturing and construction.
Read more about Water Management Solutions on pages 18 and 19 Building from a position of market leadership in the UK where the Company is the largest plastic piping systems manufacturer by sales volume and largest light commercial ventilation manufacturer Polypipe continues to invest in order to maintain and develop its position as a leader in the management and movement of air and water.
This investment and scale provides both operational efficiency and considerable economic reach to serve the broadest range of customers.
Based on a core offer of plastic piping supported by complete system performance design incorporating engineered inhouse manufactured fittings and ancillaries Polypipe is uniquely placed to offer a differentiated total solution to those from other plastic pipe manufacturers.
It is able to pursue significant growth opportunities by developing effective solutions to new and emerging legislation in addition to providing customers with a high performance alternative to pipes manufactured from legacy materials such as clay copper and concrete in each of the sectors the Company serves.
In this way Polypipes sales growth has consistently outperformed the construction market.
Polypipes focus on value addition through engineered solutions its abovemarket growth and its commitment to investment leverages an existing operational footprint to generate incremental profitability which allows Polypipe to deliver a strong and resilient financial performance.
INVESTMENT
PROPOSITION
Read more online at httpinvestors.
HIGHLIGHTS
Strong performance in UK  revenue growth at 8.1% Residential Systems segment revenue growth of 10.3% driven by demand in the new housebuild sector RMI markets remain subdued Disposal of Polypipe France for 16.5m on a cashfree debtfree normalised working capital basis expected to complete in the first half of 2018 Decisive action taken to close Dubai factory and pursue alternative manufacturing strategy in the Middle East Management succession implemented Paul James joined as CFO on 5 March 2018 OUR OPERATIONAL
03 STRATEGIC REPORT 04 Polypipe at a Glance
06 Chairmans Introduction
07 Polypipes Value Creation model 08 Polypipes Marketplace 10 Polypipes Business Model 12 Strategy 14 Key Performance Indicators 15 Our Sustainable Journey 18 Our Sustainable Journey in Action
22 Chief Executive Officers Review
26 Chief Financial Officers Report
30 Principal Risks and Uncertainties Corporate Responsibility Statement 39 OUR GOVERNANCE 40 Directors and Officers 42 Introduction from the Chairman
43 Corporate Governance Statement
48 Report of the Nomination Committee 50 Report of the Audit Committee 54 Annual Report on Remuneration 74 Directors Report 77 Directors Responsibilities Statement 79 OUR FINANCIALS
80 Independent Auditors Report
86 Group Income Statement Group Statement of Comprehensive Income 88 Group Balance Sheet 89 Group Statement of Changes in Equity 90 Group Cash Flow Statement 91 Notes to the Group Financial Statements 126 Directors Responsibilities Statement 127 Company Balance Sheet Company Statement of Changes in Equity Company Cash Flow Statement Notes to the Company Financial Statements 135 Shareholder Information Visit us online at site NAVIGATING THE REPORT Additional information online For further information within this document and relevant page numbers
REVENUE
6.3% 387.2m UNDERLYING OPERATING
6.0% PROFIT BEFORE TAX 3.9% OPERATING CASH FLOW AFTER NET CAPEX 14.9% UNDERLYING BASIC EPS FROM CONTINUING OPERATIONS 10.1% 24.7pps 27.2pps Before nonunderlying items.
01 OUR SOLUTIONS Polypipe SuDS solution enhanced flood protection and ensured minimal intrusion into residents usable space The lack of capacity in the existing highway drainage network placed many properties in the residential area of Linnet Rise at risk of flooding.
Polypipe supplied a complete prefabricated solution using Polystorm geocellular tanks together with pipework manholes and catchpits all manufactured offsite.
The final design saw the installation of two Polystorm geocellular tanks at a depth of 3.2 metres under two resident owned car parks on the Linnet Rise site providing 366m and 479m of storage respectively.
The solution was retrofitted to the existing area with minimal disruption to local residents to provide longlasting flood protection.
This retrofitted flood alleviation scheme was designed and prepared offsite to minimise disruption for this busy residential area MARKET LEADERSHIP BESPOKE PRODUCT SOLUTIONS 02 STRATEGIC REPORT POLYPIPE AT A GLANCE 04
CHAIRMANS INTRODUCTION 06
POLYPIPES VALUECREATION MODEL 07 POLYPIPES MARKETPLACE 08 POLYPIPES BUSINESS MODEL 10 STRATEGY 12 KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS 14 OUR SUSTAINABLE JOURNEY 15 OUR SUSTAINABLE JOURNEY IN ACTION 18
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICERS REVIEW 22
CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICERS REPORT 26
PRINCIPAL RISKS and UNCERTAINTIES 30 CORPORATE RESPONSIBILITY STATEMENT 35 CASE STUDY
Linnet Rise Flood Alleviation Scheme
Client
NMCNomenca Severn Trent Water
Sustainable Drainage System SuDS Car park in use after project completion 03 RESIDENTIAL SYSTEMS Areas of application Aboveground drainage Storm water drainage Belowground drainage systems Sewer drain Water supply Plumbing and heating supply Underfloor heating systems Mechanical Ventilation with Heat Recovery Positive Input Ventilation Indoor air quality solutions Smart controls Merchandised prepackaged components Areas of application Aboveground drainage Surface water drainage Storm water drainage Land drainage and irrigation Sewer drain Ducting and conduit Pressure systems Air Handling Units Ventilation solutions with heat recovery Indoor air quality solutions Smart controls integrated with Building Management Systems Green infrastructure
UNDERLYING OPERATING PROFIT
UNDERLYING OPERATING PROFIT COMMERCIAL AND INFRASTRUCTURE SYSTEMS Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Polypipe Group plc POLYPIPE AT A GLANCE Polypipe is firmly established as one of Europes largest and most innovative manufacturers of plastic piping systems with over 20000 product lines and 195 UK and European product approvals.
With our Nuaire business providing energy efficient ventilation systems for the residential commercial and industrial sectors in the UK we have a diversity of offering that further strengthens our offer for Climate Management solutions.
By investing in our facilities our staff and our product development Polypipe is uniquely placed to help an increasingly broad customer base tackle the many complex questions that climate change and urbanisation pose.
This approach sees Polypipe continue to maintain its position as an industry leader within the built environment and construction sectors in the UK and beyond.
Over 20000 products widest range in the UK Logistics capability to deliver to over 10000 delivery points annually Fleet of over 300 trailers and 150 tractor units and rigid vehicles 195 UK and European product approvals BUILDING AND
NO.1
LEADING POSITIONS IN THE UK ACROSS KEY SEGMENTS CIVILS AND
NO.1
FACILITIES IN THE UK ITALY AND THE MIDDLE EAST EMPLOYEES IN THE GROUP SALES TECHNICAL SUPPORT PEOPLE Polypipe prefabricated stack design Polypipe offsite manufacture component chamber Polypipes surface water attenuation solution for the Houghton Regis residential development scheme Polypipe drainage solution for M27 road widening scheme Stock Codesite STRATEGIC REPORT OVERVIEW I am delighted to present the Polypipe 2017 Annual Report and Accounts following another excellent year for the
Despite the continued economic and political uncertainty that has prevailed since the EU Referendum and a mixed UK construction market performance our end markets continue to perform well with the Group growing UK revenue significantly ahead of the UK construction market.
As well as managing this growth the Group has also seen a number of key leadership changes during the year including the retirement of David Hall in October 2017 following 12 years as CEO and the promotion of Martin Payne from CFO to CEO following Davids retirement.
Glen
Sabin was promoted to the role of Chief Operating Officer and appointed to the Board in October 2017 and the Company Secretarial function was also brought in house following the appointment of Emma Versluys as Company Secretary.
Paul James joined the Company and Board as Chief Financial Officer on 5 March 2018 and I believe that the executive management team is now at full complement following this period of change and well placed to drive the Groups strategy forwards.
In this regard the Group announced on 31 January 2018 that it had entered into advanced negotiations to dispose of its French subsidiary following a review of the strategic overlap between the UK and French business.
Given the French business operates in lower margin product areas it was agreed to dispose of the business.
Completion is expected in the first half of 2018 and once completed will allow the Group to focus on its higher margin product areas.
RESULTS
Performance throughout 2017 has been very strong with a 6.3% increase in revenue to 411.7m and a 6.0% increase in underlying operating profit at 72.6m.
UK revenue growth of 8.1% was ahead of the market primarily as a result of strong growth in the UK residential sector driven by new housebuilds.
Underlying operating margin was robust at 17.6% despite continued input cost inflation and underlying diluted earnings per share increased by 10.1% to 27.2p per share.
Net debt continued to reduce to 1.6 times EBITDA compared with 1.9 times for the prior year.
DIVIDEND
We have again maintained our dividend policy and I am pleased to report that the Board recommends a final dividend of 7.5 pence per share giving a full year dividend of 11.1 pence per share for the year ended 31 December 2017 a 9.9% increase on the prior year.
STRATEGY
During 2017 the key objectives of the Board included Investigating and prioritising selected development and acquisition opportunities while the Group continued to reduce leverage.
Targeting investment to support the continued growth of our key businesses.
Investigation and development of new export markets.
Good progress was made against these objectives during 2017.
In addition to our ongoing initiatives in 2018 our attention will be focused upon Continuing to develop our core manufacturing capabilities by investing in further new capacity and automation to help grow both revenues and profit organically.
Continued progression of the Groups MandA agenda.
PEOPLE
The exceptional effort and ongoing commitment of our employees continues to be a key driver of the Companys strong performance.
In 2017 the Board and I spent time visiting our sites both in the UK and France and continue to be impressed by the knowledge enthusiasm and commitment of our employees across the
Effective and efficient management of our key facilities is critical to the Groups ongoing success and strong leadership in each business unit by experienced and dedicated management teams is a key differentiator.
In November 2017 the first Save As You Earn SAYE options granted in 2014 matured and employees across the Group were able to benefit from their hard work in driving the Groups growth over the last three years and have the option of becoming shareholders in the Company.
The Company issued invitations to join a third SAYE scheme during the year resulting in 600 24% of eligible employees choosing to participate.
Across the Group we now have 30.7% of all employees currently contributing to one or more schemes.
David Hall retired in October 2017 having been CEO during the Companys prior ownership and through its transformation into a public company.
I would like to record both the Boards and my own personal thanks to David for his enormous contribution to making Polypipe the successful Group that it is today and wish him well in his retirement.
Martin Payne was appointed as Group CEO following Davids retirement and both I and my Board colleagues have been impressed and encouraged by the significant impact he has made since his appointment while continuing to have responsibility for the CFO function in the period before Paul James joined us.
The Board changes have been well received within the Group as well as with advisers and shareholders and the motivation and enthusiasm of our employees has been unaffected throughout this period of change.
The Board and I look forward to the next chapter in the Groups growth story under the stewardship of the new executive management team.
SUMMARY
Once again the Group has made significant progress during 2017.
The strong performance in the year is testament to the strength of the growth drivers on which the Groups strategy is based namely legacy material substitution tailwinds from both water management and carbon reduction legislation and development of selective export markets.
With a continued focus on investment into engineered solutions to meet those needs an experienced and dedicated senior management team committed workforce and a clear strategy I am confident that the Group will continue to thrive during 2018.
Ron Marsh
Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Polypipe Group plc
INTRODUCTION In the 1980s Polypipes offer was largely a basic product offer of discrete lengths of pipe and fittings sold through distribution which over the years has become commoditised and more difficult to differentiate.
Adoption of kitemarks and continued investment in manufacturing efficiency over this time has retained a competitive position for these products.
Further investment in new products and differentiated features continues today which helps support the Polypipe brand as the leading UK manufacturer of these discrete products.
In the mid90s this proposition evolved to combine these discrete products into performance systems such as pushfit plumbing for example.
Through developing an intimate understanding of the requirements of end customers plumbers in this case in 1998 Polypipe launched the very successful range of nondemountable grey fittings Polyplumb which has since become an industry standard system offer in the UK.
Later this evolution continued with large diameter pipe solutions for water attenuation leading to the development of the Polystorm geocellular range designed to provide retention attenuation or infiltration at a variety of depths.
Polystorm is suited to deeper burial depths and can accommodate a wide range of traffic loadings from pedestrianised areas to large HGV parks.
As a proposition it is taken to market as bespoke oneoff designs engineered according to the particular design characteristics for each project such as soil conditions flood intensity requirements and flow versus retention requirements amongst many other parameters.
Understanding the detailed characteristics and complexity of the individual projects requires Polypipe to work closely with the customers design engineers to understand these problems in order to be in a position to propose an appropriate engineered solution.
Working closely with end customers in this way helps to generate pullthrough demand for Polypipes solutions through the distribution channel.
Today this evolution is continuing through the development of smart technologies to bring together the optimised performance of underfloor heating systems with ventilation systems for the convenience and comfort of the building occupants.
Throughout this evolution Polypipe has encountered new competitors but through its progressive market reach and managing these activities and manufacturing inhouse Polypipe generates incremental profitability while maintaining commercial competitiveness and market leadership.
This collective learning and track record forms the basis of a set of competencies across the Group which position Polypipe well for future development in the UK and further afield.
The evolution of Polypipes commercial proposition over the years reflects the Companys new product development strategy to deliver valueengineered solutions for customers while generating incremental profitability and maintaining commercial competitiveness and market leadership.
PRODUCTION OF PIPE AND FITTINGS SERVES AS A FOUNDATION FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE GROUPS SOLUTIONS DISCRETE PRODUCTS PIPING SYSTEMS SMART SOLUTIONS DATA DRIVEN MONITORING and CONTROL FOR OPTIMISED SYSTEM PERFORMANCE BESPOKE ONEOFF DESIGNS PREFAB UFH VENTILATION SYSTEMS PUSHFIT PLUMBING VENTILATION and DUCT PIPE and FITTINGS ENGINEERED SOLUTIONS
PROXIMITY TO CUSTOMERS Stock Codesite STRATEGIC REPORT POLYPIPES VALUE  CREATION MODEL Unique and differentiated POLYPIPES MARKETPLACE OUTPUT TRENDS Over the next two years overall construction output is forecast to remain broadly flat in 2018 rising by only 0.2% before growth of 1.7% in 2019 driven primarily by growth in private housing and infrastructure.
Outside of the private housing and infrastructure sectors slower UK economic growth and investment uncertainty are expected to weigh on construction output in the private sectors.
This combined with the persistent uncertainty associated with the conditions of Brexit has acted as a considerable hindrance to major new investment in private sector construction especially for new highend residential and commercial offices projects within London that are particularly reliant on foreign investment.
From an economic point of view other uncertainties such as the implications of continued inflation and the fall in real wages on consumer confidence and general UK economic growth and the availability of skilled construction labour may also affect the rate of construction growth in 2018 and 2019.
RESIDENTIAL
Output in the private housing sector continued to grow in 2017 and is expected to rise further in 2018 and 2019.
Property transactions in 2017 were slightly lower than transactions in the last two years and indicate a broadly flat to slightly negative general housing market.
These transactions have been distorted due to changes in stamp duty in recent years that adversely affected sales at the top end of the market in particular.
UK house price inflation in 2017 was 3.0% compared to 2016 according to Nationwide indicating that the supply of properties onto the market slowed in line with demand.
As long as house price inflation continues housebuilders will be keen to increase supply especially given that the Governments HelpToBuy schemes have skewed demand towards new housebuild and they remain positive with respect to increasing supply.
A key part of the housebuilding market that appears to have been adversely affected over the past year is prime London properties.
House prices in central London have fallen 15% since their peak in 2014 according to Savills.
Uncertainty on rates of return on highend properties from international investors due to short term economic and longerterm Brexit uncertainty has also affected demand for prime residential real estate in the capital.
The private housing repair maintenance and improvement RMandI sector was worth an estimated 19.9 billion in 2017.
The trend of slightly negative property transactions over the past year would suggest falling output in the private RMandI sector particularly given that a higher proportion of transactions than normal involve new housebuild encouraged by
At the same time there is a slight demographic impact on RMandI particularly among older homeowners in certain areas who prefer to release equity from pensions and stay and improve rather than move.
As a result output from private RMandI is expected to remain flat in 2018 before falling 2.0% in 2019.
As falls in housebuilding in London are offset by growth in housebuilding outside the capital the private housing sector is forecast to continue its growth from 2017 with 3.0% in 2018 and 2.0% in 2019.
The UK construction market accounts for 89% of Polypipes revenue where the brand is well known and respected for its value quality of service innovation and expertise.
Construction output % growth  2015 constant prices Housing completions in Great Britain Private and public housing RMandI construction output m  2015 constant prices Source ONS Construction Products Association Winter Forecast 2017  2018 Central Scenario 1.7% 0.2% 3.0% 3.8%tel 2019 Source DCLG Construction Products Association
Publictel 2016 153619 34697 Source DCLG Construction Products Association
Publictel 2016 21288 7296 20862 7508 Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Polypipe Group plc 08 Polypipe has a balanced mix of business that covers the Residential Commercial and Infrastructure construction sectors and within each of these the activities of New Build and Repair Maintenance and Improvement RMandI subsectors.
This broad exposure across the construction sectors provides a countercyclical balance to the more volatile peaks and troughs of the newbuild cycle and provides even further opportunity for Polypipe to provide effective solutions to new and emerging legislation substitute legacy building materials and therefore to deliver abovemarket growth.
BALANCED SALES SPLIT Greater certainty over grant funding and flexibility under the Shared Ownership and Affordable Homes Programme 201621 SOAHP had been expected to drive an increase in public housing activity in 2017 however starts in England were 0.1% lower in the first three quarters of the year following two previous years of declines.
CIVILS AND INFRASTRUCTURE Overall output in the infrastructure sector is expected to rise by 6.3% in 2018 and 11.1% in 2019 driven by work on largescale infrastructure projects in the rail water and sewerage and electricity subsectors in particular.
Within this output in the rail sector is expected to increase by 5.0% in 2018 and is projected to accelerate to 20.0% in 2019 as main civil engineering work is projected to start on phase 1 of HS2.
Recent data indicated that 5.8 billion worth of annual orders have been awarded at the end of 2017 reflecting seven key contracts.
Output in roads construction where Polypipe has significant exposure is expected to remain flat in 2018 with delays in some projects pushing demand into future years.
Going forward output in roads is projected to return to growth and increase 3.0% in 2019 driven by a pickup in activity under the 15.2 billion Road Investment Strategy.
An important recent factor affecting the infrastructure construction sector has been the collapse of Carillion.
According to data from Barbour ABI around 60% of Carillions active schemes or projects with contracts awarded in which Carillion is the sole major contractor are infrastructure projects.
Within their infrastructure work 53% of the projects are road schemes and 42% of the projects are rail schemes.
The full impact of Carillions liquidation is yet to play out through the long supply chain of sub contractors but will almost certainly add to the downside risk of project delivery timing.
COMMERCIAL
Commercial activity peaked during the first half of 2017 based on new orders signed prior to the EU Referendum.
Activity remains at historically high levels as commercial sector output rose by 3.0% in 2017 based on the ONSs revised output data for the year.
However commercial offices new orders have fallen since the EU Referendum in June 2016 and following the 1218 month lag between orders and output in commercial projects output has fallen since summer last year.
Since the EU Referendum vote international investors and developers adopted more riskaverse behaviour towards new projects and new orders have fallen sharply.
Hence output in the offices subsector is expected to fall by 5.0% in 2017 15.0% in 2018 and a further 10.0% in 2019.
As a result commercial sector output overall is expected to fall by 5.0% in 2018 and 1.4% in 2019 as the fall in orders feeds through the project pipeline.
Public nonhousing output m  2015 constant prices Commercial output m  2015 constant prices Infrastructure output m  2015 constant prices Source ONS Construction Products Association Winter Forecast 2017  2018 Central Scenario 17tel 2016 2019 Source ONS Construction Products Assocation Winter Forecast 2017  2018 Central Scenario 28tel 2016 2019 Source ONS Construction Products Assocation Winter Forecast 2017  2018 Central Scenario 10tel Stock Codesite STRATEGIC REPORT RANGE Breadth and Depth of Product Systems Substituting Legacy Materials
Sustainable Products and Practices Enabling Sustainable Building Technology
Industry Authority Product Innovation
Market Leadership Polypipe Brand
Manufacturing and Logistics Scale Bespoke Product Solutions
Leading Edge Design Expertise Application Based Technical Support
Intelligent Engineered Solutions Smarter Thinking Better Solutions CUSTOMERS and
POLYPIPES BUSINESS MODEL Creating the competitive advantage Polypipe understands its customers businesses and the challenges they face making us well placed to help deliver solutions that meet key market drivers.
As well as ensuring availability of the broadest product portfolio that carry an extensive list of product approvals allowing its systems to be widely specified Polypipe has a team of experienced experts that train interact with and influence the numerous customer groups in all of our market sectors.
From specifiers and engineers to the merchants to the installers and plumbers Polypipes customers have come to expect quality support trust competence and capability which are values that are consistently maintained throughout the Companys operations.
In combining all of the above Polypipe continues to maintain the market leading position for creating plastic pipe technology and sustainable products that are intelligently engineered.
With storm events and water shortages occurring more frequently due to environmental change Polypipes engineered solutions help its customers ensure their developments are resilient.
The Company can act as a key partner in providing modern building practices in regards to managing water as a scarce resource empowering town planners and regional authorities to create drainage systems that support modern city living.
As the trend of urbanisation continues on a global scale Polypipe maintains its position as an authority on water management in these environments helping an expanding population deal with flood events and enjoy healthy green space in and around the built environment.
Polypipes ventilation solutions boosted by the acquisition of Nuaire help to provide comfortable environments for occupants of buildings by for example regulating temperature humidity The strength and longterm value of our business model is in placing our customers their markets and the environment at the heart of everything that we do. odours and contaminants in the air.
With average air temperatures projected to rise significantly over the coming decades due to climate change and the urban heat island effect likely to exacerbate the intensity of heatwaves in cities the convergence of low energy heating and ventilation solutions that maintain comfortable internal temperatures and help avoid overheating all year round becomes increasingly important.
Furthermore Polypipes Permavoid system used on podium decks or at roof level provides a solution for water capture rainwater harvesting and allows for a planted green roof that not only acts as an insulation barrier but the combination of plant processes photosynthesis and evapotranspiration and soil processes evapotransmission reduce the amount of solar energy absorbed by the roof membrane leading to cooler temperatures beneath the surface further reducing the energy required for cooling.
Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Polypipe Group plc 10 CASE STUDY O
CASE STUDY SEACOAL HOUSE
THOUGHT LEADERSHIP ENGINEERING DESIGN SUSTAINABILITY IN THE BUILT ENVIRONMENT UNIQUE DIFFERENTIATION OF POLYPIPE Client Gustafson Porter  Bowman Application Roof Garden Polypipe helped provide Seacoal House in the heart of London with a stateoftheart hard landscaped roof and stormwater management system improving the efficiency of the buildings drainage system while providing a roof garden design as a recreational space.
At just 85mm deep and with a very high void ratio Permavoid was the ideal solution for this roof garden application.
Client H.
Simm and Son Ltd.
Products Terrain FUZE HDPE Soil and Waste For this prestigious 19storey hotel with 453 bedrooms and suites it was of paramount importance that the drainage system installed could be trusted not to leak and so MandE Contractor H.
Simm and Son Ltd. approached Polypipe to manufacture a suitable solution.
Terrain FUZE HDPE made of highdensity polyethylene is lighter in weight than the cast iron equivalent and is available in longer lengths meaning less jointing is required which in turn provides fewer opportunities for the system to leak.
PRODUCT INNOVATION
LEGACY MATERIALS LEADING EDGE DESIGN EXPERTISE APPLICATION BASED TECHNICAL SUPPORT Stock Codesite STRATEGIC REPORT VISION
To be the leading provider of sustainable and resilient water and climate management solutions for the built environment We will do this by building a worldclass sustainable business and by leveraging our core UK competencies across key markets around the world.
A combination of emerging factors such as climate change increasing urbanisation skills shortages onsite and changes in legislation is leading the construction sector to seek innovations and modern methods to tackle these challenges while ensuring safe onsite working methods reduced time to install and reduced total cost of ownership.
Polypipes position as a market leader with strong heritage broad product and service portfolio advanced research and development capability and growing international presence makes it ideally placed to help its customers tackle many of these challenges.
While Polypipe is well known and respected as a manufacturer of plastic pipe products particularly for plumbing drainage and water management solutions the Companys acquisition of Nuaire greatly increases its ability to offer broader engineered solutions to customers who also face the challenge of climate management associated with heating ventilation cooling and air quality.
The innate product benefits of plastic offer the Company the opportunity to make gains against manufacturers of legacy material solutions in many of the markets it already leads  offering further growth where the brand is already well established.
As awareness continues to heighten around environmental factors and increased legislation is applied in a variety of sectors Polypipe is well placed to continue to grow in the UK and abroad.
SUSTAINABLE
WATER
MANAGEMENT
SOLUTIONS
SUSTAINABLE
CLIMATE
MANAGEMENT
SOLUTIONS
The demand for comprehensive water management solutions continues to rise.
Extreme rainfall events driven by climate change are becoming more frequent.
In response the Government has introduced new legislation.
The
Floods and Water Management Act 2010 sets out new ways to manage surface water through sustainable drainage systems
Polypipe has responded to this challenging market by developing engineered Water Management solutions including geocellular and large diameter pipe systems for retention attenuation and infiltration applications surface water treatment products and rainwater reuse solutions all supported by inhouse design technical fabrication and product support teams.
Although currently no Government legislation is in place there is growing public awareness of the need for better indoor air quality.
Particularly in urban areas the levels of toxins nitrogen dioxide and particulates from heavy traffic in particular can cause health problems for occupants who may be particularly susceptible.
Through its Nuaire business Polypipe can propose solutions that address indoor air quality through active filtration systems to remove particulates and humidity and temperature management systems.
Many ventilation systems specified today include heat recovery systems Mechanical Ventilation with Heat Recovery MVHR that as well as improving air quality also recover heat from the air being expelled so it can be used to heat the incoming air offering significant savings on the costs of heating the properties or operating the premises.
OUR STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Polypipe Group plc 12 LEGACY
SUBSTITUTION
PROPOSITION
AHEAD OF
TAILWINDS
GEOGRAPHIC
REACH
COMPLEMENTARY
ACQUISITIONS
Using engineered plastics rather than traditional materials such as concrete or clay can lead to innovative project solutions that offer transportation installation and costsaving benefits.
As thermoplastic pipes are inherently lighter in weight than legacy materials they are quicker and easier to install.
Polypipe produces pipes and fittings utilising recycled materials where appropriate and all products are recyclable at the end of their useful life.
These benefits combined with Polypipes strong brand and technical expertise offer potential for Polypipes propositions to penetrate further against legacy materials such as concrete clay or copper pipes.
As legislation continues to tighten to meet the international performance targets on water management air quality carbon reduction and city resilience Polypipe continues its longterm investment into Water Management and Climate Management solutions.
For example Government planning policy has defined the need for sustainable drainage systems SuDS to ensure that flood risk is taken into account during all stages of the planning process.
This planning policy is further interpreted into national frameworks local legislation and regulations which provide a dynamic legislative environment.
Polypipes solutions are engineered to address these challenges providing an effective controlled retention attenuation or infiltration system to suit sitespecific requirements.
With Polypipes UK standardbased products and the esteem that UK manufacturing is held in within a number of growing markets around the world the Company seeks to expand in selected further markets.
Many factors supporting Polypipes growth are not unique to the UK such as urbanisation managing water as a scarce resource combined sewer systems already at capacity urban island heat effect and poor air quality.
The track record of growth in the UK and the collective learning that the Group has developed over time form the basis of a set of unique competencies across the Group which position Polypipe well for future development outside the UK.
Acquisition of marketleading companies such as Nuaire has seen Polypipe do more than broaden its manufacturing base with the Company also diversifying its offer and giving the brand further scope to sell an increasingly broad range of systems to its customers resulting from the growing convergence of requirements of separate systems.
Supplementing the Groups existing product portfolio these acquisitions help to accelerate the Groups strategic priorities capability and product ranges offerings particularly in the areas of material substitution and Water Management and Climate Management solutions.
CONTINUOUS INVESTMENT IN PROCESSES AND EFFICIENCY INITIATIVES A key component of Polypipes success has been its efficiency initiatives with the Company committed to reducing its environmental impact in producing its systems.
This in turn has led to reductions in waste  both material and financial.
Continuous improvement initiatives across the Group through factory automation as well as investments in fleet and logistics have led to significant improvements in overall operational efficiency.
Polypipe has been able to streamline its processes by increasingly selling complete engineered solutions to customers.
Rather than simply selling pipe Polypipe has made best use of its manufacturing facilities and expertise to manufacture inhouse a complete range of complementary fittings and ancillaries enabling design of bespoke systems and improved services for customers.
New continuous corrugation investment at Horncastle Investment in robotic automation at Broomhouse Lane Stock Codesite STRATEGIC REPORT As a Board we continually review our performance measures that are critical to the measurement and delivery of our strategic objectives and delivery of sustainable shareholder returns.
We have defined our Key Performance Indicators KPIs to measure alignment between our operating activity and strategic goals.
FINANCIAL KPI PERFORMANCE COMMENTARY SALES GROWTH The annual percentage growth in both Group and UK by destination revenue from continuing operations.
The Groups UK market leadership and international development coupled with its strategy of legacy material substitution and new product development allow sales to grow ahead of the overall construction market.
UNDERLYING OPERATING MARGIN Underlying operating profit as a percentage of revenue from continuing operations. higher dropthrough profits.
CASH CONVERSION Operating cash flow excluding nonunderlying items less net capital expenditure to underlying operating profit. generative.
RETURN ON CAPITAL EMPLOYED Return on capital employed is the ratio of underlying operating profit adjusted for the full year benefit from acquisitions during the year where relevant to net assets excluding net borrowings and taxation.
ROCE.
UNDERLYING EPS Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations adjusted for nonunderlying items. business and distributed as earnings.
NONFINANCIAL KPI PERFORMANCE COMMENTARY ACCIDENT FREQUENCY Accident frequency rate is defined as the number of HSE reportable accidents and dangerous occurrences based on the current sevenday absence from work reporting requirement in the UK and although there is no direct equivalent in Mainland Europe and the Middle East the same definition is applied.
Frequency per 100000 hours worked Our overarching objective is to achieve zero accidents every year.
As the Group grows efforts continue on continuous improvement initiatives towards achieving a Groupwide shared safety culture.
GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS The Intensity Ratio is defined as the total tonnes of scope 1 2 and 3 CO e produced per total tonnes of production.
Intensity Ratio Operating in an environmentally sustainable manner is central to Group strategy.
Consequently these considerations are key in our investment decisions for our production processes.
17.6 2017 17.2 2015 78tel 13.7 2015 el el KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS For more information about our strategy see pages 12 and 13 Group  % UK  % 6.3 2017 10.3 2015 25.3 2016 9.2 2015 nnual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Polypipe Group plc At Polypipe our commitment to sustainability flows from our way of working to build and develop a sustainable business through to taking solutions to market that are by nature of their application enabling a sustainable and resilient built environment.
The start of this journey is rooted in the way we process our polymer raw materials.
The reputation of plastic as a material has suffered a deterioration in its public perception in recent times.
However the very characteristics that can lead to plastics being a problem for the environment can also be applied to solve key environmental challenges such as the management of water or the management of various attributes of climate.
By their nature plastics are chemically inert which means that by themselves they do not pollute in the way that hydrocarbons that run off from roads or fertilisers that run off from fields do.
Furthermore since plastics repel water and do not readily biodegrade they are ideally suited for applications that manage water in a sustainable manner.
Therefore in an environment where extreme storm events are becoming frequent and existing combined sewage outfall infrastructure is reaching capacity the use of plastics can be engineered as a very effective part of the solution to manage water.
Along with ensuring that virgin plastics and polymers are sourced only from reputable suppliers Polypipe has invested heavily and optimised its own recycling and polymer processing plant at the Horncastle site.
Furthermore Polypipe works with industry leading partners such as Veolia to source quality recyclable bales of plastic bottles and containers.
This allows the Company to create products from recycled plastics reducing transport and the number of processing steps to convert recyclate into a high performing product ensuring quality control throughout.
Not only is the polymer material recyclable at the end of its product life which is designed to be at least 50 years the benefits of plastic make it a much more considerate choice for the environment versus alternative materials.
Concrete clay copper steel and ductile iron pipe systems all require significantly more haulage and specialist lifting equipment than much lighter plastics which means that the use of Polypipe systems greatly reduces carbon emissions in delivery and installation.
For example producing a kilogram of virgin plastic releases 23 kilograms of carbon dioxide which is about as much as the same amount of steel.
However a single kilogram of plastic can produce 10 times more usable product in application than steel and 100 times more than concrete so the embedded carbon dioxide in application is significantly less with plastic pipes than with the alternative legacy materials.
In addition the light weight attribute of plastics means that plastic pipes can be 70% cheaper to transport than equivalent size concrete pipes and can be handled and stored much more safely onsite.
Producing pipe with recycled plastics instead of virgin plastic reduces the embedded carbon dioxide further still.
Recent life cycle analysis LCA reports suggest that there are clear environmental benefits to producing plastic products from recovered plastics compared with using virgin polymers and disposing of the product postuse via incineration or landfill and these environmental gains are particularly high for high density polyethylene HDPE such as that used to make plastic bottles.
For each tonne of HDPE that is recycled one tonne of carbon dioxide is saved versus producing and disposing of the same quantity of virgin material.
HDPE is the material that Polypipe uses to produce its large diameter pipes.
In
2017 Polypipe recycled 44000 tonnes of plastic of which 17500 tonnes came from recyclable plastic bottles and containers.
As such recycled plastic accounted for 75% of the raw material consumed by our Civils and Infrastructure Division in 2017 to produce pipes that were destined to be buried in the ground in applications that will manage and treat rainwater and stormwater.
OUR SUSTAINABLE JOURNEY For more information about our sustainable journey in action see page 18 15 15 Stock Codesite STRATEGIC REPORT SUSTAINABLE
STEP 1
POLYMERS
REDUCED
WATER
CONSUMPTION
REDUCED
MANUFACTURING
ENERGY
CONSUMPTION
REPROCESSED
MATERIAL
INTERNALLY
RECYCLED
POLYMERS
EXTERNALLY
RECYCLED
POLYMERS
Plastics are lighter easier to handle and reduce transportation costs.
Product systems that save energy and reduce CO 2 emissions.
Products that recognise water as a scarce resource and reduce ooding.
Plastic pipes and ttings are tough durable and resistant to corrosion.
LIGHT IN
STRONG
IN USE
EFFICIENT
SOLUTIONS
WATER
MANAGEMENT
SOLUTIONS
RESIDENTIAL COMMERCIAL CIVILS Recyclable at end of life
THE SUSTAINABLE BUILT ENVIRONMENT
QUALITY CONTROLLED INPUTS
PROCESSES
STEP 1
MATERIALS
STEP 1
SOLUTIONS
STEP 1 OUR SUSTAINABLE JOURNEY During the manufacturing process Polypipe works hard to limit environmental impact.
Taking an engineered approach to manufacturing ensures that Polypipe customers are able to receive systems that meet their needs exactly minimising waste.
Polypipe staff recognise the importance of design through to manufacturing and installation and the impact that these processes have on the environments in which their products are manufactured and used continuously searching for the optimum methods of reducing their environmental impact.
Polypipe believes that to fulfil its responsibilities to the wider industry it should actively participate in relevant trade bodies such as the British Plastics Federation encouraging best practice and a uniform approach to sustainability across the industry.
All of this starts with an understanding of the built environment.
While global warming may mean increasing temperatures it also means increased rainfall events that have the potential to be erratic.
Flooding which has become more frequent in the UK in recent years can cause mass disruption in the areas it affects causing damage to homes commercial premises and vital infrastructure.
In residential dwellings and tall commercial buildings Polypipes solutions start the process of managing water at roof level.
The Companys market leading geocellular solutions Permavoid enables architects and MandE consultants to create podium decks within roofs that can capture water and release it into surrounding drainage systems at a controlled rate to ensure systems are not overwhelmed.
In addition these podium decks can encourage biodiversity in urban environments through the creation of green roofs.
Building owners can cultivate roof gardens that can actively help to mitigate issues such as the Heat Island Effect.
This helps to maintain a stable climate and constant temperature inside the building and can be part of a carbon efficient solution to further reduce the energy requirement for cooling and air conditioning.
In addition the Groups Nuaire ventilation business enhances Polypipes ability to provide solutions for energy efficient ventilation alongside its heating products which are suited to low carbon heating.
While apartment blocks are ideal to meet the housing demands of cities developers must deal with the complex issues of optimising space managing air quality and overheating without creating nuisance ambient noise.
Nuaires energyefficient and lownoise ventilation systems with integral heat recovery and air filtration provide solutions to these issues offering developers lowenergy solutions which safeguard the health of residents in terms of providing sufficient fresh air.
With an increasing awareness of the need for cities to not only be resilient to flooding events but to plan for these events in advance using principles like water sensitive urban design WSUD Polypipe and its experts can provide solutions for the creation of spaces that are healthy and safe by mitigating water abundance water scarcity and poor air quality from manufacture through to system performance.
Climate Management Solutions see pages 20 and 21 Water Management Solutions see pages 18 and 19 STEP 1 STEP 1 STEP 1 STEP 1 Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Polypipe Group plc 16 SUSTAINABLE
STEP 1
POLYMERS
REDUCED
WATER
CONSUMPTION
REDUCED
MANUFACTURING
ENERGY
CONSUMPTION
REPROCESSED
MATERIAL
INTERNALLY
RECYCLED
POLYMERS
EXTERNALLY
RECYCLED
POLYMERS
Plastics are lighter easier to handle and reduce transportation costs.
Product systems that save energy and reduce CO 2 emissions.
Products that recognise water as a scarce resource and reduce ooding.
Plastic pipes and ttings are tough durable and resistant to corrosion.
LIGHT IN
STRONG
IN USE
EFFICIENT
SOLUTIONS
WATER
MANAGEMENT
SOLUTIONS
RESIDENTIAL COMMERCIAL CIVILS Recyclable at end of life
THE SUSTAINABLE BUILT ENVIRONMENT
QUALITY CONTROLLED INPUTS
PROCESSES
STEP 1
MATERIALS
STEP 1
SOLUTIONS
STEP 1 SUSTAINABLE INPUTS Enforcing quality reinforces productivity.
All of our raw materials whether prime or recycled polymers are sourced to a strict sustainable policy and this ensures all suppliers meet the highest standards.
With
ISO 9001 Quality Management and ISO 14001 Environmental Management accreditation we only manufacture with the very best materials.
SUSTAINABLE
PROCESSES
Polypipe does not just recycle all inprocess material waste we monitor every process and pursue continuous improvement in our operations to make a bigger difference.
For example we reduce power and water consumption by metering usage at machine level.
SUSTAINABLE
MATERIALS
Polypipe is proud to manufacture plastic pipes that are strong yet light in weight.
This fact alone helps towards considerably reducing fuel consumption in transportation lowering health and safety risks onsite and as we know our products can be recycled at the end of the life.
SUSTAINABLE
SOLUTIONS
Our products are not only sustainably produced but they enhance sustainability in their installation and everyday use.
For example they save energy reduce as a valuable resource.
Systems such as our underfloor heating Mechanical Ventilation with Heat Recovery and geocellular solutions provide the most comprehensive range available in our market to meet these requirements.
Recycling is also an integral part of this philosophy.
Polypipe is passionate about not only managing its own environmental impact but ensuring that its systems work to benefit the environments in which they are used.
Read more about our Sustainable Journey site THE OUTCOME The built environment across the residential commercial civils and infrastructure markets contributes significantly to the environmental impact of our habitat.
At Polypipe we are confident that our materials processes products and their applications in use are serving the demands of today and enhancing our environment into the future.
Stock Codesite STRATEGIC REPORT With an increase in urbanisation across the globe and the challenges that increased population density places on resources national and regional governments are increasingly aware of the issues surrounding sustainability and the need for urban centres to be resilient to extreme events such as flooding and overheating.
Our expertise and product range make us the ideal partner to help manage the movement of water and provide engineered solutions that enable the reduction of carbon in these environments providing a truly global opportunity to deliver a sustainable and resilient built environment in established and growing markets around the world.
As cities become more populated and as weather events become more extreme more frequently no single technical solution can claim to resolve these issues by itself.
Nevertheless steps can be taken to mitigate the potential impact.
Polypipes extensive range of Water Management solutions are designed to reduce or intercept the potential impact of extreme flooding and to help cities recover more quickly.
In fact to help cities become ever more resilient Polypipe has developed systems to manage surface water flooding rainwater harvesting and treatment as well as recycling for reuse.
WATER MANAGEMENT
OUR SUSTAINABLE JOURNEY IN ACTION CASE STUDY GLASGOW HOUSING ASSOCIATION Client Glasgow Housing Association GHA Application Plumbing and above ground drainage Part of major regeneration works by Transforming Communities Glasgow the project saw the creation of 141 new homes for social rent in Sighthill plus a further 157 new homes being built on the site of a former primary school.
Polypipes solutions were selected for their light weight durability and ease of installation allowing new tenants to move into their homes as quickly as possible.
BREADTH AND DEPTH OF PRODUCT SOLUTIONS SMARTER THINKING BETTER SOLUTIONS Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Polypipe Group plc 18 LEADERSHIP IN WATER MANAGEMENT
CASE STUDY MELINA ROAD LONDON Permavoid and Permafilter geotextile have been installed beneath permeable paving to manage stormwater on a busy residential street Project Counters Creek Flood Alleviation Scheme Thames Water Application Source control attenuation and irrigation for rain gardens Product Permavoid Permafoam and Permatex Geotextile Melina Road is part of a threestreet scheme designed to alleviate flood risk in streets built over the Counters Creek river system in
In order to compensate for the loss of permeable green space that would have alleviated the risks of excess stormwater Polypipe was able to supply a unique SuDS geocellular solution at this busy residential street in Hammersmith which includes a local school and a public open space.
2345 Permavoid cells were installed to provide 88m of rainwater storage and irrigation in four separate storage tanks beneath the new rain gardens.
INDUSTRY AUTHORITY SUSTAINABLE PRODUCTS AND PRACTICES Stock Codesite STRATEGIC REPORT OUR SUSTAINABLE JOURNEY IN ACTION As with our Water Management solutions Polypipes Climate Management solutions satisfy the most stringent of Government legislation.
We continue to invest in developing products and systems that enable and control heating ventilation and cooling.
Such solutions make built environments more energy efficient cleaner and more comfortable to live in.
This results in a more sustainable and resilient built environment not just for the benefit of Governments but for everyone.
CLIMATE MANAGEMENT
CASE STUDY Specsavers Project Glazing Services and Lens Online Distribution Centre Kidderminster West Midlands Client Specsavers International MandE Consultants KGF Cox Ltd Greenways and Partners Ltd.
Nuaire supplied four Boxer Packaged Solutions BPS air handling units to provide balanced ventilation with heat recovery and cooling to the warehouse and office facilities.
Employed directly by Specsavers building services consultancy KGF Cox Ltd designed the mechanical and electrical services for the Lens Online warehouse while also overseeing the design of the office services delivered by Greenways.
Nuaires BPS units were specified with Condenser  Direct Expansion DX reverse cycle coils which are capable of providing heating and cooling.
Specsavers employees moving into the new manufacturing and distribution centre in Kidderminster are now enjoying optimum indoor air quality and a comfortable working environment created by Nuaires BPS air handling units.
OUR SOLUTIONS Nuaire Boxer Packaged Solutions BPS air handling unit Direct Expansion DX reverse cycle coils Nuaire AireVolve AVT twin fan INTELLIGENT ENGINEERED SOLUTIONS MARKET LEADERSHIP Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Polypipe Group plc 20 CASE STUDY WINDMILL OVERLAY UFH Project The Windmill Doncaster Application Underfloor heating Products Polypipes Overlay system The very tall layout of the building meant that the heating system had to be installed to avoid the heat rising only along the wall leaving the middle of the room cold.
Polypipes Overlay system is only 18mm in depth and so does not raise the floor to an unacceptable level removing the need for messy and expensive excavation.
With the room being completely round it was impossible to locate radiators to fit the curve of the wall.
Underfloor heating resolved this issue completely with no large wall mounted equipment required and so provided the optimal retrofit solution.
Underfloor heating installed across the whole floor produces a consistent and ambient heat throughout the entire room LEADERSHIP IN CLIMATE MANAGEMENT
POLYPIPE BRAND ENABLING SUSTAINABLE BUILDING TECHNOLOGY Stock Codesite STRATEGIC REPORT  Polypipes balanced business model underpinned by the longterm growth drivers of legacy material substitution and continuing legislative tailwinds has helped produce another record performance in 2017.
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICERS REVIEW In my first review since appointment as Chief Executive Officer I am pleased to report that Polypipe has delivered another record performance in 2017 with revenue from continuing operations 6.3% higher than the prior year at 411.7m 2016 restated 387.2m and underlying operating profit 6.0% higher at 72.6m 2016 restated 68.5m.
Against a background of mixed conditions in the UK construction market this performance shows the robust nature of the Polypipe business model and the strength of its longterm strategic drivers of legacy material substitution and continuing legislative tailwinds in water management and carbon efficiency.
Polypipe continues to be cash generative and has reduced leverage to 1.6 times EBITDA 2016 1.9 times leaving the Group well invested and able to pursue bolton acquisitions that complement the Groups current activities.
The Group will continue to focus on its key strategic and operational priorities and I am confident that we will maintain revenue growth ahead of the overall UK construction market.
In January 2018 the Group announced that it was in advanced negotiations to dispose of its French subsidiary Polypipe France to Ryb S. working capital basis.
In 2017 Polypipe France generated revenue of 58.4m and underlying operating profit of There is very little strategic overlap between our UK and French businesses as they operate in different product areas the latter operating in the significantly lower margin electrical conduit potable water gas and irrigation pipe product groups.
Following a full review of the business the Board decided Polypipe France was not core to the Group and to dispose of it.
Completion of the transaction is expected in the first half of 2018.
I believe this deal represents excellent shareholder value and once completed will allow the Group to concentrate on its higher margin product areas.
For the purposes of this report the results of Polypipe France have been treated as discontinued.
I am pleased to say that the Group has risen to several commercial and operational challenges during the year.
Following the EU Referendum in June 2016 and the subsequent devaluation of Sterling materials costs rose substantially in the second half of 2016 and into 2017.
While we do all we can to ameliorate price increases through cost reduction selling price increases were inevitable.
These were successfully implemented across the Group in the first half of 2017 to mitigate materials and other inflationary increases taking effect progressively throughout the period.
Although exchange rates were relatively stable throughout 2017 increasing oil prices as well as tight polymer markets in the second half of the year pushed materials prices higher still and impacted on second half performance.
Further selling price increases are being actioned in early 2018 to address this and other inflationary effects.
The Group has a good history of cost inflation recovery even in difficult market conditions and I have confidence the Group will be successful with this latest challenge.
Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Polypipe Group plc 22 In June 2017 a trade embargo was introduced between Qatar and many of the Gulf states following ongoing political disagreements.
With approximately 60% of our pipeline projects emanating from Qatar and the more general project financing issues in the wider Gulf in the first half of the year the decision was taken to temporarily cease manufacturing in our Dubai facility and a nonunderlying charge of 0.9m was recorded in our interim results covering redundancy costs and stock provisions.
During the second half of the year there has been no change to the situation between Qatar and the other Gulf states the trade embargo remains in force and general project financing still appears to be slow as the region adjusts to a lower oil price.
While the Middle East still represents a significant opportunity for the Group we have decided to pursue an alternative manufacturing strategy in the region through use of subcontractors and to close permanently our Dubai manufacturing facility.
All equipment will be relocated back to our Horncastle plant where Polystorm is manufactured for the UK market enabling us to remove the need for more expensive subcontract manufacturing in the UK.
A further non underlying charge of 3.1m has been recorded covering machinery relocation costs further redundancy onerous lease costs and asset impairments leaving the total nonunderlying charge for the year at 4.0m of which 1.7m is noncash.
As well as expanding capacity where necessary we continue to invest in both new product technology and automation in our businesses.
Our new 2.2m multilayer extrusion lines in our main Doncaster plant became operational in the early part of 2017 which has allowed us to significantly increase the amount of recycled material used in manufacturing our drainage and latterly our soil and waste pipes.
Towards the end of the year our new 5.0m large diameter continuous corrugator came into operation at our Horncastle plant.
This increases our capacity to manufacture 750mm and 900mm drainage pipes and allows the Group to make further inroads in this area of the market.
These new pipes as well as much of our existing civils drainage pipe offer are manufactured from recycled milk bottles and other polyethylene consumer liquid bottles using our wash plant recycling facility at Horncastle.
We consume approximately 44000 tonnes of recycled material representing onethird of the overall material requirement across the Group and both of these projects further enhance our already strong sustainability and recycling credentials something that is important to Polypipe our customers and our wider stakeholders.
As well as new product technology there has been further investment in automation in the year to expand capacity but also to test out new automation techniques.
We took delivery of our first collaborative robot in December which when fully integrated into our manufacturing process will further improve productivity and quality.
This advanced lower cost automation technology has the potential to unlock productivity opportunities that have not been achievable previously because of technical or financial constraints.
The treatment of Polypipe France in this report has caused the Group to review its segmental analysis.
The remaining part of the previously reported Commercial and Infrastructure  Mainland Europe segment being our Italian business Effast will be consolidated with the existing Commercial and Infrastructure UK segment to create one segment called Commercial and Infrastructure Systems.
Stock Codesite STRATEGIC REPORT RESIDENTIAL SYSTEMS Revenue in our Residential Systems segment which is almost exclusively derived from the UK market was 10.3% higher than the prior year at 223.5m 2016 202.7m of which 6.6% is volume growth considerably ahead of the market.
Strong demand in the new housebuild sector continued to drive growth in the year as the Governments Help toBuy scheme continues to support first time buyers demand.
The Repair Maintenance and Improvement RMI market however continues to be slow with weak consumer confidence and falling real wages constraining private RMI and austerity in Government spending on social housing stock constraining public RMI.
Continued growth in this segment exacerbated by merchant pull forward of orders ahead of the February 2017 selling price increase led to some challenges in the earlier part of the year notably in capacity planning and logistics.
The year started with below normal levels of stock following some pull forward of orders into December 2016 but as a number of areas moved into seven day working these stock levels normalised.
Capital expenditure on new capacity allowed us to revert back to more normal shift patterns in those areas during the year and leaves the business well placed to continue to benefit from the buoyant UK residential market.
Residential Systems delivered an underlying operating profit 13.3% higher than the prior year of 44.3m 2016 39.1m representing a 19.8% margin 2016 19.3%.
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICERS REVIEW COMMERCIAL AND INFRASTRUCTURE SYSTEMS Revenue in our Commercial and Infrastructure Systems segment was 2.0% higher than the prior year at 188.2m 2016 restated 184.5m.
UK revenue which accounts for 79% of the overall segment revenue was 4.1% higher than the prior year against strong comparatives in 2016.
In the infrastructure sector our Civils business has seen strong demand for stormwater collection storage and attenuation products from the new housebuild sector.
However strong demand in 2016 from the Aberdeen Bypass road project which finished in early 2017 and delays in the A14 road upgrade and other projects has meant the roads sector has been more challenging.
The dip in commercial project awards seen around the time of the EU Referendum in the middle of 2016 together with a 12 to 18 month lag before delivery to site for our products led to subdued demand in the commercial sector.
Although the project pipeline improved towards the back end of the year it is clear that projects are being delayed as the continuing political and economic situation in the UK causes uncertainty.
Export revenue which accounts for approximately 21% of overall segment revenue was 5.4% lower than the prior year with the performance in the Middle East driving this.
The large Jebel Ali Hills project in 2016 that was supplied initially from our Horncastle plant and later in the year from our Dubai manufacturing facility completed in early 2017. come through at a pace to compensate.
More encouragingly exports to Europe performed well and in particular our Italian business Effast made good progress.
The following tables set out Group revenue and underlying operating profit by operating segment
Change % Residential Systems 223.5 202.7 10.3 Commercial and Infrastructure Systems 188.2 184.5 2.0 Revenue 411.7 387.2 6.3 UNDERLYING OPERATING PROFIT restated
Residential Systems 44.3 39.1 13.3 Commercial and Infrastructure Systems 28.3 29.4 3.7 Underlying operating profit 72.6 68.5 6.0 The Group gains significant resilience by having a balanced exposure to the different elements of the UK construction market all of which have different drivers and move at different paces and this years performance perhaps more than most demonstrates this.
Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Polypipe Group plc 24 Commercial and Infrastructure Systems delivered an underlying operating profit of 28.3m 2016 restated 29.4m and represents a 15.0% margin 2016 restated 15.9%.
The financial performance of our Dubai manufacturing facility including the temporary cessation of manufacturing in the second half of the year is the main driver behind this reduction in operating profit and as described earlier decisive actions have been taken to improve future performance in the Middle East.
OUTLOOK
Following the Groups record performance in 2017 the current year has started ahead of the same period last year.
Forecasts for 2018 show a broadly flat construction market although the Group has a strong track record of outperforming the market.
While the UK RMI market is likely to remain tough throughout the coming year the strength of the UK new housebuild sector will continue to drive demand for our Residential Systems segment for which the year has started well.
Conditions in the UK commercial and infrastructure sectors remain positive in terms of project pipeline and demand from key road projects such as the A14 road upgrade should gather pace this year but there is evidence that project starts continue to be delayed impacting performance in our Commercial and Infrastructure Systems segment in the early part of the year.
The news of Carillions demise in January may potentially lead to further project delays as main contracts are renegotiated and the impact on subcontractors works through the market.
Having successfully delivered the necessary actions in 2017 to mitigate polymer and other cost inflation arising from the post EU Referendum weakening of Sterling we again need to pass through polymer and other cost inflation seen during 2017 and into early 2018.
While doing everything we can to alleviate the need for selling price increases we are confident that our customers expect us to pass on essential increases and we expect to see the benefit of these price increases coming through as we move into the second quarter of 2018.
Our continued focus on delivering innovative new products and excellent customer service together with the strength of our growth drivers of legacy material substitution continuing legislative tailwinds and our balanced exposure to the different sectors of the construction industry gives the Board confidence that despite a mixed market outlook 2018 will be another year of progress for the Group and our expectations for the year remain unchanged.
Martin Payne
Chief Executive Officer
GROUP REVENUE 6.3% UNDERLYING OPERATING
6.0% Stock Codesite STRATEGIC REPORT REVENUE GROWTH AND OPERATING MARGIN restated m Change Revenue 411.7 387.2 6.3% Underlying operating profit 72.6 68.5 6.0% Underlying operating margin 17.6% 17.7% 10bps restated m Change UK 365.7 338.3 8.1% Rest of Europe 18.9 17.0 11.2% Rest of World 27.1 31.9 15.0% Group 411.7 387.2 6.3% CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICERS
Group revenue at 411.7m was 6.3% higher than the prior year.
With Polypipe France now classified as discontinued there is little foreign currency translation effect on reported revenue and the structure of the Group on a continuing operations basis is the same in both periods meaning likeforlike growth was also 6.3%.
Within this revenue derived from the UK market grew 8.1% with approximately 3.7% driven by price increases and 4.4% by volume growth.
This volume growth was materially ahead of the overall UK construction market which the Construction Products Association CPA winter forecast suggests has grown by 3.0% in the year.
The Group underlying operating margin remained robust at 17.6% 2016 restated 17.7%.
The dilutive effect of increasing selling prices to recover absolute cost inflation and the financial performance of our Dubai manufacturing facility has been offset by operational leverage and cost reduction initiatives in our core businesses.
UNDERLYING OPERATING PROFIT GROWTH OF 6.0% UNDERLYING BASIC EARNINGS PER SHARE p 10.1% SUSTAINED INVESTMENT IN STRATEGIC GROWTH
TIMES DEPRECIATION NET DEBT REDUCED TO TIMES EBITDA NONUNDERLYING ITEMS Nonunderlying items in both 2017 and 2016 included noncash amortisation charges in respect of intangible assets recognised with the acquisitions made during 2015.
In 2017 they also included restructuring costs of 4.3m in respect of the closure of our Dubai manufacturing facility 4.0m of which 1.7m is noncash and relocation of our Domus Ventilation manufacturing facilities to Nuaire 0.3m.
In 2016 they included a noncash charge of 0.9m in respect of the impairment of a surplus freehold property that is heldforsale.
Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Polypipe Group plc 26 FINANCE COSTS Finance costs of 6.9m 2016 7.6m were lower than the prior year driven by lower average net debt in the year and the lower interest rate margin payable on our borrowings as leverage reduces.
This reflects the continued cash generative nature of our business.
Interest is payable on the revolving credit facility RCF at LIBOR plus an interest rate margin ranging from 1.25% to 2.75%.
The interest rate margin at 31 December 2017 was 1.75% 2016 2.00%.
In order to reduce exposure to future increases in interest rates the Group has entered into interest rate swaps at fixed rates ranging between 1.735% and 2.21% excluding margin with notional amounts hedged ranging from 60.0m to 91.7m over the period of the interest rate swaps.
The unrealised mark to market adjustment on these forward interest rate swaps at 31 December 2017 was 2.5m negative 2016 4.2m negative.
The movement in the mark to market adjustment during the year of 1.7m is included in the Group Statement of Comprehensive Income.
TAXATION
Underlying taxation The underlying tax charge in 2017 was 11.8m representing an effective tax rate of 18.0% 2016 restated 19.2%.
This is below the blended UK standard tax rate of income tax of 19.25% 2016 20.00% due primarily to the benefit of patent box relief.
Nonunderlying items comprised Amortisation of intangible assets 5.5 6.8 Restructuring costs 4.3 Aborted acquisition costs 0.3 Impairment of freehold land and buildings  0.9 Profit on disposal of property plant and equipment  0.3 Nonunderlying items before taxation 10.1 7.4 Taxation 1.2 1.6 Nonunderlying items after taxation 8.9 5.8 Taxation on nonunderlying items is covered in the note on taxation below.
DISCONTINUED OPERATIONS On 31 January 2018 the Group announced that it had entered into exclusive negotiations to sell Polypipe France Holding SAS Polypipe France to Ryb S. and distributor of plastics in Europe.
The cash consideration payable by Ryb S. and normalised working capital basis.
It was determined that the sale was highly probable at 31 December 2017 and accordingly the net assets of Polypipe France have been classified as heldfor sale in the consolidated balance sheet.
In accordance with IFRS 5 Noncurrent Assets HeldforSale and Discontinued Operations an impairment loss of 12.5m to remeasure the carrying amount of the assets to fair value less costs to sell has been recognised.
A loss from discontinued operations of 11.3m 2016 restated 0.8m profit is recorded in the income statement being the impairment loss of 12.5m 2016 restated nil net of the posttax results of Polypipe France for the period of 1.2m profit 2016 restated 0.8m profit.
EXCHANGE RATES The Group is exposed to movements in exchange rates when translating the results of its Mainland Europe operations from Euros to Sterling.
Following the EU Referendum in June 2016 Sterling depreciated further against the Euro during 2017 with the average exchange rate used for translation purposes moving from 11.23 in 2016 to 11.15 in 2017.
With Polypipe France now classified as discontinued the impact of this exchange rate movement is now negligible on both reported revenue and underlying operating profit.
The Group trades predominantly in Sterling but has some revenues and costs in other currencies mainly the US Dollar and the Euro and takes appropriate forward cover on these flows using forward currency derivative contracts.
Forward foreign currency derivatives are classified as held for trading.
There was no unrealised gain or loss on these derivative contracts at 31 December 2017 2016 1.5m loss included in financial liabilities.
The unrealised gains or losses are treated as underlying and recorded in cost of sales in the income statement.
Stock Codesite STRATEGIC REPORT Taxation on nonunderlying items The nonunderlying taxation credit of 1.2m in 2017 represents an effective rate of 11.9% primarily due to a substantial proportion of restructuring costs being incurred in the Jebel Ali tax free zone in the Middle East.
EARNINGS PER SHARE FROM CONTINUING OPERATIONS 2017 2016 Pence per share Basic 22.7 21.8 Underlying basic 27.2 24.7 Diluted 22.5 21.7 Underlying diluted 26.9 24.6 The Directors consider that the underlying earnings per share EPS measure provides a better and more consistent indication of the Groups underlying financial performance and more meaningful comparison with prior and future periods to assess trends in our financial performance.
Underlying basic EPS improved by 10.1% in 2017 due to the improved underlying operating result lower interest costs and lower underlying tax rate as explained above.
DIVIDEND
The final dividend of 7.5 pence per share is being recommended for payment on 25 May 2018 to shareholders on the register at the close of business on 20 April 2018.
The exdividend date will be 19 April 2018.
Our dividend policy is to pay a minimum of 40% of the Groups annual underlying profit after tax.
The Directors intend that the Group will pay the total annual dividend in two tranches an interim dividend and a final dividend to be announced at the time of announcement of the interim and preliminary results respectively with the interim dividend being approximately one half of the prior years final dividend.
The Group may revise its dividend policy from time to time.
CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICERS
BALANCE SHEET The Groups balance sheet is summarised below Property plant and equipment 98.6 101.0 Goodwill 319.7 329.3 Other intangible assets 36.8 42.3 Net assets classified as heldforsale 13.1 0.7 Net working capital 0.4 0.5 Taxation 12.6 14.3 Other current and noncurrent assets and liabilities 5.6 7.8 Net debt loans and borrowings net of cash and cash equivalents 148.4 164.3 Net assets 302.0 287.4 Property plant and equipment reduced by 2.4m and excluding the transfer to assets classified as heldforsale of 9.2m in respect of Polypipe France increased by 6.8m predominantly due to capital expenditure exceeding depreciation by a similar amount which included the 3.0m of expenditure deferred from 2016 as discussed in last years Annual Report and Accounts.
Other intangible assets decreased by 5.5m compared to a decrease of 6.8m in 2016 reflecting that some of the assets in respect of the 2015 acquisitions are now fully amortised.
Net working capital reduced by 0.1m but excluding the transfer to assets classified as heldforsale of 7.2m increased by 7.1m driven by higher material costs of inventories and normalisation of stock levels.
Net debt is discussed below.
PENSIONS
The Group does not have any defined benefit pension schemes and only has defined contribution pension arrangements in place.
Pension costs for the year amounted to 2.7m 2016 2.5m.
CASH FLOW AND NET DEBT The Groups cash flow statement is summarised below Operating cash flows before movement in net working capital 90.4 86.7 Add back nonunderlying cash items 0.5 Underlying operating cash flows before movement in net working capital 90.9 86.7 Movement in net working capital 10.0 0.2 Underlying cash generated from operations 80.9 86.5 Capital expenditure net of disposals 23.2 18.7 Underlying cash generated from operations after net capital expenditure 57.7 67.8 Income tax paid 12.6 10.1 Interest paid 6.6 7.3 Nonunderlying cash items 0.5 Dividends paid 21.0 17.1 Purchase of own shares net of option exercise proceeds 0.7 2.9 Other 0.4 0.4 Movement in net debt 15.9 30.0 Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Polypipe Group plc 28 Underlying cash generated from operations after net capital expenditure at 57.7m 2016 67.8m represents a conversion rate of 78% 2016 97%.
The lower conversion rate compared to the prior year is due to a higher working capital outflow and higher capital expenditure than the prior year.
The higher working capital outflow is largely due to increases in stock partly driven by higher material costs and also finished goods stock build.
This was necessary to replenish stock back to normal levels in the earlier part of the year following preprice increase buying in December 2016 and further stock build in the latter part of the year in anticipation of further preprice increase buying ahead of the February 2018 price increase.
As discussed in last years Annual Report and Accounts in a measured response to the uncertainty created by the EU Referendum in June 2016 we took the decision to delay certain capacity expansion capital expenditure projects while continuing to spend on development growth projects and essential replacement.
The performance of the Group since the EU Referendum and the more positive economic outlook compared to the period immediately afterwards gave us the confidence to resume those delayed projects and therefore net capital expenditure in 2017 at 23.2m was 4.5m higher than the prior year.
In 2016 one million shares were purchased at a cost of 2.9m and held for the purpose of satisfying future employee share option scheme awards.
In 2017 a further 748000 shares were purchased at a cost of 0.7m net of the proceeds from the maturing Sharesave Plan.
Net debt of 148.4m comprised
Bank loans 185.0 192.0 7.0 Cash and cash equivalents 35.7 26.5 9.2 Net debt excluding unamortised debt issue costs 149.3 165.5 16.2 Unamortised debt issue costs 0.9 1.2 0.3 Net debt excluding unamortised debt issue costs EBITDA 1.6 1.9 At 31 December 2017 liquidity headroom cash and undrawn committed banking facilities was substantial and improved to 140.7m 2016 134.5m despite the 10.0m contractual reduction in the facility during the year.
Continued focus on deleveraging following the Nuaire acquisition in August 2015 has seen our net debt to EBITDA ratio reduce substantially to 1.6 times EBITDA at 31 December 2017 2016 1.9 times demonstrating the continued cash generative nature of our business.
This headroom together with the disposal proceeds from Polypipe France when received enables us to develop our acquisition pipeline and continue to seek out compelling opportunities to accelerate growth in our strategic development areas.
FINANCING
The Group has an RCF committed through to August 2020 with a facility limit at 31 December 2017 of 290m reducing by 10m per annum at 31 December 2018 and 2019.
At 31 December 2017 185m of the RCF was drawn down.
The Group is subject to two financial covenants.
At 31 December 2017 there was significant headroom
Covenant requirement Position at 31 December Interest cover 4.01 11.51
Underlying operating profit Finance costs excluding debt issue cost amortisation.
Net debt EBITDA.
FORWARDLOOKING
STATEMENTS
This report contains various forward looking statements that reflect managements current views with respect to future events and financial and operational performance.
These forwardlooking statements involve known and unknown risks uncertainties assumptions estimates and other factors which may be beyond the Groups control and which may cause actual results or performance to differ materially from those expressed or implied from such forwardlooking statements.
All statements including forwardlooking statements contained herein are made and reflect knowledge and information available as of the date of preparation of this report and the Group disclaims any obligation to update any forwardlooking statements whether as a result of new information future events or results or otherwise.
There can be no assurance that forwardlooking statements will prove to be accurate as actual results and future events could differ materially from those anticipated in such statements.
Accordingly readers should not place undue reliance on forward looking statements due to the inherent uncertainty therein.
Nothing in this report should be construed as a profit forecast.
Paul James Chief Financial Officer Stock Codesite STRATEGIC REPORT FRAMEWORK FOR MANAGING RISK The Board is responsible for ensuring that the Group maintains an effective risk management system.
It determines the Groups approach to risk its policies and the procedures that are implemented to mitigate exposure to risk.
PROCESS
The Board continually assesses and monitors the key risks in the business and Polypipe has developed a risk management framework to identify report and manage its principal risks and uncertainties.
This includes the recording of all principal risks and uncertainties on a Group Risk Register and a Group Risk Profile which are both updated at least every six months.
Risks are fully analysed allocated owners scored for both impact and probability to determine the exposure to the business which should be prioritised and what mitigation is required.
External risks include economic conditions the weather Government action policies and regulations raw material prices and information systems disruption.
Internal risks include reliance on key customers and recruitment and retention of key personnel.
The Board seeks to mitigate the businesses exposure to strategic financial and operational risk both external and internal.
The effectiveness of key mitigating controls is continually monitored and subjected to periodic testing by the Group Financial Controller.
The table below highlights the principal risks and uncertainties that could have a material impact on the Groups performance and prospects and the mitigating activities which are aimed at reducing the impact or likelihood of a major risk materialising.
These risks have all been considered by the Board when developing the Groups Viability Statement.
The Board does recognise however that it will not always be possible to eliminate these risks entirely.
In addition the principal risks listed below do not comprise all of the risks that the Group may face and they are not listed in order of priority probability or magnitude of potential impact.
PRINCIPAL
RISKS and UNCERTAINTIES Risk Potential impact Mitigation Change in potential impact andor probability Raw material prices The Group is exposed to volatile raw material prices particularly polymers due to fluctuations in the market price of crude oil and other petroleum feedstocks foreign currency exchange rate movements and changes to suppliers manufacturing capacity.
Any increase in the market price of crude oil or other petroleum feedstocks foreign currency exchange rate movements or changes to suppliers manufacturing capacity could have a direct impact on the prices the Group pays for raw materials which could adversely affect its financial results.
The Group seeks to pass on raw material price increases to its customers wherever possible.
There is usually at least a threemonth time lag from notification of the raw material price increase before selling prices can be adjusted in the market.
Competitors of the Group are likely to experience the same pressures of any sustained raw material price increases.
No change Business disruption The Groups manufacturing and distribution operations could be subjected to disruption due to incidents including but not limited to fire failure of equipment power outages workforce strikes or unexpected or prolonged periods of severe weather.
Such incidents could result in the temporary cessation in activity or disruption at one of the Groups production facilities impeding the ability to deliver its products to its customers thereby adversely affecting the Groups financial results.
In addition prolonged periods of severe weather could result in a slowdown in site construction activity reducing the demand for the Groups products thereby adversely affecting its financial results.
The Group has developed business continuity crisis response and disaster recovery plans.
The Group performs regular maintenance to minimise the risk of equipment failure.
Finished goods holdings across the operations act as a limited buffer in the event of operational failure.
The Group has the ability to transfer some of its production to alternative sites and could also subcontract out some of its tooling to reduce any potential loss in production capacity.
The Group maintains a significant amount of insurance to cover business interruption and damage to property from such incidents.
Independent insurer inspections take place across all sites to identify and assess potential hazards and business interruption risks.
No change Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Polypipe Group plc 30 Risk Potential impact Mitigation Change in potential impact andor probability Reliance on key customers Some of the Groups businesses are dependent on key customers in highly competitive markets.
Failure to manage relationships with key customers while continuing to provide high quality products delivered on time in full and developing new innovative products could lead to a loss of business thereby adversely affecting the Groups financial results.
The Groups strategic objective is to broaden its customer base wherever possible.
The Group focuses on delivering exceptional customer service and maintains strong relationships with major customers through direct engagement at all levels.
The Group maintains customer service matrices which are continually tracked and monitored with intervention made where required.
The Group closely manages its pricing rebates and commercial terms with its customers to ensure that they remain competitive.
The Group continually seeks to innovate and develop its product lines to ensure its products are to the standard our customers expect.
No change Recruitment and retention of key personnel The Group is dependent on the continued employment and performance of our senior management team and other key skilled personnel.
Loss of any key personnel without adequate and timely replacement could disrupt business operations and the Groups ability to implement and deliver its growth strategy.
The Group has a formal succession plan in place facilitating staff retention and progression through the Group.
The Group aims to provide competitive remuneration packages and incentive schemes to retain and motivate key personnel.
Increased
Economic conditions The Group is dependent on the level of activity in the construction industry and is therefore susceptible to any changes in its cyclical economic conditions.
Lower levels of activity within the construction industry could reduce sales and production volumes thereby adversely affecting the Groups financial results.
The Group closely monitors trends in the industry invests in market research and is an active member of the Construction Products Association.
The
Group uses Construction Products Association and Euroconstruct forecasts in its budgeting process.
The Group closely manages its demand forecasts and costs through weekly operational review meetings.
No change Government action and policies The Group is in part dependent on Government action and policies relating to public and private investment and is therefore susceptible to changes in Government spending priorities.
Significant downward trends in Government spending on public and private investment arising from economic uncertainty and ongoing austerity policies could have an adverse impact on the construction industry which could impact on sales and production volumes thereby adversely affecting the Groups financial results.
The Groups strategy is to have its operations structured so that it has a balanced exposure to the residential commercial and infrastructure construction sectors so as to reduce the impact of any adverse Government action or policy on any one of the construction sectors.
The Group closely monitors trends in the industry invests in market research and is an active member of the Construction Products Association.
The Group closely manages its demand forecasts and costs through weekly operational review meetings.
No change Stock Codesite STRATEGIC REPORT Risk Potential impact Mitigation Change in potential impact andor probability Government regulations and standards relating to the manufacture and use of building materials The Group is subject to the requirements of UK and European environmental and occupational safety and health laws and regulations including obligations to investigate and clean up environmental contamination on or from properties.
Failure of the Group to comply with changes to environmental regulations and other obligations relating to environmental matters could result in the Group being liable for fines require modification to operations increase manufacturing and delivery costs and could result in the suspension or termination of necessary operational permits thereby adversely affecting the Groups financial results.
The Group has a formal Health Safety and Environmental policy and procedures are in place to monitor compliance with the policy.
The Group performs internal environmental audits and is subjected to external environmental audits on a periodic basis.
The Group performs weekly and monthly reporting on key Health Safety and Environmental matters which require the attention of the Board.
No change Product liability The Group manufactures products that are potentially vital to the safe operation of its customers products or processes.
These products are often incorporated into the fabric of a building or dwelling or buried in the ground as part of an infrastructure system and in each case it would be difficult to access repair recall or replace such products.
A product failure or recall could result in a liability claim for personal injury or other damage leading to substantial financial settlements damage to the Groups brand reputation costs and expenses and diversion of key managements attention from the operation of the Group which could all adversely affect the Groups financial results.
The Group operates comprehensive quality assurance systems and procedures at each site.
Wherever required the Group obtains certifications over its products to the relevant national and European standards including Kitemarks BBAs WRCs and WRACs.
The Group maintains product liability insurance to cover third party claims arising from potential product failures or recalls.
No change Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Polypipe Group plc
RISKS and UNCERTAINTIES Risk Potential impact Mitigation Change in potential impact andor probability Information systems The Group is dependent on the continued efficient operation of its information systems and is therefore vulnerable to potential failures due to power losses telecommunication failures or from an external security breach due to the increasing levels of sophisticated cybercrime now threatening businesses.
Disruption or failure of the information systems could affect the Groups ability to conduct its ongoing operations which could adversely affect the Groups financial results.
The Group contracts with several third party providers to supply offsite business continuity arrangements for wholesale or partial recovery of the key servers and applications which are used within the various business units of the Group.
These continuity arrangements are subject to periodic validation and testing.
Some business units of the Group also take advantage of their multisite operations to provision server and applications recovery between those sites.
There are a range of local business unit specific backup processes which are performed on a daily weekly and monthly basis.
Firewalls are in place to protect the perimeter of the Groups networks and any offsite access to the Groups servers and applications is through secure Virtual Private Network connections.
In addition email and internet traffic filtering is in place to protect against potential viruses or malware entering the Groups networks.
User and server computing devices have antivirus software installed to protect from potential infection.
The Group continually invests in the maintenance and upgrade of IT infrastructure and information systems.
All upgrades are carefully planned and actively managed by senior personnel to minimise potential business disruption.
Increased
Acquisitions
The management of acquisitions activity and their integration play a part in delivering the Groups growth strategy and there is a risk that any acquisitions may not perform as expected.
Ineffective management of acquisitions could lead to management distraction a drain on financial resources and impact on the Groups ability to successfully implement and deliver its growth strategy.
Full due diligence is performed before any acquisition is made.
The Group seeks contractual assurances from the sellers to mitigate against any identified issues or risks.
Formal Board level approvals are required in accordance with the Groups delegation of authority structure for any acquisition activity.
The progress of any integration is closely monitored at Board and senior management team level.
No change Stock Codesite STRATEGIC REPORT Risk Potential impact Mitigation Change in potential impact andor probability Financial risk management The Groups operations expose it to a variety of financial risks that include the effects of The Group has in place financial risk management procedures that seek to limit the potential adverse effects of the financial risks as follows Foreign currency exchange risk  The risk that the fair value of a financial instrument or future cash flows will fluctuate because of changes in foreign currency exchange rates.
The Groups risk relates primarily to its operating activities where the revenue or expense is denominated in a currency other than the functional currency of the entity undertaking the transaction.
Foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations could adversely affect the Groups financial results.
The Group enters into forward foreign currency exchange rate contracts for the purchase and sale of foreign currencies in order to manage its exposure to fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates primarily in respect of US Dollars and Euros relative to Pounds Sterling.
It is not possible for the Group to mitigate foreign currency exchange rate movements which impact the translation of its overseas subsidiaries results and net assets as all of the Groups longterm borrowings are Pounds Sterling denominated.
Increased
Credit risk  The risk that a counterparty of the Group will not be able to meet its obligations under a financial instrument or customer contract.
The Group is exposed to credit risk from its trading activities primarily from trade receivables and from its financing activities including deposits with banks.
The failure of a counterparty to meet their financial obligations could lead to a financial loss for the Group.
Customer credit risk is managed by each business unit subject to the Groups established policy procedures and controls relating to customer credit risk management.
Credit quality of the customer is assessed based on an extensive credit rating scorecard and individual credit limits are defined in accordance with this assessment.
Outstanding customer receivables are regularly monitored and any shipments to major export customers are generally covered by letters of credit or credit insurance.
Where the Group perceives there to be a significant credit exposure it will take out credit insurance or obtain an irrevocable letter of credit prior to any transaction.
Credit risk arising from cash deposits with banks is managed in accordance with the Groups established treasury policy procedures and controls.
Investments
No change Liquidity risk  The risk that the Group will not be able to meets its financial obligations as they fall due.
Insufficient funds could result in the Group not being able to fund its operations.
The Groups approach to managing liquidity is to ensure that it will always have sufficient liquidity to meet its liabilities when due under both normal and stressed conditions without incurring unacceptable losses or risking damage to the Groups reputation.
Reduced
Interest rate cash flow risk The risk that interest rates could rise impacting on the Groups borrowings.
Increases to interest rates could result in significant additional interest rate cash payments being required on any borrowings.
To reduce the Groups exposure to future increases in interest rates the Group has entered into interest rate swaps from variable to fixed interest rates.
Increased
EU REFERENDUM AND UK DEPARTURE FROM THE EU The result of the Referendum on the UKs membership of the EU leading to the expected departure of the UK from the EU Brexit could cause disruptions to and create uncertainty around our business including affecting our relationships with our existing and future customers suppliers and colleagues.
These disruptions and uncertainties could adversely affect the Groups financial results.
As further details of the Brexit terms emerge management will continue to assess the potential risks and impact of these on the Group.
PRINCIPAL
RISKS and UNCERTAINTIES Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Polypipe Group plc 34 POLICY Polypipes policy is to enhance shareholder value while ensuring we provide a safe working environment and continually seeking to minimise the impact of our operations and products on the environment.
The Board considers that operating efficiently with high quality standards includes promoting high standards of health and safety and helping to protect the environment.
This section of the Strategic Report sets out our approach to corporate responsibility and includes regulatory information on carbon emissions employee diversity and our policies in relation to the recruitment and retention of our employees.
EMPLOYMENT
Our vision for our businesses and employees is to have a culture of customer focused continuous improvement driven by teamwork effective communication and personal development.
Our core values are hard work honesty trust and integrity and maintaining a working environment based on mutual respect.
Polypipe is committed to providing the appropriate skills and technical training that allow employees to operate effectively and safely in their roles and deliver excellent customer service.
As part of our ongoing commitment to customer service excellence all our new starters in frontline service areas receive The Institute of Customer Service training on joining the Group resulting in over 200 of our employees benefiting from this programme in the last four years.
Polypipe has consistently provided apprenticeships to the communities around our businesses by supporting enthusiastic highly motivated people who are keen to learn a trade.
We have an outstanding record of retaining apprentices in ongoing longterm fulltime employment indeed many of our management team started with the business as apprentices.
We consider it an essential part of finding and retaining people with the sector specific skills that we need.
During 2017 we had 32 apprentices employed in our businesses in the UK and we intend to increase the number further.
The majority of our apprenticeships are in electrical mechanical and toolmaking trades but we continue to support a number of apprenticeships in other disciplines.
Underlining our commitment to advanced manufacturing engineering we continue to place apprentices at the new University of Sheffield Advanced Manufacturing Research Centre a stateoftheart centre that offers the very best in practical and academic training.
In support of our engineering focus we continue to work closely with Cogent Skills strategic partner to the science industry supporting ongoing development of industry specific apprenticeship frameworks for the future.
The Group involves employees through formal and informal systems of communication and consultation.
Each of our main operating sites have display boards which set out our continuous improvement strategy and include KPIs updated each month on areas relevant to the strategy such as health and safety performance products and process improvement initiatives and customer satisfaction performance.
While the Group does not have a specific human rights policy it does have an AntiSlavery policy and Modern Slavery Act Transparency statement available on the Companys website within which we state our zero tolerance policy towards any modern slavery or human trafficking rights violations.
The Group gives every consideration to applicants for employment regardless of their sex sexual orientation religion colour race nationality marital status or disability having regard for their aptitude and ability to adequately perform the role while maintaining a safe working environment.
Where employees become disabled the Group makes appropriate and reasonable adjustments to their work environment andor duties endeavouring to maintain their employment provided there are duties they can perform.
CASE STUDY SOCIAL ENGAGEMENT The Big Bang Fair is an annual event designed to inspire students to take up a career in Science Technology Engineering and Maths STEM.
As a major Doncaster employer with a huge variety of career options Polypipe was delighted to meet young visitors at the Doncaster Big Bang Science Fair and tell them all about the career options that are open to them with staff from human resources manufacturing and supply chain on hand to answer their questions.
We also challenged students to see who could fit together PolyMax pushfit in the quickest time with the winners taking home prize bundles from our charity partner Help for Heroes which included hoodies teddies pens and mugs.
Girls from the Eskdale School at The Big Bang Fair Knowledge sharing Stock Codesite STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE RESPONSIBILITY STATEMENT The Groups split between male and female employees at 31 December 2017 is shown below Female Male Total Directors and Officers 2 5 7 Senior Managers 44 177 221 Employees 628 2200 2828 Total 674 2382 3056 HEALTH AND SAFETY The Group aims to continuously improve the quality and safety of the working environment for all employees.
The
Group has a published Health Safety and Environment policy that sets out the overriding principles of health and safety for all employees.
The business units operate to externally accredited ISO OHSAS standards.
Health and Safety achievements in the year included Following five consecutive RoSPA Gold Awards the Group achieved the Gold Medal Award for exceptional performance and dedicated support for health and safety within the organisation.
Polypipes tool making and repair business Mason Pinder based in Thorne achieved over 3400 days without a lost time accident.
This is an outstanding achievement and a significant milestone of which everyone at Mason Pinder can be proud.
These safety achievements have resulted in donations to the Childrens Heart Surgery Fund under the Charity Award for Safety and Health CASH scheme of over 3600.
The Group continued the implementation of a focused formalised safety tour programme for management.
These safety tours undertaken by Executive Directors through to department managers engage staff and further encourage health safety and environmental discussion and improvement.
The Group operates a formal system for reporting and recording hazards and near misses.
The See it Sort it Report it scheme encourages individuals across the business at all levels to report hazards suggest solutions and allows trends to be analysed.
In 2017 the number of such reports reached record levels at 5321 reports resulting in improvement projects being delivered across the Group which in turn enhanced employee working environment safety.
Accident frequency performance and details of all significant incidents are reviewed during the weekly executive meeting attended by the Executive Directors and certain senior managers.
The table below sets out the KPIs used by the Group to monitor accident performancetel Frequency per 100000 hours worked all accidents 8.24 6.43 5.93 RIDDORS 0.65 0.65 0.53 RIDDORS  HSE reportable accidents and dangerous occurrences based on the current sevenday absence from work reporting requirement in the UK and although there is no direct equivalent in Mainland Europe and the Middle East the same definition is applied.
THE ENVIRONMENT AND GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS We aim to minimise the lasting impact of our operations on the environment and sustainability is a key feature of our products and their impact on the environment.
See pages 15 to 21 for further details of our sustainable solutions for the environment.
Our modern and efficient injection moulding and extrusion operations use significant amounts of electricity.
We monitor very closely our electricity usage even at a machine level and take a proactive approach to improve energy efficiency.
The Group collects electricity and natural gas usage information from each business unit on a monthly basis.
CASE STUDY HELP FOR HEROES The Polypipe Regatta has become a popular event in the industry calendar raising Polypipes profile and offering a great way for staff to engage with existing and new customers while raising muchneeded funds for worthwhile causes which for 2017 included Polypipes new charity partner Help for Heroes.
As well as organising charitable events such as the Regatta Polypipe will sponsor exservicemen and women through a British Plumbing Employers Council BPEC course at the Polypipe Professional Development centre in
Those who are looking to embark on a career in plumbing can attend taster courses with Polypipe facilitating work experience and vocation experiences for veterans who show an interest in a career in plumbing and groundworks supporting the longstanding connection between the British Armed Forces and the UK construction industry.
Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Polypipe Group plc CORPORATE RESPONSIBILITY STATEMENT Greenhouse gas GHG emissions for the Group during 2017 in tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent tCO 2e were as follows tCO 2e %
Fgas 432 1 purchase electricity 40550 71 57071 100 Our GHG emissions annual comparison and intensity were as follows 2016 2017 change tCO 2e Total emissions 62524 57071 8.7%
Expressed in tCO2e per tonne of output.
Our GHG emissions were calculated using the methodology set out in the updated GHG reporting guidance issued in June 2013 by the Department for Environment Food and Rural Affairs
Emission factors were taken from the Department for Business Energy and Industrial Strategy  DEFRAs 2017 update of GHG Conversion Factors for Company Reporting with the exception of international electricity which were taken from the International Energy Agencys 2017 update.
RELATIONSHIPS WITH OUR CUSTOMERS AND SUPPLIERS Suppliers are key to our business and we endeavour to build longterm relationships with them based on trust.
We will seek to extend our supplier base if risks of undercapacity or resilience arise in our supply chain.
Polypipe has no significant suppliers who are wholly dependent on the Groups business.
Suppliers are paid in line with contractual obligations.
We stay close to our existing and potential customers and distributors and strive to meet their needs.
Our businesses are focused on achieving market leading delivery service levels for our customers and to respond quickly to their emerging requirements.
POLYPIPE AND THE LOCAL
Each operation is aware of its role within its local community.
Wherever possible they seek to recruit locally and retain a skilled local workforce.
They are encouraged to build relationships with local community organisations and to support charitable initiatives.
These activities range from the organisation of our Annual Charity Sailing Regatta in which over 700 people from our customers and associates participated marathon running through to quiz nights cake sales and summer gala days.
Our employees raised over 30000 2016 38000 for worthwhile causes during the year from these activities.
Charitable donations by Group companies during the year were 27000 2016 27000.
ANTIBRIBERY AND CORRUPTION POLICY The Group seeks to prohibit all forms of bribery and corruption within its business and complies with the requirements of all applicable antibribery and corruption laws.
The Group requires all relevant employees and agents to confirm each year that they remain in compliance with the Groups AntiBribery policy.
Approved by the Board and signed on its behalf.
Martin Payne
Chief Executive Officer
20 March 2018 CASE STUDY APPRENTICES Rob Bell received recognition at the National EEF Awards as Highly Commended for Business Apprentice Final Year.
Rob started his 2year Advanced Apprenticeship with Polypipe Civils in Loughborough in January 2015 as a Trainee Quality Inspector.
Rob completed the academic element of his apprenticeship in July 2017 and has been working as a Quality and Process Technician since.
Polypipe has operated and grown its apprenticeship scheme since the 80s and has seen a 14% increase in apprentice numbers across the Group between 2016 and 2017 with the first female engineering apprentices joining at both the Civils and Building Products businesses.
Stock Codesite STRATEGIC REPORT This luxury lodge is made from Canadian pine and is the first of its kind to be imported from Canada to the UK OUR SOLUTIONS Located in a picturesque forest in South Lanarkshire and on the site of a prestigious golf club this lodge is intended to be a flagship holiday let home.
Underfloor heating was the perfect solution for this green development as the pipes are entirely underfoot and out of sight maximising space and leaving walls available for furniture or artwork rather than being lost to wall mounted radiators.
Underfloor heating is also a sustainable heating option as it operates at a much lower water temperature than a radiator system so the heat source is working more efficiently and consuming less energy to generate the warm water required to heat the space.
Freedom Joinery chose Polypipe underfloor heating to bolster its green credentials and maximise available living space.
The developer chose to include Polypipe underfloor heating in this prestigious project ENABLING SUSTAINABLE BUILDING TECHNOLOGY
LEGACY MATERIALS 38 OUR GOVERNANCE DIRECTORS and OFFICERS 40 INTRODUCTION FROM THE CHAIRMAN 42
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STATEMENT 43
REPORT OF THE NOMINATION COMMITTEE 48 REPORT OF THE AUDIT COMMITTEE 50 ANNUAL REPORT ON REMUNERATION 54 DIRECTORS REPORT 74 DIRECTORS RESPONSIBILITIES STATEMENT 77 CASE STUDY
Canadian Lodge Shotts Lanarkshire
Freedom Joinery Developer
Solid floor underfloor heating Staple System 39 DIRECTORS and OFFICERS Ron Marsh Independent NonExecutive Chairman Committees Nomination Remuneration Ron Marsh was appointed to our Board of Directors on 28 March 2014 as the Senior Independent Director and as Independent NonExecutive Chairman on 27 May 2015 and is Chair of the Nomination Committee.
Mr Marsh is currently a NonExecutive Director of
1989 until 2013 Chief Executive of RPC Group.
Mr Marsh is also Chairman of the UKbased Packaging Federation and the Alliance for European Polymers which was established under the auspices of EuPC European Plastic Converters in 2015.
Mr Marsh has a Bachelor of Arts in History from Oxford University.
Martin Payne
Chief Executive Officer
Committees Nomination Martin Payne is a member of our Board of Directors and our Chief Executive Officer a position he has held since 2 October 2017.
Mr Payne was formerly Chief Financial Officer having joined Polypipe in this role in May 2016.
Before joining Polypipe Mr Payne served as Group Finance Director at Norcros plc a leading supplier of branded showers taps bathroom accessories tiles and adhesives.
His previous experience includes holding senior financial positions at JCB the construction equipment manufacturer and at IMI plc the Britishbased engineering company.
He is a Fellow of the Chartered Institute of Management Accountants and has a Bachelor of Arts in Economics from Durham University.
Paul James Chief Financial Officer Paul James is a member of our Board of Directors and our Chief Financial Officer having been appointed to the Board on 5 March 2018.
Before joining Polypipe Mr James served as Group Financial Controller of Dixons Carphone plc and prior to this role held the position of Group Financial Controller and Treasury Director of Inchcape plc and senior financial positions at British American Tobacco plc.
He is a Fellow of the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales and has a Bachelor of Science in Civil Engineering from Edinburgh University.
Glen Sabin Chief Operating Officer Glen Sabin is our Chief Operating Officer and was appointed to our Board of Directors on 2 October 2017 having been Managing Director of the Plumbing and Drainage Division since 2016.
Mr Sabin joined the Group in November 2004 as Managing Director of our UK Civils business before moving to become Managing Director of our Building Products business in 2013 with additional overall responsibility for Civils and Terrain.
Mr Sabin has over 40 years experience in the construction industry having started as an engineer with George Wimpey before moving into a commercial career initially with Redland plc followed by 22 years with Marshalls plc.
COMMITTEES
In addition to the Polypipe Group plc Board there are three Committees Remuneration Committee N Nomination Committee A Audit Committee Chairman of Committee KEY Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Polypipe Group plc Paul Dean Senior Independent Director Committees Audit Nomination Remuneration Paul Dean was appointed to our Board of Directors on 28 March 2014 as an Independent NonExecutive Director and is Chair of the Audit Committee.
Mr Dean was appointed Senior Independent Director on 27 May 2015.
Mr Dean is also a NonExecutive Director and Audit Chair of Porvair plc Focusrite plc and Wincanton plc.
He is the Senior Independent Director at Porvair plc.
Mr Dean was Group Finance Director of Ultra Electronics Holdings plc from 2009 to 2013.
Previously he had the same role at Foseco Group from 2001 to 2008 including when it floated in 2005.
Mr Dean has a Master of Arts in History from Oxford University.
Moni Mannings NonExecutive Director Committees Audit Nomination Remuneration Moni Mannings was appointed to our Board of Directors on 28 March 2014 as a Non Executive Director and is Chair of the Remuneration Committee.
Mrs Mannings was a senior partner of Olswang LLP until 31 March 2016 and had been a partner there since 2000.
Previously she was also a Board Member of the Solicitors Regulation Authority and Chair of its Equality Diversity and Inclusion Committee.
Mrs Mannings is a NonExecutive member of the Boards of Investec Bank plc Dairy Crest Group plc and Cranfield University.
She is also a Board Trustee of the charity Barnardos.
Mrs Mannings has a Bachelor of Law from the University of
Mark Hammond NonExecutive Director Committees Audit Nomination Remuneration Following listing Mark Hammond was appointed as a NonExecutive Director of our Board of
Mr Hammond has recently retired as Deputy Managing Partner of Caird Capital LLP which is the adviser to Cavendish Square Partners LP .
Mr Hammond joined HBOS plc in June 2003 and served as Head of Integrated Finance from 2006 until 2010.
Prior to joining HBOS plc Mr Hammond held roles with Gresham Trust plc The Royal Bank of Scotland plc and PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP where he qualified with the Institute of Chartered Accountants of Scotland in 1991.
Mr Hammond graduated with a Master of Arts in Economics and Accountancy from the University of Aberdeen in 1988.
Mr Hammond has previously been a Director of The Big Green Parcel Holding Company Limited and David Lloyd Leisure Group
Mr Hammond currently sits on the Board of Governors of Beechwood Park School Markyate Hertfordshire.
Emma Versluys Company Secretary Emma Versluys is our Company Secretary and is Secretary to the Board and its three Committees a position she has held since June 2017.
Before joining Polypipe Ms Versluys was Deputy Company Secretary at Provident Financial plc and has also held company secretarial roles at Serco plc and Alliance UniChem plc.
She is an Associate of the ICSA The Governance Institute and is also a solicitor.
N R R N Stock Codesite
OUR GOVERNANCE INTRODUCTION
FROM THE CHAIRMAN DEAR SHAREHOLDER I am pleased to present the Companys Corporate Governance Report for the year ended 31 December 2017 on behalf of the Board.
This year has seen further changes to the Board with Martin Payne being
appointed as Chief Executive Officer
as Chief Executive Officer.
At the same time Glen Sabin was promoted to Chief Operating Officer and appointed to the
Mr Payne continued to oversee and manage the group finance function following his appointment as CEO until the appointment of Paul James as Chief Financial Officer on 5 March 2018.
The Company Secretarial function was also brought inhouse for the first time since the IPO with the appointment of Emma Versluys as Company Secretary. from David to Martin.
I remain confident that we have a strong and diverse Board in place with the necessary motivation and an appropriate balance of experience and skills to lead the Company through the next phase of its development.
Following the externally facilitated review of our Boards performance in 2016 an internal review of the Board its Committees and individual Directors was carried out in 2017 using an evaluation questionnaire.
The results of the evaluation which were discussed by the Board at its meeting in November 2017 concluded that the Board continues to function strongly and collaboratively.
Suggestions for minor improvements were also made and the outcome of the evaluation process is discussed in more detail on pages 46 and 47 of this Report.
The terms of reference for each of the Board committees were reviewed and updated as necessary to reflect legislative changes and best practice.
During the year the Board has placed much focus on the consistent leadership of the Group through this period of change as well as its strategic development in light of which presentations by the Groups financial advisers and brokers and the annual strategy day proved very valuable.
The following pages of this report and the Directors Remuneration Report set out in greater detail how the principles and provisions of the UK Corporate Governance Code April 2016 the UK Code have been applied and how the Board and its committees have fulfilled their responsibilities during the year to ensure that robust governance practices are embedded across the Group.
The report also serves to provide insight into how the Board and management team run the business for the benefit of shareholders.
As always we welcome questions or comments from shareholders either via our website at site or in person at the Annual General Meeting AGM.
Ron Marsh
20 March 2018 Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Polypipe Group plc CORPORATE
GOVERNANCE STATEMENT
Polypipes Governance Structure
REMUNERATION
COMMITTEE
AUDIT
COMMITTEE
See page 50
COMMITTEE
See page 48 See page 54 COMPLIANCE WITH THE UK CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
This report which is also available on the Companys website explains key features of the Companys governance structure and is designed to provide a greater understanding of how the principles of the UK Code published in April 2016 by the Financial Reporting Council FRC have been applied and the areas of focus during the year.
The UK Code can be found on the FRCs website at www. rc.
In accordance with the Listing Rules of the UK Listing Authority the Board confirms that throughout the year ended 31 December 2017 and as at the date of this report the Company has complied with the principles of the UK Code.
The report also includes items required by the FCAs Disclosure Guidance and Transparency Rules.
The Board has ultimate responsibility for the approval of the Annual Report and Accounts.
It has considered the content of the Annual Report and Accounts and confirms that taken as a whole it is fair balanced and understandable and provides the necessary information for shareholders to assess the Companys position and performance business model and strategy.
HOW THE BOARD WORKS The Board and its Committees The Board is responsible for the leadership and direction of the Group and is ultimately responsible to the Companys shareholders for the Groups longterm success.
The Board takes the lead in areas such as strategy financial policy and making sure we maintain a sound system of internal control.
By delegating authority to its Committees the Board directs and reviews the Groups operations within an agreed framework of controls allowing risk to be assessed and managed within agreed parameters.
The Board has established a formal schedule of matters reserved for its approval and has delegated other specific responsibilities to its principal committees the Audit Nomination and Remuneration Committees.
These are clearly defined within the terms of reference of the respective Committees.
The schedule of matters reserved for the Board includes the consideration and approval of strategy and overall management and leadership of the Group financial items  including the Groups annual budget dividend policy annual and halfyearly accounts accounting policies and monetary limits the risk management system and internal controls contracts with third parties not in the ordinary course of business legal administration and pension arrangements the Groups corporate governance arrangements the operation of the Companys share option schemes as recommended by the Remuneration Committee Directors and Officers insurance coverage and the commencement or settlement of any litigation communications with shareholders and the issue of shareholder circulars Board and senior management appointments and arrangements and conflicts of interest where permitted by the Companys Articles of
The Board has also delegated to the
Chief Executive Officer the responsibility
The Chief Executive Officer is supported in carrying out his responsibilities by the Chief Financial Officer the Chief Operating Officer and the senior management team.
Stock Codesite OUR GOVERNANCE The Board has direct access to the Company Secretary who is responsible to the Board for ensuring that Board procedures are complied with.
The Board may take independent professional advice in the furtherance of its duties if necessary at the Companys expense.
Board Composition Qualification and Experience At the year end the Board comprised the independent NonExecutive Chairman two Executive Directors and three Non Executive Directors.
Biographical details of the individual Directors as well as Paul James who joined the Board on 5 March 2018 can be found on pages 40 and 41.
The NonExecutive Directors were appointed for the diversity of their backgrounds as well as their personal attributes and experience.
The current Board members bring a wide range of skills and experience to the Board and all actively contribute in discussion.
In accordance with UK Code Provision B.1.1 the Nomination Committee and the Board have considered the independence of each of the NonExecutive Directors.
The Board considered the Chairman and all the NonExecutive Directors to be independent throughout the period.
In accordance with UK Code Provision B.7.1 at the 2018 AGM and all future AGMs the Board is proposing that all of the Directors will be subject to re election.
Paul James and Glen Sabin will both offer themselves for election at the 2018 AGM and for reelection annually thereafter.
Role of the Chairman and Chief Executive Officer The roles and responsibilities of the Chairman and the Chief Executive Officer are separate and clearly defined.
It is the Chairmans duty to provide overall leadership and governance of the Board.
In performing this role the Chairman sets the Board agenda ensures that adequate time is available for discussion of all agenda items and promotes a culture of openness challenge and debate at Board meetings.
The Chairman is also responsible for ensuring that the Directors have an understanding of the views of major shareholders.
The Chief Executive Officer is responsible for executive management of the Groups business consistent with the strategy and commercial objectives agreed by the
He leads the senior management team in effecting decisions of the Board and its Committees and is responsible for the maintenance and protection of the reputation of the Group.
The Chief Executive Officer is also responsible for ensuring that the affairs of the Group are conducted with the highest standards of integrity probity and corporate governance.
Interaction between the Chairman
and the Chief Executive Officer
As noted above the roles of Ron Marsh as the Chairman and Martin Payne as the Chief Executive Officer are separate with a distinct division of responsibilities.
The partnership between both is based on mutual trust and facilitated by regular contact between them.
The separation of authority enhances the independent oversight of the executive management by the Board and helps to ensure that no one individual on the Board has unfettered authority.
Role of the Senior Independent
Paul Dean is the Senior Independent Director SID of the Company and is available to shareholders if they have concerns that cannot be addressed through normal channels.
The role of the SID is to act as a sounding board for the Chairman and an intermediary for the other Directors when necessary.
The
SID is also available to chair the Board in the absence of the Chairman and has authority to add items to the agenda of any regular or special meeting of the
The role of the SID is considered to be an important check and balance in the Groups governance structure.
Appointment and Tenure The NonExecutive Directors serve on the basis of letters of appointment which are available for inspection at the Companys registered office.
The letters of appointment set out the expected time commitment of the NonExecutive Directors who on appointment undertake that they have sufficient time to carry out their duties.
There is no fixed expiry date and no notice period in their letters of appointment.
The Executive Directors service contracts are also available for inspection at the Companys registered office.
The notice period for the Executive Directors is 12 months.
Directors Induction and Training Professional Development The Chairman with the support of the Company Secretary is responsible for the induction of new Directors and the ongoing development of all Directors.
Glen Sabin joined the Board during the year and received training on directors duties and obligations.
Paul James is currently in the process of receiving a comprehensive induction having joined the Company on 5 March 2018 and further information on this will be provided in the 2018 Annual Report and
As the internal and external business environment changes it is important to ensure the Directors skills and knowledge are refreshed and updated regularly.
The Board was therefore given presentations during the year by the Companys financial advisers and brokers as well as several presentations by senior management in addition to the annual strategy day.
During Board meetings held during the year the Company Secretary updated the Board on new legislation and regulations as well as changes to the current legislative and regulatory regimes to which the Company is subject.
Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Polypipe Group plc
GOVERNANCE STATEMENT Directors Conflicts of Interest Each Director has a duty under the Companies Act 2006 to avoid a situation where he or she may have a direct or indirect interest that conflicts with the interests of the Company.
The Company has robust procedures in place to identify authorise and manage such conflicts of interest and these procedures have operated effectively during the year.
All potential conflicts approved by the Board are recorded in a Conflicts of Interest Register which is maintained by the Company Secretary and reviewed by the Board on a regular basis.
Directors have a continuing duty to update the Board with any changes to their conflicts of interest.
Directors Indemnity and Insurance Details of the Directors indemnity arrangements can be found on pages 74 and 75 of the Directors Report.
Internal Controls and Risk
The Board is responsible for determining the nature and extent of the significant risks it is willing to take in achieving its strategic objectives.
It is also responsible for maintaining sound risk and internal control systems in accordance with section C.2.3 of the UK Code and confirms that there is an ongoing process for identifying evaluating and managing the principal risks faced by the Group the systems have been in place for the year under review and up to the date of approval of the Annual Report and Accounts the systems are regularly reviewed by the Board and the systems accord with the FRC guidance on risk management internal control and related financial and business reporting.
The effectiveness of these systems is also reviewed through the work of the Audit Committee described on pages 51 to 53.
The key risks which the Board has focused on this year together with their potential impact and mitigating actions are set out on pages 30 to 34.
The Company has a risk management framework which adopts a top down and a bottom up view of the key risks which involves both the downward cascade and upward escalation of risks between Group and the business units.
It comprises a risk register template a risk profile template and assessment guidelines to be used by both the Group and business units when considering risk.
It also includes a detailed approach to formally recording and independently assessing Group level risks.
The Board has conducted a review of the effectiveness of the system of internal controls and risk management and is satisfied that it complies with Provision C.2.3 of the UK Code.
FINANCIAL AND BUSINESS REPORTING PROCESS The Board recognises its duty to ensure that the Annual Report and Accounts taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the position and performance strategy and business model of the
In addition to the Annual Report and Accounts the Company also ensures that other pricesensitive reports and other information are published externally.
The Group has a thorough assurance process in place in respect of the preparation verification and approval of periodic financial reports which is set out in the Report of the Audit Committee on pages 51 to 53.
This process includes the involvement of qualified professional employees with an appropriate level of experience both in Group Finance and throughout the Groups businesses formal signoff from appropriate business segment senior executives comprehensive review and where appropriate challenge from appropriate Group senior executives and Executive Directors a transparent process to ensure full disclosure of information to the external auditor oversight by the Audit Committee involving amongst other duties a detailed review of key financial reporting judgements which have been discussed by management review and where appropriate challenge on matters including the consistency of and any changes to significant accounting policies and practices during the year significant adjustments resulting from an external audit the viability statement assumptions and the going concern assumption.
The above process provides comfort to the Board that the Annual Report and Accounts taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable.
Stock Codesite OUR GOVERNANCE BOARD MEETINGS The Board met regularly during the year holding nine Board meetings and a number of other meetings and teleconferences to discuss and review progress on issues affecting the Group.
A number of Committee meetings were also held during the year.
Details of attendance at Board and Committee meetings are shown in the table below.
Board
Attendance
Audit
Committee
Attendance
Nomination
Committee
Attendance
Remuneration
Committee
Attendance
Current Directors Ron Marsh 9 of 9  4 of 4 6 of 6 Martin Payne 9 of 9  1 of 1 Glen Sabin 2 of 2 Moni Mannings 9 of 9 3 of 3 4 of 4 6 of 6 Paul Dean 9 of 9 3 of 3 4 of 4 6 of 6 Mark Hammond 9 of 9 3 of 3 4 of 4 6 of 6 Past Director David Hall 7 of 7  3 of 3 Martin Payne served as Chief Financial Officer from the beginning of the period until 2 October 2017 and as Chief Executive Officer from 2 October 2017 to the end of the period.
Glen Sabin served as Chief Operating Officer from 2 October 2017 to the end of the period.
David Hall served as Chief Executive Officer from the beginning of the period until 2 October 2017.
As the above table demonstrates every effort is made to ensure that all Directors where possible attend scheduled Board meetings.
However in the event that a Director is unable to attend a meeting they are nevertheless provided with the meeting papers and information relating to the meeting and are able to discuss the issues arising with the Chairman and other Directors.
Senior management from across the Group and advisers attend some of the meetings for discussion of specific items in greater depth.
In order to provide the Board with greater visibility of the Groups operations and to provide further opportunities to meet senior management the Board visits at least one of the Groups business unit locations each year.
Such visits allow the Board to gain a deeper understanding of local market dynamics and to assess management performance and potential.
During the year the Board visited the Groups operations in Castres France Ulster Doncaster Loughborough and
During these visits the Board members attended management presentations andor toured the factories and distribution centres.
In November 2017 the Board held its annual strategy day where it spent a full day with senior management to discuss current performance of the Group and the strategic plan.
Members of senior management from across the Group presented the operational and financial performance of their respective businesses in detail to the Board and explained the growth prospects of each market segment in the UK and abroad.
Board dinners are typically held ahead of scheduled Board meetings to provide a more relaxed forum than the formal meetings in which the Board members are able to have additional discussions amongst themselves and with the senior management team at that location which improves the focus of the formal Board meetings.
During the year the Chairman held one meeting with the NonExecutive Directors without the Executive Directors present and the NonExecutive Directors met on one occasion without the Chairman being present to appraise the Chairmans performance as discussed below.
BOARD COMMITTEES The Board has appointed three Board Committees the Audit Committee the Nomination Committee and the Remuneration Committee.
The role and responsibilities of each Committee are set out in formal Terms of Reference.
These
Terms of Reference have been reviewed during the year and adjusted as necessary to improve the Committees efficiency and to reflect legislative changes and best practice.
The updated Terms of Reference are available on the Companys website at site The Committees make recommendations to the Board as they see fit.
Each
Committee Chair provides an update to the Board on the key discussions and decisions made at the preceding Committee meeting.
BOARD EVALUATION AND
Following the externally facilitated Board evaluation carried out in 2016 in accordance with UK Code Provision B.6.2 the Board and its Committees undertook an internal evaluation in 2017 which was facilitated by the Company Secretary and the Chairman.
Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Polypipe Group plc
GOVERNANCE STATEMENT The evaluation consisted of a high level questionnaire for the Directors completion which was structured to provide Directors with an opportunity to express their views about Board structure composition and functionality Board meetings and contents Board administration and governance interaction with management committee structure functionality and meetings and personal effectiveness and overall Board effectiveness.
The results of the performance evaluation were reviewed by the Board at its meeting in November 2017.
The results of the evaluation indicated that the Directors consider the Board to be effective collaborative and focused with positive working relationships amongst all of its members.
Notwithstanding the above the Directors recognised the need to continuously improve and develop their contributions and the following actions were agreed as a result of the exercise and will be progressed over the coming year an action plan and progress log in relation to the evaluation itself would be developed and maintained by the Company Secretary a review would be undertaken for 2019 to ensure the frequency and timing of the Board and Committee meetings remained appropriate longerterm NonExecutive Director succession planning would need to be considered in light of the fact that all NEDs would reach the end of their terms of appointment during 2020 a legal training and refresher session by the Companys appointed lawyers would be held annually and a formal review of the Companys strategic objectives would be undertaken annually at the half year following the strategy day held in the preceding November.
In addition the Chairman discussed with each Director their performance and their training needs and the Senior Independent Director led the assessment of the Chairmans leadership.
As a result of these individual reviews it is considered that the performance of each of the Directors continues to be effective and that each Director demonstrates sufficient commitment to his or her role.
It was acknowledged that the objective of the Board in supporting the senior management team to improve the performance of the Group and promote the interests of the shareholders and stakeholders had been achieved and it would continue to constructively challenge the senior management team.
Consequently I can confirm that each Director is suitable for reelection at the forthcoming AGM.
SHAREHOLDER ENGAGEMENT Responsibility for shareholder relations rests with the Chief Financial Officer.
The
Chief Financial Officer in conjunction with the corporate broker ensures that there is effective communication with shareholders on matters such as governance and strategy and that an active dialogue is maintained with investors through a planned programme of investor relations activities.
As part of the investor relations programme formal meetings with investors are scheduled to discuss the Groups interim and final results.
In the intervening periods the Company continues its dialogue with the investor community by meeting key investor representatives and holding investor roadshows.
During the reporting period the top 20 shareholders of the Group were invited to meet with the Chair of the Remuneration Committee and if appropriate the Senior Independent Director to discuss the Companys updated remuneration policy which will be subject to shareholder approval at the 2018 AGM.
No shareholders requested a meeting but written feedback from some shareholders was provided to the Remuneration Committee Chair.
The Chairman the Senior Independent Director and the other Directors are available to engage in dialogue with major shareholders as appropriate.
Board members develop an understanding of the views of major shareholders through analysts and brokers briefings and any direct contact initiated by shareholders.
The Board believes that there were appropriate mechanisms in place during the year for the Board to understand the views of shareholders and to communicate with them on matters including governance remuneration strategy and performance.
ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING The Companys AGM is to be held on 23 May 2018 at the Holiday Inn High Road Doncaster DN4 9UX.
All shareholders have the opportunity to attend and vote in person or by proxy at the AGM.
A copy of the notice of AGM can be found on the Companys website at site The AGM is the Companys principal forum for communication with private shareholders.
The Chairman of the Board and the Chair of each of the Committees will be available to answer shareholders questions at the AGM.
The notice of AGM will be sent out to shareholders at least 20 working days before the meeting.
Results will be announced to the London Stock Exchange via a Regulatory Information Service announcement and published on the Companys website.
REELECTION OF DIRECTORS At the AGM all Directors will retire and submit themselves for election or reelection.
As a result of the Board evaluation exercise as Chairman I am satisfied that each Director continues to show the necessary level of commitment to the Group and has sufficient time available to fulfil his or her duties to justify their reelection.
Paul James and Glen Sabin will both offer themselves for election at the 2018 AGM and for reelection annually thereafter.
Approved by the Board and signed on its behalf.
Ron Marsh
20 March 2018 Stock Codesite OUR GOVERNANCE INTRODUCTION FROM THE CHAIR OF THE NOMINATION COMMITTEE DEAR SHAREHOLDER I am delighted to present the Report of the Nomination Committee the Committee for 2017.
During the year the Committee has overseen a number of Board changes and a more comprehensive description of the activities of the Committee during the year is provided in the following report.
I will be available at the AGM to answer any questions about the work of the
Ron Marsh Chair of the Nomination Committee 20 March 2018 COMMITTEE MEMBERSHIP AND MEETINGS The Committee comprises Ron Marsh the Chairman all of the NonExecutive Directors being Moni Mannings Paul Dean and Mark Hammond and Martin
Payne the Chief Executive Officer.
Accordingly there are five members.
The Committee is chaired by the Board Chairman except when considering his own reelection.
In accordance with UK Code Provision B.2.1 the majority of the members were independent.
During the year Martin Payne became CEO following the retirement of David Hall and as a result took over Davids membership of the
The members of the Committee and details of their attendance at Committee meetings are set out on page 46.
Biographies of each member are shown on pages 40 and 41.
Under the Committees Terms of Reference the Committee will normally meet not less than twice a year and at such other times as the Chairman shall require.
The
Committee held three scheduled formal meetings during the year under review.
After each Committee meeting the Chairman reports to the Board on the main items discussed.
ROLE OF THE COMMITTEE The Committees main responsibilities are to evaluate the structure size and composition including the skills knowledge experience and diversity required of the Board and the Committees to give full consideration to succession planning of Directors and other senior executives and to assist with the selection process of new Executive and NonExecutive Directors including the Chairman.
The Committees Terms of Reference were reviewed and updated in March 2018 and explain the Committees role and responsibilities.
The Terms of Reference can be found on the Companys website at http investors. governanceboardcommittees.
The
Company Secretary acts as Secretary to the Committee.
In accordance with its terms of reference the Committee is required to Review the structure size and composition of the Board and make recommendations to the Board as appropriate.
Consider succession planning for Directors and other senior executives taking into account the challenges and opportunities facing the Group and the future skills and expertise needed on the Board.
Review the leadership needs of the organisation both Executive and NonExecutive with a view to ensuring the continued ability of the organisation to compete effectively in the marketplace.
Identify the balance of skills knowledge diversity and experience on the Board and nominate candidates to fill Board vacancies.
Identify and nominate for the approval of the Board candidates to fill Board vacancies as and when they arise.
Review the time commitment required from NonExecutive
Review the results of the Board performance evaluation process that relates to the composition of the Board.
Review and approve the Groups diversity policy and evaluate its effectiveness on a regular basis.
GOVERNANCE
The effectiveness of the Committee was considered as part of the Board and Committee evaluation detailed on pages 46 and 47.
At its meeting in January 2018 the Committee considered the contents of the review and concluded that the evaluation had found the Committee to be operating effectively and providing robust challenge to the business.
MAIN ACTIVITIES DURING THE YEAR During the year under review the Committee carried out a process to recruit a new Chief Executive Officer to replace David Hall who had indicated his intention to retire from the Company in October 2017.
The Committee also considered the appointment of Glen Sabin to the Board as Chief Operating Officer and carried out a process to recruit a new Chief Financial Officer to replace Martin Payne.
Further information on these processes is set out below.
The
Committee also carried out its duties as listed above and has given particular focus to succession planning for both the Board members as well as senior executives as discussed below.
As stated in the Corporate Governance Report all of the Companys Directors will retire and each will offer themselves for election or reelection at the forthcoming AGM in accordance with UK Code Provision B.7.1.
The Chairman confirms that the Committee has considered the formal performance evaluation and the contribution and commitment of the Directors that are required to offer themselves for reelection.
The Chairman has confirmed to the Board that their performance and commitment is such that the Company should support their reelection.
No Director was able to vote in respect of their own reelection when consideration was given to Director reelection at the AGM.
Information on the Directors service agreements shareholdings and share options is set out in the Directors Remuneration Report on pages 64 to 73.
Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Polypipe Group plc REPORT OF THE NOMINATION COMMITTEE SUCCESSION PLANNING A key activity of the Committee is to keep under review the Companys succession plans for members of the Board and senior managers over the short medium and long term to ensure that the composition of the Board and senior management team remains appropriately balanced between new and innovative thinking and longerterm stability.
Management training is provided to senior and middle management where appropriate in order to continue to develop the pipeline of internal talent for the future.
In addition the Committee considers emergency succession planning and is comfortable that a framework is in place should key management roles need to be covered on an interim basis.
Board appointment criteria are considered automatically as part of the Committees review of succession planning.
The Committee believes that limited tenure of the Chairman and Non Executive Directors and their subsequent enforced retirement as Directors is not always appropriate and matters of Director tenure are viewed on a case by case basis.
Currently all the NonExecutive Directors and the Chairman have been in post for less than six years as set out in Provision B.2.3 of the UK Code.
CEO SUCCESSION The Committee engaged the Zygos Partnership Zygos an executive recruitment firm to identify potential candidates to succeed David Hall on his retirement.
Zygos reviewed CVs and interviewed various candidates before providing the Chairman and the Committee members with a shortlist of candidates who were interviewed by the members of the Board excluding Martin Payne.
Following these interviews all Committee members independently identified Martin Payne as the preferred candidate having the necessary attributes and skills required of a Chief Executive
The interviewing panel also discussed and agreed that the creation of a new Board position of Chief Operating Officer reporting to the Chief Executive Officer would enable the Chief Executive Officer to better balance his strategic and operational responsibilities.
The
Committee members identified Glen Sabin as the preferred candidate having the necessary attributes and skills required of a Chief Operating Officer and considered that his appointment would provide continuity and provide further support to Martin Payne in his new role as CEO and recommended the appointments of both Martin Payne as CEO and Glen Sabin as COO to the Board.
CFO SUCCESSION In relation to the recruitment of a new CFO discussions with three potential recruitment firms were held and consideration given to the merits of using each of them.
On the basis that the appointment was time critical the Committee agreed to again engage Zygos to identify potential candidates for the role of CFO on the basis of their prior detailed knowledge of the business and the Board.
Martin Payne interviewed six potential candidates identified by Zygos and second interviews by Martin Payne and Paul Dean with a shortlist of two candidates followed shortly afterwards.
The remaining Committee members as well as Glen Sabin met with the preferred candidate following which all Committee members agreed that Paul James had the necessary attributes and skills that were being sought for the role of Chief Financial Officer and recommended his appointment to the Board.
DIVERSITY
The Committee supports diversity acknowledging the advantages that come from having diverse viewpoints and the influence this can have in decision making.
It is the aim of the Committee to always consider the benefits that arise from a diverse Board when making Board appointments.
The Committee does not judge it appropriate to introduce a quota system to enhance diversity in all of its forms to the Board.
The Companys recruitment and appointment strategy is based on the merits of the individual candidates without bias towards age gender marital or family status race sexual orientation religion or belief or any disability.
Currently one of the seven Directors is female as well as the Company Secretary.
Details of diversity within our workforce including at Board and senior management level can be found in our Corporate Responsibility Statement on pages 35 and 36.
TENURE OF NONEXECUTIVE
Appointments to the Board are typically made for an initial term of three years and are ordinarily limited to three consecutive terms in office subject to annual reelection by shareholders at the AGM.
NOMINATION COMMITTEE PRIORITIES FOR 2018 During the forthcoming year the Committee will be focusing on the composition of the Board in light of the new executive leadership team to ensure the balance of skills experience and responsibility remains appropriate which will include a process to recruit an additional NonExecutive Director.
The Committee will also consider talent management on a Groupwide basis and succession planning for the senior executives taking into account the challenges and opportunities facing the Group as it implements its strategy and the future skills and expertise needed by the business as a result.
The Committee will also consider the succession planning of NonExecutive Directors so that replacements which will be required in the longer term can be phased in over a suitable period.
The Committee will continue to consider diversity in 2018 bearing in mind the recommendations from the HamptonAlexander Review on FTSE Women Leaders and the Parker review on Diversity of Boards and will report on this in due course.
By order of the Board.
Ron Marsh Chair of the Nomination Committee 20 March 2018 Stock Codesite OUR GOVERNANCE INTRODUCTION FROM THE CHAIR OF THE AUDIT COMMITTEE DEAR SHAREHOLDER I am pleased to present the Report of the Audit Committee the Committee for 2017.
The Committee is appointed by the Board from its NonExecutive Directors.
The Committee has continued to focus on the integrity of the Groups financial reporting risk management and internal controls and the quality of the internal and external audit processes.
We will continue to keep our activities under review to ensure that we comply with any changes in the regulatory environment.
The Board has asked the Committee to oversee the process for determining whether the Annual Report and Accounts when taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Groups financial position and performance business model and strategy.
As a result of its work undertaken during the year and taking into account the result of the performance evaluation further details are set out on pages 46 and 47 the Committee considers that it has acted in accordance with its Terms of Reference and has ensured the independence objectivity and effectiveness of the external and internal auditors.
I am pleased to welcome Paul James to the Board following his appointment on 5 March 2018.
I would also like to thank Martin Payne for his hard work and continued support in 2017 in particular in continuing to carry out the CFO function following his change in role to CEO while the recruitment process for the new CFO was completed.
I will be available at the AGM to answer any questions about the work of the
Paul Dean Chair of the Audit Committee 20 March 2018 Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Polypipe Group plc REPORT OF THE AUDIT COMMITTEE ROLE AND RESPONSIBILITIES The full responsibilities of the Committee are set out in its Terms of Reference which are available on the Companys website at httpir.
Terms of Reference have been reviewed and updated during the year to reflect the ICSA The Governance Institutes guidance and the Financial Reporting Councils FRCs Guidance on Audit
The key responsibilities of the Committee are to assist the Board with the discharge of its responsibilities in relation to internal and external audits monitor and review the Groups internal control and risk management systems monitor and review the effectiveness of the Groups internal audit function monitor the integrity of the financial statements of the Group including its annual and halfyearly reports trading updates preliminary results announcements and any other formal announcements relating to its financial performance and reviewing significant financial reporting issues and judgements where requested by the Board review the content of the Annual Report and Accounts and advise the Board on whether taken as a whole it is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Groups financial position and performance business model and strategy oversee the relationship with the external auditor including their appointment reappointment andor removal approval of the scope of the annual audit their remuneration and the terms of engagement monitor and review their independence and objectivity the effectiveness of the audit process and the extent of non audit services performed and report to the Board on how it has discharged its responsibilities.
COMMITTEE MEMBERSHIP AND MEETINGS The Committee is appointed by the Board and comprises three Non Executive Directors being Paul Dean Mark Hammond and Moni Mannings.
All Committee members are considered independent.
In accordance with the requirements of Provision C.3.1 of the UK Code Paul Dean is designated as the Committee member with recent and relevant financial experience.
All other members of the Committee are deemed to have the necessary ability and experience to understand the financial statements.
The
Committee as a whole has competence relevant to the sector in which the Group operates.
The Committee discharges its responsibilities through a series of scheduled formal meetings during the year.
Each meeting has a formal agenda which is linked to the events in the financial calendar of the Group.
Attendees at each of the meetings are the Committee members as well as by invitation the Chairman the Chief
Executive Officer the Chief Financial
Officer the Chief Operating Officer the Group Financial Controller and the external auditor Ernst and Young LLP .
The
Company Secretary is also Secretary to the Committee.
The Committee held three formal meetings during the year.
In accordance with best practice the Committee met with the Ernst and Young LLP lead audit partner without executive management being present.
GOVERNANCE
In accordance with best practice the effectiveness of the Committee was evaluated internally this year by means of a questionnaire completed by all Directors following the external evaluation performed in 2016.
At its meeting in November 2017 the Committee considered the results of the internal evaluation and concluded that it had found the Committee to be operating effectively particularly in relation to the open and robust discussion of audit matters thus providing the Board with a high level of assurance that they are dealt with appropriately.
Areas which the Committee believed could potentially be improved were discussed and included in its action plan for next year.
MAIN ACTIVITIES OF THE COMMITTEE DURING THE YEAR As part of the process of working with the Board to carry out its responsibilities and to maximise its effectiveness meetings of the Committee normally take place prior to the Board meetings at which the Chair of the Committee provides an update to the Board.
At these meetings the Committee focused on the following areas Financial reporting During the year Committee meetings were held prior to the Board meetings to approve the Groups interim and annual financial statement announcements and to consider the financial reporting judgements made by management.
These considerations are made through review of the accounting papers and financial reports prepared by management and reports prepared by the Groups external auditor.
The Committee also reported to the Board that it considered that taken as a whole the Annual Report and Accounts is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Groups financial position and performance business model and strategy.
Stock Codesite OUR GOVERNANCE Significant financial reporting risk judgement and estimates The significant risk reviewed by the Committee in respect of the year under review was as follows Revenue recognition and customer rebates  The Committee considered the operating effectiveness of controls surrounding revenue recognition and managements subjective assessment and recognition of customer rebate liabilities at the interim and year end.
The significant judgement reviewed by the Committee in respect of the year under review was as follows Discontinued operations  On 31 January 2018 the Group announced it had entered into exclusive negotiations to sell Polypipe
It was determined that the sale was highly probable at 31 December 2017.
The Committee considered the financial accounting and reporting disclosure impacts in relation to this determination outlined by management including the French operations being classified as discontinued the associated net assets being classified as heldfor sale and a loss on remeasurement to fair value less costs to sell being recognised.
The significant estimates reviewed by the Committee in respect of the year under review were as follows Impairment of nonfinancial assets  The Committee considered a detailed report prepared by management setting out the assumptions used in determining whether goodwill other intangible assets or property plant and equipment required impairment for any of the business units.
This included a review of the discount rate and growth factors used to calculate the discounted projected future cash flows the sensitivity analysis applied and the discounted projected future cash flows used to support the carrying amount of the goodwill.
Restructuring provisions  The Committee considered various reports prepared by management setting out the events and changes in circumstances which resulted in the closure of the Dubai United Arab Emirates manufacturing facility and the resulting recognition of cash and noncash restructuring costs.
Inventory provisioning  The Committee reviewed the carrying amount of the Groups finished goods inventory and managements assessment and recognition of the appropriate level of provisioning against slowmoving and obsolete items.
Internal control internal audit and
risk management
Internal audit performs an integral role in the Groups governance structure and provides regular reports to the
The Committee has reviewed and approved the scope of the rolling internal audit work programme in relation to the Groups internal controls and procedures at each of the three meetings held during the year.
The Committee reviews and challenges the results and reports from the internal audit work programme and the adequacy of managements responses and proposed resolutions.
The Groups risk assessment process including how significant financial risks are managed and mitigated is a key area of focus for the Committee.
During the year the Committee monitored and reviewed the Groups risk management framework and the results of testing performed by the Groups internal audit function on specific elements of that framework.
There were no significant internal control failings or weaknesses during the year.
Other activities Other activities undertaken by the Committee during the year included the following considered the external audit plan and approved the audit fee considered the viability statement and going concern assumption instigated monitored and reviewed the Groups response to an external review of cyber security performed during the year by PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP considered the impact of new financial reporting standards and legislative requirements on the Group reviewed the Committees performance effectiveness and constitution and recommended the Report of the Audit Committee for approval by the Board.
EXTERNAL AUDIT
The Committee carefully considers the reappointment of the external auditor each year prior to making its recommendation to the shareholders.
As part of this process the Committee considers the independence of the external auditor the effectiveness of the external audit process its remuneration and the terms of engagement.
Having reviewed the performance of Ernst and Young LLP in 2017 the Committee has decided to recommend to the Board that Ernst and Young LLP should be reappointed for the 2018 audit and a resolution to this effect will be proposed at the 2018 AGM.
In accordance with current professional standards the external auditor is required to change the lead audit partner every five years in order to protect auditor independence and objectivity.
Ernst and Young LLP were awarded the external audit in 2012 following a competitive tendering process.
The lead audit partner was rotated in 2017.
In accordance with the UK Code the Competition and Markets Authority CMA Order and the EU Audit Directive it is the Groups intention to put the audit out to tender at least every ten years.
Accordingly the Company plans to run a competitive tender process in or before 2022.
Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Polypipe Group plc REPORT OF THE AUDIT COMMITTEE Independence The independence of the external auditor was confirmed by Ernst and Young LLP in November 2017 and March 2018 at the Committee meetings.
The Committee considered Ernst and Young LLPs presentation on auditor independence and confirmed that it considered the auditor to be independent.
Nonaudit services The Groups nonaudit services policy restricts the external auditor from performing certain nonaudit services in accordance with the Revised Ethical Standard 2016 issued by the FRC.
All nonaudit services proposed to be performed by the external auditor must be preapproved and sponsored by a senior executive with a detailed written recommendation including the nature and scope of the proposed service the supplier selection process and criteria the chosen supplier and selection rationale the relationship of the individual within the external auditor to perform the proposed service with those undertaking the audit work a fee estimate and the category of nonaudit service if relevant.
In addition the external auditor must provide a written statement of independence approved by the lead audit partner.
All nonaudit services proposed to be performed by the external auditor with a fee estimate in excess of 10000 must also be preapproved by the
This policy and approach further enhances auditor objectivity and independence.
There were no exceptions to this policy during 2017.
Effectiveness of the external audit process The Committee operated a formal process for reviewing the effectiveness of Ernst and Young LLP during the year under review.
This process included the following an assessment of the lead audit partner and the audit team a review of the audit approach scope determination of significant risk areas and materiality the execution of the audit interaction with management and communication with and support to the Committee the quality of any recommendation points and a review of independence objectivity and scepticism.
Ernst and Young LLPs external audit of the Groups financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2016 was reviewed by the FRCs Audit Quality Review AQR team.
We have considered the findings of the AQR team as part of the Committees assessment of the effectiveness of Ernst and Young LLPs external audit.
As well as receiving and discussing the AQRs final letter which summarised their conclusions the Committee had open and transparent conversations with Ernst and Young LLPs lead audit partner on the areas of the external audit that were reviewed by the AQR team.
This included understanding the substance of the discussions between Ernst and Young LLP and the AQR team during the review and the actions that will be taken by Ernst and Young LLP in response to the AQR teams findings.
After considering the above matters the Committee considered that the audit had been effective and recommended to the Board that Ernst and Young LLP be reappointed as external auditor to the
FRAUD WHISTLEBLOWING AND THE UK BRIBERY ACT The Committee monitors any reported incidents under its whistleblowing policy which has been reviewed during the year.
This policy is included in the Employee Handbook and sets out the procedure for employees to raise legitimate concerns about any wrongdoing in financial reporting or other matters such as something that could be unlawful a miscarriage of justice a danger to the health and safety of any individual damage to the environment or improper conduct.
There were no concerns which required the attention of the Committee during the year.
The Committee also reviews the Groups procedure for detecting fraud and the systems and controls in place to prevent a breach of antibribery legislation.
The
Group Finance Manual sets out the procedures to which employees must adhere and is aimed at reducing the risk of fraud occurring.
The Group is committed to a zerotolerance position with regard to bribery.
Those employees which the Group considers are more likely to be exposed to potential breaches of the Groups AntiBribery policy and statutory obligations under the UK Bribery Act have been provided with relevant guidance on compliance with their obligations.
The Group maintains a record of all employees who have received this guidance and requests annual confirmations from each relevant individual stating that they have complied with the Groups policy.
By order of the Board.
Paul Dean Chair of the Audit Committee 20 March 2018 Stock Codesite OUR GOVERNANCE ANNUAL STATEMENT FROM THE CHAIR OF THE REMUNERATION COMMITTEE DEAR SHAREHOLDER I am pleased to present the Directors Remuneration Report for the year ended 31 December 2017.
The report is split into two sections in line with legislative reporting regulations Remuneration Policy  contains details of the various components of the Remuneration Policy which will be subject to a binding shareholder vote at our 2018 Annual General Meeting AGM and will have effect from the date on which it is approved.
The Remuneration Policy is broadly unchanged from the Policy approved by shareholders at the 2015 AGM apart from a reduction in the maximum level of pension provision for Executive Directors from 20% to 15% of salary and an increase in the required minimum shareholding guideline for Executive Directors from 100% to 200% of salary.
Further details are set out on pages 56 to 63.
The Annual Report on Remuneration  contains details of remuneration received by Directors in 2017 and also contains full details of how we intend to implement the updated Remuneration Policy during 2018.
The Annual Report on Remuneration will be subject to an advisory vote at the 2018 AGM.
Further details are set out on pages
This Directors Remuneration Report
Large and Mediumsized Companies and Groups Accounts and Reports Regulations 2013 the UK Listing Authority Listing Rules and the Companies Act 2006 and is consistent with the UK Corporate Governance Code 2016 the Code.
ALIGNING REMUNERATION WITH COMPANY STRATEGY The Remuneration Policy is designed to encourage achievement of our strategic goals and priorities details of which are set out on pages 12 and 13 by rewarding in line with underlying Company performance while encouraging leadership behaviour which carries an appropriate level of risk.
This is achieved by an annual bonus arrangement which is linked to achieving profit targets working capital targets and personal objectives and a longterm incentive plan which only rewards for shareholder value creation and delivery of longterm earnings growth.
The most substantial issues considered by the Remuneration Committee the Committee during the past year are set out below.
PERFORMANCE IN 2017 The financial and operating performance of the Group in 2017 is set out on pages The Company has continued to deliver sustainable returns and growth for its shareholders during 2017 achieving profit before tax of 55.6m up 3.9% from 2016 and increasing underlying basic earnings per share from continuing operations by 10.1% to 27.2p per share.
Based on the Companys strong financial performance during the year and fulfilment of their individual objectives the Committee determined that
Martin Payne Chief Executive Officer
CEO earned 66.8% of his maximum potential annual bonus in respect of 2017 performance and that Glen Sabin Chief Operating Officer COO earned 65.8% of his maximum potential annual bonus in respect of 2017 performance prorated to reflect the amount of time served in their respective roles during the year.
In accordance with the current Remuneration Policy 25% of this bonus will be deferred into shares.
RETIREMENT OF DAVID HALL As a Committee we recognise our responsibility to ensure that pay decisions relating to departing Directors are determined fairly both for shareholders and for the departing individuals.
During
2017 our former CEO David Hall retired after 12 years service as CEO of the Company.
Mr Hall received no termination payment although he will receive a time prorated annual bonus for 2017 payable at the end of March 2018.
His outstanding Deferred Share Bonus Plan DSBP awards vested upon cessation of employment in accordance with the rules of the DSBP  and were settled in cash.
His outstanding awards under the LongTerm Incentive Plan LTIP are subject to the rules of the LTIP  and will therefore vest on the normal vesting date subject to achievement of the relevant performance target and prorated to reflect the period of time between the date of grant and date of retirement.
APPOINTMENT OF MARTIN PAYNE The Committee approved the pay arrangements for Martin Payne the former CFO who took over as CEO of the Company on 2 October 2017 when David Hall retired.
It is the Committees intention subject to satisfactory performance to increase Martin Paynes salary over time to the equivalent salary as was paid to David Hall when he held the CEO role.
This may therefore result in an annual increase over and above the average increase awarded to the workforce in any given year.
Full details of Martin Paynes remuneration are set out on pages 64 to 73.
APPOINTMENT OF GLEN SABIN The Committee approved the pay arrangements for Glen Sabin who was promoted to the position of COO and joined the Board on 2 October 2017.
Full details of those arrangements are set out on pages 64 to 73.
Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Polypipe Group plc APPOINTMENT OF PAUL JAMES The Committee approved the pay arrangements for Paul James who joined the Company as CFO on 5 March 2018.
Full details of those arrangements are set out on pages 65 and 66.
LTIP AWARDS In May 2017 the Committee approved the grant of LTIP awards to the Executive Directors and other senior management.
Award levels were 125% of salary for David Hall 100% of annual salary for Martin Payne CFO at the date of grant and the relevant percentage of annual salary for Glen Sabin in his role as Managing Director of the Plumbing and Drainage Division at the date of grant.
These award levels are significantly below the maximum of 200% of annual salary permitted under the current Remuneration Policy.
The Committee considered a number of possible performance measures and concluded that a combination of stretching Earnings per Share EPS growth targets and a relative Total Shareholder Return TSR measure provided an appropriate basis for rewarding the successful delivery of longerterm strategic priorities Company growth and shareholder value.
KEY REMUNERATION DECISIONS FOR 2018 The proposed implementation of the Remuneration Policy for our Executive Directors for 2018 is outlined on pages Key decisions made by the Committee in relation to 2018 include The award of a 2.0% salary increase for Executive Directors.
This is consistent with the average increase awarded to the Groups UK workforce for 2018.
Maximum bonus potential and LTIP award levels for Martin Payne in 2018 will be the same as applied to his predecessor as CEO in 2017 125% of salary for each element.
Maximum bonus potential and LTIP award levels for the other Executive Directors will be 100% of salary for each element.
The Committee believes that these levels of award are appropriate to ensure that the Executive Directors interests are fully aligned with the interests of other shareholders.
No changes to the performance measures to be used to assess Company performance in 2018.
The Group Underlying Operating Profit and Working Capital financial measures which determine 90% of the bonus and the Underlying diluted EPS and relative TSR measures which determine 100% of the LTIP provide alignment with the priorities outlined in the Strategic Report and alignment with our shareholders interests.
The Committee believes that this combination provides a fair and rounded assessment of short term and longerterm Company performance.
SHAREHOLDER ENGAGEMENT We take a keen interest in shareholder views on executive remuneration and in this context the Committee carried out a consultation process with its top 20 shareholders and the shareholder advisory bodies in 2017 on the proposed draft Remuneration Policy to be presented for approval by shareholders at the 2018 AGM.
Overall feedback from those shareholders that responded was supportive.
I will be available to answer questions on the Remuneration Policy and the Annual Report on Remuneration at the AGM on 23 May 2018.
I hope you will find this report to be clear and helpful in understanding our remuneration practices and that you will be supportive of the resolutions relating to remuneration at the AGM.
Moni Mannings Chair of the Remuneration Committee 20 March 2018 Stock Codesite OUR GOVERNANCE This part of the report sets out the Directors Remuneration Policy Remuneration Policy.
This Remuneration Policy will be subject to a binding shareholder vote at the 2018 AGM and will apply to payments made from the date of approval.
The information provided in this section of the Directors Remuneration Report is not subject to audit.
The only changes of substance in this Remuneration Policy from the Remuneration Policy approved by shareholders at the 2015 AGM are a reduction in the maximum level of pension provision for Executive Directors from 20% to 15% of salary and an increase in the required minimum shareholding guideline for Executive Directors from 100% to 200% of salary.
POLICY TABLE The following table sets out details of each component of the Executive Director remuneration package.
Our aim is to provide pay packages that will Promote the longterm success of the
Encourage and support a high performance culture.
Reward delivery of the Companys business plan and our key strategic and operational goals.
Motivate and retain our industry leading employees.
Attract high quality individuals to join the Company.
Align our employees interests with the interests of shareholders and other external stakeholders.
Consistent with these aims the Committee has agreed a remuneration policy for Executive Directors whereby Salaries will be set at competitive but not excessive levels compared to peers and other companies of an equivalent size and complexity.
Performancerelated pay based on stretching targets will form a significant part of remuneration packages.
There will be an appropriate balance between rewards for delivery of short term and longerterm performance targets taking into account where relevant existing shareholdings.
EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS Purpose and link to strategy Operation Maximum opportunity Performance conditions and provisions for recovery of sums paid Fixed pay Base salary To appropriately recognise skills experience and responsibilities and attract and retain talent by ensuring salaries are market competitive.
Generally reviewed annually with any increase normally taking effect from 1 January although the Committee may award increases at other times of the year if it considers it appropriate.
The review takes into consideration a number of factors including but not limited to The individual Directors role experience and performance.
Business performance.
Market data for comparable roles in appropriate pay comparators.
Pay and conditions elsewhere in the
No absolute maximum has been set for Executive Director base salaries.
Current
Executive Director salaries are set out in the Annual Report on Remuneration section of this Remuneration Report.
Any annual increase in salaries is at the discretion of the Committee taking into account the factors stated in this table and the following principles Salaries would typically be increased at a rate consistent with the average salary increase for UK employees.
Larger increases may be considered appropriate in certain circumstances including but not limited to a change in an individuals responsibilities or in the scale of their role or in the size and complexity of the Group.
Larger increases may also be considered appropriate if a Director has been initially appointed to their position on the Board at a lower than typical salary.
No performance conditions.
Malus and clawback provisions do not apply.
Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Polypipe Group plc
POLICY Purpose and link to strategy Operation Maximum opportunity Performance conditions and provisions for recovery of sums paid
To provide market competitive benefits.
Benefits currently include company car or car allowance income protection insurance private family medical insurance permanent health insurance and life assurance of four times annual salary.
The Committee has discretion to add to or remove benefits provided to Executive Directors.
Executive Directors are entitled to reimbursement of reasonable expenses.
Executive Directors also have the benefit of a qualifying third party indemnity from the Company as well as Directors and Officers liability insurance.
There is no overall maximum as the level of benefits depends on the annual cost of providing individual items in the relevant local market and the individuals specific role.
No performance conditions.
Malus and clawback provisions do not apply.
Pension
To provide market competitive retirement benefits.
Current policy is for the Company to contribute to the Group Pension Plan a personal pension scheme andor provide a cash allowance in lieu of pension.
Executive Directors receive a pension related contribution of up to 15% of salary reduced from 20% under the previous policy.
No performance conditions.
Malus and clawback provisions do not apply.
Variable pay Annual bonus To link reward to key financial and operational targets for the forthcoming year.
Additional alignment with shareholders interests through the operation of bonus deferral.
The Executive Directors are participants in the annual bonus plan which is reviewed annually to ensure bonus opportunity performance measures and targets are appropriate and supportive of the business plan.
No more than 75% of an Executive Directors annual bonus is delivered in cash following the release of audited results and the remaining amount is deferred into an award over Company shares under the Deferred Share Bonus Plan.
Deferred awards are usually granted in the form of conditional share awards or nilcost options and may also be settled in cash.
Deferred awards usually vest in two equal tranches two and three years after award although may vest early on leaving employment or on a change of control see later sections.
An additional payment in the form of cash or shares may be made in respect of shares which vest under deferred awards to reflect the value of dividends which would have been paid on those shares during the vesting period this payment may assume that dividends had been reinvested in Company shares on a cumulative basis.
The maximum award that can be made to an Executive Director under the annual bonus plan is 125% of salary.
The bonus is based on performance assessed over one year using appropriate financial operational and individual performance measures.
The majority of the bonus will be determined by measures of Group financial performance.
A sliding scale of targets is set for each Group financial measure with payout at no more than 25% for threshold financial performance increasing to 100% for maximum performance.
The remainder of the bonus will be based on financial strategic or operational measures appropriate to the individual Executive Director.
Details of the bonus measures operating each year will be included in the relevant
Annual Report on Remuneration.
Any bonus payout is ultimately at the discretion of the Committee.
The cash bonus will be subject to recovery andor deferred shares will be subject to withholding at the Committees discretion in exceptional circumstances where within three years of the bonus determination or before the vesting of each tranche of deferred shares a material misstatement or miscalculation comes to light which resulted in an overpayment under the annual bonus plan or if evidence comes to light of material misconduct by an individual or if evidence emerges of a material health and safety breach.
Stock Codesite OUR GOVERNANCE Purpose and link to strategy Operation Maximum opportunity Performance conditions and provisions for recovery of sums paid LongTerm Incentive Plan
To link reward to key strategic and business targets for the longer term and to align Executive Directors interests with shareholders interests.
Awards are usually granted annually under the LTIP to selected senior executives.
Individual award levels and performance conditions on which vesting will be dependent are reviewed annually by the
Awards may be granted as conditional awards of shares nilcost options or if appropriate as cashsettled equivalents.
Awards normally vest or become exercisable at the end of a period of at least three years following grant although may vest early on leaving employment or on a change of control see later sections.
The Committee has flexibility at its discretion to add an additional holding period after a performance period before awards vest.
An additional payment in the form of cash or shares may be made in respect of shares which vest under LTIP awards to reflect the value of dividends which would have been paid on those shares during the vesting period this payment may assume that dividends had been reinvested in Company shares on a cumulative basis.
The maximum annual award permitted under the LTIP is shares with a market value as determined by the Committee of 200% of salary.
Each year the Committee determines the actual award level for individual senior executives within this limit.
All LTIP awards granted to Executive Directors must be subject to a performance condition.
Vesting of Executive Directors LTIP awards would be dependent on measures which could include Group earnings return on capital employed and total shareholder return with the precise measures and weighting of the measures determined by the Committee ahead of each award.
Performance will usually be measured over a performance period of at least three years.
For achieving a threshold level of performance against a performance measure no more than 25% of the portion of the LTIP award determined by that measure will vest.
Vesting then increases on a sliding scale to 100% for achieving a maximum performance target.
LTIP awards will be subject to withholding or recovery at the Committees discretion in exceptional circumstances where before the later of the vesting of an award and the second anniversary of the end of the performance period a material misstatement or miscalculation comes to light or if evidence comes to light of material misconduct by an individual or if evidence emerges of a material health and safety breach.
Sharesave Plan To create staff alignment with the Group and promote a sense of ownership.
UK taxapproved monthly savings scheme facilitating the purchase of shares through share options at a discounted exercise price by all eligible UK employees.
Executive Directors are eligible to participate on the same basis as other UK employees.
Monthly savings limit of 500 or such other limit as may be approved from time to time by HMRC under all savings contracts held by an individual.
The Sharesave Plan is structured in accordance with HMRC requirements so has no performance conditions but requires participants to make regular contributions into a savings contract.
Malus and clawback provisions do not apply.
Share Ownership
To create alignment between the longterm interests of Executive Directors and shareholders.
Executive Directors have been required to build and maintain a shareholding as a percentage of salary in the form of shares in the Company since Admission.
Executive Directors are expected to achieve the shareholding requirement within five years of an individual becoming subject to the requirement.
Since Admission Executive Directors have been required to build a shareholding equal to 100% of salary.
Following a review by the Committee in 2017 this will be increased to 200% of salary with effect from 2018.
Not applicable.
Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Polypipe Group plc
POLICY Notes to table The Committee may amend or substitute any performance conditions if one or more events occur which cause it to determine that an amended or substituted performance condition would be more appropriate provided that any such amended or substituted performance condition would not be materially less difficult to satisfy than the original condition in its opinion.
The Committee may also adjust the calculation of performance targets and vesting outcomes for instance for material acquisitions disposals or investments and events not foreseen at the time the targets were set to ensure they remain a fair reflection of performance over the relevant period.
In the event that the Committee was to make an adjustment of this sort a full explanation would be provided in the next Directors
Remuneration Report.
Performance measures  annual bonus.
The annual bonus measures are reviewed annually and chosen to focus executive rewards on delivery of key financial targets for the forthcoming year as well as key strategic or operational goals relevant to an individual.
Specific targets for bonus measures are set at the start of each year by the Committee based on a range of relevant reference points including for Group financial targets the Groups business plan and are designed to be appropriately stretching.
The Committee may a in the event of a variation of the Companys share capital demerger special dividend or dividend in specie or any other corporate event which it reasonably determines justifies such an adjustment adjust and b amend the terms of awards granted under the share schemes referred to above in accordance with the rules of the relevant plans.
Share awards may be settled by the issue of new shares or by the transfer of existing shares.
In line with prevailing best practice at the time this Remuneration Policy is approved any issuance of new shares is limited to 5% of share capital over a rolling tenyear period in relation to discretionary employee share schemes and 10% of share capital over a rolling tenyear period in relation to all employee share schemes.
Performance measures  LTIP .
The LTIP performance measures will be chosen to provide alignment with our longerterm strategy of growing the business in a sustainable manner that will be in the best interests of shareholders and other key stakeholders in the Company.
Use of earnings and return on capital employed measures would reward management for delivery of key financial measures of Company success that should result in sustainable value creation.
Use of a total shareholder return measure would align managements interests with the interests of our shareholders.
Targets are considered ahead of each grant of LTIP awards by the Committee taking into account relevant external and internal reference points and are designed to be appropriately stretching.
The Committee reserves the right to make any remuneration payments andor payments for loss of office including exercising any discretions available to it in connection with such payments notwithstanding that they are not in line with the policy set out above where the terms of the payment were agreed i before the 2015 AGM the date the Companys first shareholderapproved Directors Remuneration Policy came into effect ii before the policy set out above came into effect provided that the terms of the payment were consistent with the shareholder approved Remuneration Policy in force at the time they were agreed or iii at a time when the relevant individual was not a Director of the Company and in the opinion of the Committee the payment was not in consideration for the individual becoming a Director of the Company.
For these purposes payments includes the Committee satisfying awards of variable remuneration and in relation to an award over shares the terms of the payment are agreed at the time the award is granted.
The Committee may make minor amendments to the Remuneration Policy for regulatory exchange control tax or administrative purposes or to take account of a change in legislation without obtaining shareholder approval for that amendment.
Stock Codesite OUR GOVERNANCE NONEXECUTIVE DIRECTORS Purpose and link to strategy Operation Maximum opportunity NonExecutive Director NED fees To appropriately recognise responsibilities skills and experience by ensuring fees are market competitive.
NED fees comprise payment of an annual basic fee and additional fees for further Board responsibilities such as Senior Independent Director Chair of Audit Committee Chair of Remuneration Committee The Chairman of the Board receives an allinclusive fee.
No NED participates in the Groups incentive arrangements or pension plan or receives any other benefits other than where travel to the Companys registered office is recognised as a taxable benefit in which case a NED may receive the grossed up costs of travel as a benefit.
NonExecutive Directors are entitled to reimbursement of reasonable expenses.
Fees are reviewed annually.
NEDs also have the benefit of a qualifying third party indemnity from the Company and Directors and Officers liability insurance.
Fees are set at an appropriate level that is market competitive and reflective of the responsibilities and time commitment associated with specific roles.
No absolute maximum has been set for individual NED fees.
Current fee levels are set out in the Annual Report on Remuneration section of this Remuneration Report.
The Companys Articles of Association provide that the total aggregate fees paid to the Chairman and NEDs will not exceed 600000 per annum.
ILLUSTRATIONS OF APPLICATION OF REMUNERATION POLICY The Implementation of Remuneration Policy in 2018 section of the Annual Report on Remuneration details how the Committee intends to implement the Remuneration Policy during 2018.
The charts below illustrate in three assumed performance scenarios the total value of the remuneration package potentially receivable by Martin Payne Glen Sabin and Paul James in relation to 2018.
This comprises salary and benefits plus an annual bonus of up to a maximum of 125% of salary for Martin Payne and 100% of salary for Glen Sabin and Paul James and an LTIP award of 125% of salary for Martin Payne and 100% of salary for Glen Sabin and Paul James.
The charts are for illustrative purposes only and actual outcomes may differ from that shown.
LTIP awards have been shown at face value with no share price growth or discount rate assumptions.
Allemployee share plans have been excluded.
The totals shown in the charts relate to the potential value receivable by the current Executive Directors in relation to 2018.
On target Maximum 48% 100% 26% 26% 32% 34% 34% Minimum Maximum 37% 32% 31% On target 54% 23% 23%
100%
37% 32% 31%
100% On target 54% 23% 23% Martin Payne Glen Sabin Paul James Fixed Pay Annual Bonus LongTerm Incentive Plan Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Polypipe Group plc
POLICY Assumed performance Assumptions used All performance scenarios Fixed pay Consists of total fixed pay including base salary benefits and pension Base salary  salary effective as at 1 January 2018 Benefits  the value of benefits received in 2017 have been included.
For Paul James this has been calculated as an average of the Executive Directors benefits received in 2017.
Pension  15% of salary Minimum performance Variable pay No payout under the annual bonus No vesting under the LTIP Performance in line with expectations Variable pay 50% of the maximum payout under the annual bonus 50% vesting under the LTIP Maximum performance Variable pay 100% of the maximum payout under the annual bonus 100% vesting under the LTIP APPROACH TO RECRUITMENT
Principles
In determining remuneration arrangements for new appointments to the Board including internal promotions the Committee will apply the following principles The Committee will take into consideration all relevant factors including the experience of the individual market data and existing arrangements for other Executive Directors with a view that any arrangements should be in the best interests of both the Company and our shareholders without paying more than is necessary.
Typically the new appointment will have or be transitioned onto the same remuneration structure as the other Executive Directors in line with the Remuneration Policy.
Upon appointment the Committee may consider it appropriate to offer additional remuneration arrangements in order to secure the appointment.
In particular the Committee may consider it appropriate to buy out terms or remuneration arrangements forfeited on leaving a previous employer discussed below.
The Committee may provide costs and support if the recruitment requires relocation of the individual.
Where an Executive Director is an internal promotion the normal policy of the Company is that any legacy arrangements would be honoured in line with the original terms and conditions.
Similarly if an Executive Director is appointed following the Companys acquisition of or merger with another company legacy terms and conditions would be honoured.
Maximum level of variable pay The maximum level of variable remuneration which may be granted to new Executive Directors in respect of recruitment shall be limited to the maximum permitted under the Remuneration Policy namely 325% of their annual salary.
This limit excludes any payments or awards that may be made to buy out the Executive Director for terms awards or other compensation forfeited from their previous employer discussed below.
Buyouts
To facilitate recruitment the Committee may make a oneoff award to buy out compensation arrangements forfeited on leaving a previous employer.
In doing so the Committee will take account of all relevant factors including any performance conditions attached to incentive awards the likelihood of those conditions being met the proportion of the vestingperformance period remaining and the form of the award e. cash or shares.
The overriding principle will be that any buyout award should be of comparable commercial value to the compensation which has been forfeited.
However such buyout awards would only be considered where there is a strong commercial rationale to do so.
Components and approach The remuneration package offered to new appointments may include any element within the Remuneration Policy or any other element which the Committee considers is appropriate given the particular circumstances with due regard to the best interests of shareholders subject to the limits on variable pay set out above.
In considering which elements to include and in determining the approach for all relevant elements the Committee will take into account a number of different factors including but not limited to market practice existing arrangements for other Executive Directors and internal relativities.
If appropriate different measures and targets may be applied to a new appointees annual bonus in their year of joining.
The Committee would seek to structure buyout and variable pay awards on recruitment to be in line with the Companys remuneration framework so far as practical but if necessary the Committee may also grant such awards outside of that framework as permitted under Listing Rule 9.4.2 subject to the limits on variable pay set out above.
Stock Codesite OUR GOVERNANCE The exact terms of any such awards e. the specific commercial circumstances.
Recruitment of NonExecutive
In the event of the appointment of a new NonExecutive Director remuneration arrangements will normally be in line with the Remuneration Policy for NonExecutive Directors.
However the Committee or the Board as appropriate may include any element within the Remuneration Policy or any other element which the Committee considers is appropriate given the particular circumstances with due regard to the best interests of shareholders.
In particular if the Chairman or a NonExecutive Director takes on an executive function on a shortterm basis they would be able to receive any of the standard elements of Executive Director pay.
SERVICE CONTRACTS Key terms of the current Executive Directors service agreements and NonExecutive Directors letters of appointment are summarised in the table below.
It is envisaged that any future appointments would have equivalent contractual arrangements unless otherwise stated in this Report.
Provision Policy Notice period Executive Directors  12 months notice by either the Company or the Executive Director.
NonExecutive Directors  at the Companys discretion NonExecutive Directors may have a notice period of up to three months.
The NonExecutive Directors do not have a notice period in their letters of appointment.
Termination payment Following the serving of notice by either party the Company may terminate employment of an Executive Director with immediate effect by paying a sum equal to salary.
Executive
Directors are not contractually entitled to any bonus for the period of service in the year in which their employment ends.
NonExecutive Directors are only entitled to receive any fee accruing in respect of the period up to termination.
Expiry date Executive Directors have rolling 12 month notice periods so have no fixed expiry date.
NonExecutive Directors letters of appointment have no fixed expiry date.
In accordance with the Code each Director will retire annually and put themselves forward for reelection at each AGM of the
All Executive Directors service agreements and NonExecutive Directors letters of appointment are available for inspection at the Companys registered office at Broomhouse Lane Edlington Doncaster South Yorkshire DN12 1ES.
POLICY ON PAYMENT FOR LOSS OF OFFICE In relation to payments under non contractual incentive schemes the Committee would take the following factors into account The Committee may determine that the Executive Director is eligible to receive a bonus in respect of the financial year in which they cease employment.
This bonus would usually be time apportioned and may be settled wholly in cash.
In determining the level of bonus to be paid the Committee may at its discretion take into account performance up to the date of cessation or over the financial year as a whole based on appropriate performance measures as determined by the Committee.
The treatment of outstanding share awards is governed by the relevant share plan rules as summarised below.
Deferred Share Bonus Plan On cessation of employment unvested shares will vest in full unless the Committee determines otherwise.
On a change of control unvested shares will vest in full.
If other corporate events occur such as a demerger delisting special dividend voluntary windingup or other event which in the opinion of the Committee may affect the current or future value of shares the Committee will determine whether unvested shares should vest.
Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Polypipe Group plc
POLICY LTIP On cessation of employment unvested awards will lapse unless cessation is as a result of death ill health injury disability transfer of employing company or business to which an individuals employment relates out of the Group or any other scenario in which the Committee determines at its discretion that good leaver treatment is appropriate other than circumstances justifying summary dismissal.
In these scenarios unvested awards will usually continue until the normal vesting date unless the Committee determines that the award should vest earlier and will vest to an extent that takes into account the performance condition assessed at the date of vesting and unless the Committee determines otherwise to an extent that takes into account the period of time between grant of the award and cessation of employment.
On a change of control unvested LTIP awards will vest immediately to an extent that takes into account the performance condition assessed at the change of control and unless the Committee determines otherwise to an extent that takes into account the period of time between grant of the award and the change of control.
If other corporate events occur such as a demerger delisting special dividend voluntary windingup or other event which in the opinion of the Committee may affect the current or future value of shares the Committee will determine whether unvested LTIP awards should vest.
If they do vest they will vest immediately to an extent that takes into account the performance condition assessed at the date of the event and unless the Committee determines otherwise to an extent that takes into account the period of time between grant of the award and the date of the event.
Sharesave Plan Options become exercisable immediately on death ceasing employment due to injury disability retirement redundancy sale of the employing company or business to which an individuals employment relates out of the Group or on a change of controlvoluntary winding up of the Company.
The Committee reserves the right to make any other payments in connection with a Directors cessation of office or employment where the payments are made in good faith in discharge of an existing legal obligation or by way of damages for breach of such an obligation or by way of a compromise or settlement of any claim arising in connection with the cessation of a Directors office or employment.
Any such payments may include but are not limited to paying any fees for outplacement assistance andor the Directors legal and or professional advice fees in connection with hisher cessation of office or employment.
CONSIDERATION OF EMPLOYMENT CONDITIONS ELSEWHERE IN THE GROUP The Committee does not formally consult with employees when determining Executive Director pay.
However the Committee is kept informed of general management decisions made in relation to employee pay and is conscious of the importance of ensuring that its pay decisions for Executive Directors are regarded as fair and reasonable within the business.
As outlined in the Remuneration Policy table pay and conditions in the Group are one of the specific considerations taken into account when the Committee is considering changes in salaries for the Executive
DIFFERENCES IN POLICY FROM BROADER EMPLOYEE
A greater proportion of Executive Directors potential wealth is at risk either through their existing shareholding or through LTIP awards than for our employees generally and a greater proportion determined by performance than for our employees generally.
However common principles underlie the pay policy throughout the Company including for the Executive Directors.
In particular we place great emphasis throughout the Company on reward being linked to performance either Group performance or performance of an individuals business unit and on encouraging share ownership through participation in the LTIP or an all employee share scheme.
CONSIDERATION OF SHAREHOLDERS VIEWS The Company carried out a consultation process with its top 20 shareholders and the shareholder advisory bodies in 2017 setting out the key elements of the draft Remuneration Policy and the rationale for the changes to the Policy approved by shareholders at the 2015
The Committee Chair offered to meet with any shareholders who wished to discuss the proposals in more detail.
The feedback received from those that responded was generally supportive.
Stock Codesite OUR GOVERNANCE UNAUDITED INFORMATION Implementation of Remuneration Policy in 2018 This section provides an overview of how the Committee is proposing to implement the Remuneration Policy in 2018 for the Executive Directors.
Base annual salary As described in the Annual Statement from the Chair of the Remuneration Committee an annual salary review has been carried out by the Committee.
The Committee approved a 2.0% increase in Executive Director salaries effective from 1 January 2018.
This increase is consistent with the average annual salary increase awarded to the Companys UK workforce for 2018.
Salary
1 January
2 October % increase Martin Payne CEO 438600 430000 2.0 Glen Sabin COO 280500 275000 2.0 Paul James CFO 285000 na na Date of appointment to current role.
Appointed to the Board on 5 March 2018.
Pension
In 2018 the Executive Directors will receive a Company contribution worth 15% of annual salary to the Group Pension Plan a personal pension scheme or as a cash allowance.
This has been reduced from 20% the level of contribution under the previous Remuneration Policy.
Other benefits In 2018 the Executive Directors will receive a standard package of other benefits consistent with those received in 2017 other than as disclosed below in relation to the relocation allowance for Paul James.
Annual bonus The annual bonus plan for 2018 will be broadly consistent with the bonus plan operated in 2017.
Key features of the plan for 2018 are There will be a maximum bonus opportunity of 125% of annual salary for Martin Payne and 100% of annual salary for Glen Sabin and Paul James prorated from date of joining.
25% of any bonus earned will be deferred into shares under the Deferred Share Bonus Plan DSBP.
Half of these shares will vest two years post grant and the remaining half three years post grant.
In the event that a material misstatement or miscalculation subsequently comes to light which resulted in an overpayment under the annual bonus plan or if evidence comes to light of material misconduct by an individual or if evidence emerges of a material health and safety breach then the Committee has the flexibility to withhold the value of shares granted under the DSBP andor to require repayment of an appropriate portion of the annual bonus cash award in respect of the relevant bonus year.
The annual bonus for 2018 for Executive Directors will be determined as detailed below Performance measure Percentage of maximum bonus opportunity CEO CFO COO Group Underlying Operating Profit 70% 70% 70% Working Capital 20% 20% 20% Individual objectives 10% 10% 10% The targets for these performance measures in relation to the 2018 financial year are deemed to be commercially sensitive.
However retrospective disclosure of the targets and performance against them will be provided in next years Directors Remuneration Report to the extent that they do not remain commercially sensitive at that time.
Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Polypipe Group plc ANNUAL REPORT ON REMUNERATION LTIP The Executive Directors will receive an award under the LTIP during 2018.
Key terms of this award will be Martin Payne will receive an award over shares worth 125% of annual salary at grant and Glen Sabin and Paul James will receive an award over shares worth 100% of annual salary at grant.
Awards will become exercisable three years after grant.
In the event that a material misstatement or miscalculation subsequently comes to light which results in too high a level of vesting under the LTIP or if evidence comes to light of material misconduct by an individual or if evidence emerges of a material health and safety breach then the Committee has the flexibility to withhold or recover the value of shares granted under the LTIP .
Awards will be subject to a combination of underlying diluted EPS and relative TSR performance measures assessed over a threeyear period as detailed below Underlying diluted EPS performance condition 75% of award TSR performance condition 25% of award Threeyear cumulative underlying diluted EPS % of overall award vesting Ranking in TSR comparator group % of overall award vesting Below threshold 89.0 pence per share 0% Below median 0% Threshold 89.0 pence per share 18.75% Median 6.25% Maximum 101.7 pence per share 75% Upper quartile 25% Threshold threeyear cumulative underlying diluted EPS will be calculated using a 5% per annum growth on 2017 underlying diluted
Maximum threeyear cumulative underlying diluted EPS will be calculated using a 12% per annum growth on 2017 underlying diluted
Vesting for performance between Threshold and Maximum will be calculated pro rata on a straightline basis.
Comparator group comprises companies in the FTSE 250 Index that are classified as Industrials by the Industry Classification Benchmark.
Vesting for performance between Median and Upper quartile will be calculated pro rata on a straightline basis.
Sharesave Plan Invitations to UK employees including Executive Directors to participate in the Sharesave Plan were issued in 2014 2016 and 2017.
The Board is proposing to issue invitations to join the Plan on an annual basis and all eligible UK employees will therefore be invited to join the Plan in 2018.
New CFOs pay arrangements Paul James commenced employment with the Company on 5 March 2018 and was appointed to the Board on the same date.
His pay arrangements upon appointment were in line with the updated Remuneration Policy and comprise Annual salary of 285000.
Pension contribution worth 15% of annual salary plus a standard benefits package.
Eligibility to participate in the annual bonus plan with a maximum annual bonus opportunity of 100% of annual salary time prorated from date of appointment.
Annual LTIP awards.
The current policy is that Executive Directors other than the CEO will receive an annual LTIP award of shares worth 100% of annual salary.
The LTIP award to be granted in 2018 will be time prorated to reflect the fact that he will be employed for only part of the threeyear period to which the award will relate.
12month notice period.
Relocation package comprising reimbursement of costs of up to 75000 for relocation expenses recoverable on a sliding scale if employment lasts less than three years.
Costs will cover temporary accommodation costs for a maximum of nine months from 5 March 2018 removal costs and fees associated with the purchase of a local residence including stamp duty.
In addition certain buyout arrangements set out on page 66 have been agreed to partially compensate Paul James for bonus and longterm incentive awards that were forfeited when he left his previous employer Dixons Carphone plc.
The buyout arrangements have been structured in accordance with the principles set out in the approved Remuneration Policy in particular that they should be of comparable commercial value to the incentives that have been forfeited.
These awards will be granted after the announcement of the Groups preliminary results on 20 March 2018.
Stock Codesite OUR GOVERNANCE Maximum potential value of buyout award Form of buyout award
Relates to the annual bonus Paul James would have received from his previous employer in relation to the year of his departure year ending 30 April 2018 if he had not joined the Company.
216545 To provide alignment with shareholders the buyout award will be granted wholly in the form of Company shares.
These shares will vest on the dates set out below subject to continued employment but no further performance conditions as the number of shares has been calculated based on an assessment of the anticipated performance outturn at Dixons Carphone plc.
The maximum number of shares comprised in the award will be announced via a Regulatory Information Service when the award is granted and will be reduced to reflect 1 the extent to which the bonus is payable and 2 any amount received by Paul James from Dixons Carphone plc.
Proportion of award Date of Vesting 50% 5 March 2020 50% 5 March 2021
Relates to a longterm share award due to vest in June 2020 that was forfeited by Paul James on joining the
121331 The buyout award will vest on the same date that the original award would have vested subject to continued employment but no further performance conditions.
The number of shares comprised in the award will be announced via a Regulatory Information Service when the award is granted.
Proportion of award Date of Vesting 100% 30 June 2020 All of these nonpensionable share awards were granted under a deed in accordance with Listing Rule 9.4.2R 2 of the Listing Rules in order to facilitate the recruitment of Paul James as permitted under the approved Remuneration Policy and set out in the Approach to Recruitment Remuneration section on page 61.
Other significant terms of these awards are as follows Awards will be granted as nil cost options exercisable from their respective vesting dates until the tenth anniversary of grant.
At its discretion the Committee may permit settlement in cash.
The number of shares will be calculated using the average closing share price for the three dealing days prior to grant.
The number of shares under the forfeited bonus award will be increased to reflect dividends with a record date between the date Paul James commenced employment with the Company and the vesting date.
The value of the dividends will be determined as if they had been reinvested into Company shares on such terms as the Committee will determine.
In such circumstances as the Committee determines appropriate including if a material misstatement of Dixons Carphone plcs audited financial results in relation to which a buyout award is being granted subsequently comes to light or if evidence comes to light of material misconduct by the individual then the Committee has the flexibility to withhold the buyout awards.
Awards will be satisfied by existing shares other than treasury shares.
Ordinarily unvested buyout awards would lapse on cessation of employment.
However if Paul James ceases to hold office or employment in good leaver circumstances including death ill health injury or disability or any other reason at the Committees discretion except in circumstances justifying summary dismissal unvested awards would become exercisable on a time prorated basis unless the Committee determines otherwise either at the original vesting date or the date of cessation of employment at the Committees discretion.
In the event of a change of control other than an internal reorganisation of the Polypipe Group unvested awards would become exercisable on a time prorated basis unless the Committee determines otherwise.
The Committee may allow some or all of the award to vest or adjust the number of shares subject to the award in the event of demerger delisting special dividend or other event which in their opinion would affect the current or future value of the award.
The number of shares subject to the award may also be adjusted in the event of any variation of share capital.
No further awards will be made under this arrangement and no amendments will be made to the advantage of Paul James in relation to i the basis for determining his entitlement to and the terms of shares to be provided under the award and ii any adjustment that may be made for any variation of share capital or special dividend without prior shareholder approval in general meeting except for minor amendments to benefit the administration of the award to take account of a change in legislation or to obtain or maintain favourable tax exchange control or regulatory treatment.
The award is personal to Paul James and cannot be transferred assigned or otherwise disposed of by him other than to his personal representative following his death.
5 March 2021 Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Polypipe Group plc ANNUAL REPORT ON REMUNERATION NonExecutive Director remuneration During the year NonExecutive Director fees were reviewed following which it was agreed to increase the NonExecutive Directors base fee by 2.0% and the Chairmans fee by 2.0%.
The table below shows the fee structure for NonExecutive Directors for 2018.
NonExecutive Director fees are determined by the full Board except for the fee for the Chairman of the Board which is determined by the Committee.
Chairman of the Board allinclusive fee 142800 Basic NonExecutive Director fee 45900 Senior Independent Director additional fee 10000 Chair of Audit Committee additional fee 8000 Chair of Remuneration Committee additional fee 8000 AUDITED INFORMATION The information provided in this section of the Remuneration Report up until the Unaudited information heading on page 71 is subject to audit.
SINGLE TOTAL FIGURE OF REMUNERATION The following table sets out the total remuneration for Executive Directors and NonExecutive Directors for 2017 with comparative figures for 2016.
2017 2016 All figures shown in 000
Benefits
Annual bonus
Total
Salary and fees
Annual bonus
Other
Total
Executive Directors David Hall Martin Payne Glen Sabin NonExecutive Directors Ron Marsh 140    140 130     130 Paul Dean 63    63 60     60 Moni Mannings 53    53 50     50 Mark Hammond 45    45 42     42 Notes to the table  methodology Salary and fees  Executive Director salaries were increased by 2.5% effective 1 January 2017 consistent with the average increases awarded to the Companys UK workforce.
Martin Paynes salary subsequently increased to 430000 upon appointment as Chief Executive Officer in October 2017.
Glen Sabins annual salary was set at 275000 per annum upon appointment to the Board as Chief Operating Officer in October 2017.
In 2017 the NonExecutive Director base fee was increased by 3000 and the Chairmans fee increased by 10000.
Benefits  this represents the taxable value of all benefits.
Executive Directors receive benefits including car allowance private family medical insurance and life assurance of four times annual salary.
Annual bonus  the bonus is paid 75% in cash and 25% deferred into shares under the DSBP .
Further details on the 2017 annual bonus are set out on page 68.
Pension  pension provision during 2016 and 2017 was 20% of annual salary for David Hall and Martin Payne.
On appointment as CEO the pension provision for Martin Payne was reduced to 15%.
On appointment as COO the pension provision for Glen Sabin was set at 15%.
Other  for 2016 this column comprises the value of shares awarded to Martin Payne in partial compensation for bonus and longterm incentive awards forfeited when he left his previous employer Norcros plc as well as the value of the grant of options to Martin Payne under the Sharesave Plan during 2016.
Further details are set out in the Annual Report on Remuneration for the year ended 31 December 2016.
David Hall retired from the Company on 2 October 2017 and Martin Payne formerly CFO was appointed CEO on 2 October 2017.
Glen Sabin was appointed to the Board as COO on 2 October 2017.
Total remuneration paid to Directors in respect of 2017 is 1784000 2016 2151000 inclusive of 252000 paid to Peter Shepherd who retired during the year.
Stock Codesite OUR GOVERNANCE Annual bonus The maximum annual bonus opportunity for the Executive Directors in 2017 was as follows 125% of annual salary for David Hall prorated to his retirement date of 2 October 2017.
100% of annual salary for Martin Payne for the period 1 January to 1 October 2017 and 125% of annual salary for the period from 2 October 2017 when he was appointed CEO to 31 December 2017.
100% of annual salary for Glen Sabin for the period from 2 October 2017 when he was appointed to the Board to 31 December 2017.
For Martin Payne and Glen Sabin 75% of the bonus earned will be paid in cash and 25% will be deferred into shares under the DSBP .
Half of these shares will vest two years post grant and half after three years post grant.
For David Hall the bonus will be paid wholly in cash.
Malus and clawback provisions apply to the bonuses of all of the aforementioned Directors.
Performance measures and targets applying to the 2017 annual bonus are set out below
Proportion of bonus determined by measure
Target performance
Actual performance % of maximum bonus payable
Underlying
Operating
Profit including discontinued operations 70% 69.3m 17.5% of total bonus payable 35% of total bonus payable 70% of total bonus payable 74.0m 38.5%
Capital
20% Net working capital position assessed at the end of each month relative to target.
Maximum performance requires the monthly target to be met at the end of all 12 months.
Target achieved in 11 of 12 months 18.3%
10% David Hall objectives linked to operational performance and succession planning.
Fully achieved 10.0% Martin Payne objectives linked to satisfactory handover from previous CEO and continuing effective leadership of the Company.
Objectives as CFO related to the establishment of an inhouse Company Secretarial function and a major upgrade to the IT systems.
Fully achieved 10.0% Glen Sabin objectives linked to the health and safety performance of the Group.
Partially achieved 9.0% Total bonus payable % of maximum Total bonus payable 000 and % of annual salary David Hall 66.8% 287 83.5% of 2017 salary earned in period 1 January  2 October 2017 Martin Payne 66.8% 236 72.3% of salary earned as CFO from 1 January to 2 October 2017 and CEO from 2 October 2017 to 31 December 2017 Glen Sabin 65.8% 45 65.8% of salary earned in period 2 October  31 December 2017 Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Polypipe Group plc ANNUAL REPORT ON REMUNERATION SCHEME INTERESTS AWARDED DURING THE FINANCIAL YEAR LTIP awards An award was granted under the LTIP to selected senior executives including the Executive Directors in May 2017.
This award is subject to the performance conditions described below and will become exercisable in May 2020.
Type of award Date of grant
Face value
End of performance period David Hall Nil cost option 2 May 2017 143383 572098 25% of award EPS element December 2019 Martin Payne 2 May 2017 73214 292124 Glen Sabin 2 May 2017 30056 119923 TSR element December 2019 The maximum number of shares that could be awarded has been calculated using the share price of 3.99 average closing share price for 2628 April 2017 and is stated before the impact of reinvestment of the dividends paid since grant.
Awards granted to David Hall who retired on 2 October 2017 will be treated in accordance with the LTIP rules and will therefore vest subject to the achievement of the relevant performance condition on the vesting date and will be time prorated.
The award granted to Glen Sabin was made prior to his appointment to the Board and was therefore at a lower face value of salary as this was commensurate with the role he held at the date of grant.
Vesting of the awards is subject to satisfaction of the following performance conditions measured over a threeyear performance period.
Vesting is calculated on a straightline basis.
Underlying diluted EPS performance condition 75% of award TSR performance condition 25% of award Threeyear cumulative underlying diluted EPS % of overall award vesting Ranking in TSR comparator group % of overall award vesting Below threshold 82.8 pence per share 0% Below median 0% Threshold 82.8 pence per share 18.75% Median 6.25% Maximum 94.5 pence per share 75% Upper quartile 25% Threshold threeyear cumulative underlying diluted EPS is calculated using a 5% per annum growth on 2016 underlying diluted EPS.
Maximum threeyear cumulative underlying diluted EPS is calculated using a 12% per annum growth on 2016 underlying diluted EPS.
Vesting for performance between Threshold and Maximum will be calculated pro rata on a straightline basis.
Comparator group comprises companies in the FTSE 250 Index that are classified as Industrials by the Industry Classification Benchmark.
TSR performance will be measured over the threeyear period to 31 December 2019.
Vesting for performance between Median and Upper quartile will be calculated pro rata on a straightline basis.
Deferred Share Bonus Plan awards On 25 April 2017 the Executive Directors received an award of shares under the Deferred Share Bonus Plan relating to the 2016 annual bonus.
The value of these shares was included in the annual bonus figure in the 2016 single total figure of remuneration.
No further performance conditions apply to these shares.
Type of award
Face value Vesting date David Hall Deferred shares 23924 96901 50% vests in each of April 2019 and April 2020 Martin Payne Deferred shares 8241 33380 The maximum number of shares awarded was calculated using the average closing share price for the three dealing days prior to grant of 4.05 per share.
Awards granted to David Hall who retired on 2 October 2017 vested in full on retirement and were paid in cash.
Stock Codesite OUR GOVERNANCE Sharesave Plan Glen Sabin was granted options on 7 September 2017 under the Sharesave Plan on the same terms as other UK employees.
On 1 November 2017 the options granted under the Sharesave Plan in 2014 matured and Glen Sabin exercised his options on 1 November 2017.
Details of the Executive Directors SAYE options are set out below.
No performance conditions apply to these options.
Type of award Number of shares under option year of grant Number of shares exercised Option price Options exercisable from Market price on date of exercise Notional gain on exercise Martin Payne Share Option 8144   2.21 November 2019 Glen Sabin Share Option 9045  9045 1.99 November 2017 4.20 20003 Glen Sabin Share Option 2322   3.10 November 2020 The option price represents a 20% discount to the average closing price of a share on the three dealing days prior to the relevant invitation date.
The notional gain is the difference between the option price and the market price of the shares on the date of exercise.
PAYMENTS TO PAST DIRECTORS There were no payments to past Directors during 2017 that have not already been fully disclosed in previous Directors
Remuneration Reports.
PAYMENTS FOR LOSS OF OFFICE David Hall the former CEO retired from the Company on 2 October 2017.
He received salary pension and benefits up until his retirement date as outlined in the single total figure of remuneration table on page 67 and received no subsequent loss of office payments.
The Committee determined that David Hall should be entitled to receive a time prorated bonus for 2017 based on the Companys fullyear performance again as outlined in the single total figure of remuneration table on page 67.
David Halls outstanding share incentives were treated in accordance with the rules of the applicable plans DSBP  David Hall was granted 42801 ordinary shares in April 2015 31174 ordinary shares in April 2016 and 23924 ordinary shares in April 2017 representing the 25% retained value of his 2014 2015 and 2016 annual bonus awards.
The
Committee determined that he should be treated as a good leaver in respect of these awards which therefore vested on 2 October 2017.
Under the rules of the DSBP he took up the option to receive a cash amount in substitution for the right to receive these shares.
LTIP  David Hall was granted 194340 ordinary shares in May 2016 and 143383 ordinary shares in May 2017.
Under the rules of the LTIP  he will be deemed to be a good leaver and will therefore be entitled to exercise the awards on their normal vesting dates subject to achievement of the relevant performance targets and time prorated to reflect the period of time that has elapsed between the date of grant of the relevant award and the date of his retirement.
Sharesave Plan  David Halls outstanding options held under the allemployee Sharesave Plan were subject to the rules of the Sharesave Plan and therefore exercisable within six months of his retirement date.
STATEMENT OF DIRECTORS SHAREHOLDING AND SHARE INTERESTS Upon Admission the Committee introduced a shareholding requirement of 100% of annual salary for the Executive Directors.
Following a review of this requirement in 2017 the Committee agreed that this should be increased to 200% of salary in line with current market practice.
Executive Directors are expected to achieve the shareholding requirement within five years of an individual becoming subject to the requirement.
The Committee reviews ongoing individual performance against the shareholding requirement at the end of each financial year.
Martin Payne commenced employment with the Company during 2016 and his salary was increased in October 2017 when he became CEO and he is continuing to build up his shareholding on this basis in line with the aforementioned five year timescale.
Glen Sabin met this requirement as at 31 December 2017.
Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Polypipe Group plc ANNUAL REPORT ON REMUNERATION The number of shares currently held by Directors is set out in the table below Number of shares at 31 December 2017 Director Shares owned outright Interests in share incentive schemes subject to performance conditions Interests in share incentive schemes awarded without performance conditions
DSBP
Recruitment awards
Plan
Martin Payne 69726 63% of salary 150957 8241 20898 8144 Glen Sabin 892932 1276% of salary 70794   2322 Ron Marsh 175000 Paul Dean 5000 Moni Mannings Mark Hammond 15000 David Hall 5873740 337723 Notes to the table This relates to shares awarded under the LTIP in May 2016 and May 2017.
This relates to shares awarded under the DSBP in April 2017 in relation to the 2016 annual bonus.
This relates to shares awarded to Martin Payne in partial compensation for bonus and longterm incentive awards forfeited when he left his previous employer.
Full details are set out on pages 55 to 57 of the 2016 Annual Report on Remuneration.
A further 24352 shares including 668 dividend shares vested during 2017 and are included net of shares sold to satisfy the related personal tax liability in the Shares owned outright column.
This relates to shares awarded under the Sharesave Plan in September 2016 Martin Payne and September 2017 Glen Sabin For the purposes of determining the value of Executive Director shareholdings the individuals current annual salary and the share price as at 31 December 2017 has been used 3.932 per share.
Shareholding as at date of cessation of employment on 2 October 2017.
Between 31 December 2017 and the date of this report there were no changes in the shareholdings of current Directors outlined in the above table.
UNAUDITED INFORMATION The information provided in this section of the Directors Remuneration Report is not subject to audit.
PERFORMANCE GRAPH AND CEO REMUNERATION TABLE The chart below compares the Total Shareholder Return performance of the Company over the period from Admission to 31 December 2017 to the performance of the FTSE 250 Index.
This index has been chosen because it is a recognised equity market index of which the Company is a member.
The base point in the chart for the Company equates to the Offer Price of 2.45 per share.
Value of 100 invested at the Offer Price on the date of Admission FTSE 250 Index FTSE 250 Index
16 April 2014 31 December 31 December 31 December 31 December Polypipe Group Stock Codesite OUR GOVERNANCE The table below summarises the CEO single figure for total remuneration annual bonus payouts and longterm incentive vesting levels as a percentage of maximum opportunity over this period.
CEO single figure of remuneration 00tel717 218 Annual bonus payout as a % of maximum opportunity 88.7% 68.2% 69.4% 66.8% 66.8% LTIP vesting outturn as a % of maximum opportunity na no award vested in 2014 na no award vested in 2015 na no award vested in 2016 na no award vested in 2017 na no award vested in 2017 1 This reflects the remuneration received by David Hall CEO for the period from 1 January 2017 to 1 October 2017.
2 This reflects the remuneration received by Martin Payne who was appointed as CEO on 2 October 2017 following the retirement of David Hall.
PERCENTAGE CHANGE IN REMUNERATION OF THE CEO The table below illustrates the percentage change in annual salary benefits and bonus between 2016 and 2017 for the CEO and the average for all Company UK employees.
The CEO is a UKbased employee so the Committee feels that a comparator based on all UK employees is appropriate for the purposes of this analysis.
Salary change 2016 to 2017 Benefits change 2016 to 2017 Annual bonus change 2016 to 2017
0.8% 7.1% 2.9% Average for all UK employees  2.0%  14.9% 1 This table reflects the fact that David Hall was CEO until 2 October 2017 and Martin Payne was appointed as CEO on 2 October 2017.
Martin Paynes salary on appointment was lower than David Halls CEO salary and as set out in the Annual Statement by the Chair of Remuneration Committee on page 54 it is the Committees intention to increase Mr Paynes salary over time to the same level as was received by David Hall.
RELATIVE IMPORTANCE OF THE SPEND ON PAY The chart below illustrates the total expenditure on pay for all of the Companys employees compared to dividends payable to shareholders.
Employee remuneration costs
2.0mtel Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Polypipe Group plc ANNUAL REPORT ON REMUNERATION CONSIDERATION BY THE DIRECTORS OF MATTERS RELATING TO DIRECTORS REMUNERATION The Committee is chaired by Moni Mannings.
During the year the Committee also comprised Ron Marsh Paul Dean and Mark
The Committee met six times during 2017.
The CEO David Hall was also present at those meetings by invitation until his retirement on 2 October 2017 following which Martin Payne CEO from 2 October 2017 was present by invitation.
The Committee is responsible for determining all aspects of Executive Director pay.
It also monitors pay arrangements for other senior executives and oversees the operation of all share plans.
Full terms of reference of the Committee are available on our website at site Deloitte LLP was appointed in 2014 to provide advice on executive remuneration matters.
During the year the Committee received independent and objective advice from Deloitte LLP principally on market practice incentive design and remuneration policy for which Deloitte LLP was paid 8920 2016 47300 in fees charged on a time plus expenses basis.
Deloitte LLP is a founding member of the Remuneration Consultants Group and as such voluntarily operates under the code of conduct in relation to executive remuneration consulting in the UK.
In addition during 2017 other departments within Deloitte LLP provided advice to the Company in relation to tax.
The Committee has reviewed the nature of this additional advice and is satisfied that it does not compromise the independence of the advice that it has received.
SHAREHOLDER VOTING ON REMUNERATION REPORT RESOLUTIONS A high level of shareholder support has been received for our Remuneration Report resolutions since the Remuneration Policy was first approved by shareholders in 2015 as summarised below Votes for Votes against Votes withheld Approval of the Remuneration Policy 2015 AGM 146494935 99.99% 1457 0.01% 3197875 Approval of the Annual Report on Remuneration 2016 AGM 2017 AGM 139544564 95.97% 140730698 98.23% 5860276 4.03% 2530161 1.77% EXTERNAL BOARD APPOINTMENTS Executive Directors are not normally entitled to accept a NonExecutive Director appointment outside the Company without the prior approval of the Board.
None of the current Executive Directors currently holds any such appointment.
ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING This Annual Report on Remuneration will be subject to an advisory shareholder vote at our AGM to be held on 23 May 2018.
By order of the Board.
Moni Mannings Chair of the Remuneration Committee 20 March 2018 Stock Codesite
OUR GOVERNANCE INTRODUCTION
The Directors present their Annual Report and Accounts for the period ended 31 December 2017.
In accordance with the Companies Act 2006 as amended and the Listing Rules and the Disclosure Guidance and Transparency Rules the reports within the Governance section of the Annual Report and Accounts should be read in conjunction with one another and the Strategic Report.
As permitted by legislation some of the matters normally included in the Directors Report have instead been included in the Strategic Report pages 4 to 37 as the Board considers them to be of strategic importance.
THE COMPANY Polypipe Group plc is a public company limited by shares incorporated in England and Wales with registered number Since 16 April 2014 the Company was and remains listed on the premium segment of the London Stock
While the Group operates predominately in the UK it does have operations in France Italy and the United Arab Emirates.
STRATEGIC REPORT The Companies Act 2006 requires the Company to present a fair review of the development and performance of the Groups business during the financial year and the position of the business at the end of that year.
This review is contained within the Strategic Report on pages 4 to The principal activities of the Group are described in the Strategic Report on pages 4 to 11.
FINANCIAL RISK
The Groups financial risk management objectives and policies including information on financial risks that materially impact the Group and financial instruments used by the Group if any are disclosed in Note 28 to the Groups consolidated financial statements on pages 120 to 123.
VIABILITY STATEMENT In accordance with Provision C.2.2 of the UK Code the Directors have assessed the prospects of the Group over a longer period than 12 months required by the Going Concern provision.
The Board conducted this review for a period of three years as the Groups Strategic Review covers a threeyear period.
During 2017 the Board carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Group including those that would threaten its business model future performance solvency or liquidity.
In their assessment of the viability of the Group the Directors have considered each of the Groups principal risks and uncertainties detailed on pages 30 to 34 of the Strategic Report.
The Directors believe that the Group is well placed to manage its business risks successfully having taken into account the current economic outlook.
Accordingly the Board believes that taking into account the Groups current position and subject to the principal risks faced by the business the Group will be able to continue in operation and to meet its liabilities as they fall due for the period up to 31 December 2020 being the period considered under the Groups current threeyear strategic plan.
GOING CONCERN STATEMENT After making enquiries the Directors have a reasonable expectation that the Group has adequate resources to continue its operational existence for the foreseeable future and for a period of at least 12 months from the date of this report.
Accordingly the Board continues to adopt and consider appropriate the going concern basis in preparing the Annual Report and Accounts.
DIRECTORS
The current Directors biographies are set out on pages 40 and 41.
In addition Mr David Hall was Chief Executive Officer until 2 October 2017.
In accordance with the UK Code each Director will retire annually and put themselves forward for reelection at each AGM of the
Paul James joined the Board on 5 March 2018 and Glen Sabin joined the Board on 2 October 2017 and both will offer themselves for election at the 2018 AGM and for reelection annually thereafter.
APPOINTMENT AND REPLACEMENT OF DIRECTORS The rules about the appointment and replacement of Directors are contained in our Articles of Association the Articles.
They provide that Directors may be appointed by ordinary resolution of the members or by a resolution of the
Directors must retire and put themselves forward for election at their first AGM following their appointment and every third anniversary thereafter.
However the Directors wishing to continue to serve as members of the Board will seek reelection annually in accordance with the UK Code.
Details of the NonExecutive Directors letters of appointment are given on page 44 under Appointment and Tenure.
The Executive Directors have service contracts under which 12 months notice is required by both the Company and the Executive Director.
POWERS OF DIRECTORS The general powers of the Directors set out in Article 94 of the Articles provide that the business of the Company shall be managed by the Board which may exercise all the powers of the Company subject to any limitations imposed by applicable legislation or the Articles.
The general powers of the Directors are also limited by any directions given by special resolution of the shareholders of the Company which are applicable on the date that any power is exercised.
COMPENSATION FOR LOSS OF OFFICE The Company does not have arrangements with any Director that would provide compensation for loss of office or employment resulting from a takeover except that provisions of the Companys share plans may cause options and awards granted under such plans to vest on a takeover.
Further information is provided in the Directors Remuneration Report on pages 64 to 71.
DIRECTORS INDEMNITY
Directors and officers of the Company are entitled to be indemnified out of the assets of the Company in respect of Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Polypipe Group plc
REPORT any liability incurred in relation to the Company or any associate company to the extent the law allows.
In this regard the Company is required to disclose that under Article 212 of the Articles the Directors have the benefit of an indemnity to the extent permitted by the Companies Act 2006 against liabilities incurred by them in the execution of their duties and exercise of their powers.
This indemnity has been in place since the Companys application for listing on the London Stock Exchange on 28 March 2014 and remains in place.
The
Company has purchased and maintained throughout the financial period Directors and Officers liability insurance.
SHARE CAPITAL As at 31 December 2017 the share capital of the Company was 199999862 ordinary shares of 0.001 each of which 402746 ordinary shares were held in treasury.
Details of the Companys share capital are disclosed in Note 22 to the Groups consolidated financial statements on pages 114 and 115.
Authority of the Directors to allot shares The Company passed a resolution at the AGM held on 24 May 2017 authorising the Directors to allot ordinary shares up to an aggregate nominal amount of 132190.46 representing approximately twothirds of the ordinary share capital.
No shares have been issued under this authority.
This authority will expire at the Companys AGM to be held on 23 May 2018 and the Directors will be seeking a new authority to allot shares to ensure that the Directors continue to have the flexibility to act in the best interests of shareholders when opportunities arise by issuing new shares.
There are no current plans to issue new shares except in connection with employee share schemes.
Issue of shares A special resolution was passed at the AGM held on 24 May 2017 granting the Directors the authority to issue shares on a non preemptive basis up to 9914.28 representing 9914285 ordinary shares or approximately 5% of the ordinary share capital.
No shares have been issued under this authority.
A special resolution was also passed granting the Directors the authority to issue shares on a non preemptive basis in respect of an additional 5% of the ordinary share capital in connection with an acquisition or specified capital investment.
No shares have been issued under this authority.
These authorities will expire at the Companys AGM to be held on 23 May 2018 and the Directors will be seeking a new authority to issue shares on a non preemptive basis up to 9985.93.
In addition to this the Directors will seek authority to issue non preemptively for cash shares up to 9985.93 representing 9985939 ordinary shares or approximately 5% of the ordinary share capital for use only in connection with an acquisition or specified capital investment in accordance with the Pre Emption Group Statement of Principles as updated in March 2015.
Excluding any shares issued in connection with an acquisition or specified capital investment as described above the Directors do not intend to issue more than 7.5% of the issued share capital on a non preemptive basis in any rolling threeyear period.
Purchase of own shares by the Company A special resolution was passed at the AGM held on 24 May 2017 granting the Directors the authority to make market purchases up to 29723028 ordinary shares with a total nominal value of 29723.03 representing approximately 14.99% of the Companys issued ordinary share capital.
The authority to make market purchases will expire at the Companys AGM to be held on 23 May 2018 and the Directors will be seeking a new authority to make market purchases up to 14.99% of the Companys issued ordinary share capital which will only be exercised if the market and financial conditions make it advantageous to do so.
Further details are set out in the explanatory notes on pages 5 and 6 of the Notice convening the AGM.
Particulars of treasury share purchases are also disclosed in Note 22 to the Groups consolidated financial statements.
Rights attaching to shares The rights attaching to the ordinary shares are summarised as the ordinary shares rank equally for voting purposes on a show of hands each shareholder has one vote and on a poll each shareholder has one vote per ordinary share held each ordinary share ranks equally for any dividend declared each ordinary share ranks equally for any distributions made on a winding up of the Company each ordinary share ranks equally in the right to receive a relative proportion of shares in the event of a capitalisation of reserves the ordinary shares are freely transferable and no ordinary shares carry any special rights with regard to control of the Company and there are no restrictions on voting rights.
AMENDMENT TO THE COMPANYS ARTICLES The Company may alter its Articles by special resolution passed at a general meeting of the Company.
POLITICAL DONATIONS The Group made no political donations during the year.
GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS Information on the Groups greenhouse gas emissions is set out in the Corporate Responsibility Statement on pages 35 to 37 and forms part of this Report by reference.
FUTURE DEVELOPMENTS WITHIN THE GROUP The Strategic Report contains details of likely future developments within the Group.
The Groups research and development costs are disclosed in Note 6 to the Groups consolidated financial statements on page 104.
Stock Codesite OUR GOVERNANCE OVERSEAS OPERATIONS As explained in the Strategic Report the Group operates in the UK France Italy and the United Arab Emirates.
POST BALANCE SHEET EVENTS On 31 January 2018 the Group announced that it had entered into exclusive negotiations to sell Polypipe France Holding SAS its French operations to Ryb S. in Europe.
Further information is provided in Note 18 to the Groups consolidated financial statements on pages 112 and There have been no other significant post balance sheet events to report.
PRINCIPAL RISKS AND
The Board has carried out a robust assessment of our current key risks and these are summarised in the Principal Risks and Uncertainties section of the Strategic Report on pages 30 to 34.
RESULTS AND DIVIDENDS An interim dividend totalling 3.6 pence per share was paid on 22 September 2017 reflecting the continued strong cash generation of the Group.
The Board recommends a final dividend of 7.5 pence per share.
Shareholders will be asked to approve the final dividend at the AGM on 23 May 2018 for payment on 25 May 2018 to shareholders whose names appear on the register on 20 April 2018.
Total ordinary dividends paid and proposed for the year amount to 11.1 pence per share or a total return to shareholders of 22.0m in total.
EMPLOYEES
The Companys policies in relation to the employment of disabled persons and gender breakdown and employee involvement are included in the Corporate Responsibility Statement Employment on pages 35 and 36.
SUBSTANTIAL SHAREHOLDERS As at 31 December 2017 and 20 March 2018 the Company was aware of the following interests in voting rights representing 3% or more of the issued ordinary share capital of the Company.
This information was correct at the date of notification.
It should be noted that these holdings may have changed since they were notified to the Company.
However notification of any change is not required until the next applicable threshold is crossed.
As at 31 December 2017 As at 20 March 2018 Name of shareholder
Ordinary
Standard Life Aberdeen plc 27208250 13.72 27488305 13.77 Schroders plc 9889770 4.98 9222003 4.61 JP Morgan Asset Management 9400827 4.70 8168768 4.08 Norges Bank Investment Management 9949382 5.02 9655437 4.84 Vanguard Group 7400056 3.70 7694311 3.85 Canaccord Genuity Wealth Management Guernsey 6360619 3.18 6281440 3.14 1 Held indirectly.
AUDITOR
A resolution to reappoint Ernst and Young LLP as the Companys external auditor and to authorise the Directors to fix the auditors remuneration will be proposed at the 2018 AGM.
DIRECTORS STATEMENT OF DISCLOSURE OF INFORMATION TO AUDITOR Each of the Directors has confirmed that as at the date of this report So far as each Director is aware there is no relevant audit information of which the Companys auditor is unaware and The Directors have taken all reasonable steps that they ought to have taken as Directors in order to make themselves aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that the Companys auditor is aware of that information.
This confirmation is given and should be interpreted in accordance with the provisions of Section 418 of the Companies Act 2006.
REQUIREMENTS OF THE LISTING RULES Apart from the details of any longterm incentive scheme as required by Listing Rule 9.4.3.
Directors Remuneration Report on pages 64 to 73 disclosure of the information listed in Listing Rule 9.8.4R is not applicable.
ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING The 2018 AGM will be held on 23 May 2018 at the Holiday Inn High Road Doncaster DN4 9UX.
A full description of the business to be conducted at the meeting is set out in the separate Notice of AGM.
By order of the Board.
Emma Versluys Company Secretary 20 March 2018 Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Polypipe Group plc
REPORT The Directors are responsible for preparing the Annual Report and the Groups consolidated financial statements in accordance with applicable law and regulations.
UK company law requires the Directors to prepare financial statements for each financial year.
Under that law the Directors are required to prepare the Groups consolidated financial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union.
Under company law the Directors must not approve the Groups financial statements unless they are satisfied that they give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Group and of the profit or loss of the Group for that period.
In preparing the Groups consolidated financial statements the Directors are required to present fairly the financial position financial performance and cash flows of the Group select suitable accounting policies in accordance with IAS 8 Accounting Policies Changes in Accounting Estimates and Errors and then apply them consistently present information including accounting policies in a manner that provides relevant reliable comparable and understandable information make judgements that are reasonable provide additional disclosures when compliance with the specific requirements in IFRSs as adopted by the European Union is insufficient to enable users to understand the impact of particular transactions other events and conditions on the Groups financial position and financial performance and state whether the financial statements have been prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union.
The Directors are responsible for keeping adequate accounting records that are sufficient to show and explain the Groups transactions and disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the financial position of the Group and enable them to ensure that the Groups consolidated financial statements comply with the Companies Act 2006 and Article 4 of the IAS Regulation.
They are also responsible for safeguarding the assets of the Group and hence for taking reasonable steps for the prevention and detection of fraud and other irregularities.
The Directors are also responsible for preparing the Directors Report the
Strategic Report the Remuneration
Report and the Corporate Governance Statement in accordance with the Companies Act 2006 and applicable regulations including the requirements of the Listing Rules and the Disclosure Guidance and Transparency Rules.
The Directors are responsible for the maintenance and integrity of the corporate and financial information included on the Companys website.
Legislation in the UK governing the preparation and dissemination of financial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
DIRECTORS RESPONSIBILITY
We confirm that to the best of our knowledge the Groups consolidated financial statements prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union give a true and fair view of the assets liabilities financial position and profit or loss of the Company and the undertakings included in the consolidation taken as a whole the Strategic Report and the Directors Report include a fair review of the development and performance of the business and the position of the Company and the undertakings included in the consolidation taken as a whole together with a description of the principal risks and uncertainties that they face and the Annual Report and financial statements taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Groups position and performance business model and strategy.
By order of the Board.
Martin Payne
Chief Executive Officer
20 March 2018 Paul James Chief Financial Officer 20 March 2018 Stock Codesite OUR GOVERNANCE
RESPONSIBILITIES STATEMENT OUR SOLUTIONS As early adopters in 2013 Nuaire were the first ventilation manufacturer to provide a free level1 BIM library of Revit files for the ventilation equipment offered.
Nuaire designs its BIM models as type catalogues allowing the parametric selection of units and components from a single Revit file.
The models also contain information such as links to installation and maintenance guides company websites electrical data acoustic data and connection points to facilitate integration with ducting systems and ancillaries from third parties.
Now across the Polypipe Group the adoption of BIM and Revit are at the forefront for offering additional services to customers.
Projectspecific performance criteria and support for design project management and building operations can be incorporated which result in improved design efficiency and help to position the Group as future ready.
INTELLIGENT
ENGINEERED SOLUTIONS APPLICATION BASED TECHNICAL SUPPORT 78 OUR FINANCIALS
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT 80
GROUP INCOME STATEMENT 86 GROUP STATEMENT OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME 87 GROUP BALANCE SHEET 88 GROUP STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY 89 GROUP CASH FLOW STATEMENT 90 NOTES TO THE GROUP FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 91 DIRECTORS RESPONSIBILITIES STATEMENT 126 COMPANY BALANCE SHEET 127 COMPANY STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY 128 COMPANY CASH FLOW STATEMENT 129 NOTES TO THE COMPANY FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 130 SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION 135 CASE STUDY BIM modelling allows the design solution to be integrated into the whole building 79 OPINION In our opinion Polypipe Group plcs Group financial statements and parent company financial statements the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the Groups and of the parent companys affairs as at 31 December 2017 and of the Groups profit for the year then ended the Group financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union the parent company financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union as applied in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006 and the financial statements have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006 and as regards the Group financial statements Article 4 of the IAS Regulation.
We have audited the financial statements of Polypipe Group plc which comprise Group Parent company Group balance sheet as at 31 December 2017 Company balance sheet as at 31 December 2017 Group income statement for the year then ended Company statement of changes in equity for the year then ended Group statement of comprehensive income for the year then ended Company cash flow statement for the year then ended Group statement of changes in equity for the year then ended Related Notes 1 to 9 to the financial statements Group cash flow statement for the year then ended Related Notes 1 to 29 to the financial statements including a summary of significant accounting policies The financial reporting framework that has been applied in their preparation is applicable law and International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and as regards the parent company financial statements as applied in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006.
BASIS FOR OPINION We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing UK ISAs UK and applicable law.
Our
Statements section of our report below.
We are independent of the Group and parent company in accordance with the ethical requirements that are relevant to our audit of the financial statements in the UK including the FRCs Ethical Standard as applied to listed public interest entities and we have fulfilled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with these requirements.
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion.
USE OF OUR REPORT This report is made solely to the Companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006.
Our audit work has been undertaken so that we might state to the Companys members those matters we are required to state to them in an auditors report and for no other purpose.
To the fullest extent permitted by law we do not accept or assume responsibility to anyone other than the Company and the Companys members as a body for our audit work for this report or for the opinions we have formed.
Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Polypipe Group plc
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT
TO THE MEMBERS OF POLYPIPE GROUP plc CONCLUSIONS RELATING TO PRINCIPAL RISKS GOING CONCERN AND VIABILITY STATEMENT We have nothing to report in respect of the following information in the Annual Report and Accounts in relation to which the ISAs UK require us to report to you whether we have anything material to add or draw attention to the disclosures in the Annual Report and Accounts set out on pages 30 to 34 that describe the principal risks and explain how they are being managed or mitigated the Directors confirmation set out on page 74 in the Annual Report and Accounts that they have carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the entity including those that would threaten its business model future performance solvency or liquidity the Directors statement set out on page 74 in the financial statements about whether they considered it appropriate to adopt the going concern basis of accounting in preparing them and their identification of any material uncertainties to the entitys ability to continue to do so over a period of at least 12 months from the date of approval of the financial statements whether the Directors statement in relation to going concern required under the Listing Rules in accordance with Listing Rule 9.8.6R 3 is materially inconsistent with our knowledge obtained in the audit or the Directors explanation set out on page 74 in the Annual Report and Accounts as to how they have assessed the prospects of the entity over what period they have done so and why they consider that period to be appropriate and their statement as to whether they have a reasonable expectation that the entity will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the period of their assessment including any related disclosures drawing attention to any necessary qualifications or assumptions.
OVERVIEW OF OUR AUDIT APPROACH Key audit matters  Revenue recognition and customer rebates.
Audit scope  We performed an audit of the complete financial information of all components of the Group.
The components where we performed full audit procedures accounted for 100% of Profit Before Tax 100% of Revenue and 100% of Total Assets.
Materiality  Overall Group materiality of 3.1m 2016 2.7m which represents 5% of Profit Before Tax excluding nonunderlying items other than amortisation of intangible assets.
Stock Codesite OUR FINANCIALS KEY AUDIT MATTERS Key audit matters are those matters that in our professional judgement were of most significance in our audit of the financial statements of the current period and include the most significant assessed risks of material misstatement whether or not due to fraud that we identified.
These matters included those which had the greatest effect on the overall audit strategy the allocation of resources in the audit and directing the efforts of the engagement team.
These matters were addressed in the context of our audit of the financial statements as a whole and in our opinion thereon and we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters.
Risk Our response to the risk Key observations communicated to the Audit Committee Revenue recognition and customer rebates Refer to the Report of the Audit Committee page 52 Summary of Significant Accounting Policies page 92 and Note 3.2 to the consolidated financial statements page 99.
The timing of revenue recognition is relevant to the reported performance of the Group as a whole and also to the completeness of rebate expense and related year end liabilities as discussed below.
There is opportunity to misstate the recording of revenue between periods in order to influence reported results.
Furthermore as described in Note 3.2 to the Group financial statements the Groups pricing structure includes rebate arrangements with customers.
Some of these arrangements involve estimation when determining the amount to be recognised as an expense in the year and a liability at the year end.
This is particularly the case where the Group is reliant on information from customers which may not be available at the time the liabilities are recognised.
We validated any material manual journals either side of the year end to assess for any evidence of management bias by checking to supporting documentation.
We tested the accuracy of revenue cut off around the year end.
Our work comprised the agreement of sales transactions from either side of the year end to supporting documentation.
We also performed procedures where applicable using EY bespoke data analytics tools to test the appropriateness of journal entries recorded in the general ledger by correlating sales postings with cash receipts throughout the year.
We tested the appropriateness of rebate provision calculations by agreeing a sample of amounts recognised to terms of agreements and other supporting documents.
We compared year end customer rebate provisions and rebate costs in the year to prior year amounts and expectations in order to identify unusual trends.
We compared a sample of rebate payments made in the year with amounts provided as at 31 December 2016 which gave us assurance over the accuracy of amounts previously provided.
We assessed the completeness of rebate amounts recognised by reference to the Groups customer base from which revenue was derived in the year.
We performed full scope audit procedures over this risk area in all locations which covered 100% of the risk amount.
We have concluded that revenue is appropriately recognised in the correct accounting period and found no evidence of management bias.
We have concluded that the customer rebates expense and liability are appropriately recognised and that amounts estimated are reasonable.
AN OVERVIEW OF THE SCOPE OF OUR AUDIT Tailoring the scope Our assessment of audit risk our evaluation of materiality and our allocation of performance materiality determine our audit scope for each entity within the Group.
Taken together this enables us to form an opinion on the consolidated financial statements.
We take into account factors such as size risk profile the organisation of the Group and effectiveness of Groupwide controls when assessing the level of work to be performed at each entity.
In assessing the risk of material misstatement to the Group financial statements and to ensure we had adequate quantitative coverage of significant accounts in the financial statements of the 12 reporting components of the Group we selected all 12 components covering entities within the UK France Italy and the United Arab Emirates which represent the principal business units within the Group.
We performed an audit of the complete financial information of all 12 components selected full scope components.
Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Polypipe Group plc
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT
TO THE MEMBERS OF POLYPIPE GROUP plc Therefore for the current year the full scope components where we performed audit procedures accounted for 100% of the Groups Profit Before Tax 2016 100% 100% of the Groups Revenue 2016 100% and 100% of the Groups Total Assets 2016 100%.
Changes from the prior year There were no scoping changes from the prior year.
Involvement with component teams In establishing our overall approach to the Group audit we determined the type of work that needed to be undertaken at each of the components by us as the primary audit engagement team or by component auditors from other EY global network firms operating under our instruction.
Of the 12 full scope components audit procedures were performed on nine of these directly by the primary audit team which was responsible for all UK locations.
For the three full scope components where the work was performed by component auditors we determined the appropriate level of involvement to enable us to determine that sufficient audit evidence had been obtained as a basis for our opinion on the Group as a whole.
During the current years audit cycle visits were undertaken by the primary audit team to the component team in France.
This visit involved discussing the audit approach with the component team and any issues arising from their work meeting with local management attending the closing meeting and reviewing key audit working papers on risk areas.
The primary team interacted regularly with the component teams where appropriate during various stages of the audit reviewed key working papers and were responsible for the scope and direction of the audit process.
This together with the additional procedures performed at Group level gave us appropriate evidence for our opinion on the Group financial statements.
OUR APPLICATION OF MATERIALITY We apply the concept of materiality in planning and performing the audit in evaluating the effect of identified misstatements on the audit and in forming our audit opinion.
Materiality
The magnitude of an omission or misstatement that individually or in the aggregate could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of the users of the financial statements.
Materiality provides a basis for determining the nature and extent of our audit procedures.
We determined materiality for the Group to be 3.1m 2016 2.7m which is 5% 2016 5% of the Groups Profit Before Tax excluding nonunderlying items other than amortisation of intangible assets.
We believe that Profit Before Tax excluding nonunderlying items other than amortisation of intangible assets provides us with the most relevant measure of Group profitability.
Starting basis
Materiality
Reported Prot Before Tax of 55.6m Totals 61.6m Materiality of 3.1m 5% of materiality basis Add Prot from discontinued operations before tax of 1.4m Add Nonunderlying items excluding amortisation of intangible assets of 4.6m We determined materiality for the parent company to be 2.3m 2016 2.5m which is 1% 2016 1% of equity.
Performance materiality The application of materiality at the individual account or balance level.
It is set at an amount to reduce to an appropriately low level the probability that the aggregate of uncorrected and undetected misstatements exceeds materiality.
On the basis of our risk assessments together with our assessment of the Groups overall control environment our judgement was that performance materiality was 75% 2016 75% of our planning materiality namely 2.3m 2016 2.0m.
We have set performance materiality at this percentage due to the past history of few misstatements indicating a lower risk of misstatement in the financial statements.
Audit work at component locations for the purpose of obtaining audit coverage over significant financial statement accounts is undertaken based on a percentage of total performance materiality.
The performance materiality set for each component is based on the relative scale and risk of the component to the Group as a whole and our assessment of the risk of misstatement at that component.
In the current year the range of performance materiality allocated to components was 0.5m to 2.3m 2016 0.4m to 2.0m.
Reporting threshold An amount below which identified misstatements are considered as being clearly trivial.
We agreed with the Audit Committee that we would report to them all uncorrected audit differences in excess of 0.2m 2016 0.1m which is set at 5% of planning materiality as well as differences below that threshold that in our view warranted reporting on qualitative grounds.
We evaluate any uncorrected misstatements against both the quantitative measures of materiality discussed above and in light of other relevant qualitative considerations in forming our opinion.
Stock Codesite OUR FINANCIALS OTHER INFORMATION The other information comprises the information included in the Annual Report and Accounts set out on pages 1 to 78 other than the financial statements and our auditors report thereon.
The Directors are responsible for the other information.
Our opinion on the financial statements does not cover the other information and except to the extent otherwise explicitly stated in this report we do not express any form of assurance conclusion thereon.
In connection with our audit of the financial statements our responsibility is to read the other information and in doing so consider whether the other information is materially inconsistent with the financial statements or our knowledge obtained in the audit or otherwise appears to be materially misstated.
If we identify such material inconsistencies or apparent material misstatements we are required to determine whether there is a material misstatement in the financial statements or a material misstatement of the other information.
If based on the work we have performed we conclude that there is a material misstatement of the other information we are required to report that fact.
We have nothing to report in this regard.
In this context we also have nothing to report in regard to our responsibility to specifically address the following items in the other information and to report as uncorrected material misstatements of the other information where we conclude that those items meet the following conditions Fair balanced and understandable set out on page 45 the statement given by the Directors that they consider the Annual Report and Accounts taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Groups performance business model and strategy is materially inconsistent with our knowledge obtained in the audit or Audit Committee reporting set out on pages 50 to 53 the section describing the work of the Audit Committee does not appropriately address matters communicated by us to the Audit Committee or Directors statement of compliance with the UK Corporate Governance Code set out on page 43  the parts of the Directors statement required under the Listing Rules relating to the Companys compliance with the UK Corporate Governance Code containing provisions specified for review by the auditor in accordance with Listing Rule 9.8.10R 2 do not properly disclose a departure from a relevant provision of the UK Corporate Governance Code.
OPINIONS ON OTHER MATTERS PRESCRIBED BY THE COMPANIES ACT 2006 In our opinion the part of the Directors Remuneration Report to be audited has been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 2006.
In our opinion based on the work undertaken in the course of the audit the information given in the Strategic Report and the Directors Report for the financial year for which the financial statements are prepared is consistent with the financial statements and those reports have been prepared in accordance with applicable legal requirements the information about internal control and risk management systems in relation to financial reporting processes and about share capital structures given in compliance with rules 7.2.5 and 7.2.6 in the Disclosure Guidance and Transparency Rules sourcebook made by the Financial Conduct Authority the FCA Rules is consistent with the financial statements and has been prepared in accordance with applicable legal requirements and information about the Companys corporate governance code and practices and about its administrative management and supervisory bodies and their committees complies with rules 7.2.2 7.2.3 and 7.2.7 of the FCA Rules.
MATTERS ON WHICH WE ARE REQUIRED TO REPORT BY EXCEPTION In the light of the knowledge and understanding of the Group and the parent company and its environment obtained in the course of the audit we have not identified material misstatements in the Strategic Report or the Directors Report or the information about internal control and risk management systems in relation to financial reporting processes and about share capital structures given in compliance with rules 7.2.5 and 7.2.6 of the FCA Rules.
We have nothing to report in respect of the following matters in relation to which the Companies Act 2006 requires us to report to you if in our opinion adequate accounting records have not been kept by the parent company or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or the parent company financial statements and the part of the Directors Remuneration Report to be audited are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns or certain disclosures of Directors remuneration specified by law are not made or we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit or a Corporate Governance Statement has not been prepared by the Company.
Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Polypipe Group plc
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT
TO THE MEMBERS OF POLYPIPE GROUP plc RESPONSIBILITIES OF DIRECTORS As explained more fully in the Directors Responsibilities Statements set out on pages 77 and 126 the Directors are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements and for being satisfied that they give a true and fair view and for such internal control as the Directors determine is necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error.
In preparing the financial statements the Directors are responsible for assessing the Group and parent companys ability to continue as a going concern disclosing as applicable matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless the Directors either intend to liquidate the Group or the parent company or to cease operations or have no realistic alternative but to do so.
AUDITORS RESPONSIBILITIES FOR THE AUDIT OF THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error and to issue an auditors report that includes our opinion.
Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with ISAs UK will always detect a material misstatement when it exists.
Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if individually or in the aggregate they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these financial statements.
EXPLANATION AS TO WHAT EXTENT THE AUDIT WAS CONSIDERED CAPABLE OF DETECTING IRREGULARITIES INCLUDING FRAUD The objectives of our audit in respect to fraud are to identify and assess the risks of material misstatement of the financial statements due to fraud to obtain sufficient appropriate audit evidence regarding the assessed risks of material misstatement due to fraud through designing and implementing appropriate responses and to respond appropriately to fraud or suspected fraud identified during the audit.
However the primary responsibility for the prevention and detection of fraud rests with both those charged with governance of the entity and management.
Our approach was as follows We obtained an understanding of the legal and regulatory frameworks that are applicable to the Group and determined that the most significant frameworks which are directly relevant to specific assertions in the financial statements are those that relate to the reporting framework IFRS the Companies Act 2006 and UK Corporate Governance Code and the relevant tax compliance regulations in the UK.
We understood how Polypipe Group plc is complying with the relevant frameworks by making enquiries of management and those responsible for legal and compliance.
We corroborated our enquiries through our review of Board minutes and papers provided to the Audit
We assessed the susceptibility of the Groups financial statements to material misstatement including how fraud might occur.
Based on this understanding we designed our audit procedures to identify noncompliance with such laws and regulations.
Where the risk was considered to be higher we performed audit procedures to address each identified fraud risk.
These procedures included testing manual journals and were designed to provide reasonable assurance that the financial statements were free from fraud and error.
A further description of our responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements is located on the FRCs website at https www. rc. iteauditorsresponsibilities.
This description forms part of our auditors report.
OTHER MATTERS WE ARE REQUIRED TO ADDRESS We were appointed by the Company in 2012 to audit the financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2012 and subsequent financial periods.
The period of total uninterrupted engagement including previous renewals and reappointments is six years covering the years ended 31 December 2012 to 31 December 2017.
The nonaudit services prohibited by the FRCs Ethical Standard were not provided to the Group or the parent company and we remain independent of the Group and the parent company in conducting the audit.
The audit opinion is consistent with the additional report to the Audit Committee.
Christabel Cowling Senior Statutory Auditor for and on behalf of Ernst and Young LLP Statutory Auditor
20 March 2018
The maintenance and integrity of the Polypipe Group plc website is the responsibility of the Directors the work carried out by the auditor does not involve consideration of these matters and accordingly the auditor accepts no responsibility for any changes that may have occurred to the financial statements since they were initially presented on the website.
Legislation in the UK governing the preparation and dissemination of financial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
Stock Codesite OUR FINANCIALS 2017 2016
Underlying
Non underlying
Underlying
Non underlying
Continuing operations Selling and distribution costs 68.7  68.7 64.4  64.4 Administration expenses 8 34.4 1.8 36.2 35.2  35.2 Trading profit 72.6 4.6 68.0 68.5  68.5 Profit on disposal of property plant and equipment 8     0.3 0.3 Impairment of freehold land and buildings 8     0.9 0.9 Amortisation of intangible assets 8  5.5 5.5  6.8 6.8 Operating profit 5 6 72.6 10.1 62.5 68.5 7.4 61.1 Finance costs 11 6.9  6.9 7.6  7.6 Profit before tax 5 65.7 10.1 55.6 60.9 7.4 53.5 Profit from continuing operations 53.9 8.9 45.0 49.2 5.8 43.4 Profitloss from discontinued operations 8  11.3 11.3  0.8 0.8 Profit for the year attributable to the owners of the parent company 53.9 20.2 33.7 49.2 5.0 44.2 Basic earnings per share pence From continuing operations 13 22.7 21.8 From discontinued operations 13 5.7 0.4 Diluted earnings per share pence From continuing operations 13 22.5 21.7 From discontinued operations 13 5.7 0.4 Dividend per share pence  interim 14 3.6 3.1 Dividend per share pence  final 14 7.5 7.0 Total 11.1 10.1 The prior year comparatives have been restated where required to reflect adjustments in respect of discontinued operations.
Nonunderlying items are presented separately.
The definition of nonunderlying items is included in the Group Accounting Policies on page 98.
Nonunderlying items are detailed in Note 8 to the consolidated financial statements.
Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Polypipe Group plc GROUP INCOME STATEMENT FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 2017 Profit for the year attributable to the owners of the parent company 33.7 44.2 Other comprehensive income Items which will be reclassified subsequently to the income statement Exchange differences on translation of foreign operations 0.3 2.9 Effective portion of changes in fair value of interest rate swaps 1.7 2.1 Tax relating to items that will be reclassified to the income statement 0.3 0.3 Other comprehensive income for the year net of tax 1.7 1.1 Total comprehensive income for the year attributable to the owners of the parent company 35.4 45.3 Attributable to the owners of the parent company from Continuing operations 46.7 43.1 Discontinued operations 11.3 2.2 Stock Codesite OUR FINANCIALS GROUP STATEMENT OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 Notes 31 December 31 December Noncurrent assets Property plant and equipment 15 98.6 101.0 Intangible assets 16 356.5 371.6 Total noncurrent assets 5 455.1 472.6 Current assets Assets classified as heldforsale 18 24.0 0.7 Inventories 19 53.5 52.2 Trade and other receivables 20 34.5 40.1 Cash and cash equivalents 21 35.7 26.5 Total current assets 147.7 119.5 Total assets 5 602.8 592.1 Current liabilities Liabilities associated with assets classified as heldforsale 18 10.9 Trade and other payables 24 87.6 91.8 Provisions 8 2.2 Derivative financial instruments 25 2.5 5.7 Income tax payable 5.6 7.0 Total current liabilities 108.8 104.5 Noncurrent liabilities Loans and borrowings 25 184.1 190.8 Other liabilities 25 0.9 2.1 Deferred income tax liabilities 12 7.0 7.3 Total noncurrent liabilities 192.0 200.2 Total liabilities 5 300.8 304.7 Net assets 5 302.0 287.4 Capital and reserves Equity share capital 22 0.2 0.2 Capital redemption reserve 22 1.1 1.1 Own shares 22 4.3 4.6 Hedging reserve 22 2.1 3.5 Foreign currency retranslation reserve 22 0.7 0.4 Retained earnings 306.4 293.8 Total equity 302.0 287.4 The consolidated financial statements were approved for issue by the Board of Directors and signed on its behalf by Martin Payne
20 March 2018 Paul James
20 March 2018 Company Registration No.
Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Polypipe Group plc GROUP BALANCE SHEET AT 31 DECEMBER 2017 Equity share capital
Own
Hedging reserve
Retained earnings
At 31 December 2015 0.2 1.1 1.7 1.7 2.5 265.6 261.0 Profit for the year      44.2 44.2 Other comprehensive income    1.8 2.9  1.1 Total comprehensive income for the year    1.8 2.9 44.2 45.3 Dividends paid      17.1 17.1 Purchase of own shares   2.9    2.9 Sharebased payments charge      1.3 1.3 Sharebased payments settled      0.3 0.3 Sharebased payments excess tax benefit      0.1 0.1 At 31 December 2016 0.2 1.1 4.6 3.5 0.4 293.8 287.4 Profit for the year      33.7 33.7 Other comprehensive income    1.4 0.3  1.7 Total comprehensive income for the year    1.4 0.3 33.7 35.4 Dividends paid      21.0 21.0 Purchase of own shares   3.2    3.2 Sharebased payments charge      1.2 1.2 Sharebased payments settled   3.5   1.4 2.1 Sharebased payments excess tax benefit      0.1 0.1 At 31 December 2017 0.2 1.1 4.3 2.1 0.7 306.4 302.0 Stock Codesite OUR FINANCIALS GROUP STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 Notes Operating activities Profit before tax 55.6 53.5 Finance costs 11 6.9 7.6 Operating profit 62.5 61.1 Profit before tax from discontinued operations 8 1.4 0.9 Noncash items Profit on disposal of property plant and equipment 8 0.1 0.3 Nonunderlying items  amortisation of intangibles assets 8 5.5 6.8 provision for restructuring costs 8 4.3 settlement of restructuring costs 0.4 impairment of freehold land and buildings 8  0.9 provision for aborted acquisition costs 8 0.3 settlement of aborted acquisition costs 0.1 Depreciation 15 16.2 16.3 Sharebased payments 0.8 1.0 Operating cash flows before movement in working capital 90.4 86.7 Movement in working capital Receivables 3.2 8.3 Payables 2.1 11.5 Inventories 8.9 3.4 Cash generated from operations 80.4 86.5 Income tax paid 12.6 10.1 Net cash flows from operating activities 67.8 76.4 Investing activities Proceeds from disposal of property plant and equipment 0.2 0.4 Purchase of property plant and equipment 23.4 19.1 Net cash flows from investing activities 23.2 18.7 Financing activities Repayment of bank loan 7.0 25.5 Interest paid 6.6 7.3 Dividends paid 14 21.0 17.1 Purchase of own shares 3.2 2.9 Proceeds from exercise of share options 2.5 Net cash flows from financing activities 35.3 52.8 Net change in cash and cash equivalents 9.3 4.9 Cash and cash equivalents at 1 January 21 26.5 21.6 Net foreign exchange difference 0.1 Cash and cash equivalents at 31 December 21 35.7 26.5 The net increase in cash and cash equivalents in the year from discontinued operations included in the above was 1.3m 2016 0.5m.
The prior year comparatives have been restated where required to reflect adjustments in respect of discontinued operations.
Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Polypipe Group plc GROUP CASH FLOW STATEMENT FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 1.
AUTHORISATION OF FINANCIAL STATEMENTS The consolidated financial statements of the Group for the year ended 31 December 2017 were authorised for issue by the Board of Directors on 20 March 2018 and the balance sheet was signed on the Boards behalf by Martin Payne and Paul James.
Polypipe Group plc is a public limited company incorporated and domiciled in England and Wales.
The principal activity of the Group is the manufacture of plastic pipe systems for the building and construction market.
SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES The basis of preparation and accounting policies used in preparing the consolidated historical financial information for the year ended 31 December 2017 are set out below.
These accounting policies have been consistently applied in all material respects to all the periods presented.
As explained in Note 18 certain operations have been classified as discontinued during the year and consequently the comparative financial information has been restated where appropriate to meet the presentational requirements of IFRS 5 Noncurrent Assets HeldforSale and Discontinued Operations to take account of this change.
2.1 Basis of preparation and statement of compliance with IFRSs The Groups consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as endorsed by the European Union regulations as they apply to the consolidated financial statements of the Group for the year ended 31 December 2017 and also in accordance with those parts of the Companies Act 2006 applicable to companies reporting under IFRS.
The accounting policies which follow set out those policies which apply in preparing the consolidated financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017.
The Groups consolidated financial statements have been prepared on a historical cost basis except for derivative financial instruments that have been measured at fair value.
The consolidated financial statements are presented in Pounds Sterling and all values are rounded to one decimal place of a million m unless otherwise indicated.
2.2 Going concern The Directors having considered all relevant risk factors believe the Group has adequate financial resources to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future.
Accordingly they continue to adopt the going concern basis in preparing the consolidated financial statements.
2.3 Basis of consolidation The consolidated financial statements comprise the financial statements of the Group and its subsidiaries at 31 December 2017.
Control is achieved when the Group is exposed or has rights to variable returns from its involvement with the investee and has the ability to affect those returns through its power over the investee.
Specifically the Group controls an investee if and only if the Group has power over the investee i. the ability to use its power over the investee to affect its returns.
The Group reassesses whether or not it controls an investee if facts and circumstances indicate that there are changes to one or more of the three elements of control.
Consolidation of a subsidiary begins when the Group obtains control over the subsidiary and ceases when the Group loses control of the subsidiary.
Assets liabilities income and expenses of a subsidiary acquired or disposed of during the year are included in the consolidated financial statements from the date the Group gains control until the date the Group ceases to control the subsidiary.
When necessary adjustments are made to the financial statements of subsidiaries to bring their accounting policies into line with the Groups accounting policies.
All intergroup assets and liabilities equity income expenses and cash flows relating to transactions between members of the Group are eliminated in full on consolidation.
The Group holds 100% of the equity and controls 100% of the voting rights in all subsidiaries with the exception of Water Management Solutions LLC which has not traded since incorporation in Qatar in 2015.
Accordingly the treatment of non controlling interests or any other nonvoting right factors in respect of control is not material.
Stock Codesite OUR FINANCIALS NOTES TO THE GROUP FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 2.
SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED 2.4 Business combinations Business combinations are accounted for using the acquisition method.
The cost of an acquisition is the total of the consideration transferred measured at acquisition fair value.
Acquisition costs incurred are expensed and included in administration expenses in the income statement.
Identifiable intangible assets meeting either the contractuallegal or separability criterion are recognised separately from goodwill.
2.5 Goodwill Goodwill is initially measured at cost being the excess of the aggregate of the acquisition date fair value of the consideration transferred over the net identifiable amounts of the assets acquired and the liabilities assumed in exchange for the business combination.
After initial recognition goodwill is stated at cost less any accumulated impairment losses see Note 2.12.
The carrying amount of goodwill allocated to a cashgenerating unit is taken into account when determining the profit or loss on disposal of the unit or of an operation within it.
2.6 Foreign currency translation The Groups consolidated financial statements are presented in Pounds Sterling which is also the parent companys functional currency.
Each entity in the Group determines its own functional currency and items included in the financial statements of each entity are measured in that functional currency.
Transactions in foreign currencies are initially recognised by the Group entities at their respective functional currency rates prevailing at the date of the transaction.
Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are retranslated at the functional currency spot rate of exchange at the balance sheet date.
All differences arising on settlement or translation are taken to the income statement.
Nonmonetary items that are measured in terms of historical cost in a foreign currency are translated using the exchange rates at the dates of the initial transactions.
The assets and liabilities of foreign operations are translated into Pounds Sterling at the rate of exchange ruling at the balance sheet date.
Income and expenses are translated at average exchange rates prevailing.
The resulting exchange differences are recognised in other comprehensive income.
2.7 Revenue recognition Revenue is recognised to the extent that it is probable that the economic benefits will flow to the Group and the revenue can be reliably measured.
Revenue is measured at the fair value of the consideration received excluding discounts rebates value added tax and other sales taxes.
The following criteria must also be met before revenue is recognised Sale of goods Revenue is recognised when the significant risks and rewards of ownership of the goods have been passed to the buyer when the goods are delivered.
The amount is recognised net of any discounts or rebates payable which are accrued at the point at which the goods are delivered.
As explained in Note 3.2 rebates can be complex in nature and involve estimation.
Interest income Interest income is recognised as interest accrues on cash balances using the effective interest method.
The effective interest rate is the rate that exactly discounts estimated future cash receipts through the expected life of the financial instrument to its net carrying amount.
2.8 Income taxes Current income tax Current income tax assets and liabilities for the current and prior years are measured at the amount expected to be recovered from or paid to the tax authorities based on income tax rates and laws that are enacted or substantively enacted by the balance sheet date.
Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Polypipe Group plc NOTES TO THE GROUP FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 2.
SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED Deferred income tax Deferred income tax is recognised on all temporary differences arising between the tax bases of assets and liabilities and their carrying amounts in the consolidated financial statements with the following exceptions where the deferred income tax asset relating to the deductible temporary difference arises from the initial recognition of an asset or liability in a transaction that is not a business combination and at the time of the transaction affects neither the accounting profit nor taxable profit or loss in respect of taxable temporary differences associated with investments in subsidiaries where the timing of the reversal of the temporary differences can be controlled and it is probable that the temporary differences will not reverse in the foreseeable future and deferred income tax assets are recognised only to the extent that it is probable that taxable profit will be available against which the deductible temporary differences carried forward tax credits or tax losses can be utilised.
For deductible temporary differences associated with investments in subsidiaries it must additionally be probable that the temporary differences will reverse in the foreseeable future.
The carrying amount of deferred income tax assets is reviewed at each balance sheet date.
Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are offset only if a legally enforceable right exists to set off current income tax assets against current income tax liabilities and the deferred income taxes relate to the same tax authority and that authority permits the Group to make a single net payment.
Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are measured on an undiscounted basis at the income tax rates that are expected to apply when the asset is realised or the liability is settled based on income tax rates and tax laws enacted or substantively enacted at the balance sheet date.
Income tax is charged or credited to other comprehensive income if it relates to items that are charged or credited to other comprehensive income.
Similarly income tax is charged or credited directly to equity if it relates to items that are charged or credited directly to equity.
Otherwise income tax is recognised in the income statement.
2.9 Property plant and equipment Property plant and equipment is stated at cost less accumulated depreciation and accumulated impairment losses if any.
Cost comprises the aggregate amount paid and the fair value of any other consideration given to acquire the asset and includes costs directly attributable to making the asset capable of operating as intended.
Depreciation is provided on the cost less residual value of property plant and equipment and is on a straightline basis over its expected useful life as follows Freehold land Nil Freehold buildings Over expected economic life not exceeding 50 years Plant and other equipment 4 to 10 years The carrying amounts of property plant and equipment are reviewed for impairment if events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying amount may not be recoverable and are written down immediately to their recoverable amount.
Useful lives residual values and depreciation methods are reviewed at each financial year end and where adjustments are required these are made prospectively.
An item of property plant and equipment and any significant part initially recognised is derecognised upon disposal or where no future economic benefits are expected to arise from the continued use of the asset.
Any profit or loss arising on the derecognition of the asset calculated as the difference between the net disposal proceeds and the carrying amount of the asset is included in the income statement when the asset is derecognised.
Stock Codesite OUR FINANCIALS 2.
SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED 2.10 Intangible assets Intangible assets acquired separately are initially measured at cost.
Intangible assets arising on business combinations are initially measured at fair value.
Following initial recognition intangible assets are carried at cost or fair value less accumulated amortisation and accumulated impairment losses if any.
Internally generated intangible assets excluding capitalised development costs are not capitalised and expenditure is reflected in the income statement in the year in which the expenditure is incurred.
The useful lives of intangible assets are assessed as either finite or indefinite.
Intangible assets with finite lives are amortised on a straightline basis over their useful economic life and are assessed for impairment whenever there is an indication that the intangible asset may be impaired.
Amortisation of intangible assets is provided over the following expected useful lives Patents and brand names ten years Customer relationships five years Customer order book up to one year Research and development costs Research costs are expensed as incurred.
Development expenditures on individual projects are recognised as an intangible asset when the Group can demonstrate the technical feasibility of completing the intangible asset so that it will be available for use or sale its intention to complete and its ability to use or sell the asset how the asset will generate future economic benefits the availability of resources to complete the asset and the ability to measure reliably the expenditure during development.
At the balance sheet date no development costs have met the above criteria.
2.11 Assets classified as heldforsale Assets classified as heldforsale are measured at the lower of carrying amount and fair value less costs to sell.
Assets are classified as heldforsale if their carrying amount will be recovered through a sale transaction rather than through continuing use.
This condition is regarded as met only when the sale is highly probable expected to be completed within one year from the date of classification and accordingly included within current assets with the associated liabilities being included within current liabilities and the asset is available for immediate sale in its present condition.
2.12 Impairment of nonfinancial assets The Group assesses at each balance sheet date whether there are any indicators that an asset may be impaired.
If any such indication exists or when annual impairment testing for an asset is required the Group makes an estimate of the assets recoverable amount in order to determine the extent of the impairment loss.
The recoverable amount of an asset or cashgenerating unit CGU is the higher of its fair value less costs to sell and its value in use and it is determined for an individual asset unless the asset does not generate cash flows that are largely independent of those from other assets or groups of assets.
Where the carrying amount of an asset exceeds its recoverable amount the asset is considered impaired and is written down to its recoverable amount.
In assessing value in use the estimated future pretax cash flows are discounted to their present value using a pretax discount rate that reflects current market assessments of the time value of money and the risks specific to the asset.
In determining fair value less costs to sell recent market transactions are taken into account.
If no such transactions can be identified an appropriate valuation model is used.
These calculations are corroborated by valuation multiples or other available fair value indicators.
The Group bases its impairment calculations on detailed budgets and industry forecast calculations which are prepared separately for each of the Groups CGUs to which the individual assets are allocated.
These budgets and industry forecast calculations are generally covering a period of four years.
For longer periods a longterm growth rate is calculated and applied to project future cash flows after the fifth year.
Impairment losses are recognised in the income statement in those expense categories consistent with the function of the impaired asset.
Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Polypipe Group plc NOTES TO THE GROUP FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 2.
SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED
Goodwill has specific characteristics for impairment and is tested annually at 31 December or when circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may be impaired.
Impairment is determined for goodwill by assessing the recoverable amount of each CGU to which the goodwill relates.
For the purpose of impairment testing goodwill is allocated to the related CGUs.
Each CGU or group of CGUs to which goodwill is allocated represents the lowest level within the entity at which the goodwill is monitored for internal management purposes and is not larger than an operating segment before aggregation.
Where the recoverable amount of the CGU is less than its carrying amount including goodwill an impairment loss is recognised in the income statement.
Impairment losses related to goodwill are not reversed in future periods.
2.13 Leasing The classification of leases as finance or operating leases requires the Group to determine based on an evaluation of the terms and conditions whether it retains or acquires the significant risks and rewards of ownership of these assets and accordingly whether the lease requires an asset and liability to be recognised on the balance sheet.
Leases where the lessor retains a significant portion of the risks and benefits of ownership of the asset are classified as operating leases and rentals payable are charged in the income statement on a straightline basis over the lease term.
2.14 Financial instruments i Financial assets Initial recognition and measurement Financial assets within the scope of IAS 39 are classified as financial assets at fair value through profit or loss FVTPL loans and receivables heldtomaturity investments availableforsale financial assets or as derivatives designated as hedging instruments in an effective hedge as appropriate.
The Group determines the classification of financial assets at initial recognition.
All financial assets are recognised initially at fair value plus directly attributable transaction costs except in the case of financial assets recognised at FVTPL.
The Groups financial assets include cash and cash equivalents derivative financial instruments and trade and other receivables.
Subsequent measurement The subsequent measurement of financial assets depends on their classification.
The Group does not hold any heldto maturity investments or availableforsale financial assets.
Financial assets at fair value through profit or loss Financial assets at FVTPL include financial assets held for trading.
Financial assets are classified as held for trading if they are acquired for the purpose of selling in the near term.
This category includes derivative financial instruments entered into by the Group that are not designated as hedging instruments in hedge relationships as defined by IAS 39.
Financial assets at FVTPL are carried in the balance sheet at fair value with changes in fair value recognised in finance revenues or finance costs in the income statement.
Loans and receivables Loans and receivables are nonderivative financial assets with fixed or determinable payments that are not quoted in an active market.
After initial measurement such assets are subsequently measured at amortised cost using the effective interest method less impairment.
Amortised cost is calculated by taking into account any discount or premium on acquisition and fees or costs that are an integral part of the effective interest rate.
The effective interest rate amortisation is included in finance revenues in the income statement.
The losses arising from impairment are recognised in the income statement in finance costs.
Loans and receivables also include cash and cash equivalents and trade and other receivables.
Stock Codesite OUR FINANCIALS 2.
SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED
A financial asset or where applicable a part of a financial asset or part of a group of similar financial assets is derecognised when the rights to receive cash flows from the asset have expired. substantially all the risks and rewards of the asset but has transferred control of the asset.
Impairment
The Group assesses at each balance sheet date whether a financial asset or group of financial assets is impaired.
Trade receivables which generally have 30 day terms are recognised and carried at the lower of their original invoiced value and recoverable amount.
Where the time value of money is material receivables are carried at amortised cost.
A provision for impairment is made when there is objective evidence such as the probability of insolvency or significant financial difficulties of the debtor that the Group will not be able to collect all of the amounts due under the original terms of the invoice.
The carrying amount of the receivable is reduced through use of an allowance account.
Impaired debts are derecognised when they are assessed as irrecoverable.
Initial recognition and measurement Financial liabilities within the scope of IAS 39 are classified as financial liabilities at FVTPL loans and borrowings or as derivatives designated as hedging instruments in an effective hedge as appropriate.
The Group determines the classification of financial liabilities at initial recognition.
The Group has trade and other payables loans classified as loans and borrowings and derivative financial instruments.
All financial liabilities are recognised initially at fair value except in the case of loans and borrowings which are recognised at fair value net of directly attributable transaction costs.
Subsequent measurement The subsequent measurement of financial liabilities depends on their classification as follows Financial liabilities at fair value through profit or loss Derivatives are classified as held for trading unless they are designated as effective hedging instruments.
Profits or losses on liabilities held for trading are recognised in the income statement.
Loans and borrowings After initial recognition loans and borrowings are subsequently measured at amortised cost using the effective interest method.
Profits and losses arising on the repurchase settlement or otherwise cancellation of liabilities are recognised in finance revenues and finance costs respectively.
Derecognition
A liability is generally derecognised when the contract that gives rise to it is settled sold cancelled or expires.
Where an existing financial liability is replaced by another from the same lender on substantially different terms or the terms of an existing liability are substantially modified such an exchange or modification is treated as a derecognition of the original liability and the recognition of a new liability and the difference in the respective carrying amounts together with any costs or fees incurred are recognised in the income statement.
Financial assets and financial liabilities are offset and the net amount reported in the balance sheet if and only if there is a currently enforceable legal right to offset the recognised amounts and there is an intention to settle on a net basis or to realise the assets and settle the liabilities simultaneously.
Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Polypipe Group plc NOTES TO THE GROUP FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 2.
SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED iv Fair values Fair value is the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction in the principal or most advantageous market at the measurement date under current market conditions.
The fair value of financial instruments that are traded in active markets at the balance sheet date is determined by reference to quoted market prices or dealer price quotations without any deduction for transaction costs.
For financial instruments not traded in an active market the fair value is determined using appropriate valuation techniques.
Such techniques may include using recent arms length market transactions reference to the current fair value of another instrument that is substantially the same discounted cash flow analysis or other valuation models.
An analysis of fair values of financial instruments and further details as to how they are measured are provided in Note 28.
The Group uses derivative financial instruments in particular interest rate swaps and forward foreign currency exchange contracts to manage the financial risks arising from the business activities and the financing of those activities.
The Group does not use derivative financial instruments for speculative purposes.
Derivative financial instruments are recognised as assets and liabilities measured at their fair value on the balance sheet date.
Changes in the fair value of any derivative financial instruments that do not fulfil the criteria for hedge accounting contained in IAS 39 are recognised immediately in the income statement.
A derivative is presented as a noncurrent asset or a non current liability if the remaining maturity of the instrument is more than 12 months and it is not expected to be realised or settled within 12 months.
The Group maintains documentation of the relationship between the hedged item and the hedging instrument at the inception of a hedging transaction together with the risk management objective and the strategy underlying the designated hedge.
The Group also documents its assessment both at the inception of the hedging relationship and subsequently on an ongoing basis of the effectiveness of the hedge in offsetting movements in the fair values or cash flows of the hedged items.
When hedge accounting is used the relevant hedging relationships are classified as fair value hedges cash flow hedges or net investment hedges.
Note 28 sets out the details of the fair values of the derivative financial instruments used for hedging purposes.
The Group does not currently have any designated fair value hedges or net investment hedges.
Cash flow hedge Cash flow hedging matches the cash flows of hedged items against the corresponding cash flows of the derivative.
The effective part of any profit or loss on the derivative is recognised directly in other comprehensive income and the hedged item is accounted for in accordance with the policy for that financial instrument.
Any ineffective part of any profit or loss is recognised immediately in the income statement.
Amounts taken to other comprehensive income are transferred to the income statement when the hedged transaction affects profit or loss such as when a forecast sale or purchase occurs.
Hedge accounting is discontinued when the hedging instrument expires or is sold terminated or exercised or no longer qualifies for hedge accounting.
At that time any cumulative profit or loss on the hedging instrument recognised in equity is retained in equity until the forecast transaction occurs.
If a hedged transaction is no longer expected to occur the net cumulative profit or loss recognised in equity is transferred to the income statement for the period.
2.15 Inventories Inventories are stated at the lower of cost and net realisable value.
Cost includes all costs incurred in bringing each product to its present location and condition as follows raw materials  purchase cost on a first in first out basis. level of activity.
Net realisable value is based on estimated selling price less any further costs expected to be incurred to completion and disposal.
Stock Codesite OUR FINANCIALS 2.
SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED 2.16 Cash and shortterm deposits Cash and shortterm deposits consist of cash at bank and in hand.
2.17 Pensions The Group operates a defined contribution pension plan.
Contributions payable in the year are charged to the income statement.
The assets are held separately from those of the Group in an independently administered fund.
Differences between contributions payable in the year and contributions actually paid are shown as either accruals or prepayments in the balance sheet.
2.18 Nonunderlying items The Group presents discontinued operations amortisation of intangible assets profit on disposal of property plant and equipment and nonrecurring operating costs finance costs and tax in respect of acquisitions as nonunderlying items on the face of the income statement.
These are items of income and expense which because of the nature and expected infrequency of the events giving rise to them the Directors consider merit separate presentation to provide a better and more consistent indication of the Groups underlying financial performance and more meaningful comparison with prior and future periods to assess trends in financial performance.
The tax effect of the above is also included.
2.19 Sharebased payments In the case of equitysettled schemes the fair value of options granted is recognised as an employee expense with a corresponding increase in equity.
The fair value is measured at the date of grant and spread over the period during which the employees become unconditionally entitled to the options.
The value of the options is measured using the BlackScholes and Monte Carlo models taking into account the terms and conditions including market and nonvesting conditions upon which the options were granted.
Nonmarket vesting conditions are taken into account by adjusting the number of equity instruments expected to vest at each balance sheet date so that ultimately the cumulative amount recognised over the vesting period is based on the number of options that eventually vest.
No expense is recognised for awards that do not ultimately vest except for equitysettled transactions where vesting is conditional upon a market or nonvesting condition which are treated as vesting irrespective of whether or not the market or nonvesting condition is satisfied provided that all other performance andor service conditions are satisfied.
The dilutive effect of outstanding options is reflected as additional share dilution in the computation of diluted earnings per share.
2.20 Own shares The Group operates an employee benefit trust EBT.
The Group andor the EBT holds Polypipe Group plc shares for the granting of Polypipe Group plc shares to employees and Directors.
These shares are recognised at cost and presented in the balance sheet as a deduction from equity.
No profit or loss is recognised in the income statement on the purchase sale issue or cancellation of these shares.
No dividends are earned on these shares and they are ignored for the purposes of calculating the Groups earnings per share.
2.21 Provisions Provisions are recognised when the Group has a present obligation legal or constructive as a result of a past event it is probable that an outflow of resources embodying economic benefits will be required to settle the obligation and a reliable estimate can be made of the amount of the obligation.
Restructuring provisions are recognised only when the Group has a constructive obligation which is when a detailed formal plan identifies the business or part of the business concerned the location and number of employees affected a detailed estimate of the associated costs and an appropriate timeline and the employees affected have been notified of the plans main features.
Provisions for warrantyrelated costs are recognised when the product is sold or service provided to the customer.
Initial
The initial estimate of warrantyrelated costs is revised at least annually.
Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Polypipe Group plc NOTES TO THE GROUP FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 3.
JUDGEMENTS AND KEY SOURCES OF ESTIMATION UNCERTAINTY The preparation of financial statements requires management to make judgements estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported for assets and liabilities at the balance sheet date and the amounts reported for revenues and expenses during the year.
However the nature of estimation means that actual outcomes could differ from those estimates.
The following judgement has the most significant effect on amounts recognised in the consolidated financial statements 3.1 Discontinued operations In accordance with IFRS the conditions for a disposal group or noncurrent asset to be classified as heldforsale include whether management is committed to a plan to sell the disposal group is available for immediate sale an active programme to locate a buyer is initiated the sale is highly probable within 12 months of classification as heldforsale subject to limited exceptions the asset is being actively marketed for sale at a sales price reasonable in relation to its fair value and the actions required to complete the plan indicate that it is unlikely that plan will be significantly changed or withdrawn.
On 31 January 2018 the Group announced it had entered into exclusive negotiations to sell Polypipe France.
It was determined that the sale was highly probable at 31 December 2017 and accordingly the French operations were classified as discontinued the associated net assets were classified as heldforsale and a loss on remeasurement to fair value less costs to sell was recognised.
The following estimates have the most significant effect on amounts recognised in the consolidated financial statements 3.2 Revenue recognition and customer rebates The Groups pricing structure involves rebate arrangements with several of its direct and indirect customers.
These can be complex in nature and involve estimation in determining the required level of provision for rebate liabilities particularly where the Group is reliant on information from customers which may not be available at the time the liabilities are assessed.
3.3 Impairment of nonfinancial assets Nonfinancial assets include goodwill other intangible assets and property plant and equipment.
In accordance with IFRS the Group considers whether there are any indicators of impairment of these assets.
Where indicators of impairment are identified the Group tests the asset for impairment.
Goodwill is tested for impairment annually at 31 December and when circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may be impaired.
The Groups impairment test for goodwill is based on a value in use calculation.
The value in use calculation is based on a discounted cash flow model.
The cash flows are derived from the budgets and forecasts for the next four years and do not include restructuring activities that the Group is not yet committed to or significant future investments that will enhance the performance of the asset or the cashgenerating unit CGU being tested.
The recoverable amount is most sensitive to the discount rate used for the discounted cash flow model as well as the expected future cash flows and the growth rate used for extrapolation purposes.
The key assumptions used to determine the recoverable amount for the different CGUs are further explained in Note 16.
3.4 Restructuring provisions Provisions are recognised when the Group has a present obligation legal or constructive as a result of a past event it is probable that the Group will be required to settle the probable outflow of resources and a reliable estimate can be made of the amount of the obligation.
Present obligations arising under onerous contracts are recognised and measured as provisions.
Onerous contracts are considered to exist where the Group has a contract under which the unavoidable costs of meeting the obligations under the contract exceed the economic benefit expected to be received under the contract.
Provisions for employee contract termination benefits are recognised when the Group is demonstrably committed to either terminating the employment of current employees according to a detailed formal plan where valid expectations are created that the obligation will be discharged or when the Group provides termination benefits as a result of an offer made to encourage voluntary redundancy.
3.5 Inventory provisioning The Directors make estimates based on experience regarding the level of provisioning required against slowmoving and obsolete items to state inventories at the lower of cost and net realisable value.
Stock Codesite OUR FINANCIALS 4.
STANDARDS ISSUED BUT NOT YET EFFECTIVE Standards which have been adopted in the year There were no new standards or interpretations adopted in the year that had a material impact on the Groups consolidated financial statements.
Standards issued but not yet effective The following listing of standards and interpretations issued are those that the Group reasonably expects to have an impact on disclosures financial position or performance but which have an effective date after the date of these consolidated financial statements.
The Group has not early adopted them and plans to adopt them from the effective dates adopted by the European Union.
International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs Effective date IFRS 9 Financial Instruments 1 January 2018 IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers 1 January 2018 IFRS 16 Leases 1 January 2019 IFRS 9 Financial Instruments IFRS 9 addresses the classification measurement and derecognition of financial assets and liabilities introduces new rules for hedge accounting and a new impairment model for financial assets.
The Group has reviewed its financial assets and liabilities and is expecting the following impact from the adoption of the new standard on 1 January 2018 Cash and cash equivalents and trade and other receivables the new rules do not affect the classification and measurement of these financial assets which will continue to be recognised at amortised cost.
Financial liabilities the new rules only affect the accounting for financial liabilities that are designated at fair value through profit or loss FVTPL.
The only liabilities currently designated as FVTPL are the forward foreign currency derivatives see below.
The derecognition rules have been transferred from IAS 39 Financial Instruments Recognition and Measurement and have not been changed.
Interest rate swaps these will continue to qualify as hedges on adoption of IFRS 9.
Forward foreign currency derivatives these are currently accounted for as heldfortrading derivatives at FVTPL.
Accordingly no change is required to the way in which these liabilities are recognised.
The new impairment model requires the recognition of impairment provisions based on forwardlooking expected credit losses rather than backward looking incurred losses previously applied under IAS 39.
This applies to financial assets classified at amortised cost namely cash and cash equivalents and trade and other receivables.
The only financial asset that is currently impaired and which may continue to be impaired under IFRS 9 is trade receivables.
A large proportion of trade receivables are covered by credit insurance.
Initial assessments indicate any change to the loss allowance for trade receivables will be immaterial.
IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers IFRS 15 replaces IAS 18 which covers contracts for goods and services and IAS 11 which covers construction costs.
The new standard is based on the principle that revenue is recognised when control of a good or service transfers to a customer.
The standard permits either a full retrospective or a modified retrospective approach for the adoption.
We have considered variable consideration specifically in relation to rebates.
The Group accounts for rebates as discussed in Notes 2.7 and 3.2 to the consolidated financial statements and there is not expected to be any impact of applying the new standard.
Due to the generally shortterm nature of the Groups contracts there will likely be no significant impact on the timing of recognition of revenue prospectively.
The Group intends to adopt the standard using the modified retrospective approach which means that the cumulative impact of the adoption will be recognised in retained earnings as of 1 January 2018 and the comparatives will not be restated.
Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Polypipe Group plc NOTES TO THE GROUP FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 4.
STANDARDS ISSUED BUT NOT YET EFFECTIVE CONTINUED IFRS 16 Leases Under IFRS 16 the present distinction between operating and finance leases will be removed resulting in all leases being recognised on the balance sheet except shortterm leases and leases of lowvalue assets and termed rightofuse assets.
At inception a rightofuse asset will be recognised together with an equivalent liability reflecting the discounted lease payments over the estimated term of the lease.
While the overall cost of using the asset over the lease term should be the same it is likely that the weighting of the charge between periods may differ due to the requirement to distinguish between the lease and nonlease elements of the agreement.
Adoption of this standard is likely to result in an increase in gross assets and gross liabilities in the balance sheet and finance costs being reclassified in the income statement to depreciation andor interest expense.
Currently the Group does not have any finance leases but does have operating leases which are disclosed in Note Beyond the information above it is not practicable to provide a reasonable financial estimate of the effect of this standard until a detailed review has been completed.
SEGMENT INFORMATION IFRS 8 Operating Segments requires operating segments to be identified on the basis of the internal financial information reported to the Chief Operating Decision Maker CODM.
The Groups CODM is deemed to be the Board of Directors who are primarily responsible for the allocation of resources to segments and the assessment of performance of the segments.
Following the announcement on 31 January 2018 that the Group had entered into exclusive negotiations to sell Polypipe France Holding SAS its French operations to Ryb S. the Board of Directors refined its reporting segments.
The Group now has two reporting segments  Residential Systems and Commercial and Infrastructure Systems.
The reporting segments are organised based on the nature of the end markets served.
There are no significant judgements in aggregating operating segments to arrive at the reporting segments.
Intersegment sales are on an arms length basis in a manner similar to transactions with third parties.
As explained in Note 18 the operations of Polypipe France have been classified as discontinued during the year and consequently the comparative financial information has been restated where appropriate to meet the presentational requirements of IFRS 5 Noncurrent Assets HeldforSale and Discontinued Operations to take account of this change.
2017 2016
Systems
Commercial and
Systems
Total
Residential
Systems
Commercial and
Systems
Total
Continuing operations Segmental revenue 228.8 196.0 424.8 207.6 190.6 398.2 Inter segment revenue 5.3 7.8 13.1 4.9 6.1 11.0 Underlying operating profit 44.3 28.3 72.6 39.1 29.4 68.5 Nonunderlying items  segmental 0.3 4.0 4.3 0.2 0.1 0.3 Segmental operating profit 44.0 24.3 68.3 39.3 29.5 68.8 Nonunderlying items  Group 5.8 7.7 Operating profit 62.5 61.1 Finance costs 6.9 7.6 Profit before tax 55.6 53.5 Underlying operating profit is stated before nonunderlying items as defined in the Group Accounting Policies on page 98 and is the measure of segment profit used by the Groups CODM.
Details of the nonunderlying items of 10.1m 2016 7.4m are set out below at Nonunderlying items before tax.
Stock Codesite OUR FINANCIALS 5.
SEGMENT INFORMATION CONTINUED Balance sheet 31 December 2017 31 December 2016
Total liabilities
Total liabilities Continuing operations Residential Systems 287.0 60.7 280.6 60.8 Commercial and Infrastructure Systems 256.8 32.5 251.9 30.5 Total segment assetsliabilities 543.8 93.2 532.5 91.3 Discontinued operations 23.3 10.9 33.1 8.1 Current and deferred income taxes  12.6  14.5 Net assets 302.0 287.4 Capital additions Residential Systems 10.3 8.6 Commercial and Infrastructure Systems 12.1 10.1 Continuing operations 22.4 18.7 Discontinued operations 1.3 1.0 Total  Group 23.7 19.7 Depreciation of property plant and equipment Residential Systems 8.0 8.3 Commercial and Infrastructure Systems 6.9 6.7 Continuing operations 14.9 15.0 Discontinued operations 1.3 1.3 Total  Group 16.2 16.3 Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Polypipe Group plc NOTES TO THE GROUP FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 5.
SEGMENT INFORMATION CONTINUED Nonunderlying items before tax Residential Systems  restructuring costs 0.3 Commercial and Infrastructure Systems  restructuring costs 4.0 Residential Systems  profit on disposal of property plant and equipment  0.2 Commercial and Infrastructure Systems  profit on disposal of property plant and equipment  0.1 UK operations 4.3 0.3 Group  amortisation of intangible assets 5.5 6.8 Group  aborted acquisition costs 0.3 Group  impairment of freehold land and buildings  0.9 Continuing operations 10.1 7.4 Discontinued operations loss recognised on remeasurement to fair value less costs to sell 12.5 Discontinued operations profitloss from discontinued operations 1.4 0.9 Total  Group 21.2 6.5 Geographical analysis Revenue by destination Continuing operations Rest of Europe 18.9 17.0 Rest of World 27.1 31.9 Total  Group 411.7 387.2 Noncurrent assets 31 December 31 December Continuing operations Rest of Europe 4.0 3.9 Total  Group 455.1 454.0 Noncurrent assets for this purpose consist of property plant and equipment goodwill and other intangible assets.
The Group has two customers 2016 two which individually accounted for more than 10% of the Groups total continuing and discontinued revenue during 2017.
These customers account for 13.2% and 10.5% respectively 2016 12.5% and 11.1% respectively and are included in both reporting segments.
Stock Codesite OUR FINANCIALS 6.
OPERATING PROFIT Income statement charges Continuing operations Depreciation of property plant and equipment owned 14.9 15.0 Cost of inventories recognised as an expense 238.8 219.1 Operating lease payments  minimum lease payments 4.0 4.5 Research and development costs written off 0.8 0.5 Discontinued operations Depreciation of property plant and equipment owned 1.3 1.3 Cost of inventories recognised as an expense 46.1 37.7 Operating lease payments  minimum lease payments 0.1 0.4 Income statement credits  continuing operations Profit on disposal of property plant and equipment 0.1 0.3 AUDITORS REMUNERATION The Group paid the following amounts to the Companys auditor in respect of the audit of the consolidated financial statements and for other services provided to the Group.
Auditors remuneration for audit services Audit of the Companys annual financial statements Audit of the Companys subsidiaries 0.3 0.3 Total audit fees 0.3 0.3 The Group did not make any payments to the Companys auditor for nonaudit services 2016 nil.
Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Polypipe Group plc NOTES TO THE GROUP FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 8.
NONUNDERLYING ITEMS Nonunderlying items comprised 2017 2016
Tax
Net
Gross
Tax
Net
Cost of sales Restructuring costs 2.8 0.2 2.6 Administration expenses Restructuring costs 1.5  1.5 Administration expenses Aborted acquisition costs 0.3 0.1 0.2 Profit on disposal of property plant and equipment    0.3  0.3 Impairment of freehold land and buildings    0.9  0.9 Amortisation of intangible Discontinued operations loss recognised on remeasurement to fair value less costs to sell 12.5  12.5 Discontinued operations profit loss from discontinued operations 1.4 0.2 1.2 0.9 0.1 0.8 Total nonunderlying items 21.2 1.0 20.2 6.5 1.5 5.0 Gross restructuring costs of 4.3m were recognised in 2017 in respect of a change in our Commercial and Infrastructure Systems manufacturing strategy in the Middle East 4.0m and the relocation of our Residential Systems Domus Ventilation manufacturing facilities 0.3m.
The Middle East restructuring plan was drawn up and announced to the relevant employees in 2017.
The Domus Ventilation restructuring plan was drawn up announced and completed in 2017.
Of the 4.0m Middle East restructuring costs 1.7m were noncash and the remaining 2.3m costs are expected to be fully cash settled by the end of 2018.
The discontinued operations relate to the sale of Polypipe France Holding SAS as explained in Note 18.
Provisions comprised 31 December 31 December Restructuring costs 2.2 Stock Codesite OUR FINANCIALS 9.
STAFF COSTS Staff costs including Directors comprised Continuing operations Wages and salaries 87.1 81.2 Social security costs 8.3 7.6 Other pension costs 2.6 2.4 Discontinued operations Wages and salaries 6.2 5.8 Social security costs 2.6 2.4 Other pension costs 0.1 0.1 Total  Group 106.9 99.5 The average monthly number of persons employed by the Group by segment was as follows
No.
Residential Systems 1668 1537 Commercial and Infrastructure Systems 1257 1199 Continuing operations 2925 2736 Discontinued operations 214 202 Total  Group 3139 2938 DIRECTORS REMUNERATION Details of the Directors remuneration are set out below Fees 0.3 0.3 Emoluments 1.8 1.9 The aggregate amount of gains made by the Directors on the exercise of share options during the year was 0.3m 2016 0.2m.
FINANCE COSTS Interest on bank loan 5.8 6.6 Debt issue cost amortisation 0.3 0.4 Other finance costs 0.8 0.6 Finance costs 6.9 7.6 Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Polypipe Group plc NOTES TO THE GROUP FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 12.
INCOME TAX a Tax charged in the income statement Continuing operations Current income tax UK income tax 11.2 12.4 Overseas income tax 0.1 Total current income tax 11.3 12.4 Deferred income tax Origination and reversal of temporary differences 0.7 2.0 Effect of changes in income tax rates  0.3 Total deferred income tax 0.7 2.3 Total tax expense reported in the income statement 10.6 10.1 Discontinued operations Current income tax Overseas income tax 0.2 0.1 Total tax expense reported in the income statement 0.2 0.1 Details of the nonunderlying tax credit of 1.0m 2016 1.5m are set out in Note 8.
A reconciliation between the tax expense and the product of accounting profit multiplied by the blended UK standard rate of income tax for the years ended 31 December 2017 and 2016 is as follows Accounting profit before tax  continuing operations 55.6 53.5 Accounting profit multiplied by the blended UK standard rate of income tax of 19.25% 2016 20.00% 10.7 10.7 Expenses not deductible for income tax 0.4 0.7 Nontaxable income  0.1 Sharebased payments 0.4 0.3 Effects of patent box 0.8 0.7 Effects of changes in income tax rates 0.1 Effects of other tax rates  credits 0.8 0.2 Total tax expense reported in the income statement  continuing operations 10.6 10.1 Total tax expense reported in the income statement  discontinued operations 0.2 0.1 The effective rate for the full year was 19.1% 2016 18.9%.
If the impact of nonunderlying items is excluded the underlying income tax rate would be 18.0% 2016 19.2%.
Stock Codesite OUR FINANCIALS 12.
INCOME TAX CONTINUED c Deferred income tax The deferred income tax included in the Group balance sheet is as follows 31 December 31 December Continuing operations Deferred income tax liabilities  assets Shortterm timing differences 6.2 6.5 Capital allowances in excess of depreciation 1.3 1.4 Sharebased payments 0.5 0.4 Continuing operations 7.0 7.5 Discontinued operations 0.3 0.2 The Group offsets tax assets and liabilities if and only if it has a legally enforceable right to set off current income tax assets and current income tax liabilities and the deferred income tax assets and deferred income tax liabilities relate to income taxes levied by the same tax authority.
A reconciliation of deferred income taxes for the years ended 31 December 2017 and 2016 is as follows Deferred income tax reported in the income statement 0.7 2.3 Deferred income tax reported in other comprehensive income 0.3 0.3 Sharebased payments excess tax benefit 0.1 0.1 Net foreign exchange difference 0.1 d Change in corporation tax rate The Chancellor has announced that the main UK corporation tax rate will be reduced from the current rate of 19% which was applied from 1 April 2017 to 17% from 1 April 2020.
The reduction in the corporation tax rate to 17% was included within the UK Finance Act 2016 that was enacted in September 2016.
Deferred income tax is measured at income tax rates that are expected to apply in the periods in which the temporary timing differences are expected to reverse based on income tax rates and laws that have been enacted or substantively enacted at the balance sheet date.
Deferred income tax has therefore been provided at 17% 2016 17%.
A deferred income tax asset of 0.6m 2016 1.0m in respect of surplus nontrading losses of 3.7m 2016 5.5m has not been recognised at 31 December 2017 as its recovery is uncertain.
Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Polypipe Group plc NOTES TO THE GROUP FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 13.
EARNINGS PER SHARE Basic earnings per share amounts are calculated by dividing profit for the year attributable to the owners of the parent company by the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding during the year.
The diluted earnings per share amounts are calculated by dividing profit for the year attributable to the owners of the parent company by the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding during the year plus the weighted average number of potential ordinary shares that would be issued on the conversion of all the dilutive share options into ordinary shares.
The calculation of basic and diluted earnings per share is based on the following 2017 2016 Weighted average number of ordinary shares for the purpose of basic earnings per share 198390485 198930384 Effect of dilutive potential ordinary shares 1788892 1053339 Weighted average number of ordinary shares for the purpose of diluted earnings per share 200179377 199983723 Underlying earnings per share is based on the result for the year after tax excluding the impact of nonunderlying items of 20.2m 2016 5.0m.
The Directors consider that this measure provides a better and more consistent indication of the Groups underlying financial performance and more meaningful comparison with prior and future periods to assess trends in our financial performance.
The underlying earnings per share is calculated as follows 2017 2016 Underlying profit for the year attributable to the owners of the parent company m 53.9 49.2 Underlying basic earnings per share pence 27.2 24.7 Underlying diluted earnings per share pence 26.9 24.6 DIVIDENDS PER SHARE Amounts recognised as distributions to equity holders in the year Final dividend for the year ended 31 December 2016 of 7.0p per share 2015 5.5p 13.9 11.0 Interim dividend for the year ended 31 December 2017 of 3.6p per share 2016 3.1p 7.1 6.1 Proposed final dividend for the year ended 31 December 2017 of 7.5p per share 2016 7.0p 14.9 13.9 The proposed final dividend is subject to approval by shareholders at the Annual General Meeting and has not been included as a liability in these consolidated financial statements.
Stock Codesite OUR FINANCIALS 15.
PROPERTY PLANT AND EQUIPMENT
Plant and other equipment
Cost
At 1 January 2016 48.1 147.0 195.1 Additions 1.2 18.5 19.7 Disposals  3.2 3.2 Reclassified as assets heldforsale 3.2  3.2 Exchange adjustment 1.0 4.6 5.6 At 31 December 2016 47.1 166.9 214.0 Additions 1.9 21.8 23.7 Disposals  1.3 1.3 Reclassified as assets heldforsale 11.5 31.4 42.9 Exchange adjustment 0.3 1.2 1.5 At 31 December 2017 37.8 157.2 195.0 Depreciation and impairment losses At 1 January 2016 10.1 86.9 97.0 Provided during the year 1.4 14.9 16.3 Disposals  3.1 3.1 Impairment 0.9  0.9 Reclassified as assets heldforsale 2.5  2.5 Exchange adjustment 0.7 3.7 4.4 At 31 December 2016 10.6 102.4 113.0 Provided during the year 1.3 14.9 16.2 Disposals  1.2 1.2 Impairment  0.9 0.9 Reclassified as assets heldforsale 6.7 27.0 33.7 Exchange adjustment 0.2 1.0 1.2 At 31 December 2017 5.4 91.0 96.4 Net book value At 31 December 2017 32.4 66.2 98.6 At 31 December 2016 36.5 64.5 101.0 The impairment charge in 2017 of 0.9m related to plant and equipment in the Middle East as explained in Note 8.
The
Polypipe France assets with a net book value of 9.2m were reclassified as heldforsale in accordance with IFRS 5 Non current Assets HeldforSale and Discontinued Operations as explained in Note 18.
The impairment charge in 2016 of 0.9m related to surplus freehold land and buildings at Wolverhampton that are being actively marketed and writes down their carrying amount to 0.7m being their fair value less costs to sell.
The written down asset was reclassified as heldforsale in accordance with IFRS 5 Noncurrent Assets HeldforSale and Discontinued Operations.
Included in freehold land and buildings is nondepreciable land of 12.6m 2016 13.0m.
Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Polypipe Group plc NOTES TO THE GROUP FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 16.
INTANGIBLE ASSETS
Patents
Brand names
Customer order book
Cost
At 31 December 2016 329.3 18.2 25.5 6.4 2.0 381.4 Reclassified as assets heldforsale 9.6     9.6 At 31 December 2017 319.7 18.2 25.5 6.4 2.0 371.8 Amortisation and impairment At 1 January 2016  0.7 1.0 0.5 0.8 3.0 Charge for the year  1.8 2.6 1.2 1.2 6.8 At 31 December 2016  2.5 3.6 1.7 2.0 9.8 Charge for the year  1.8 2.5 1.2  5.5 At 31 December 2017  4.3 6.1 2.9 2.0 15.3 Net book value At 31 December 2017 319.7 13.9 19.4 3.5  356.5 At 31 December 2016 329.3 15.7 21.9 4.7  371.6 Goodwill is not amortised but is subject to annual impairment testing.
The Polypipe France goodwill of 9.6m was reclassified as heldforsale in accordance with IFRS 5 Noncurrent Assets Held forSale and Discontinued Operations as explained in Note 18.
Impairment testing of goodwill Goodwill acquired through business combinations has been allocated for impairment testing purposes to a number of cashgenerating units CGUs.
These represent the lowest level within the Group at which goodwill is monitored for internal management purposes.
Carrying amount of goodwill allocated to each of the CGUs
31 December 31 December Building Products 146.1 146.1 Terrain 31.4 31.4 Civils 36.0 36.0 Nuaire 91.3 91.3 Others 14.9 24.5 Impairment tests on the carrying amounts of goodwill are performed by analysing the carrying amount allocated to each CGU against its value in use.
Value in use is calculated for each CGU as the net present value of that CGUs discounted future pre tax cash flows.
These pretax cash flows are based on budgeted cash flows information for a period of one year construction industry forecasts of growth for the following year and growth of between 2% to 3% thereafter 2016 2% to 3%.
A pretax discount rate of 10.0% 2016 10.0% has been applied in determining the recoverable amounts of CGUs.
The pre tax discount rate is estimated based on the Groups risk adjusted cost of capital.
The Group has applied sensitivities to the remaining goodwill of 319.7m to assess whether any reasonably possible changes in assumptions could cause an impairment that would be material to these consolidated financial statements.
The application of these sensitivities did not cause an impairment of goodwill.
Stock Codesite OUR FINANCIALS 17.
INVESTMENTS
Details of Group undertakings Details of the investments in which the Group holds 20% or more of the nominal value of any class of share capital at 31 December 2017 are set out in Note 4 to the parent company financial statements.
ASSETS CLASSIFIED AS HELDFORSALE On 31 January 2018 the Group announced that it had entered into exclusive negotiations to sell Polypipe France Holding SAS its French operations to Ryb S. a Francebased manufacturer and distributor of plastics in Europe.
The cash consideration payable by Ryb S. will be 16.5m on a cashfree debtfree and normalised working capital basis.
It was determined that the sale was highly probable at 31 December 2017 and accordingly the net assets of the French operations have been classified as heldforsale in the consolidated balance sheet.
In accordance with IFRS 5 Noncurrent Assets HeldforSale and Discontinued Operations an impairment loss of 12.5m to remeasure the carrying amount of the assets to fair value less costs to sell has been recognised following the reclassification of the net assets of Polypipe France Holding SAS as heldforsale.
An analysis of the assets heldforsale and liabilities associated with the assets classified as heldforsale is as follows Book value
31 December Assets heldforsale Intangible assets 9.6 9.6 Property plant and equipment 9.2 2.9 6.3 Inventories 7.7  7.7 Trade and other receivables 9.0  9.0 Deferred income tax assets 0.3  0.3 Liabilities associated with assets classified as heldforsale Trade and other payables 9.5  9.5 Income tax payable 0.2  0.2 Other liabilities 1.2  1.2 Net assets heldforsale 24.9 12.5 12.4 The table below provides further detail of the discontinued operations Revenue 58.4 49.7 Expenses 57.0 48.8 Profit before tax 1.4 0.9 Income tax 0.2 0.1 Profit from discontinued operations 1.2 0.8 Loss recognised on remeasurement to fair value less costs to sell 12.5 Profitloss from discontinued operations 11.3 0.8 Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Polypipe Group plc NOTES TO THE GROUP FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 18.
ASSETS CLASSIFIED AS HELDFORSALE CONTINUED The remaining assets classified as heldforsale comprised 31 December 31 December Property plant and equipment 0.7 0.7 These assets classified as heldforsale consist exclusively of freehold land currently not in use by the Group.
It is expected that the disposal of this asset will be completed during 2018.
The assets classified as heldforsale are analysed between operating segments as follows 31 December 31 December Residential Systems 0.4 0.4 Commercial and Infrastructure Systems 0.3 0.3
31 December 31 December Raw materials 18.2 17.4 Work in progress 5.3 6.1 Finished goods 30.0 28.7 All inventories are carried at cost less a provision to take account of slowmoving and obsolete items.
The provision as at 31 December 2017 was 5.4m 2016 6.1m.
TRADE AND OTHER RECEIVABLES 31 December 31 December Trade receivables 28.6 34.9 Other receivables  1.2 Prepayments and accrued income 5.9 4.0 Trade receivables are noninterest bearing and are generally settled on 30 days credit.
Stock Codesite OUR FINANCIALS 20.
TRADE AND OTHER RECEIVABLES CONTINUED Impairment losses The Group maintains a substantial level of credit insurance covering the majority of its trade receivables which mitigates against possible impairment losses.
Therefore such impairment losses are not significant.
The ageing of trade receivables at the balance sheet date was as follows 31 December 2017 31 December 2016
Provisions
Net
Gross
Provisions
Net
Not past due 26.9  26.9 31.1  31.1 Past due 130 days 0.9  0.9 2.1  2.1 Past due 3190 days 0.6  0.6 2.0 0.3 1.7 Past due more than 90 days 0.7 0.5 0.2 0.3 0.3 The movements in provisions for impairment of trade receivables comprised At 31 December 2016 and 2015 0.6 Charged to the income statement during the year 0.3 Utilised during the year 0.4 At 31 December 2017 0.5 CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTS Cash and cash equivalents comprised 31 December 31 December Cash at bank and in hand 35.7 26.5 Cash at bank earns interest at variable rates based on daily bank deposit rates.
The Group only deposits cash surpluses with banks that have as a minimum a single A credit rating.
SHARE CAPITAL AND RESERVES Share capital 31 December 2017 31 December 2016 Number  Number Authorised share capital Ordinary shares of 0.001 each 200 200000 200 200000 Allotted called up and fully paid Ordinary shares of 0.001 each 200 200000 200 200000 Millions of shares.
The ordinary shares are voting nonredeemable shares and rank equally as to dividends voting rights and any return of capital on winding up.
Capital redemption reserve Following the consolidation and subdivision of shares in 2014 the Companys deferred shares were cancelled.
In order to maintain the Companys capital a transfer was made from retained earnings to a capital redemption reserve at that time.
Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Polypipe Group plc NOTES TO THE GROUP FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 22.
SHARE CAPITAL AND RESERVES CONTINUED Own shares Own shares represent the cost of Polypipe Group plc shares purchased in the market and held by the Company andor the employee benefit trust EBT to satisfy the future exercise of options under the Groups share option schemes.
At 31 December 2017 the Group held 402746 2016 1714148 of its own shares at an average cost of 294p 2016 268p per share.
The market value of these shares at 31 December 2017 was 1.6m 2016 5.6m.
The nominal value of each share The EBT held 748000 shares at 31 December 2017 2016 nil at an average cost of 422p 2016 nil per share.
The market value of these shares at 31 December 2017 was 2.9m 2016 nil.
The nominal value of each share is 0.001.
Hedging reserve The hedging reserve contains the effective portion of the cash flow hedge relationships entered into by the Group in respect of interest rate swaps as mentioned in Note 25.
Foreign currency retranslation reserve The foreign currency retranslation reserve is used to record exchange differences arising from the translation of the financial statements of foreign subsidiaries.
Capital management The primary objective of the Groups capital management is to ensure that it maintains an appropriate capital structure to support its business objectives and maximise shareholder value.
The Group regards shareholders equity and net debt as its capital.
The Groups net debt is defined as cash and cash equivalents loans and borrowings.
At 31 December 2017 the Group had bank debt of 185.0m 2016 192.0m an undrawn committed revolving credit facility of 105.0m 2016 108.0m and cash of 35.7m 2016 26.5m.
A key objective of the Group is to maintain sufficient liquidity cash and committed bank facilities in order to meet its cash commitments including interest payments due on that debt.
No changes were made to the objectives policies or processes during the years ended 31 December 2017 and 31 December 2016.
Stock Codesite OUR FINANCIALS 23.
SHAREBASED PAYMENTS Share options were granted by the Company under its various share option schemes as detailed in the table below
31 December
Granted
Number
Dividend accrual
Exercised
Number
Lapsed forfeited
31 December
Date first exercisable
2014 Sharesave granted 2014 1.99 1487080   1273732 46558 166790 1 Nov 30 April 2014 Sharesave granted 2016 2.21 1415697   1356 120701 1293640 1 Nov 30 April 2014 Sharesave granted 2017 3.10  1108772   17703 1091069 1 Nov 30 April 2014 LTIP granted 2014 Nil 36314   36314 8 Sept 8 Sept 2014 LTIP granted 10 May 2016 Nil 552803    24368 528435 10 May 10 May 2014 LTIP granted 31 May 2016 Nil 77743     77743 31 May 31 May 2014 LTIP granted 2 May 2017 Nil  499896   12845 487051 2 May 2 May 2014 LTIP granted 22 May 2017 Nil  10960    10960 22 May 22 May DSBP granted 28 April 2015 Nil 42801  2922 45723 28 April 28 April DSBP granted 26 April 2016 Nil 31174  1719 32893 26 April 26 April DSBP granted 25 April 2017 Nil  32165 837 24547  8455 25 April 25 April Other share awards granted 31 May 2016 Nil 44582  1451 24352  21681 16 May 31 May 3688194 1651793 6929 1438917 222175 3685824 Sharesave Plan Sharesave Plan options were granted to eligible employees on 7 September 2017 at an exercise price of 3.10 per share a 20% discount to the average share price over the three business days preceding the offer.
Participating employees can exercise their options to purchase the shares acquired through their savings plans at the option price after three years.
These options have an exercise date of 2020 to 2021.
LongTerm Incentive Plan LTIP LTIP options were awarded to a number of senior executives on 2 May and 22 May 2017.
These options have an exercise date of 2020 to 2027.
The vesting of each award is subject to the satisfaction of certain performance criteria of which 25% is based on total shareholder return the TSR element and 75% is based on earnings per share performance the EPS element.
Further details of the scheme are provided in the Annual Report on Remuneration.
Deferred Share Bonus Plan DSBP On 25 April 2017 the Executive Directors received an award of shares under the DSBP relating to the 2016 annual bonus.
David Halls deferred bonus share awards vested upon cessation of employment on 2 October 2017 in accordance with the DSBP rules and were settled in cash.
Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Polypipe Group plc NOTES TO THE GROUP FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 23.
SHAREBASED PAYMENTS CONTINUED Other share awards In 2016 other share awards in the form of nil cost options were made relating to buyout arrangements to partially compensate Martin Payne for bonus and longterm incentive awards which were forfeited when he left his previous employer.
Of these 24352 were exercised on 8 August 2017 including 668 in respect of dividends accrued since the grant date.
Further details are provided in the Annual Report on Remuneration.
All these equitysettled sharebased payments are measured at fair value at the date of grant.
The fair value determined at the date of grant of the equitysettled sharebased payments is expensed to the income statement on a straightline basis over the vesting period based on the Groups estimates of shares that will eventually vest with a corresponding adjustment to equity.
Fair value for the Sharesave Plan options and the EPS element of the LTIP options is measured by use of a BlackScholes model.
Fair value of the TSR element of the LTIP options is measured by use of a Monte Carlo model.
The expected life used in the models has been adjusted based on managements best estimate for the effects of nontransferability exercise restrictions and behavioural considerations.
The assumptions used for each sharebased payment are as follows
2 May 2017
22 May 2017
Share price at the date of grant 4.03 4.20 4.09 Exercise price Nil Nil 3.10 Shares under option 499896 10960 1108772 Vesting period years 3.00 3.00 3.25 Expected volatility 30.0% 29.9% 28.0% Median volatility of the comparator group 29.9% 30.0% na Expected life years 3.00 3.00 3.25 Risk free rate 0.15% 0.18% 0.30% Dividend yield 2.50% 2.40% 2.59% TSR performance of the Company at the date of grant 31.7% 37.2% na Median TSR performance of the comparator group at the date of grant 17.0% 17.0% na Correlation median 22.4% 22.6% na Fair value per option 3.44 3.63 0.91 Stock Codesite OUR FINANCIALS 23.
SHAREBASED PAYMENTS CONTINUED
10 May 2016
31 May 2016
Share price at the date of grant 2.87 3.18 2.77 Exercise price Nil Nil 2.21 Shares under option 552803 77743 1422700 Vesting period years 3.00 3.00 3.25 Expected volatility 25.4% 25.6% 26.7% Median volatility of the comparator group 26.1% 26.0% na Expected life years 3.00 3.00 3.25 Risk free rate 0.50% 0.58% 0.18% Dividend yield 2.80% 2.53% 3.35% TSR performance of the Company at the date of grant 3.3% 7.4% na Median TSR performance of the comparator group at the date of grant 1.6% 2.8% na Correlation median 13.4% 13.4% na Fair value per option 2.32 2.65 0.60 The expected volatility is based on historical share price movements.
The Directors anticipate it is possible the performance criteria in relation to the LTIP options may not be met.
Sharebased payments charge for the year 1.2 1.3 TRADE AND OTHER PAYABLES 31 December 31 December Trade payables 68.5 66.6 Other taxes and social security costs 8.3 11.4 Accruals 10.8 13.8 Trade payables are noninterest bearing and generally settled on 30 to 60 day terms.
Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Polypipe Group plc NOTES TO THE GROUP FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 25.
FINANCIAL LIABILITIES 31 December 31 December Noncurrent loans and borrowings Bank loan  principal 185.0 192.0 unamortised debt issue costs 0.9 1.2 Total noncurrent loans and borrowings 184.1 190.8 m m Other financial liabilities Trade and other payables 87.6 91.8 Forward foreign currency derivatives  1.5 Interest rate swaps 2.5 4.2 Other liabilities 0.9 2.1 Bank loan The bank loan which is a revolving credit facility is secured and expires in full in August 2020.
Interest is payable on the bank loan at LIBOR plus an interest margin ranging from 1.25% to 2.75% which is dependent on the Groups leverage net debt as a multiple of EBITDA and reduces as the Groups leverage reduces.
The interest margin at 31 December 2017 was 1.75% 2016 2.00%.
At 31 December 2017 the Group had available subject to covenant headroom 105.0m 2016 108.0m of undrawn committed borrowing facilities in respect of which all conditions precedent had been met at 31 December 2017.
The facility reduced by 10m to 290m at 31 December 2017 and will reduce by a further 10m each year regardless of leverage at 31 December 2018 and 2019 the remainder is available until August 2020.
The Group is subject to a number of covenants in relation to its bank loan which if breached would result in the bank loan becoming immediately repayable.
These covenants specify certain maximum limits in terms of net debt as a multiple of EBITDA and interest cover.
At 31 December 2017 the Group was not in breach of any bank covenants.
The covenant position was as follows
Covenant requirement Position at 31 December Interest cover Underlying operating profitFinance costs excluding debt issue cost amortisation 4.01 11.51 Leverage Net debtEBITDA 3.01 1.61 The interest cover and leverage covenants remain at 4.01 and 3.01 respectively throughout the remaining term of the revolving credit facility to August 2020.
Stock Codesite OUR FINANCIALS 26.
COMMITMENTS AND CONTINGENCIES Operating lease commitments The Group has entered into commercial leases on certain properties and plant and equipment.
These leases have an average life of between five to ten years.
Future minimum rentals payable under noncancellable operating leases comprised Continuing operations 31 December 31 December Land and buildings Within one year 1.2 0.2 After one year but not more than five years 3.5 3.0 More than five years 5.7 9.4 Continuing operations m m Plant and equipment Within one year 0.2 0.1 After one year but not more than five years 2.3 2.7 More than five years 2.6 2.2 Capital commitments At 31 December 2017 the Group had commitments of 3.6m 2016 6.5m relating to plant and equipment purchases.
RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS Compensation of key management personnel including Directors Shortterm employee benefits 2.9 2.9 Sharebased payments 0.5 0.5 Key management personnel comprise the Executive Directors and key divisional managers.
FINANCIAL RISK MANAGEMENT OBJECTIVES AND POLICIES The Groups principal financial liabilities comprise loans and borrowings and trade and other payables.
The main purpose of these financial liabilities is to finance the Groups operations.
The Group has trade and other receivables and cash that are derived directly from its operations.
The Group is exposed to interest rate cash flow foreign currency exchange credit and liquidity risk.
Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Polypipe Group plc NOTES TO THE GROUP FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 28.
FINANCIAL RISK MANAGEMENT OBJECTIVES AND POLICIES CONTINUED The Groups senior management oversees the mitigation of these risks which are summarised as follows Interest rate cash flow risk The interest rate on the Groups 290m revolving credit facility is variable being payable at LIBOR plus a margin.
To reduce the Groups exposure to potential future increases in interest rates the Group has entered into interest rate swaps for the following notional amounts with interest payable at a fixed rate return dependent on the swap of either 2.21% or 1.735% 2016 2.21% or 1.735% excluding margin Year ending 31 December
Notional amount rate of 1.735% 2018 66.6 25.1 2019  82.0 To August 2020  72.2 Foreign currency exchange risk Foreign currency exchange risk is the risk that the fair value of a financial instrument or future cash flows will fluctuate because of changes in foreign currency exchange rates.
The Groups exposure to the risk of changes in foreign currency exchange rates relates primarily to the Groups operating activities where the revenue or expense is denominated in a currency other than the functional currency of the entity undertaking the transaction.
The Group enters into forward foreign currency exchange contracts for the purchase and sale of foreign currencies in order to manage its exposure to fluctuations in currency rates primarily in respect of US Dollar and Euro receipts and payments.
Foreign currency exchange sensitivity The table below demonstrates the sensitivity to a 10% change in the Euro exchange rate and the United Arab Emirates Dirham exchange rate versus Pounds Sterling the presentational currency of the Group used for translation purposes on the net assets and profit after tax of the Group.
The Groups exposure to foreign currency exchange rate changes for all other currencies is not material.
Change in exchange rate Effect on net assets Effect on profit after tax 10% strengthening of Pounds Sterling against Euro 1.8 0.1 10% weakening of Pounds Sterling against Euro 2.2 0.1 10% strengthening of Pounds Sterling against United Arab Emirate Dirham 0.1 0.3 10% weakening of Pounds Sterling against United Arab Emirate Dirham 0.1 0.4 10% strengthening of Pounds Sterling against Euro 1.6 0.1 10% weakening of Pounds Sterling against Euro 2.0 0.1 10% strengthening of Pounds Sterling against United Arab Emirate Dirham 0.5 10% weakening of Pounds Sterling against United Arab Emirate Dirham 0.6 Stock Codesite OUR FINANCIALS 28.
FINANCIAL RISK MANAGEMENT OBJECTIVES AND POLICIES CONTINUED Credit risk Credit risk is the risk that a counterparty will not meet its obligations under a financial instrument or customer contract leading to a financial loss.
The Group is exposed to credit risk from its operating activities primarily for trade receivables and from its financing activities including cash deposits with banks.
Trade receivables Customer credit risk is managed by each subsidiary subject to the Groups established policy procedures and controls relating to customer credit risk management.
Credit quality of the customer is assessed based on an extensive credit rating scorecard and individual credit limits are defined in accordance with this assessment.
Outstanding customer receivables are regularly monitored and any shipments to major export customers are generally covered by letters of credit or other forms of credit insurance.
The requirement for impairment is analysed at each balance sheet date on an individual basis for major clients.
Additionally a large number of minor receivables are grouped into homogenous groups and assessed for impairment collectively.
The calculation is based on actually incurred historical data.
The maximum exposure to credit risk at the balance sheet date is the carrying amount of each class of financial assets as disclosed in Note 20.
The Group does not hold collateral as security.
The Group evaluates the concentration of risk with respect to trade receivables as low.
At 31 December 2017 68.2% 2016 75.3% of net trade receivables were covered by credit insurance which is subject to the normal policy deductibles.
Financial instruments and cash deposits The Group maintains strong liquidity through cash balances and deposits 35.7m at 31 December 2017 and its undrawn committed revolving credit facility 105.0m at 31 December 2017 which matures in August 2020.
Credit risk arising from cash deposits with banks is managed in accordance with the Groups established treasury policy procedures and controls.
Deposits of surplus funds are made only with banks that have as a minimum a single A credit rating.
The Groups maximum exposure to credit risk for the components of the balance sheet at 31 December 2017 and 31 December 2016 is the carrying amounts as illustrated in Note 21.
Liquidity risk Liquidity risk is the risk that the Group will not be able to meet its financial obligations as they fall due.
The Groups approach to managing liquidity is to ensure that it will always have sufficient liquidity to meet its liabilities when due under both normal and stressed conditions without incurring unacceptable losses or risking damage to the Groups reputation.
The Group had cash and cash equivalents of 35.7m and undrawn and committed credit facilities of 105.0m at 31 December 2017 and no debt maturities within 12 months.
The table below summarises the maturity profile of the Groups financial liabilities based on contractual undiscounted payments 31 December 2017 3 months 3 to 12 months 1 to 5 years
Bank loan  principal   185.0 185.0 Other financial liabilities Trade and other payables 87.6   87.6 Forward foreign currency derivatives Interest rate swaps   2.5 2.5 Other liabilities   0.9 0.9 Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Polypipe Group plc NOTES TO THE GROUP FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 28.
FINANCIAL RISK MANAGEMENT OBJECTIVES AND POLICIES CONTINUED 31 December 2016 3 months 3 to 12 months 1 to 5 years
Bank loan  principal   192.0 192.0 Other financial liabilities Trade and other payables 91.8   91.8 Forward foreign currency derivatives 0.8 0.6 0.1 1.5 Interest rate swaps   4.2 4.2 Other liabilities   2.1 2.1 Fair values of financial assets and financial liabilities The book value of trade and other receivables trade and other payables cash balances bank loan and other liabilities equates to fair value.
The table below sets out the Groups accounting classification of its other financial assets and liabilities and their carrying amounts and fair values
Fair value Forward foreign currency derivatives Interest rate swaps 2.5 2.5 Interest bearing loans and borrowings due after more than one year 184.1 184.1 Total at 31 December 2017 186.6 186.6
Fair value Forward foreign currency derivatives 1.5 1.5 Interest rate swaps 4.2 4.2 Interest bearing loans and borrowings due after more than one year 190.8 190.8 Total at 31 December 2016 196.5 196.5 The fair value of the interest rate swaps was determined by reference to market values.
Forward foreign currency derivatives fair value was determined using quoted exchange rates.
Fair value hierarchy The Group uses the following hierarchy for determining and disclosing the fair value of financial instruments by valuation technique Level 1 quoted unadjusted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities Level 2 other techniques for which all inputs which have a significant effect on the recognised fair value are observable either directly or indirectly and Level 3 techniques which use inputs which have a significant effect on the recognised fair value that are not based on observable market data.
The fair values disclosed above all relate to items categorised as Level 2.
There have been no transfers in any direction between Levels 1 2 or 3 in the years ended 31 December 2017 and 2016.
Stock Codesite OUR FINANCIALS 29.
CONSOLIDATED CASH FLOW STATEMENT The analysis of cash generated from operations split by continuing and discontinued operations is as follows Continuing operations Profit before tax 55.6 53.5 Finance costs 6.9 7.6 Operating profit 62.5 61.1 Noncash items Profit on disposal of property plant and equipment 0.1 0.3 Nonunderlying items  amortisation of intangibles assets 5.5 6.8 provision for restructuring costs 4.3 settlement of restructuring costs 0.4 impairment of freehold land and buildings  0.9 provision for aborted acquisition costs 0.3 settlement of aborted acquisition costs 0.1 Depreciation 14.9 15.0 Sharebased payments 0.8 1.0 Operating cash flows before movement in working capital 87.7 84.5 Movement in working capital Receivables 2.5 8.2 Payables 0.7 13.4 Inventories 8.0 4.7 Cash generated from operations 77.9 85.0 Income tax paid 12.6 10.1 Net cash flows from operating activities 65.3 74.9 Investing activities Proceeds from disposal of property plant and equipment 0.2 0.4 Purchase of property plant and equipment 22.2 18.1 Net cash flows from investing activities 22.0 17.7 Financing activities Repayment of bank loan 7.0 25.5 Interest paid 6.6 7.3 Dividends paid 21.0 17.1 Purchase of own shares 3.2 2.9 Proceeds from exercise of share options 2.5 Net cash flows from financing activities 35.3 52.8 Net change in cash and cash equivalents 8.0 4.4 Cash and cash equivalents at 1 January 24.5 20.3 Net foreign exchange difference 0.2 0.2 Cash and cash equivalents at 31 December 32.3 24.5 Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Polypipe Group plc NOTES TO THE GROUP FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 29.
CONSOLIDATED CASH FLOW STATEMENT CONTINUED Discontinued operations Profit before tax from discontinued operations 1.4 0.9 Loss recognised on remeasurement to fair value less costs to sell 12.5 Operating lossprofit 11.1 0.9 Noncash items Nonunderlying item  loss recognised on remeasurement to fair value less costs to sell 12.5 Depreciation 1.3 1.3 Operating cash flows before movement in working capital 2.7 2.2 Movement in working capital Receivables 0.7 0.1 Payables 1.4 1.9 Inventories 0.9 1.3 Net cash flows from operating activities 2.5 1.5 Investing activities Purchase of property plant and equipment 1.2 1.0 Net cash flows from investing activities 1.2 1.0 Net change in cash and cash equivalents 1.3 0.5 Cash and cash equivalents at 1 January 2.0 1.3 Net foreign exchange difference 0.1 0.2 Cash and cash equivalents at 31 December 3.4 2.0 Stock Codesite OUR FINANCIALS The Directors are responsible for preparing the Annual Report and the financial statements in accordance with applicable law and regulations.
UK company law requires the Directors to prepare financial statements for each financial year.
Under that law the Directors have elected to prepare the financial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union.
Under company law the Directors must not approve the financial statements unless they are satisfied that they give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Company and of the profit or loss of the Company for that period.
In preparing the financial statements the Directors are required to present fairly the financial position financial performance and cash flows of the Company select suitable accounting policies in accordance with IAS 8 Accounting Policies Changes in Accounting Estimates and Errors and then apply them consistently present information including accounting policies in a manner that provides relevant reliable comparable and understandable information make judgements that are reasonable provide additional disclosures when compliance with the specific requirements in IFRSs as adopted by the European Union is insufficient to enable users to understand the impact of particular transactions other events and conditions on the Companys financial position and financial performance and state whether the financial statements have been prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union.
The Directors are responsible for keeping adequate accounting records that are sufficient to show and explain the Companys transactions and disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the financial position of the Company and enable them to ensure that the financial statements comply with the Companies Act 2006 and Article 4 of the IAS
They are also responsible for safeguarding the assets of the Company and hence for taking reasonable steps for the prevention and detection of fraud and other irregularities.
Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Polypipe Group plc DIRECTORS RESPONSIBILITIES STATEMENT IN RELATION TO THE PARENT COMPANY FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Notes 31 December 31 December Noncurrent assets Investments 4 234.0 233.3 Current assets Amounts owed by subsidiary undertakings and other receivables 5 84.1 74.0 Total assets 318.1 307.3 Current liabilities Amounts owed to subsidiary undertakings and other payables 6 85.7 60.8 Net assets 232.4 246.5 Capital and reserves Equity share capital 7 0.2 0.2 Capital redemption reserve 7 1.1 1.1 Own shares 7 4.3 4.6 Retained earnings 235.4 249.8 Total equity 232.4 246.5 Included within retained earnings is profit for the year of 6.7m 2016 5.0m.
The financial statements were approved for issue by the Board of Directors and signed on its behalf by Martin Payne
20 March 2018 Paul James
20 March 2018 Company Registration No.
0tel127 Stock Codesite OUR FINANCIALS COMPANY BALANCE SHEET AT 31 DECEMBER 2017 Equity share capital
Own
Retained earnings
At 31 December 2015 0.2 1.1 1.7 260.9 260.5 Profit for the year    5.0 5.0 Total comprehensive income for the year    5.0 5.0 Dividends paid    17.1 17.1 Purchase of own shares   2.9  2.9 Sharebased payments charge    1.3 1.3 Sharebased payments settled    0.3 0.3 At 31 December 2016 0.2 1.1 4.6 249.8 246.5 Profit for the year    6.7 6.7 Total comprehensive income for the year    6.7 6.7 Dividends paid    21.0 21.0 Purchase of own shares   3.2  3.2 Sharebased payments charge    1.2 1.2 Sharebased payments settled   3.5 1.4 2.1 Sharebased payments excess tax benefit    0.1 0.1 At 31 December 2017 0.2 1.1 4.3 235.4 232.4 Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Polypipe Group plc COMPANY STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 2017 Operating activities Profit before tax 6.7 4.9 Net finance revenues 10.0 8.7 Operating loss 3.3 3.8 Noncash items Sharebased payments 0.1 0.4 Operating cash flows before movement in working capital 3.2 3.4 Movement in working capital Payables 0.1 0.1 Intergroup balances 14.8 14.6 Net cash flows from operating activities 11.7 11.3 Investing activities Interest received 10.0 8.7 Net cash flows from investing activities 10.0 8.7 Financing activities Dividends paid 21.0 17.1 Purchase of own shares 3.2 2.9 Proceeds from exercise of share options 2.5 Net cash flows from financing activities 21.7 20.0 Net change in cash and cash equivalents Cash and cash equivalents at 1 January Cash and cash equivalents at 31 December Stock Codesite OUR FINANCIALS COMPANY CASH FLOW STATEMENT FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 1.
AUTHORISATION OF FINANCIAL STATEMENTS The parent company financial statements of Polypipe Group plc the Company for the year ended 31 December 2017 were authorised for issue by the Board of Directors on 20 March 2018 and the balance sheet was signed on the Boards behalf by Martin Payne and Paul James.
Polypipe Group plc is a public limited company incorporated and domiciled in England and Wales.
The principal activity of the Company is that of a holding company.
SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES The basis of preparation and accounting policies used in preparing the historical financial information for the year ended 31 December 2017 are set out below.
These accounting policies have been consistently applied in all material respects to all the periods presented.
2.1 Basis of preparation and statement of compliance with IFRSs The Companys financial statements have been prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as endorsed by the European Union regulations as they apply to the financial statements of the Company for the year ended 31 December 2017 and also in accordance with those parts of the Companies Act 2006 applicable to companies reporting under IFRS.
The accounting policies which follow set out those policies which apply in preparing the financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017.
The Companys financial statements have been prepared on a historical cost basis.
The financial statements are presented in Pounds Sterling and all values are rounded to one decimal place of a million m unless otherwise indicated.
No income statement or statement of comprehensive income is presented by the Company as permitted by Section 408 of the Companies Act 2006.
The results of Polypipe Group plc are included in the consolidated financial statements of Polypipe Group plc.
2.2 Going concern The Directors having considered all relevant risk factors believe the Company has adequate financial resources to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future.
Accordingly they continue to adopt the going concern basis in preparing the financial statements.
2.3 Investments Investments in subsidiary undertakings are held at historical cost less any applicable provision for impairment.
2.4 Sharebased payments In the case of equitysettled schemes the fair value of options granted is recognised as an employee expense with a corresponding increase in equity.
The fair value is measured at the date of grant and spread over the period during which the employees become unconditionally entitled to the options.
The value of the options is measured using the BlackScholes and Monte Carlo models taking into account the terms and conditions including market and nonvesting conditions upon which the options were granted.
Nonmarket vesting conditions are taken into account by adjusting the number of equity instruments expected to vest at each balance sheet date so that ultimately the cumulative amount recognised over the vesting period is based on the number of options that eventually vest.
No expense is recognised for awards that do not ultimately vest except for equitysettled transactions where vesting is conditional upon a market or nonvesting condition which are treated as vesting irrespective of whether or not the market or nonvesting condition is satisfied provided that all other performance andor service conditions are satisfied.
The financial effect of awards by the Company of options over its equity shares to employees of subsidiary undertakings are recognised by the Company in its individual financial statements.
In particular the Company records an increase in its investment in subsidiaries with a corresponding adjustment to equity equivalent to the IFRS 2 cost in subsidiary undertakings.
2.5 Own shares The Company operates an employee benefit trust EBT.
The Company andor the EBT holds Polypipe Group plc shares for the granting of Polypipe Group plc shares to employees and Directors.
These shares are recognised at cost and presented in the balance sheet as a deduction from equity.
No profit or loss is recognised in the income statement on the purchase sale issue or cancellation of these shares.
No dividends are earned on these shares.
Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Polypipe Group plc NOTES TO THE COMPANY FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 3.
DIVIDENDS PER SHARE Amounts recognised as distributions to equity holders in the year Final dividend for the year ended 31 December 2016 of 7.0p per share 2015 5.5p 13.9 11.0 Interim dividend for the year ended 31 December 2017 of 3.6p per share 2016 3.1p 7.1 6.1 Proposed final dividend for the year ended 31 December 2017 of 7.5p per share 2016 7.0p 14.9 13.9 The proposed final dividend is subject to approval by shareholders at the Annual General Meeting and has not been included as a liability in these financial statements.
INVESTMENTS
Shares in subsidiary undertakings
At 1 January 2016 232.7 Additions  sharebased payments 0.6 At 31 December 2016 233.3 Additions  sharebased payments 0.7 At 31 December 2017 234.0 Net book value At 31 December 2017 234.0 At 31 December 2016 233.3 At 1 January 2016 232.7 In 2017 an adjustment in respect of sharebased payments of 0.7m 2016 0.6m was made to shares in subsidiary undertakings representing the financial effects of awards by the Company of options over its equity shares to employees of subsidiary undertakings.
The total contribution to date was 1.8m 2016 1.1m.
The companies in which the Company has an interest at 31 December 2017 are shown below Name of company Country of incorporation
Proportion of voting rights and shares held Ferrob Ventilation Ltd England and Wales Ordinary 1 100% Hayes Pipes Ulster Limited Northern Ireland Ordinary 1 100% Home Ventilation Ireland Limited Northern Ireland Ordinary 1 100% Insulated DampProof Course Limited England and Wales Ordinary 1 100% Mason Pinder Toolmakers Limited England and Wales Ordinary 1 100% Mr Plumber Limited England and Wales Ordinary 1 100% NuOval Acquisitions 1 Limited England and Wales Ordinary 0.94  1 100% NuOval Acquisitions 2 Limited England and Wales Ordinary 1 100% NuOval Acquisitions 3 Limited England and Wales Ordinary 1 100% Nuaire Limited England and Wales Ordinary 1 100% Nuhold Limited England and Wales Ordinary 0.1 100% Stock Codesite OUR FINANCIALS 4.
INVESTMENTS CONTINUED Name of company Country of incorporation
Proportion of voting rights and shares held Oracstar Limited England and Wales Ordinary 1 100% Oval  Limited England and Wales Ordinary 0.01 100% Plumbexpress Limited England and Wales Ordinary 1 100% Pipe Holdings plc England and Wales Ordinary 1 100% Pipe Holdings 1 plc England and Wales Ordinary 1 100% Pipe Holdings 2 Limited England and Wales Ordinary 1 100% Pipe Luxembourg Sarl Luxembourg Ordinary 1 100% Polypipe Building Products Limited England and Wales Ordinary 1 100% Polypipe Commercial Building Systems
England and Wales Ordinary 1 100% Polypipe Civils Limited England and Wales Ordinary 1 100% Polypipe France SAS France Ordinary 200 100% Polypipe France Holding SAS France Ordinary 1.76 100% Polypipe Holdings Ireland Limited Republic of Ireland Ordinary 1 100% Polypipe Ireland Ltd Northern Ireland Ordinary 1 100% Polypipe Middle East FZE United Arab Emirates Ordinary 1m UAE Dirhams 100% Polypipe Italia SRL Italy Ordinary 0.52 100% Polypipe Limited England and Wales Ordinary 0.1 100% Polypipe Terrain Limited England and Wales Ordinary 1 100% Polypipe Terrain Holdings Limited England and Wales Ordinary 1 100% Polypipe T.
Limited
England and Wales Ordinary 1 100% Polypipe Trading Limited England and Wales Ordinary 0.1 100% Polypipe Ulster Limited Northern Ireland Ordinary 1 100% Polypipe Ventilation Limited England and Wales Ordinary 1 100% Robimatic Limited England and Wales Ordinary 1 100% Surestop Limited England and Wales Ordinary 1 100% Water Management Solutions LLC Qatar Ordinary 1000 Qatari Riyals 49% All the companies operate principally in their country of registration and in the same class of business as the Group.
The shares in the undertakings marked with an asterisk are held by subsidiary undertakings.
Registered offices of subsidiaries Broomhouse Lane Edlington Doncaster South Yorkshire DN12 1ES.
Dromore Road Lurgan Co.
Armagh BT66 7HL.
19 Bedford Street Belfast BT2 7EJ.
5 Rue Guillaume Kroll L1882 Luxembourg.
11 rue dAltkirch F68580 SeppoisLeBas France.
1 Ontario Terrace Portobello Bridge Rathmines Dublin 6 Ireland.
PO Box 18679 Showroom A2 SR 07 First Al Khail Street Jebel Ali Free Zone Dubai United Arab Emirates.
Localita Pianmercato 5CDH 16044 Cicagna Genova Italy.
Level 15 Commercial Bank Plaza West Bay Doha Qatar.
Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Polypipe Group plc NOTES TO THE COMPANY FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 5.
AMOUNTS OWED BY SUBSIDIARY UNDERTAKINGS AND OTHER RECEIVABLES 31 December 31 December Amounts owed by subsidiary undertakings 83.8 73.8 Deferred income tax assets 0.2 0.1 Other receivables 0.1 0.1 AMOUNTS OWED TO SUBSIDIARY UNDERTAKINGS AND OTHER PAYABLES 31 December 31 December Amounts owed to subsidiary undertakings 85.4 60.6 Other payables 0.3 0.2 SHARE CAPITAL AND RESERVES Share capital 31 December 2017 31 December 2016 Number  Number Authorised share capital Ordinary shares of 0.001 each 200 200000 200 200000 Allotted called up and fully paid Ordinary shares of 0.001 each 200 200000 200 200000 Millions of shares.
The ordinary shares are voting nonredeemable shares and rank equally as to dividends voting rights and any return of capital on winding up.
Details of share options in issue on the Companys share capital and sharebased payments are set out in Note 23 to the Groups consolidated financial statements.
Capital redemption reserve Following the consolidation and subdivision of shares in 2014 the Companys deferred shares were cancelled.
In order to maintain the Companys capital a transfer was made from retained earnings to a capital redemption reserve at that time.
Own shares The Company andor the employee benefit trust holds own shares for the granting of Polypipe Group plc shares to employees and Directors.
These shares are recognised at cost and presented in the balance sheet as a deduction from equity.
No profit or loss is recognised in the income statement on the purchase sale issue or cancellation of these shares.
No dividends are earned on these shares.
Stock Codesite OUR FINANCIALS 8.
PROFIT FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR Polypipe Group plc has not presented its own income statement as permitted by Section 408 of the Companies Act 2006.
The profit for the year dealt with in the financial statements of the Company was 6.7m 2016 5.0m profit for the year.
Remuneration paid to the Directors of the Company is disclosed in Note 10 to the Groups consolidated financial statements.
Amounts paid to the Companys auditor in respect of the audit of the financial statements of the Company are disclosed in Note 7 to the Groups consolidated financial statements.
Fees paid to the auditor for nonaudit services to the Company itself are not disclosed in the individual financial statements of the Company because the Groups consolidated financial statements are prepared which are required to disclose such fees on a consolidated basis.
These are disclosed in Note 7 to the Groups consolidated financial statements.
RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS These are disclosed in Note 27 to the Groups consolidated financial statements.
Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Polypipe Group plc NOTES TO THE COMPANY FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 FINANCIAL CALENDAR Preliminary Announcement of Results for the year ended 31 December 2017 20 March 2018 Annual General Meeting 23 May 2018 Final dividend for year ended 31 December 2017 Exdividend date 19 April 2018 Record date 20 April 2018 Payment date 25 May 2018 Half yearly results for six months ending 30 June 2018 14 August 2018 Half yearly dividend for six months ending 30 June 2018 Exdividend date 30 August 2018 Record date 31 August 2018 Payment date 21 September 2018 REGISTRAR SERVICES Our shareholder register is managed and administered by Link Asset Services.
Link Asset Services should be able to help you with most questions you have in relation to your holding in Polypipe Group plc shares.
Link Asset Services can be contacted at Link Asset Services The Registry 34 Beckenham Road
Kent
BR3 4TU site Telephonetel calls cost 12p a minute plus network extras lines are open 9 am530 pm MonFri from outside the UK 44 0tel Email email In addition Link offers a range of other services to shareholders including a share dealing service and a share portal to manage your holdings.
SHARE DEALING SERVICE A share dealing service is available to existing shareholders to buy or sell the Companys shares via Link Market Services.
Online and telephone dealing facilities provide an easy to access and simple to use service.
For further information on this service or to buy or sell shares please contact site  online dealingtel  telephone dealing email email Please note that the Directors of the Company are not seeking to encourage shareholders to either buy or sell their shares.
Shareholders in any doubt as to what action to take are recommended to seek financial advice from an independent financial adviser authorised by the Financial Services and Markets Act 2000.
Stock Codesite OUR FINANCIALS SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION PRINCIPAL GROUP BUSINESSES
Polypipe Building Products Broomhouse Lane
Doncaster
South Yorkshire DN12 1ES Neale Road
South Yorkshire DN2 4PG Polypipe Ulster Dromore Road
Co.
Armagh
BT66 7HL Polypipe Civils Charnwood Business Park North Road
LE11 1LE Holmes Way
LN9 6JW Polypipe Terrain New Hythe Business Park College Road
Kent
ME20 7PJ
Western Industrial Estate
CF83 1NA Domus Ventilation Cambria House Caerphilly Business Park Van Road
CF83 3ED Mainland Europe Polypipe France Building Products 11 rue dAltkirch F68580 SeppoisLeBas
Polypipe France Building Products 79 rue de LIndustrie
F81100 Castres
Polypipe France PE Pressure Pipes 359 Avenue du Douard
Les Paluds F13400 Aubagne
Polypipe Italia Localita Pianmercato 5CDH 16044 Cicagna Genova
Middle East Polypipe Middle East FZE PO Box 18679 Showroom A2 SR 07 First Al Khail Street Jebel Ali Free Zone
United Arab Emirates CONTACT DETAILS AND
Company registration number and registered office Broomhouse Lane
Doncaster
South Yorkshire DN12 1ES Independent auditor Ernst and Young LLP 1 Bridgewater Place Water Lane
LS11 5QR Principal bankers
Sheffield
RBS
Leeds
Santander
Leeds
Registrar and transfer office Link Asset Services The Registry 34 Beckenham Road
Kent
BR3 4TU
Deutsche Bank AG Numis Securities Limited Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Polypipe Group plc SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION As well as promoting a sustainable built environment through water and climate management solutions in the UK and abroad we are proud to be recognised for our efforts in developing and safeguarding our staff.
SUSTAINABLE PROCESSES
TONNES
REDUCED
LANDFILL
RAINWATER
HARVESTED FROM ROOF AT PLANT 75% OF WA TER
WE HELP OUR CUSTOMERS MEET
TARGETS
5TH CONSECUTIVE GOLD AWARD AWARDED FOR COMPETENCE AND RESPONSIBILITY
45% OF POL YMER USED AT OUR
SITE Polypipe Group plc Broomhouse Lane
Doncaster
